ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT DISPLAYED: IN THE TYRANNICK VSVRPATION OF THE Rump
PARLIAMENT, AND OLIVER CROMWELL.

BEING A clear account of their Arbitrary, Cruel and Illegal Proceedings, under
the Notion of Liberty and Property.

AND A Compendious History of those Times.

By a Person of Honor.

London, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill: 1683,

THE INTRODUCTION.
OF late, since the Spirit of Discontent has possessed a great part of this
Nation; nothing more has been discoursed of and feared, next to that of the
Alteration of the Protestant Religion, than Arbitrary Government; which I
suppose is the Rule of any Person or Persons, by their own Will and Authority,
without being tied to the Rules, Methods, and Directions of the Laws of the
Land, and a Converting of this most glorious Monarchy, into Tyranny. The fear
and Jealousy of this Government, has been exceedingly, of late, fomented,
among the discontented People, by the sly Arts of those, who are, and ever will
be, Enemies to the Religion, Peace, and Tranquillity of this Nation; and no
doubt, but the Machivilian Jesuit, and the Zealous Papist, have been the cause
of all the imbroils of England, hoping by that Gate, to bring in their own
Religion, and Arbitrary Government: The thing so much feared by the People of
England. And truly in this Case they are not to be blamed, Religion and
Liberty, being the two chiefest, and most valuable Jewels, belonging to the
Crown of Life. And when they cast abroad their Eyes, and behold the Arbitrary,
Despotical and Tyrannical reign of the Princes of other Countries, they may
well be desirous of Conserving the own happy Government, in the Monarchy of
this Nation; which is so equally divided, betwixt King and People, That the one
cannot do injury, or wrong to the other, unless the one become Arbitrary, and
the other Rebellious.

The Constitution of the Government of England is so sound, as it is not to be
shaken or altered, with every small Occasion, for it must be absolute Tyranny
on the one Hand, or absolute Rebellion of the other, that must break it to
Pieces, and bring in the so much feared Arbitrary Government. And therefore, it
is against the Interest both of King and People, to entrench upon one the
other, the one to invade the Prerogative of the King, the other the Privileges
of the People: For so equally hangs the Balance between them, that as it is
the Env^ and admiration of all other Nations, so is it the Happines^ and
strength of our own; for the one side cannot Preponderate or weigh down the
other, without breaking the just and equal Constitution of our Government. If
therefore the King (...) of this happy Nation, should at any time, through the
Evi^ advice of their Counselors, go about to invade the people. Liberties, and
to think or hope to bring in Arbitrary Government, it would not be so easy a
thing to effect it, since the mutual Bonds and Obligations, between the King
and People are already so strong, as it is almost impossible to attain to that
end, whilst the three Estates of the Land have a being, and without whom no
alteration can be made. The people therefore, need not be in those Fears and
Agonies, on every the least Occasion, of the evil Ministration of some of the
chie^ Officers of State, of their Kings Intentions of bringing in o^ Arbitrary
Government; for no doubt the Kings of England are as great and Imperial
Monarchs, holding their Crown of God only, and so account themselves, as any
other Monarch whatsoever: Nor can we see, how a lawful Monarch can any ways
better himself, or become more great, by such unlawfu^^ Arbitrariness, who by
the Laws of the Land, and the Lov^ of his People, wants neither Power nor
Money, the onl^ things a Tyrant can pretend to. It is therefore the Cunning Art
of the Enemies to Englands peace, who so needlessly, seek t^ buz it into the
Ears of the People, that their King intends t^ bring in Arbitrary Government,
upon every Occasion, give^ by any of his Ministers of State, in the management
of thos^ Affairs, they cannot see into the Bottom. But since the greatest
Ministers, are Accountable for their Maladministration t^^ Parliaments, there
is, and can be no such Fear, I say of eve^ attaining that end, so long as
Parliaments have a being and without which our happy Monarchy cannot subsist
totally But many cry out against Arbitrary Government, and know not what it is,
not being sufficiently sensible; of their livin^ under, and being ruled and
governed by a legal Monarch Tho some Faults and Miscarriages may be found, or
appear in his Ministers; for the King himself can do no wrong, since he Acts
nothing of himself, but by Ministers, who are all Responsible for their
Actions. Yet the People are not to be blamed, for their abhorrency of Arbitrary
or Tyrannick Government, which always attends Usurpation, since it is not so
many years, that they have felt the burden thereof; and if we look back, into
all the Actions, of the most Arbitrary and Tyrannick, the lawful Kings of this
Nation, we shall find the Arbitrary Government, attending Usurpers, in the
little time of their Usurpation, to be more horrid and dreadful, and brought on
this Nation more Misery, Blood, and Persecution, than any of them; nay, all of
them together. I cannot think therefore, that any are serious, who cry out on
the Phanaticks, as endeavoring or desiring a Commonwealth, for I do think
there are none of them, so really mad, as to desire any such thing, that would
bring on them the dreaded Arbitrary Government, they so much Fear; since they
found it by so late Experience, to be no remedy to their Evils, and cured their
Fears and Jealousies with a Plaster of Poison. And this also, I look upon to
be^a Stratagem of the same Enemies, on the other side, to Create a Jealousy in
the Head of the Prince, and his Ministers, and to make them Construe every
Action of the People, tending to that end, which may be, and no doubt is, as
far from their thinking, as it is from that of the other, in bringing in of
Arbitrary Government. Since the Fears and Jealousies of either side, are alike
much heightened, by the endeavors of several sorts of evil Persons, and by some
well meaning People, by being too severe in uncomely and bitter Expressions,
and through the Toleration of the many Licentions, and Scandalous Papers, which
daily fly abroad, the Author of these true Collections, of the Miseries this
Nation suffered, under the Arbitrary Government, of Tyrannic Usurpers, Exposes
it to the Abhorrency of the Nation, that they might behold it in a Glass; and
that the Governors of our Commonwealth, may not run upon the same Rocks: Nor
the People, into the like Rebellion, in seeking to avoid Arbitrary Government,
or some Shadows of it, bring it upon themselves totally, to the subverting the
Monarchy and the Fundamental Laws of the Land.

To the intent then, that they may see the difference, between the happy Reign
of lawful Kings, and usurping Tyrants, we have Collected the illegal Acts, and
bloody Persecutions, of those Usurpers of Arbitrary Government, the Rump and
Oliver, that by the matter of Fact, the People may be convinced and deterred
from thinking of Rebelling against their lawful Prince, since it is the only way
to bring in Arbitrary Government, whose most horrid Picture, is displayed in
the following History.

Arbitrary Government displayed to the Life, in the illegal Transactions of the
late Times.
IF we mount up the Hill of Time present, and thence take a view; on either
hand lies Time past, and Time future, or to come; the latter is continually
hidden in a Cloud, and we are not able to take any Prospect of it, unless by
Divine or Prophetic illumination, which tho certain, is rare; yet a wise man
by looking back on Time past, and Comparing the certain Effects resulting from
several Causes, may give a shrewd Guess, of what is to come; and thus from
Experience he will pronounce, that Fears and Jealousies betwixt a Prince and
his people, being wrought to the height, will produce on the one hand Severity,
on the other Rebellion: If the Prince gets the better of the People, after they
have run into actual disobedience, it is not to be expected, he should, whilst
he Lives, slacken the Reins of his Power, but by keeping them under, extend it
to the utmost of the line: If the people thrive in their Rebellion, the certain
sequel is Usurpation, Tyrannick and Arbitrary Government, as has been seen in
several Ages, and recounted in several Histories, which we shall not mention;
our Design being to confine our Discourse to our own late Affairs, and
Transactions, from the first setting up of the Rump, in the place of Monarchy,
to the Restoration of our present Monarch, whom God grant long to Reign.

If we look down from this Hill of Time present, through the Optic of History,
on Time past, we behold the first Ages as in Landscape only, not in a due
Proportion, being much lessened in Relation; the middle Ages are more clearly
viewed, and lie open to discovery, and are more largely Displayed in History:
but again, the more near, or next to the Mountain of Time present, are also
covered in a certain obscurity, and as it were over-shadowed by the Mount of
Time present, that Truth is traced with a faint touch, and usually things are
not so clearly seen, as at a longer distance. But since every day renders the
Prospect more clear, We hope in this our short Relation, of the late Usurpers,
and of their Tyrannick and Arbitrary Government, to show to the People a most
lucid Picture of that dreaded Monster, which they do, and may most justly fear,
Arbitrary Government.

Fears and Jealousies fomented and heightened, we may say begot it, and
Rebellion brought it forth, for it was the foul Issue of our bloody Civil Wars.
It is not my task to write the Transactions, between the late King and his
Parliaments, nor to draw forth a Scheme of that most unnatural War, which
robbed England of it is Peace, and devoured so many brave and valiant Subjects;
this has been sufficiently and fully, by several Pens, already performed. But
I shall begin the rise of my Historical Collections, from the time of the
Exclusion of the greater part of the Members of the house of Commons, called
the long Parliament, and when the Tail or Rump, as they are called, of the said
Commons, against all Law and Right usurped, the Regal Authority of the Nation,
and placing it upon themselves, Exercised a Tyrannick, and Arbitrary
Government, with any shadow of legal Authority; for although it is not to be
doubted, that the bloody War, commenced by the long Parliament, against their
sovereign Lord and King, was illegal and unjust, yet I say, by that Bill,
passed by his late Majesty, together with the Bill of attainder against the
Earl of Strafford, on the 8th. of May, 1641. for the continuance of that
Parliament, and that it should not be Prorogued or Adjourned, but by act of
Parliament, and on the 10th. of the same Month had the Royal assent, gave them
I say some Color or shadow of Authority, and extremely inbroiled the Kings
affairs. The advisers to the passing of this Act are not certainly known, some
attribute it to the Lord Say, others to the designing Marquess Hamilton, who
bragged of it in Scotland, as his Act; but whoever they were, it proved most
pernicious to the King, and seemed to Authorize the Rebellion by his own Act.

But before we enter upon the Actions of these Usurpers, we shall only make
mention of some preliminary Acts, of illegal Arbitrariness, of this Parliament,
before their Votes of Non-Addresses, to the King, and their se^luding their
fellow Members, and of their growing up to that perfection of Evil, in taking
upon them the Administration of the Government, and of that unparalled
Murder of a great Monarch, their sovereign Lord and King. The first was, under
the Notion of maintaining the Protestant Religion, their entering into a solemn
Protestation or Association among themselves, and also imposing it on the
Consciences of all others, who should bear any Office either in Church or
State. Secondly, their raising men, arming them, and forming an Army, and so
running on into actual Rebellion, against their Head, and continuing that most
Bloody War with so much Heat and Animosity, harkening to no Treaties, etc.
Next, their flinging the Bishops out of the House, and imprisoning twelve of
them for asserting their Right only, by a Protestation. And which was
absolutely against the Privileges granted to them by Magna Charta, and a
lopping off one of the Estates of the Realm. Then their putting a difference
between the Kings person, and his politic Capacity, raising War against him in
his own Name, for as yet the Keepers of the Liberties of England were not
thought of, but the Style ran in the name of the King and Parliament, making
the King to fight against himself, and to War with himself. Next their illegal
imprisoning their fellow Subjects, and disseizing many of their free Holds, for
their Loyalty to their Prince, and for not lending them Money to carry on their
Rebellion, and also putting to Death the Hothams, all contrary to Magna Charta,
and the Liberty of the subject, and full of Arbitrariness. Next their
endeavoring to persuade the People, that the Sovereignty law wholly and
radically in them, and so effectually in the Parliament, or House of Commons,
for they now began to be esteemed only the Parliament. Then by their
Endeavoring to take the power of the Sword out of their Sovereigns hand, and
to put it into their own, thereby to make him a King of Clouts, or in Show, or
a mere Duke of Venice. Then their own Declaration, printed and published,
showed how well Arbitrariness thrived, when they owned, That their Votes were
not to be questioned, either by King or People: That no Precedents could bound
their proceedings: That the Sovereign Power resides in the two Horses: That the
King has no negative Voice: That a levying War against the personal Commands
of the King, the he were present, is not a levying War against the King, but
that a levying War against his Laws and Authority, is levying War against the
King, which was levying War against them: That Treason could not be committed
against the person of the King, otherwise then he wa^ entrusted: That they had
power to judge of his Actions, and whether he discharged his trust or not, and
that they were only judges of the Law. Their Arbi^trary putting to death of
Yeomans and Boucher at Bristol and others at London, for endeavoring to show
their Loyalty to their King, and Acting against them, and their illegal
Authority. Voting and making a new Seal and breaking all the Kings old Seals,
Privy Signets, (...) the King's Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Adm^^ralty,
etc. Beheading of several persons by a Court ma^^tial, against Law and Equity.
Putting Archbishop La^^ to Death after four years Imprisonment. Their takin^
the Scotch solemn League and Covenant, for the Extirpation of Episcopacy, and
the alteration of Religion established by Law, contrary to Law, and accor^^ing
to their own illegal and Arbitrary proceedings. With many more Acts of the same
nature, which plainly declared to all the World, how far they had deviated from
their first more plausible Pretexts. But all this while I say, by the Kings
great Concession, in yielding to pass that Act, which wrought him so much
Mischief, they seemed to have a shadow of Power, from the King: and acted as an
House, tho contrary to the King, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the
Subject, and against Equity, Conscience, and Religion.

But now, after the King had been delivered up to them from the Scots, and that
they had subdued all his Forces and Garrisons, Ragland Castle in Wales, being
the last that held out for his Majesty, then they showed their power more
manifestly, and that their Intentions were to usurp the Regal Authority
altogether, having thus far tasted the sweetness of it, and thrived in their
Rebellion. On the 4th. of June 1647. a Party of Horse, under Cornet Joyce,
seized the King at Holdenby, where he was under restraint by the Parliaments
order, and Carried him away to the Army, and thence by them brought to Hampton
Court, about the middle of August; where both the Parliament and Army make to
him their several unjust Proposals, after the insolent manner of Victors, which
the King could in no ways grant, being contrary to his Conscience, his Crown
and Dignity. At the same time the Independent Officers of the Army, kept their
chief Cabals at Putn^y, where it was proposed among them: That it was not safe
for them, nor the Kingdom, to grant any Power to the King: That it was not for
them to set up a Power, which God had determined to pull down: That the power
of Kings was grown a burden to the Nation, and that the reason of all their
Distractions in their Counsels, was from their Compliance to save that man of
Bood, and to uphold the Tyranny, which God by their many Successes, had
declared against. Where also Major General Harrison made a speech pressing them
to the taking off the King: Who having notice of these wicked Agitators
Actions, makes his escape from Hampton Court, leaving a Letter behind him,
intending to get over to the Isle of Jersey, but being in the Isle of Wight, he
put himself under the Protection of Colonel Hammond a Parliament man, and
Governor there; who sending notice thereof to the Parliament, they Vote, That
he should be continued in the Castle of Cowes: That no Malignants shall stay in
the Island: That no Delinquent or Forreigner should be permitted to come to him
without the Parliaments leave: That five Thousand pounds should be advanced for
his Aocommodation, and That they would consider who should attend his Person.

In the mean time the Independent party of the Army cause a Mutiny, which tho
quelled by the Industry of Cromwell and his Son-in-Law Ireton; yet it caused
them to alter their Councels, and to join with them against the Parliament, and
all accommodation whatsoever with the King. The King sends a Letter to the
Parliament from the Isle of Wight, dated November, 18. 1647. superscribed to
the Speaker of the House of Lords, to be communicated to the House of Commons.
In which he granted for Peace-sake, the settling of Presbytery for three years:
And the Militia in the hands of the Parliament during his Reign, with a Proviso
by Patent, that then it should return again to his Successors; And also that
they should have the Choice of his Privy Counselors, and desired earnestly to
have with them a personal treaty in London. After a long debate upon this
Letter, the Commissioners of Scotland also pressing them to comply with the
Kings just desires, on the 26th. of November they concluded, That four Previous
Acts should be drawn up, and sent to the King, to which if he would sign, they
Voted, That they then would admit of a personal Treaty with him. These
unreasonable Proposals, drawn into form of Acts, were these: First, an Act for
raising, settling, and maintaining Forces by Sea and Land, etc. In which they
fully and wholly divested the King of the Militia, his Heirs and Successors for
ever, and gave an unlimitted Power to the two houses, to raise what Forces they
please, or Land or Sea, and of what persons they please, and what Money they
please to maintain them. The second was, that ^ll Declarations, Oaths,
Proclamations against the Parli^ment, might be recalled, or against all or any
that adher^d to them. The third, an Act that those Peers, that were ^nade after
the great Seal was carried away from the Parliament, might be made incapable of
sitting in the house of Peers: And lastly, That Power may be given to the two
Houses to adjourn themselves as they think fit. By these you may easily
perceive, to what height they were come of all unreasonableness. These were
presented to the King at Caris brook Castle in the Isle of Wight, on the 24th.
of December 1647. by the Earl of Denby, the Lord Mountague, Lisle, Goodwin,
Bunkley, and Kemp, Commissioners from both Houses of Parliament. The King it
may well be thought, having no desire to dethrone himself, and enslave his
Subjects, refused the Bills, and desired to Treat personally, sending them his
reasons in Writing: Whereupon Sr. Tho. wroth, moves the House, That the King,
who had Acted like a Madman, should be secured in some inland Castle, with
sure Guards: That Articles of Impeachment should be drawn up against him: That
he should be wholly laid by, and that they would think of some other
Government, no matter what, so it were not by Kings or Devils. Then Ireton
gravely, and with his Protesting he spoke the Sense of many thousand Godly men,
who had ventured their Lives with him in the Army, said: That the King in
denying those Bills, had denied his safety and protection to the People, and
that therefore they might justly, and lawfully deny to yield him any further
Obedience, and that it was fit they should settle the Kingdom without him. Then
Cromwell at last, after a long debate, with an Hypocritical Face, stood up,
telling them, of the Valor, Courage, Resolution, and readiness of the Army, to
stand by them, and to Live and Dye with them, and that therefore, now the
Parliament should by their own Power, Rule and Govern the Kingdom, and not
expect safety any lon^er, or any help from an Obstinate man, whose hea^ God had
hardened, and therefore no more to be truste^ for that his future Reign, would
become more insu^portable, and fuller of Revenge than Justice. That el^^ those
men, who had so long defended them, wou^^ think themselves betrayed by them, to
the Malice an^ Rage of an irreconcilable Enemy, whom they had sub^dued for
their sakes, and that despair might teach them to seek their safety, by some
other means, than ad^hering to them, who would not stick to themselves and how
destructive that resolution might be to the^ all, he even trembled to think of,
and left them t^ consider. This concluding Menace, from that terribl^ Bugbear,
very much overawed the House. Upon th^^ they came to Vote, and the Questions
being put, they Vo^^ed, No more Addresses or Applications should be mad^ to the
King, carrying it in the Affirmative, there being on^ hundred and forty one
Yeas and ninety one Noes. Thi^ was also assented to by the Lords and published,
Resolved by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That no Application
or Address be made to the King by any Person whatsoever without the leave of
both Houses. Resolved by the Lords and Commons, etc. That the Person or
Persons, that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalty of high
Treason. Resolved by the Lords and Commons, etc. That they will receive no more
any Message from the King; and do enjoin, that no Person whatsoever, do presume
to receive or bring any Message from the King to both or either of the Houses
of Parliament, or any other Person.

Upon this comes forth a Declaration from the Army Among other things they
declare, That they are resolved to stand by the Parliament, in these their
Votes concerning the King, and in what shall be necessary for the Prosecution
thereof, and for the settling and securing of the Parliament and Kingdom,
without the King, and against him, or any other that shall partake with him.
The Parliament also after this, put forth a public Declaration, about the
beginning of February, 1648. in which were many strange Invectives against the
King, and his Government, raking in all the Errors thereof, and remembering
things done before his Reign. They also endeavored to have fixed on him the
Murder of his Royal Father King James, the Rebellion and Massacre of Ireland,
and other wicked and horrid Crimes laid to his Charge, and almost in every
bodies Mouth, so that they were not only Content to take away the Government
from their King, and to usurp the Royal dignity, but they went about to desame
him, and to Murder his Honor and Innocence, even before they had agreed to
take away his Life from his Person, and to make him as odious as they could, in
the Eyes of all men, to take off the Odium as much as they could from
themselves, for what they now intended to do, viz. The murder of their Prince,
which began now to be designed by the prevailing Independent Party, who had got
the Army on their sides and overawed the rest.

However, they could not carry things so, but that their Intentions began to be
seen, although they had procured Letters or Addresses of thanks, from several
Counties, by their Agents, for their Votes against the King; yet for the most
part the peoples Eyes being now every day more and more opened, began to see
what a Brat they had nourished up, under the notion of Liberty, who being grown
up to it is height, proved that most dreadful Arbitrary, they so much had
feared; insomuch, that from Grumbling and Murmuring, the City began to stir,
and in several other places, as in Kent, and in Wales, under Lauhorn, Poyer,
and Powell; upon this the Commitee of Darby House was Empowered anew, for the
suppressing of Tumults and Insurrections. The Insurrections were soon quelled,
tho not without Blood, by the industry of Cromwell and Ireton, and by the
Permission of divine Providence. The Scots by their Commissioners, desired to
know if they were excepted by the Parliaments Votes of Non-Addresses to the
King, which Message caused great debates, and being yet fearful of disobliging
them, at last it was permitted them, to make Addresses to the King: which was
not wel^ taken by the Independent Faction in the Army. Bu^ the King was now
more straightly secured, by Collone^ Hammond, and he found not that Favor from
him h^ had hoped for, being the Brother of one of his belov^^ed Chaplains
Doctor Hammond: His Servants were re^moved from him, and he restrained within
the Castle^ walls, which begot a Pity and Commiseration of hi^ Case, in the
breast of several Loyal Subjects within the Island, and especially Captain
Burleigh, who had formerly served him in the Army, and who now made an^ attempt
to rescue the King out of Hammond's hands: but miscarrying, he was taken, and
on the 10th. of February put to death at Winchester, being tried for High
Treason by Sergeant Wild. Upon this his Majesty put forth his Declaration,
which begot great Compassion in the Hearts of all his Loyal Subjects throughout
the Kingdom. But yet they were not able to help him, the Power being out of
their Hands. And he suffered a very close Confinement, being sequestered from
the Converse of men, which made him apply himself to a more divine and blessed
Converse with God, as may be seen by his Excellent meditations, in his Book
called (...), or the Pou^traiture of his Majesty, in his Solitude and
Sufferings, then wrote.

And now the Universities were purged; for having the Sword, they resolved to
have none of those Gownmen to plead Gospel for the Kings Authority, and
therefore all such should be ejected, that knew not how against Conscience to
preach and declaim of their sides; to which end the Earl of Pembrook
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, with others as learned as himself,
were sent to purge the University, where they turned forth many learned and
honest men, under the Notion of Ignorant and Scandalous, by which means they
sent packing all such as were not for their turn.

April the 20th. the Duke of York made his escape from St. James's, in woman
apparel, and landed safe at ^ort in Holland; and about the same time, several
Peti^ions came to the Parliament, and especially one from ^he County of Essex,
which supplicate, That the Army might be paid off and Disbanded, and the King
admit^ed to a personal Treaty. Surry and the City of London followed with the
like, and the Affections of the People began to appear, and were ready to fly
to Arms. The Kentish men being up ten Thousand strong were routed by General
Fairfax, the Earl of Norwich who ^eaded them, with five hundred men crossed
over the Thames into Essex, and Sr. Charles Lucas joining him with 200 thousand
men, they possessed themselves of Cholchester, which became the seat of War and
endured a famous Siege. Also at the same time a part of the Navy revolted to
the Prince, who having attempted to help his Father, in vain, was forced to
retire into Holland, with his Fleet. Then the Earl of Holland, the Earl of
Peterborough and others, Head a fresh Insurrection at Kingston upon Thames,
where they were routed, the Earl of Holland taken, and the Lord Francis Villers
the Duke of Buckingham's Brother slain.

Affairs standing in this Posture, the Scots are much displeased, tho they had
many fair Offers made them by the Parliament, Concerning the Payment of money
yet due to them; and on the 24th, day of July they passed an Ordinance, to
establish the Presbyterian Government in England and Ireland, under Classical,
Provincial, and Parochial Assemblies, to please them; yet all would not do, for
they Voted in Scotland, a War with England, and published a Declaration,
wherein they propose: That the King may come to London, or to some of his
Houses near, with safety: That those who had Carried him away might make
Satisfaction, or be punished for it: That the Army under the Lord Fairfax might
be disbanded: That Presbytery be settled and Sectaries punished: That all
members of the House might be restored. Upon this Berwick was surprised, Forces
came out of Ireland, and many rise in the North for the King: Carlisle is
seized, and their Forces increased under Sr. Marmaduke Langdale, Sr. Thomas
Glenham* Sr. Philip Musgrave, and others, to the number of three Thousand Horse
and foot. Sr. Marmaduke Langdale is made their General: And on the 13th, of
July, the Scots enter with an Army into England, under Duke Hamilton with whom
Langdale joins, and beats Lambert at Apple^^by: Several places declared for the
King, and all things seemed in an hopeful way, when Cromwell having qui^eted
Wales, marches with his Army to Preston in Lancashire, to give a stop to
Hamilton, who was about twenty Thousand strong, with the English: Lambert joyn^
with Cromwell, and make up a Body of about twelve Thousand; on the 17th. of
August both Armies Face one another, and the battle being begun on the English
side, after two hours dispute, the Scots gave ground (...) and were most
fiercely pursued by the English, and Totally routed, multitudes of them being
taken, but Hamilton escaped to Nantwich, with three Thousand horse where the
Country being up in Arms seized upon most of them, and at last Hamilton
himself was taken at Uloxeter, by the Lord Gray of Grooby; the Scots En^signs,
Cornets, and Colors, then taken, were afterward hung up in Westminster Hall.
Sr. Marmaduke Langdale wa^ also taken, and Cromwell improving his Victory,
marches toward Monroe, who was coming with a reserve of six Thousand Scots,
but upon Hamilton's overthrow, had order to return into Scotland, which they
did, but the Anti-Hamiltonian party in Scotland, under Argile, which were the
stricter sort of Presbyters; invited Cromwell in to Scotland, which the laying
hold on, to smooth his way he put forth a Declaration, severely prohibiting any
Soldier, under pain of Death, to take either Money, Horses, Goods, Victuals,
or any other thing, o^ any way to abuse the People. He put such a terror among
the Scots, that they all presently submitted, and agreed to disband their
Armies, and to render up to him Berwick, and Carlisle, which were in their
Hands: That a Parliament should be called in Scotland for the settling Religion,
and composing their differences, and also that none that had been in the last
In^agements against England, should be chosen of this ^ew Parliament, or into
their general Assembly. Thus ^aving settled Scotland to his mind, he returns
into Eng^and. Upon his Victory against Hamilton, Colchester ^eing driven to the
utmost extremity, was surrendered, and the two valiant Gentlemen contrary to
Faith given, Sr. Charles Lucas, and Sr. George Lisle, shot to Death, and the
Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel. and others sent Prisoners to London. While these
things were in doing, there had been some Attempts made toward the private
murdering of the King, which was made known to the Parliament, who took some
Examinations thereupon, but nothing to any purpose done in it, he being ^ow
looked upon as a Tyrant, and suffered openly to be so called daily, with many
other most opprobrious Speeches, both against his person and Government, which
the Parliament took no notice of, but had made an Order in April, before: That
any three of their Committee Men at Darby House, should have Power to Imprison
and sequester, all such as shall actually adhere to any, that shall raise or
endeavor to raise, any Tumults or Insurrections, or shall so much as speak or
publish any thing reproachful of the Parliament or their proceedings; so that
you see they had tied up men's Tongues; from speaking against themselves,
without the least restraint of reviling their King, and, for every light Word,
a free born Subject of England, was made an offender, and liable to be ruined,
at the Pleasure of three Arbitrary men of their Committee, absolutely against
that known Maxim of our Law, Nemo imprisonetur aut disseisietur nisi per legale
judicium parium suorum. No man shall be imprisoned, or disseised of his
Property, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers; that is, by a jury of twelve
men. But what signified Magna Charta, Petition of Right, the Ancient Laws of
the Land, to these Men, who had trampled the Imperial Crown under their feet,
and usurped more than ever rightful Monarch, or the most Arbitrary of our Kings
ever Claimed? And had raised upon the People, for the maintenance of the
unnatural War, and toward the enslaving of themselves, about three Millions of
pounds sterling Per annu^ which was six times more than ever the most rapacio^
of our Kings had raised on the People, besides the va^ Incomes of the Kings
revenue, Sequestrations, and Compositions.

About the third of August, the Prince (now our Sovereign) sent Letters to the
City, Expressing his goo^ affection to Peace, and to the whole City, and his
E^deavours to vindicate his fathers Liberty and just Prer^gative, and Rights;
and to restore to the People the^^ Laws, Liberties, and Property, to free them
from Bondage, and to ease them of the Burden of Excise, an^ Taxes, to settle
Religion, and to reduce all things in to their proper Channel. This Letter was
accompanie^ with others, and a Declaration to the same purpose, a^^ which were
Communicated to the Parliament. Bu^ there, in Requital, it was vehemently urged
by some* That the Prince might be declared a Traitor and a Rebel, but others
stood up and gave several Reasons (to^ long here to rehearse) to the Contrary;
and so it passed over at this time. On the 7th. of August an ordinance passed,
for erecting a new Militia in every County, and particularly for the County of
Wilts, Commissioners being named, who had power to raise what men they pleased,
to Arm them, and to fine defaulters ten pound a Man, and twenty days
Imprisonment, and to levy four hundred pound a Week, upon that one County,
besides the ordinary Taxes, and free Quarter. O brave Liberty and Freedom!

Whilst the Army were employed in reducing the Scots, and Royal party,
Petitions were continually sent from several Counties, to the Parliament, all
tending to the same effect, the disbanding the Army, easing the people of their
Burdens, and a personal Treaty with the King. The City of London Petitions
also for the same, and to have their imprisoned Citizens released, which were,
chiefly Aldermen Langham and Bunce, and their Recorder Glin. The Lords had, it
seems, not con^^rred readily with the Commons, in some of their ^otes, upon
which it was moved in the House, to take ^way the Lords negative Voice So early
Arbitrary ^egan to show it self in the highest degree, nothing ^ow seeming too
great for the Commons: For a certain ^awyer, undertook to make good; That the
House of Commons (being the Representative of all the People) ^ad power to Act
without the Lords, for the safety of ^he People, in case the Lords deserted
their Trust. Here was a ground laid for a future subverting the Foundation of
all Parliaments, and how well they improved this Doctrine we shall see
hereafter. The Lords and Commons, had laid by the King, and now the Commons
were for laying aside the Lords, and the next thing to be expected will be to
see the Army and their Grandees to lay aside the Commons, and to rule alone by
themselves, usurping both the Kings Sovereign and Governing power, the
Parliaments Legislative power, and the Judges Iudicative power, and so
Establish their Oligarchy, or else it may be expected, that one more powerful
than the rest, should usurp all the Power into his own hand, and become a most
absolute and Arbitrary Tyrant, as it happened to come to pass.

I cannot pass over another excellent mark of strange Arbitrariness, against
all Law and Right, Moral as well as Civil, in their sequestring the Estate of
one Wall a Delinquent as they called him, after his Death, and taking it from
his Wife and Children gave it to one of their Creatures, who sued for the same,
tho it was argued against their unjust Proceedings, That in the case of the
highest Treasons, and of Felony, no man was Condemned after his Death, because
he was not then in being, to Answer for himself, and there could be no
proceeding in Law against Non Ens: Nay if a Fellon tho alive, will stand mute,
he shall not forfeit his Lands, because he wants Answer, tho he loses his Life
for Contempt of the Law. Yet the Godly party prevailed, and they bestowed the
Sequestration of the sai^ Wall's Lands, tho dead, on another, with a Proviso,
th^^ it should not be drawn into Example.

Cromwell gives the Parliament, by a Letter to the Speaker, an account of his
Victories, with Admonition to them, not to hate God's people, who were as the
Apple of his Eye, and for whom Kings were to be reproved, That they should
fulfill the end of their Magistracy, that all that would live quietly and
Peaceably might have Countenance from* them, and that they wh^ were implacable,
might be speedily destroyed out o^ the Land. And to prepare the way for their
Destruction, they ordered: That an Ordinance be Penned, and brought into the
House of Commons, to try all such by Martial Law, in the City of London, as
shall be found to Plot Design, or Contrive any thing, to endanger the
Parliament or City: Here again; you may see all the Common Laws of the Land
laid aside, and Martial Law made use of, in the Head City of the Land. Which
was then no Garrison, and by order of these Parliamentarians, and Assertors of
the peoples Liberties, Rights, and Priviled^ges.

But however, the Army being at a distance from the City, subduing the Kings
Friends, and the Parliaments Foes, the Independent Party in the House of
Commons, were not so prevalent, but that the other Party took Courage; and
appearing, began to come more to themselves, encouraged by several Petitions
out of the Country, for a Treaty with the King, upon which they became
inclinable, and begun to set themselves to that Pious work, tho hindered all
that could be, by the Clamours, Speeches, and Behavior of the Independants.
And thereupon the Earl of Middlesex, Sir John Hippesly, and Mr. Bulkley, were
sent to the King, to let him know their Resolutions; who returned, related the
Kings ready Compliance thereto, as a thing he much desired; upon which they
Vote, That the Votes of Non-Addresses should be repealed; That the King might
send for such Persons, as were necessary for him in the Treaty; That he should
be in a state of Freedom; That five Lords and ten Commoners, be chosen
Commissioners to Treat with the King at New^ort in the Isle of Wight. These
Votes were sent to the ^ing, and Commissioners chosen; for the Lords, the ^arls
of Northumberland, Salisbury, Pembroke, Middlesex, and the Lord Say: for the
Commons were, Lord Wain^an, Mr. Peirpoint, Sr. Henry Vain the younger, Sr.
Har^^ttle Grimston, Sr. Jo. Pots, Mr. Brown, Mr. Crew, Mr. Bulkly, Mr. Hollis,
and Mr. Glyn. Their Propositions ^ere not much easier than their former, to
which the King gave very Satisfactory Answers, conceding to ma^y things, for
Peace sake, against his Prerogative; the ^reatest Difficulty being the business
of Episcopacy, which ^he King was unwilling should be wholly abolished. And now
it was very likely, that the King and Parliament had agreed, and a full peace
had insued, but in ^he mean time many Officers of the Army held their Cabals at
Windsor, where they were Contriving the Destruction of the King, and the
Dissolution of the Par^iament; which Cabals they also continued at London, and
other places, under the name of Agitators in behalf of the Army. These were
framing a Government among themselves, and drew up a Remonstrance, shew^ng:
That they were the Body of the People of England: That their Interest was the
public Interest of the People; That the People were the only Competent Judges
of their own safety: That the supreme Magistrates were the People Armed with
supreme Authority, and with the Sword. These persons concluded among
themselves; that some should be chosen out of the Army, to represent the whole
Body: These not to exercise the Legislative power, but only to draw up the
Foundation of a Government; which the people were to consent to, which consent
or Agreement of the People, should be above Law: That in the Agreement a day
should be set for the Dissolution of the Parliament; and this to be drawn up in
a Remonstrance from the Army. This was encouraged by Major general Harrison,
who urgged, there could be no safety for them nor the Nation, but by the
cutting off the Kings Head, and the thoroughly purging at least, if not the
Dissolving the Parliament. Upon this the Army, now wholly at Cromwell's
Devotion, sends up a Petition to the Commons, for Justice to be done on the
King, as a Capital Offender. That the Prince of Wales and Duke: of York be
Summoned by a Day, and if they come not in, to be declared incapable of the
Succession and Government, and if they come in, to be proceeded against for
Satisfaction: That the Revenues of the Crown be sequestered: That public
Justice might be done against the Actors in the late Wars, against the
Parliament: That they may be paid their Arrears, and the Country eased of free
Quarters; and lastly, that a Period be put to this Parliament; and care taken
son the Electing of future Parliaments, and that no King be admitted for the
future.

Upon this the Army, that they might once more get the King into their
Clutches, cause their General Fairfax, to write a Letter to Colonel Hammond,
commanding him to deliver up the King to Colonel Ewer, who obeing, Ewer
carries the King out of the Isle of Wight to Hurst Castle, on the 30th. of
November: This force gave the Parliament an ill Resentment, and they Vote, That
the seizing the Person of the King and Carrying him Prisoner to Hurst Castle,
was without the Advice and Consent of the Houses. The Treaty thus broke off,
and both the Lords and Commons, Vote, That the King's Concessions was a
sufficient Ground for Peace. But the Army come up to London, and quarter at
White Hall, St. James's and the Mews, resolving to hinder the Parliaments
proceedings with the King, and for that end they seized about forty Members
coming to the House, and committed them to Guards, in several places at
Westminster, and then acoused ninety odd Members for inviting in the Scots, and
required they might be excluded the House. The House of Commons troubled at
these Proceedings, Adjourned for three days, and in the mean time the Army go
on in making a Model of Government: In which it was agreed, That in April
following, The Army Entering the City

Oliver seeking God whil the King: is murdered by his order

The Rump and dreggs of ye house of Commons Sitting after ye Army had turned ye
good members out

Bradshaw the Iaylor. and ye Hangman keeper of the Libertyes of England

that Parliament should be Dissolved, and that new Re^esentatives of the people
should be chosen, Consisting three hundred Men, half of which number should be
suffi^^ent to make a Law: and that in the Intervalls of Parlia^ent, the Nation
should be Governed by a Council of State. ^hese, with some other the like
Stuff, was to be called ^e Agreement of the People.

This force being put upon the House, and new mould^d, driving away all that
were not for their turn, be^^des many others for fear absented themselves, the
rest who afterward obtained the name of Rump, or Rumpers, being the Relics of
a greater Body) met again, and submitting to the Power of the Army to please
them, Vote: That no Message be received from the King (...) pain of Treason:
That the General should take Care of his Person, and that a Charge of High
Treason should be ^rawn up against him: Having now fully concluded to ^estroy
him.

Thus have we briefly drawn to your View, the first ^ineaments of an Arbitrary
Government, and Tyrannical Usurpation, in very short Draughts, showing however
the ^ays and means, whereby these Men, or Junto of U^urpers, came by their
Power and Authority, overthrow^^g the very Foundation of our Ancient and most
glorious Monarchy, under the Notion of Liberty, and setting up a Tyrannical
Democracy, or rather Oligarchy, under the Regiment of a few selected Fellows,
who called themselves the Parliament, and the Representatives of the Nation,
and in whom they pretend all Right of Power and Magistracy was to be placed.

The very shadow of all legal Power was now gone, and this unparalled force
put upon the Parliament, in ^xcluding the Major part of their Members, by the
Arbitrary will of Oliver Cromwell, and his M^rmidons, contrary to all Law and
Right, took from them the very ^lame of a Parliament. But they care not for
that, ^hey shadow their impious Acts, under that venerable Denomination, and
having now, as they thought, got unto the Kingly throne, by the power of the
Army, and the, Sword, imagined they should keep it, when all thi^ while, not
having the Command of the Army, but being ridden by the general Officers
thereof, who designed as soon as they had done their work, to pay them their
Wages by dismissing them, were but as the Cats foot, made use of by the Monkey,
for the raking the Chestnut out of the Fire, the benefit of which they intended
to take themselves, and this was the Murdering of their lawful Soverain, whom
they had deposed, which was the next main Design driven on by the Independent
Army, and their Dromidaries this Junto of Men.

We have seen these Men grown up into full Strength of Arbitrariness, and got
into the Throne of their Sovereign, we will now proceed, to Trace them by their
Steps, in the Exercise of this their Tyrannical Usurpation; which we shall find
to be according to the same unlawful Progress, and to be of the same bloody
Complexion; for it is a certain Maxim, That what Power is got by unlawful
means, must be kept by the same unlawful ways, notwithstanding the specious
pretenses of Liberty, and settling the Kingdom.

This Junto of Men being met, and Voted as we have declared, That no more
Address should be made to the King, nor any Message received from him, they
take Care in the next place, having got into the Saddle, to keep it; and to
make the World believe, they had a right to it, if they could: for now an
Ordinance was drawn up, that the Lords and Commons of England do declare. That
by the Fundamental Laws of the Land, it is Treason in the King of England, to
levy War against the Parliament. This preparative in making the King a
Transgressor, and in placing the Supreme Power in the People, whose
Representatives they were, was in Order to their Design of Murdering the King.
This being sent up to the Lords, who denied to consent to it, the Commons grow
very angry, and finding the Lords to be yet an Obstacle to their bloody
Intentions, they Vote: That all Members of Committees, should Act in any
Ordinance by them made, without the Lords Concurrance, the People having by
God, the full power Originally in themselves, and therefore what ever they
enact is Law; which ^assed Nemine Contradicente:

The Army still continuing their Guards upon the House, keeping out any of
those Members were not of their Party, and imprisoning them, they had much ado
^o make and House, and sometimes it was Noon before ^hey could get forty men
together, without which it ^ould not be an House; so very Scrupulous were these
^rand Hypocrites, to keep up a Face of Authority, in ^hese minute
Circumstances, who in the great Fundamentals had broke in two all Bonds,
Obligations, Oaths, and Laws.

The Army now the Lords of all, Garrison Black-Fryars, and St. Paul's, turning
the house of God into a Stable, and defiling it with Dung, robbing diverse Halls
(which they called borrowing) of several sums of Money, by their Saint-like
Prerogative, accounting the test Egyptians. In the mean time, the secluded
Members, still imprisoned, put forth a Declaration against this most horrid
violence of the Army, done to their Persons, and to the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, the Rights of the People, and the privileges of Parliament: this was
dated 11th. December, 1648. This being complained of to the House, both Lords
and Commons put forth a Declaration against it, wherein they declare, That the
Declaration put forth, by those Members of the House of Commons, Excluded the
House, in which was these Words, viz: That all Acts, Ordinances, Votes, and
Proceedings of the House of ^ommons, made si^^e the 6th, of December or
hereafter to be ^ade, duering the restraint and forcible Seclusion from the
House, and the Continuance of the Armies force upon it, ^re no way Obligatory,
but void and null, to all Intents and Purposes; was false, Scandalous, and
Seditious, and ^nded to destroy the visible, and fundamental Government of the
Kingdom. And therefore ordered the printed ^aper to be suppressed, and that all
who had an hand (...) it, to be incapable to bear Office, or to have any trust,
place, or Authority in the Kingdom, or to sit as Members of either House of
Parliament. Here again you see a most bold stroke of Arbitrary Sway, and what
Noses of Wax they made of all priviledes of Parliaments* O most excellent
Conservators of the Liberties of the Nation*

The next thing they fell upon was the unvoting of all former Votes of the
House which tended to any accommodation with the King, and renewed again their
old Vote of Non-Addresses in Terminis, and that the Treaty with him in the Isle
of Wight was highly dishonorable, and apparently Destructive to the good of
the Kingdom. Thus forty or fifty of this Independent Junto undid, what was
before done by at least three hundred and forty before.

December 14th. Major General Brown, Sr. William Waller, Sr. John Clotworthy,
Major General Massy, Commissary General Copley, were all imprisoned by a
Council of War at White Hall, tho Members of Parliament, upon which, they put
forth also a new Declaration, or Protestation, in the name of themselves, and
all the Freeborn people of England, against the violent and illegal
Proceedings of the General and his Council of War, against the Laws of the
Land, and Liberties of the People the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; and
that i^ was an higher Usurpation, and exercise of an Arbitrary and unlawful
Power, than has been heretofore pretended, or attempted by this, or any other
King, or other Power whatsoever, within this Realm.

About this time came forth a Paper from the Army, called the Agreement of the
People; being almost word for word, the same which formerly had been presented
in the Year 1647. by the Agitators of the Army, and one Gifford a Jesuit,
busy in promoting it, and then condemned by the Commons, as matter Destructive
to the beings of Parliaments, and to the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom;
and caused General Fairfax to condemn one of these Agitators, who promoted it,
and caused him to be shot to Death a Ware. This was ill timed, and the business
not yet Rip^ enough, and was a second time by the Vote of the same House
condemned, as Seditious and Contemptuous and Destructive, etc. and several were
imprisoned upon it; but now the same being again obtruded upon this Junto, they
closed with it, and followed it is Dictates, which were briefly: That the people
should agree, or did agree together, to take away the present Government, by
King Lords and Commons, which they were now going about, as the Armies
Journy-men, as fast as they could.

And now Oliver Cromwell every day begins to grow more Conspicuous, insomuch as
several Lords laying aside their Honor and Greatness begin to Court and fawn
upon him, and servilely to attend on him and do him Homage. The next thing the
Lords and Commons do, is to Curb the City, whom they suspect; and to hinder
them from a free Election of their City Officers; another mark of Arbitrary
Power: For which end many Exceptions are made, for those that were to be
elected into any Office, that none who had bore Arms for the King, in the first
or second War, or that had joined with the Scots, or had subscribed the
Engagement 1647. or were aiding in any Tumult, or Insurrection in the City,
with other Restrictions, by which they brought all those under, that they
believed not fit for their wicked purposes. This was thought yet too short by
Skippon, who moved it to have also added, That none might bear Office that
promoted the Treaty with the King, or endeavored to have him brought to
London: Which according to the desire of the Saints was ordered as an
Additional Ordinance; So that you now see, the very endeavoring of a Peace and
Settlement of the Nation, was become a notorious Crime, and made a person
incapable of bearing any Office in the City.

And to make themselves sure one of another, as Oaths, Declarations, and
Protestations could make these Usurpers, they cause their Members to sign a new
P^otestation, against the Votes for a Treaty in the Isle of Wight, and
especially against that Vote which much troubled them: That his Majesty's
Answers to the Propositions of both Houses, were a ground for the two Houses to
Proceed to a Settlement. This, tho formerly thought by themselves to tend to
Faction, was now readily performed at the Armies request: Four of their
imprisoned Members had been released, and now sixteen more were sent for before
Ireton, and by him discharged Telling them it was the General's pleasure, they
should be released, provided they attempted nothing against the Actings of the
present Parliament and Army. But the Gentlemen would pass no such Engagement,
which seeing, he gave order for their release, but with this Menace, That if
they made any Disturbance it should be at their peril.

The business they had now in hand, and were Resolved on, viz: The King's
murder, must be cloaked under a Religious Covering, as if they were about some
Pious Work; and therefore they mock God, as well as delude man, and keep a Fast
at St. Margarets Westminster, where some few Lords and some of the Commons
assembled, to whom the Pulpit-merry- Andrew, Hugh Peter's preached: Moses
leading the Children of Israel out of Egypt, being the Subject which he applied
to the General and the Leaders of the Army, now leading the people out of
Egyptian Bondage; and after some time, as Ridiculously as profanely hiding
himself in the Pulpit, he starts up, and tells them he had it now by
Revelation, That the Army was to root out Monarchy, not only in England, but in
all other Kingdoms, and so should bring all people out of that Egyptian
Bondage: That that Army, was the Stone cut out of the Mountain, which was to
dash all the Powers of the earth to pieces: With other Blasphemous Speeches of
the like Nature.

Mr. Prin was yet kept a Prisoner at the Kings-head-Inn in the Strand, from
whence he wrote a Letter to Fairfax, to know by what Authority he was thus kept
a Prisoner; he be ing a Parliament man, and a Freeborn Subject of England. The
General, who was but Chip ^n Porridge, and knew little of what was done by
^romwell and Ireton, sent him word, That he thought he had been released with
the rest, and that he would ^end to know what they had against him. Upon which
Mr. Prin puts forth a Declaration, showing the ^orrid Injustice of their
Proceedings against the Members of Parliament: and against and Contrary to all
the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of the Subject.

The Council of War in the mean time, to humble his Majesty, ordered, That all
State and Ceremony should be ^orborn to the King, and his Attendants lessened.
And now having made way for the most horrid and Bloody design that ever was
heard of, the Motion is made in this usurping House, to proceed to the Trial of
the King, as a Capital Offender: When the grand Impostor Cromwell stood up, and
said; That if any man moved this upon Design, he should think him the greatest
Traitor in the World; but since Providence and Necessity had cast them upon it,
he should pray to God to bless their Counsels. And so on the 28th. of
December, 1648. Thomas Scot, brought in the Ordinance for the Trial of the
King, being read and Committed three several times, and all the Commissioners
names inserted, Consisting of diverse Gentlemen and Soldiers. This Ordinance
being passed the Junto, they send it up to the Lords House, by the Lord Gray of
Grooby, together with their Vote formerly made, Viz. Resolved, etc. That the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; do declare, and adjudge, That by the
Fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason in the King of England for the
time to come, to levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom of England. The
house of Lords debate the matter, and first the Declaratory Vote; against
which, the Earls of Manchester and Northumberland, with others, spoke, and
declared, There was none nor could be any such Fundamental Law in England,
whereby the King could be a Traitor, by leaving War against his People; and
that thus to declare Treason by an Ordinance, when no law was extant to judge
it by, was most unreasonable. Upon which the Lords cast out this Ordinance and
Vote and adjourned themselves for seven days. This proceeding of the Lords gave
them no small trouble, and stirr'^ up the wrath of some of the Zealots, who
threatened t^ hang a Pad-lock on the Lords door; and sending up t^ search their
journal Book, they found the Lords ha^ made these two Votes: That they do not
Concur to t^^ said declaratory Vote. And Secondly, That they rejecte^ the
Ordinance for the Trial of the King. Upon which these men resolving to be rid
of the Lords, as well a^ of King, they Vote, That they should Act without them
(as well they might, according to their own Law) Tha^ all Authority was founded
in the People, and that they b^ing the Representatives of the People, all
Authority l^^ in them. Some of them were for Impeaching the Lords, for
favoring the grand Delinquent of the Land, a^ they called the King. And now to
make all sure on the sides, that they may Act legally, On the 4th. of Janu^ry
they Vote; That the People are, under God, the Orig^nal of all just Power. That
the Commons of England i^ Parliament ass^mbled, being chosen by, and
representing the People, have the Supreme Power of this Nation. To^ whatsoever
is declared or Enacted for Law, by the Hou^^ of Commons assembled in
Parliament, has the force of Law This makes clear Work, and by this our
Arbitrary U^urpers may do what they will, and cut off their King Head according
to their own Position, legally; wha^ need of Kings, Lords, Laws, Rights,
Liberties, Properties, or sundamental Government, when the Arb^trary
Consciences of such men, may serve instead of al^ and conclude thereby all the
People of England. th^^ they declare against it, and tho opposed by the King or
House of Peers? And thus, notwithstanding the rejection of the Lords, these
Commons pass their Ordinance, and declaratory Vote by the name of An Act o^
Parliament of the House of Commons (which was never before heard of) for the
Trial of Charles Stewart, Kin^ of England. This being o^jected to Hugh Peter's,
tha^ there was no President or Example, for the Trial o^ a King, by a judicial
Court, he Profanely applied* That there was never any President before the
Virgin Mary, of a Woman's conceiving and bringing forth a Child, without
accompanying with a Man, therefore they might walk without President, for this
was an Age to make Examples and Presidents.

There was yet one thing that passed these men, which they had not foreseen,
which was, That it was a very improper thing, to make use of the Kings Seal,
wherein he is styled King of England, etc. by the Grace of God; to seal a
Commission against him for his Trial. They were now in have, and could not stay
for a new one, which they had not as yet thought on, therefore it was
concluded, the Commissioners should proceed upon the Ordinance, without any
Commission under Seal, and that every Commissioner should set his own Hand and
Seal, to the Instruments of their Proceedings. All things being now in a
readiness for the Trial, The King is taken from Hurst Castle, and brought to
Winchester, thence to Farnham, thence to Winsor, and thence to St. James, on
the 19th. day of January. And they had caused for the greater Solemnity of the
Business, their Sergeant Dandy, who was appointed Sergeant at Arms to the
Commissioners, for the Trial of his Majesty, to proclaim it openly in
Westminster Hall, with his Mace on Horse back, with six Trumpets and several
Officers attending, all bare, That the Commissioners were to sit to morrow, and
that all those, who had any thing to say, against Charles Stewart King of
England, might be heard. This was done in like manner in Cheap Side, and at the
Royal Exchange. The same day the House Voted their great Seal to be broken, and
ordered a new one to be made.

Upon this Mr. Prin, sends to the Junto a Memento, of their unpresidented
Proceedings, Complaining of the force and Violence put upon their fellow
Members, warning them from Acting, Consulting, or ordaining any Act or
Ordinance without Concurrence of their fellow Members, being Arbitrary and
against Law, and that the secluded Members, not only declared against such
Proceedings, but more especially against this horrid Act of theirs for the
Trial of the King, showing them, That by the common Law, and by the Statute of
25. Ed. 3. and all other Acts concerning Treason it is high Treason for any man
to Compass or Contrive the Death of the King, or his eldest Son, tho never
Executed: That they were also bound to the Contrary by their Oath of All
giance, from which no Power could absolve them. That they had in above an
hundred Declarations and Ordinances, in the name of the Parliament professed;
That they never intended the least hurt, injury, or Violence to the Kings
person, hi^ Crown, Dignity, or Posterity, with several other things, very
pressing and full, as may be seen at larg^ in the printed Paper: but all was in
vain, for they were resolved on the Business; tho they could give no^ kind of
colorable Reason for their Actings. This Memento was seconded with a
Declaration and Protestation (...) signed the 19th. of January, by the said
Prin and Clement Walker, another of the secluded Members, which ran very much
after the same Tenure, and absolutely Protesting against the Junto's Actings
and Proceedings declared against the illegal Act of Erecting an high Court of
Justice, and usurping a Power against all Law and without all President, to
try, depose, and bring to Capital punishment, the King, and to dis-inherit hi^
Posterity, etc. But at the same time the Officers of the Army, had contrived
and ordered two Godly Petitions, to be presented to them, viz: For the
abolishing Tithes, and the Repealing the Act for the Banishment of the Jews.

And now Oliver and his Privado Officers, having brought their Work to this
readiness, are fasting and praying as hard as they can, no doubt for the
Success of it, tho they put another Face on the matter, and said, it was for
Direction and Counsel. And now i^ was, and not before, that this great Usurper
of the Monarchy, and Liberties of the people, began to lay the great Design of
steping into the Sovereignty, and laying the Foundation of his Tyrannical
reign, by the Death and Murder of the King; For the private Officers, both
from the King, and his Friends, and from the Prince himself, in this exigent,
to save the Life of his Father, were not small; but he that now aimed at all,
would not be content with a portion of justly acquired greatness, and perhaps
he was not sufficiently assured of the Mercy of the Prince he had so highly
offended, as that he could be able to forgive all those great Crimes he was
guilty of; but that either himself, or his Posterity might remember them to his
Prejudice, since all he was able to do toward his Majesty's Restoration, was
but what in Duty and Conscience he was bound to do. But what ever insti^ations
he had, besides those of the Devil, he was not to be shaken, tho attempted by a
Kinsman of his, and of his own Name, who (as reported) was sent either from the
Prince himself, then at the Hague, or from the States of Holland, with
Credential Letters, and a Blank sealed with the Kings and Princes Signets, and
confirmed by the States, for Cromwell to write his own Conditions in, if he
would preserve the Life of the King. This found him at his House recluse, with
his Privadoes at their Prayers, (as given out) but to what God we may casi^y
Imagine. The business being urgent, and the Kings Martyrdom approaching, the
Gentleman with some difficulty got to the private Speech of him, to whom (...)
very fully laid open the Hainousness of the Fact he was going about, and what
an Odium it was about to ^ast on the English Nation abroad, and withal let him
understand what Terms he had to offer him, and that he ^ight now make himself,
his Family, and Posterity for ever happy and Honorable; He was to have been
made Earl of Essex and Knight of the Garter, his S^n of the Bedchamber to the
Prince; Ireton Lord Lieutenant of Irelands.
otherwise he would bring such an Ignoimny on ^^e whole Generation, that no
^^me would be able to delete: Cromwell after his canting way, shifted it off
from himself, and put the Act upon the Army and Parliament, declaring he had
sought God very much in the Business, but as yet had no return of his Fasting
and Prayers about it, therefore he desired till night to consider of it, and
promised that he should hear from him before he went to Bed; and accordingly,
about Twelve or One of the Clock, the Gentlemen expecting his Answer, he sent
him word, That he might return, for he and his Officers had been seeking God,
and that now it was Resolved, the King must dye: this was but a night or two
before the King's Murder.

On the 20th. day of January, 1648. being Saturday, these bloody Commissioners
met, called an high Court of Justice, for the Trial of the King, who was
brought before them, and with much Patience, and sometimes smiling, he heard
their long Charge; but denying the Jurisdiction of the Court, refused to plead,
requiring them to show by what Law or Authority, besides their unjust
U^urpation, or power of the Sword, he was brought before them who were his
Subjects. I shall not trouble the Reader with any farther Relation of this
Trial, it being at large so often printed; nor with the Names of the Judges and
Officers of this pr^tended Court, it being to be had in every Booksellers shop:
I intending in these Collections only a brief Narrative of these Usurpers
Proceedings, that the World might behold the true Picture of Arbitrary
Government, and Tyrannical rule, and not an exact Chronicle or History of those
times, tho I would not omit any Material thing that may give Satisfaction or
Delight to the Reader. I shall observe that as an ill Omen, the Silver head of
the King's Staff dropped off, as the Charge was reading, which the King wondering
at and seeing none so Officious as to take it up, he stooped himself and taking
it up put it into his Pocket. At his going from the Court looking very
austerely about him without moving his Hat, he pointed with his Staff to the
Sword, and said I do not fear that. As he went along the Hall some Cried out
Justice, Justice, and others, God save the King.

On Sunday, Cromwell, Bradshaw, and the rest of the ommissioners kept a Fast at
White Hall, where preach^^ Joshuah Sprigg, whose Text was, He that sheds Man's
^ood by Man shall his Blood be shed. Then Mr. Foxley, those Text was, Judge not
lest you be Judged. Lastly, Hugh ^eters whose Text was: I will Bind their Kings
in Chains, ^^d their Nobles in Fetters of Iron. And thus by their wick^d
application of the word of God, they endeavored ^o justify their most
Execrable Murder of their Lawful King. There was by some, who durst to do any
thing against these Cruel and powerful men, certain Pa^ers scattered about, in
which were several Queries; ^s, Whether a King of three Kingdoms, could be
Con^emned by one Kingdom alone, without the Consent or Concurrence of the other
Kingdoms? Whether a King if tried, ought not to be tried by his Peers? And
whether he could be said to have any such in his Kingdom? Whether if a King
were Tryable, he ought not to be tried ^n full Parliament, of Lords and
Commons? Whether ^he 8th. part of the Members of the Commons meeting ^n the
House, under the force of the Army, the rest being forcibly restrained from
sitting, can by any Pretext of Law or Justice erect a Court for the Trial of
the King? And whether this could be properly called a Court of Justice, without
the great Seal of England? Whether that those men who by several Remonstrances,
Speeches, and Actions, have publicly declared themselves Enemies to the King,
can either in Law or Conscience be his Judges, when it is Exception enough for
the basest Felon to any Jury-man, to hinder him from being his Judge? Whether
this most illegal and Arbitrary Trial of the King, by an high Court of Justice,
may not prove a most Dangerous inlet, to absolute Tyranny, and bloody Butchery,
and every man's Life be at the Arbitrary will of his Enemies, erected into a
Court of Conscience without limits or bounds?

But words are nothing, and these paper Arms, tho furnished with the highest
Reason, could not move these obdurate Men, who persisted in their bloody
Business, driven on by the secret and forcible Machinations Oliver and his
Cabal. The second day being Mond^ the 22d. of January, the Court met again, and
the S^licitor Cook urged extremely for judgment against the Prisoner, unless he
would own the Authority of the Court; which the King constantly denied to do,
an^ offered his reasons against them, but they would not (...) heard. The 3d.
day, being January 23d. the King w^^ brought again before the Court, who had in
the Painte^ Chamber the day before, Resolved, That the King should not be
suffered to argue the Courts Jurisdiction, and ha^^ ordered, That in case he
offered to dispute the Authority of the Court, that the President should let
him kno^ that he ought to rest satisfied with this Answer: Tha^ the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament, have Constituted this Court, whose Power may
not, nor should be permitted, to be disputed by him. And that in case he should
refuse to answer, or acknowledge the Court, the Lord President should let him
know, his Contumacy should be recorded. But the King still persisted in the
deny a^ of their Authority, upon which the Clark reads, Charle^ Stewart King of
England, you are accused in the behal^ of the Commons of England, of diverse
high Crimes and Treasons, which Charge has been read unto you; the Court now
requires you to give your positive and final Answer, by way of Confession or
denial of the Charge^ But the King told them he could not acknowledge a new
Court, set up contrary to the Privileges of the People, to alter the
fundamental Laws of the Land. The 4th. and last day was the 27th. of January,
1648. where appeared about fifty six of those Commissioners, who sat when
judgment was given against the King by their President Bradshaw. But the King
having moved to be heard, before the Lords and Commons, in the painted Chamber,
promising after that to abide the judgment of the Court, they withdrew for
half an hour, and returning, they told the King This was but another denial of
the Courts jurisdiction, and therefore if he had no more to say, they would
proceed to Judgment. Upon this, after Bradshaw had made a long Speech,
endea^^uring to justify their Proceedings on this false point: ^^at the People
are the supreme Power, whom the Commons presented, he commanded the Clark to
read the Sentence, which was drawn up in Parchment, in these words. Whereas the
Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High Court of Justice,
for the trying of Charles Stewart King of England, before whom he had been
three times convented, and the first time a Charge of high Treason, and other
Crimes and Misdemeanors was read, in the behalf of the Kingdom of England, etc.
Here the Charge at length was read, after which the Clark proceeds, which
Charge being read unto him, as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stewart was
required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do: For all which Treasons
and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, the said Charles Stewart, as a Tyrant,
Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be put to Death, by the severing
his Head from his Body.

After this wicked Sentence passed by these Miscreants, ^he King was had away
to Sr. Robert Cotten's, and thence ^o St. James's, the rude Soldiers in his
passage by them ^lowing Tobacco in his Face, and one spit on it, which he wiped
off with his Hand-kerchief without taking ^otice of it. But when he heard some
of them to Cry out Justice, Justice, he said, alas! Poor Souls, for a piece of
Money, they will do as much for their Commanders. On the 29th. a Committee met
in the paint^d Chamber, to consider on the time and place of the Kings death,
which they ordered to be the next day, before his own Palace Gate, which was
approved of by the Commissioners, and a Warrant Signed and Sealed, by them
directed, to Hacker, Hunts, and Phare, and order that Marshal, Nigh, Caryl,
Salway, and Dell, should attend on his Majesty, and to administer to him
spiritual help; but the King would not be troubled with them, and at his
desire, Doctor Juxon Bishop of London was admitted to Pray with him in private,
in his Chamber, and to administer to him the Sacrament, and his Children
permitted to come to see him. But John Godwin was also sent to be an
over-looker of their Actions. (...) the mean time, the Junto Pen a
Proclamation, which they afterward caused to be published, making it hi^
Treason for any man, to proclaim or publish Char^^ Stewart, the Son, to be
rightful Heir and Successor the Crown of England after his Fathers death, or
^^ny other of that Line King of England: and that (...) man under Pain of
imprisonment, or other Arbitrary punishment, which they should think fit to
inflic^ shall Preach, Write, or speak any thing, contrary (...) the present
Proceedings of the supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament.

The Sunday before the King dyed, it is reported that some of the chief of the
Army and Parliament, tendered the King a paper to sign with promise of Life, an^
some show of a King, the Power being wholly investe^ on themselves, and was
Destructive to the Fundament^ Laws of the Land, to the Religion established, to
the Liberties and Properties of the People; one Proposition whereof was, To
continue the Power of the Sword (...) the Army, and to have as a standing
Force, under the same general Officers, forty Thousand Horse and Foot; they to
have the Choice of their own Officer among themselves, by a Council of War, and
to settl^ a constant Tax upon the People, by way of a Land rate^ for the
payment of the said Army, and to be collecte^ and levied by themselves; and a
Court martial to be Erected of an exorbitant Extent and Latitude. But h^
Majesty, disdaining to read them all, flung them aside and told them, He should
rather become a Sacrifice for his People, and dye by their Hands, than so to
betra^ their Laws, Liberties, Lives, and Estates, the Church and Honor of his
Crown, and so to make all Slaves t^ the Arbitrary Will, and Tyranny of an Army!
O Glorious Prince! Oh height of Impudence of armed Arbitrariness!

See yet how they proceed, on the 29th. of January the Junto Vote, That it be
enacted by this present Par^s^ament, and by the Authority of the same, That in
all Courts (...) Law, Justice, Equity, and in all Writs, Grants, Pa^nts,
Commissions, Inditements, Informations, Suits, Re^urns of Writs, Fines,
Recoveries, Exemplifications, Re^^gnizances, Processes, and Proceedings at Law,
etc. ^ithin the Kingdom of England and Ireland and Domi^ion of Wales, etc.
Instead of the Name, Style, or Ti^^e of King heretofore used, should thence
forward be used, and no other than the Name, Style, or Title, Custodes
^ibertatis Angliae, Authoritate Parliamenti; The keep^rs of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament; and the date of the Year of our Lord, and
no other; and instead of Juratores pro Domino Rege, shall be u^ed Juratores pro
republica: and so, Contra pacem dignitatem and Coronam nostram, should be
turned into Contra pacem publicam. All judges, Justices, Ministers, and
Officers to take Notice thereof, and that whatever should be done Contrary to
this Act hence forward, should ^e declared null, and void in Law, the Death of
the King, ^r any Usage, Law, Custom etc, to the Contrary.

The King after his Sentence, was lodged in White Hall, and the little time
they gave him to prepare himself, he was disturbed with the noise of his rude
Guards, filling all the Rooms with the smoke of their Tobacco, a thing
extremely offensive to him, and they Rung in his Ears the clincking of Pots,
and such like Noises; and not on^y so, but he lay so near the place where he
was to Dye, that he could hear every stroke of the Hammers of those Workmen,
that were erecting the Scaffold, and working all night: all which Barbarity was
to mortify him, but that would not bring him to their Bent: On Monday he was
removed to St. James's, whence he came the next day on Foot through the Park, to
suffer his Martyrdom.

And now on the 30th. of January, 1648. was Acted the most unheard of Tragedy,
that ever was Committed, and not to be paralleled in History, in any Country.
A King convented, and Tried, openly in a Court of unlawful Judicatory, as a
Capital Criminal, by the meanest of his Subjects, under pretense of Law, and
the publicly Executed on a Scaffold in the face of the Su^ and the People,
before his own Palace; by the han^ of the common Hangman (as it has since
appeared is so strange a thing, that it will be the Admiration o^ succeeding
Ages, as well as it has been of our own, and I think, a most notable Display
of Arbitrary Usurpation For tho we have had some of our Kings murdered i^ our
Land, yet there was some modesty showed in their Assassination, in that it was
done Privately, and Acted by great Persons, laying claim to, or Ambitioning the
Crown; nay, they were so Cautious, as in the Murders o^ Edward the second, and
Richard the second, First to depose them, and to take away their Crowns, or
making them to resign them by their own Acts, becoming thereby private men,
accounting them else Sacred to b^ murdered; but thus I say, to be publicly
put to Death, under the Color of Law and Justice, and to justify such a
bloody Perpetration to the World as a legal Act, being so palpable against all
Laws both Divine and Humane, was a thing never to be found in any Age, or in
any story. I shall say no more of it, his Majesty's Speech and all the fatal
Transactions of that Tragedy, being Printed at large; only I shall take notice,
that this Royal Martyr, with much Constancy, Courage, and Resolution laid his
Head on the Block, and suffered under the Ax, in refusing to acknowledge the
Authority of these bloody Usurpers to be legal, and because he would not betray
the Liberties, Lives, and Properties of his people to an unjust and usurping
Tyrannical Government.

Even whilst he was on the Scaffold, he was pitied by some of his Persecutors,
the Officers of the Army, which Cromwell perceiving, he begun to play with them
his usual juggling Tricks, and made them believe that he would consult with
them, concerning the saving of the Kings Life; Seeming to pity him himself,
and blaming him for being Obstinate, in not adhering to their Propositions,
feigning a Reluctance for his Death, and therefore told them, He should be very
glad if it might be effected with the safe^^ of the Kingdom; tho what was done,
was by the Autho^^ty of the Parliament, yet he feared the Odium might be ^^st
on them; but says he, before we proceed in this ^eighty Matter, let us seek
God; to which they agreed, and Oliver began a long-winded Prayer, which lasted
so ^^ng, till News was brought them, that the King was ^xecuted, which several
not suspecting, were surprised and amazed, but Cromwell holding up his Hands
told them, he now saw clearly, that it was not the will of God that the King
should live, and therefore he was ^fraid they had done ill to tempt God to
desire it.

This was the end of his Majesty Charles the First, and ^ow all the world
believed, as most legally they might, that this Parliament was dissolved of
Course, by the Death of the King; by what Authority now can they pretend to sit
and Act? Even by the same unjust Power of the Sword, whereby they had committed
so many ^llegal Acts, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Land; as now in
continuing themselves a Parliament, was against the most ancient Constitutions
of Parliaments. But they lay hold of the Act, of 17. Car. 1. for the
Continuance of this Parliament: In which these words Were: And be it declared
and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
that this present Parliament now assembled, shall not be dissolved, unless by
Act of Parliament, to be passed for that Purpose. Therefore they declared, and
believe, that they are still a Parliament, and are not Dissolved by the Kings
Death, because not dissolved by an Act of Parliament. But it was answered, that
it was, and ever has been, the undoubted Prerogative of the King, to Call and
Dissolve Parliaments, and that an Act for their Perpetuation, was a taking away
one of the chiefest Flowers in the imperial Crown of England, which the King
could not grant, and give away, tho with consent of both Houses. But this Act
was palpably against the King's inclination, being as it were forced to it
(...) some Heady, violent, and turbulent Men. But that Perpetuation or
Extention of it beyond the Kings Death was never then thought of, is most plain
by the Preamble of the said Act, where it is expressed, That by reason of great
Sums of Money, of necessity to be advanced, for the speedy relief of his
Majesty's Army an^ People, in the northern parts of the Realm, and tha^ Credit
might be had for the raising such Moneys, an^ to take away the Fears and
Jealousies of any that should lend such Moneys upon their Credit, that this
Parliamen^ should not be Prorogued or Dissolved, before Justice b^ done on
Delinquents, and public Grievances redressed, (...) was Enacted, etc: That
they should not be Dissolved, b^^ by an Act of Parliament; so that by the very
end an^ Scope of this Act, there could not be thought to b^ any Perpetuation of
this Parliament: or that they should not be Dissolved by the Kings death: For
else, certainly they would have inserted the like special Clause, a^ That this
Parliament shall not be Dissolved by his Majesty death, but only by Act of
Parliament. But that the Parliament was Dissolved Ipso facto, by the Kings
death, being called by his Writ, to confer with him as his Parliament, Arduis
negotiis, or about urgent Affairs, wa^ Resolved, 1 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 14.14.
Hen. 4. Cook 4th. Institut. p. 46. etc. For it is not natural to suppose, and
impossible, That the Lords and Common should be a Parliament, and make Acts and
Laws without the King, as for a Body to move and Act without an Head; and
therefore, had there been any such thin^ intended to have been Enacted, it was
void, because impossible; for the Kings Royal assent could not be ha^ after his
Death, and there is no Clause in the Act tha^ obliges his Successor to Consent,
which clearly shew^ they never had any such intention, at the making of this
Act. And therefore on the death of the King all Commissions both of the Judges
and others cease, and a^ Proceedings determined, tho the King is said to sit i^
the Court of the King's Bench in his politic Capacity which indeed never dies
so as to cause an Interregnum, ^ut other ways as to the Continuance of
Commissions, Writs etc. which must be renewed. Consider also, that if these men
after the Death of the King, could ^e a Parliament, they must be so either by
the Common Law and Custom of Parliaments, which is clearly against them, or by
this Statute which as little Countenances them, for they would then be another
thing, distinct from the Parliament which was summoned in the Kings Life; for
the Country had no Power to elect their Representatives, but by the King's
Writ, and therefore could receive no more Power from them, than the Tenor of
the Kings Writ granted, which determining with the Kings Life, their
Representative-Power was also determined, and by Consequence, they could be no
longer a Parliament. If it could be thought they could be yet so, by that Act,
then it follows, That a Parliament by their Act might create another
Parliament, to exist after themselves were dissolved, which is most absurd,
and alters the Root and Foundation of all the Liberties of the Subject; for
they become no longer their Representatives, but a Parliament by their own Act;
and it will never be thought that the people intended to entrust them with
their Authority, to change the Government, and deprive them of their
Fundamental Privileges. The Parliament cannot De jure do any thing against
natural Equity, quia jura naturae sunt immutabilia. And also by the judgment
of a Parliament this could not be, being against the Law and Custom of
Parliament, for To. Parl. 42. E. 3. no 7. it is declared, by the Lords and
Commons in full Parliament, upon demand made of them, in the behalf of the
King, That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
Disherision of the King and his Crown, to which they were Sworn. Now this Act
of the 17th. of Caroli Primi, is expressly against the Kings Successors
Prerogative, to call his own Parliament, and therefore they could not make such
an Act, to the Disherision of his King and Crown. A Parliament may be three
ways Dissolved, by the Declaration of the Kings pleasure, or for want of
entering their Continuances, or by the Kings death, whereby the Kings Wri^ which
gives them their Authority, is determined. These words, That this Parliament
shall not be Dissolved, unl^^^ by Act of Parliament, is a general Negative,
which cannot extend to all Causes of Dissolution, but have a respect only to
that most usually happening, the Pleasure of the King, till the pretended
Grievances of the time were satisfied. Now in all Times, the judges have
excepted particular Cases out of the general Negative, or Affirmative Words of
Statutes. By the Stat. of Magna Charta C. 11. It Is enacted, That Common pleas
shall not follow or be sued in the King's Bench, which is a general Negative,
yet it is holden to be clear in Law, That the King is not within these general
Words, and may sue in his Bench, or any other Court at his Pleasure. The
Statute of winchester is a general Statute, That the Hundred, etc. shall make
Satisfaction for all Robberies and Fellonies, within the Hundred, yet it is
Resolved, That the Hundreds shall make no Satisfaction for the Robberies of an
House, because the House was the owners Castle, and he might have defended
himself, and preserved his Goods. Besides this Clause in the said Act, That all
and every thing done, or to be done, for the Proroguing or Dissolving of this
present Parliament, contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly void and of
none Effect: By which it appears, That the cause of Dissolution, which they
intended to prevent, was something that should consist in Action, by the words,
Thing or Things done, or to be done; which words can only be applicable to an
Actual dissolution by the Kings pleasure: And the King's death, is not a thing
done, but a Cessation of his personal being, and of the Dependants thereupon:
And is not an Action, but a Termination or Period. So that it is most Clear,
these men could no longer by any the least Color of Law or Reason, pretend to
sit and Act as a Parliament. But alas! What are Arguments to them, who had
usurped the Throne and ^ower of their Sovereign? and had the vain and idle
^opes to keep it? And to the strengthening themselves, ^ith all the Arbittary
and Tyrannical ways imaginable, ^hey proceed.

First, they issue out their spurious Act before menti^ned, against proclaiming
the King, tho by the Law of ^^e Land, instantly upon the King's decease, the
imperial Crown of the Kingdom of England, was by his inherent ^irthright, and
by an undoubted Succession and Descent, Actually vested in our now Sovereign,
eldest Son to ^he murdered King, and next Heir of the Blood to ^is Royal
Father, and that before any Ceremony of Co^onation, as by Stat. of 1. Jacobi
Chapter 1. And that all ^eers of the Realm, Majors, Sheriffs, and other chief
Officers in all the Cities and Corporations of England, ^re obliged by their
places, and Allegiance, to proclaim ^im under pain of High Treason, and
forfeiting their City and Corporation Charters. And notwithstanding ^he Junto's
Prohibition, there were several Proclamati^ns printed and scattered about the
City, which pro^laimed and asserted the Right of the Prince, as next Heir to
the Crown, and by Birthright to be the lawful King of Great Britain, etc. Dated
the 1st. of Februa^y. Then also in like manner was privately scattered about,
another Paper, in which were four Propositions ^riefly declaring: That the
House of Commons had no Power of themselves alone, and without the Concur^ance
of the King and House of Lords, to make any Act of Parliament, Ordinance, or to
impose any Tax, Oath, Forfeiture, or Capital Punishment, on any. Secondly. That
the few Members now sitting, were no Court of justice in themselves, and could
Erect no such Court ^or the Trial of any person, nor had Power to hear and
determine any Civil or Criminal Causes, and that all Acts, by Pretext of such
Power, were illegal, and the ad^udging any Person to death, and Executing them
was Treason, and wilful Murder. Thirdly, That the said Commons had no power to
make any great Seal of England, and that all Commissions granted under their
great Seal, were illegal, and all Proceedings in Law upon such Writs null and
void, to all intents and purposes. Lastly That the denial of the King's Title
to the Crown, and the plotting to deprive him of it, and the setting it upon
the Head of another, was High Treason, and within the Stat. 25th. Ed. 3. Chapter 2.
as likewise their Subverting the fundamental Laws of the Land, and introducing
at Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, was High Treason at the common Law, etc.

This was all the Loy^lists could do at present, by these weak Endeavors, to
assert the Kings right, and show the people what Slaves they were become, but
this affrighted not these Men, who in the next place, February 1st. Vote, That
all such Members who assented to the Vote of the 5th. of December 1648. That
the Kings Concessions were a Ground for the House to Proceed to a Settlement,
should not be admitted into the House, until they had declared their
disapproval of that Vote, before they sit, and that such as were now in the
House, should enter their dissent to that Vote, being only those who had before
Voted in the Negative.

The Lords were yet sitting, but no notice taken of them by the Commons, for
having overthrown the Monarchy, they now lay aside the Lords, and therefore
Vote them dangerous and useless, Frebruary 5th. and so Voted them down, with
this Proviso, That they might be capable to be Elected Knights of the shire,
and Burgesses, and so sit among the Commons. Three of them only so debased
themselves, viz. The Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury, and the Lord Howard of
Estrick. The rest of the Peers, put forth their Protestation against these
Proceedings, of the Commons; which came forth on the 8th. of Frebruary, in
which they asserted their own Privileges, and the fundamental Laws of the
Nation, disclaiming the Votes of the Commons, for Erecting an high Court of
Justice, for the Trial of the King, and altering the Government, Law, Seal,
etc. and against their Traitorous murdering their Sovereign, and disinheriting
the Prince, the Lawful Heir of the Crown of England, and also protesting
against their Vote of the 6th. of Frebruary, for the abolishing the House of
Peers, as destructive to the beings of Parliament, the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, and the ^ives, Liberties; and Properties of the people, whom ^hey had
made Slaves to their Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government.

But this affrights not the Commons, and to keep the Lords from meeting, the
Army set a Guard at their Doors of their House, and the House now proceeds to
^et up a Commonwealth, and to abolish Monarchy; and therefore they formed an
Act entitled, an Act for ^he Exheredation of the Royal Line, the abolishing of
Mo^archy in this Kingdom, and the setting up a Commonwealth, which they
ordered to be published in all places. And ^o Vindicate these their most horrid
Proceedings, they ^ad their Pulpit-Trumpeters, who justified their Impi^us Acts
in all places: and John Godwin and Milton, ^o write in their Defense of putting
the King to death, ^eclaring in Print, That the King suffered on just Grounds,
and according to his Demerits. And now ^nstead of one King, these Commonwealth
Rumpers set up ^orty Tyrants, as a Committee of State. But the people ^enerally
seemed displeased at this Alteration of the Government, and Reineldson Lord
Major of the City re^used to publish their Act for abolishing of Monarchy, ^or
which he was discharged of his Office, and with ^wo Aldermen sent to the Tower,
and Andrews was cho^en in his stead; upon this the Rumpers put forth a ^ew
Declaration, to justify their Proceedings, calling them, A Deliverance of the
people from the Bondage that was brought in by the Norman Conquest, and their
^laintenance of the ancient Laws, notwithstanding their ^lteration of some
forms of the Regality, which anci^^t Laws might consist very well with a
Republic, and ^^at they had only abolished their Abuses, promising to
^stablish a safe and firm Peace, and to advance the true ^rotestant Religion,
the Encouragment of a Godly mini^ry, and of Trade, and the Maintenance of the
Poor thorowout the Realm. Then their Great Seal came forth, having on one side
a Cross and Harp, for the Arms of England and Ireland, with this Inscription*
The Great Seal of England. And on the other side, was the Picture of the
Commons, with these words: In the first year of Freedom by God's blessing
restored, 1648. Likewise they caused a new Coin to be minted, and stamped their
Money with a Cross and Harp, instead of the King's Effigies, with this Motto:
God with us. The^ they took away all Clauses in any former Acts, for the taking
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and made them null, and a new Oath
framed and tendered to all that were to have any public place of Trust, and
assumed to themselves both Judicial and Legislative power of the King, and both
Houses of Parliament, and the Executive power they committed to a Council of
State of forty Persons, of the most Active men in the Army, and others of
desperate Fortunes.

Six of the Judges, viz. Justice Bacon, Brown, Beddinfield, Creswell, Trevor,
and Atkins, quitted their places, not being able to bring their Consciences to
Act under this Arbitrary and illegal power; six other of them continued, who
were Justice Rolls, St. John's, Pheasant, Baron Wild, and Baron Yates.

To their new Council of State, they gave Power to Command, and settle the
Militia of England, and Ireland: Power to set forth Ships, and such a
Considerable Navy as they should think fit. Power to appoint Magistrates and
stores for England and Ireland; and to dispose of them for the Service of the
Nation. And power to Execute all the powers given them for a^ whole Year to
come. They had two Seals appointed, a great Seal and a Signet: Cromwell was
made Chairman of this Committee, and an Oath framed for every Member to take,
to be true to the Parliament, (as they termed themselves) not to disclose their
Secrets, and to adhere to the present Settlement of the Government as a
Republic without King or House of Lords. About this time the Officers of the
Army at a Counci^ of War, debated, Whether they should not put to the Sword all
that were of the King's Party, to secure the Nation to themselves, and it was
carried in the Negative, but by two voices, so near were they to a general
Massacre. And many Petitions came from several Counties, that at least three of
the most eminent of the King's party, in each County, might be put to Death; to
free the Land from Blood-Guiltiness.

Cromwell by this, as you may perceive, had gotten all the executive Power of
the Kingdom into his own Hand, and into the hands of his own Creatures of the
Council of State, altogether ruled by him, and therefore it may be wondered at,
that he did not immediately seize the Crown, and set himself in the Throne,
which he now aspired to: But things were not yet ripe, and the subtle Fox found
such a Levelling party in the Army, which he saw must first be Crushed, who
would never endure it; for they were for dividing and sharing all, as a Land
subdued by them among themselves, and for owning no Authority but the Saints,
who were themselves. These begin to rip up the Miscarriages of the Parliament;
and Cromwell, to make them the more Odious, puts them upon all Things he
believed would make them so to the People and Army. One of which was, the new
Erection of their most Tyrannical Court of Justice, for the Trial of some of
the Lords and others, whom they had still imprisoned for their Loyalty. The
first was Duke Hamilton, who had invaded England as you have heard; with him
they at first deal gently, hoping to have screwed out of him the Names of some
Eminent men in England, that they thought might have invited him in. But he
either not able or willing in that point to give them Satisfaction, and finding
the Scots and Argile's party to hate him, and to desire his Head, he was
Condemned, tho he pleaded* he had Quarter given him by Lambert upon Articles,
and would have given a hundred Thousand pound to save his Life. After him was
also tried and Condemned the Earl of Holland, and that most Noble and Heroic
Peer the Lord Capel, who had escaped out of the Tower, but was retaken by means
of a perfidious Water-man, ever after hated for it He pleaded Articles of
surrender, but that was denied him: then he pleaded to be tried at Common Law,
put them in mind of Magna Charta, Petition of right, and of the Fundamental
Laws of the Land, and that of right he ought to be tried by his Peers, urging
them to show a President of any such Trial by an Arbitrary Court of Justice, as
they called it. He talked to deaf Statues, for he was too gallant a Man, and
too Active, and Loyal, to be permitted to Live. On the 9th. of March these
three Lords Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and this Noble Lord much
lamented were put to Death, on a Scaffold in the Pallace-yard in Westminster,
by severing their Heads from their Bodies. It is remarkable that this Lord dyed
with much Courage and Christianity, being nothing daunted at Death. The Earl of
Norwich and Sr. John Owen were pardoned, by Vote of the House, the Earl of
Norwich having his Life by the casting Voice of Lenthal the Speaker only.

Thus they proceed dipping their hands in Blood, growing thereby more Odious to
the People, and about this time the Scots begin to stir, and made a Protest
against the Actions of the Parliament of England; and on the third of February
proclaim the King by the name of Charles the second at Edenborough; by Lion
King at Arms. The Scotch Commissioners who had been long here, were called
home, and at their departure, they left an Expostulary Declaration putting the
Junto in mind of all their Vows and Oaths, in maintenance of the Kings Rights
and defense of his Person, and upbraided them with their shameful Abjuration
and Infringment of them, by their late horrid Proceedings. This paper they Vote
Scandalous and Seditious, imprison the Messenger who brought it, and sending
after the Commissioners secure them, till the Parliament in Scotland send to
justify the Action, and require their Commissioners, being imprisoned Contrary
to the Law of Nations, upon which they were permitted to depart into Scotland,
and thus Jealousies of a breach began.

Troublesome John Lilburn, an Active Leveller began now to stir, delivering a
Petition in the Names of many Thousand well affected, etc. with a Book
entitled Englands new Chains discovered, in which they find fault with many
things done by this Junto, and especially the Council of State, and with the
erecting an high Court of Justice and altering the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, for Trials by Juries. Complain of the Excise, and of several other
things. And after this another, called a second Part of Englands new Chains,
which showed the Hypocrisy and Perfidiousness of the Grandees of the Army, and
the Council of State, in Cheating all Interests, King, Parliament, People,
Soldiers, City, Agitators, Levellers, etc. Upon the back of this comes forth
another Book, called the Hunting of the Fox, which spoke against the Army and
Council of State, set up by Cromwell and Ireton, to erect a new Tyranny, worse
than the thirty Tyrants at Athens, the Star Chamber, the High Commission, or
house of Lords, etc. These coming forth one upon the Neck of another, showed
the troublesome Spirit that began to ferment in the Army; which was now to be
Purged, as well as the Parliament had been, or else Cromwell found he should
not be able to work them to his ends. And now he had an opportunity offerr'd
him, for Ireland being in a manner wholly lost, excepting Dublin, then
besieged, eleven Regiments were ordered by the Rump to be Transported for its
relief, by which means Cromwell hoped to purge out this Turgent humor of the
Army. But some of these bold Petitioners were seized, and tried by a Council of
War, of which Barksted was President, in which they were Cashiered the Army,
their Swords ordered to be broken over their Heads, and to Ride with their
Faces to the Horses Tails, with Papers of their Crimes pinned to their Breasts,
at the head of the Regiments; which Sentence was executed accordingly, to the
great Exasperation of the Army. And not long after, several Regiments began to
Mutiny and to wear White Colors for distinction in their Hats, which might
have proved fatal to Cromwell's designs, had he not with an undaunted Boldness
at that time, appearing in Person, overawed them, and causing two of them to be
shot to Death, before their Faces. But this could not purge out the Humor,
which still increasing, two more of the Levelling Tribe were shot, one of which
was named Lockyer a Trooper, shot in St. Paul's Church yard, but buried in
great State by the Lilburnlan Faction, wearing green and black Ribbons in their
Hats. And now the peoples Eyes daily began to be opened, finding what Keepers
of Englands Liberties they had got. The Regiments ordered to march at Salisbury
make an Eruption, alleging that this was a Trick to divide the Army, and that
they were not Mereenaries but took up Arms upon a righteous Principle of
Government, and therefore would not divide: upon which several Regiments
revolt, and Colonel Scroop's laid aside their Officers, and with Colors
flying marched to join Harrison's Regiment, and Ireton's, and Skippon's, who
had confederated. But Fairfax and Cromwell, by hasty marches with the whole
Army follow them, who at Burford in Oxfordshire, made up about five Thousand
Horse and Foot, with whom Cromwell by private Messengers held them in hand of a
Treaty, putting them in hopes of reconciling the Business without blows, which
made them neglectful till Fairfax and Cromwell sell upon them in their Quarters
unsuspected, their Horses being most at Grass at twelve a Clock of the night,
routed them and took about four hundred Prisoners, of which only three were
shot to Death, the rest pardoned by Cromwell's Intercession, to ingratiate
himself with the Army. One Thomson and two more dyed very Resolutely: This
business being over, the General and Cromwell come to Oxford, where they are
feasted and made Doctors of the Civil Law. And now the Army were sain to
submit, and accepted their Lots for going to Ireland, which were these
following: Ireton's, Scroop's, Horton's and Lambert's Regiments of Horse:
Colonel Abot's of Dragoons. And of Foot Colonel Eure's, Cook's, Hewson's, and
Dean's, to which were added three new ones, Cromwell's Venable's, and Phayer's,
Cromwell was made Commander in Chief, with the Title of Lord Governor of
Ireland, and Fairfax was left at home to attend the Junto.

In the mean time, the Keepers of the peoples Liberties, were as fast as they
could taking away the Lives of several Persons, in several places, whose
Loyalty and Consciences had engaged them for their King, as Lieutenant Colonel
Moris, and Cornet Blackborn, who suffered at York, the former having been
Governor of Pomfret; and one Beamount, a Minister was hanged at Pomfret, by
Sentence of a Court Marshal, Major Monday was shot to Death at Leicester, Poyer
a brave Gentleman in Covent Garden, for the Welsh Insurrection. Sr. John
Stowell and Judge Jenkins were arraigned at the King's Bench Bar as Traitors
against the Government, for their Loyalty to their King, but they would not own
the Courts jurisdiction, yet they were not yet Sentenced, but their Estates
seized, and Judge Jenkins-kept long a Prisoner.

And that the people might the better see their Freedom and Liberty, this Rump
lay upon them a standing Tax of ninety thousand pound a Month, for the
maintenance of the Army: these were the Persons who made such a stir about
Ship Money. The Lord Major of London Reynoldson is fined two thousand Pound for
refusing to proclaim their Act for abolishing Kingly Government. Then upon a
report from the Council of State they order: The King's and Queens Lands to be
sold, Thirty thousand Pound to be taken out of it for the use of the Fleet, and
the rest to be distributed amongst the most considerable among them, for
Satisfaction of Losses sustained. Thus they had killed and were now taking
possession; and several of the Kings Houses and Manors were bestowed amongst
them. And besides this they had twenty thousand Pound a month out of the
Fee-Farm Rents. Now that the World might perceive what Liberty should be
granted to the people, they Order, That no Minister in his Pulpit should meddle
with State affairs, and this in others was Oppression, and tying up men's
Consciences. But for all that, new Lights as they called them increased, and
about this time one that was a Soldier, came t^ Walton upon the Thames in
Surry, and in the Churchyard having a Candle and Lanthorn with him, met the
Minister and People coming out of the Church, and told them, he had a Vision
and five new Lights were showed him, which they were to receive from him, under
pain of Damnation. The first was, That the Sabbath was abolished; The second,
That Tithes were abolished; Third, That Ministers were abolished, as
Antichristian; Fourth, That Magistrates were abolished as useless; and Fifthly,
That the Bible was abolished; for Christ was come in the Spirit and Glory; and
so drawing a little Bible out of his Pocket, he set it on Fire before them. The
War with Holland being now about to break forth, the Earl of Warwick's former
Commission is made voy'd, and three Generals of the Fleet were made, who were
Popham, Blake, and Dean. Before Cromwell's going to Ireland a Fast was kept at
White Hall, where among the Militant Preachers Oliver stood up, and in his
Prayer he desired God to take off from him the Government of this mighty people
of England, as being too heavy for his shoulders to bear. About this time also
a third Book of John Lilburn's came forth, Called, The Picture of the Council
of State, wherein he fully set forth all the illegal, Arbitrary, Violent, and
Tyrannical Proceedings of that Council. Lilburn, Overton, Walwin, Prince and
others had been before Clapped into the Tower, intending to try them for their
Lives; Lilburn was ordered to be brought to the King's Bench Bar upon his Habeas
Corpus, but Cromwell sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower, that he should not be
brought, who was obeyed, not the Judges. By which may be seen of what force the
Laws were with them. Then some thousands well affected Women petition the House
in behalf of Lilburn, but the Junto answered them, He should be tried by the
Law, for his Book called Englands new Chains discovered, and they bid to go
home and wash their Dishes. Who replied they had neither Dishes nor Meat left.

This John Lilburn was tried by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer in
October 1649. where he so notably pleaded his Cause, showed the illegality of
the Parliaments Proceedings, and so punctually cited all the Statutes and Laws
of the Land, in the behalf of the Liberties of the Subjects, and so bafled the
Judges, the Attorney general Prideaux, and their Council, that they could not
Effect what they desired, the taking away his Life upon an Indictment of High
Treason put in against him, but was found Not Guilty, by his Jury, to the great
disappointment of his Enemies.

Their chief business now was to give one another Estates, out of the
Delinquents Lands, as they called the Loyal Party, whom they now sequester, and
made an Order That no Malignant or such as had been in Arms against them should
come within twenty miles of London, or go five miles from their own
habitations. Bishops and Deans and Chapters Lands sold and disposed to one
another at easy Rates, some got for three years Purchase, for none but
themselves would buy them. About this time they send their Ambassadors Oliver
St. John's, and Walter Strictland into Holland, for Satisfaction for Doctor
Dorislaus, who drew up the Charge against the King, his being Assassinated in
Holland, by some Cavaliers, but they were there affronted and forced to return
Re infecta, in great Discontent, which exasperated our new States against the
Dutch. Ascham another of their Creatures was murdered also in Spain. And tho
the Dutch sent afterward their Agent Mine here Joachim, with Complements and
excuses, our Junto could not forget it, and by it took an occasion to forgo
their Friendship, and prohibited their Fishing upon the English Coasts, and the
importing of any foreign Commodities, except in English bottoms: or such as
were of the Country, whence the Commodities came. This brought on the ensuing
War commenced the next year, between these two States.

In the mean time, they have no small umbrage of the Scots Proceedings; who had
sent to the King then at the Hague, and invited him into Scotland with several
Propositions in order thereunto. But Middleton and Monroe fearing the Kirk
Party would hold the King to hard Terms, should he come in upon their
Propositions, rise in the North of Scotland, but were soon suppressed by Ke^ and
Stranghan; upon this our Junto strike in, and offering them by their Letters
several fair Temptations, that they might break with the King, promising to
stand by them, and to defend their Liberty as they called it. Bu^ this took
not. And about this time they make a new Act of Treason, such as scarce was
ever heard of before That to kill the General, Lieutenant General, or any
Member of that House of Parliament, or Council o^ State should be Treason, was
to have been put into it but after long debate was omitted, betraying too much
Cowardice in them, and having other ways secured themselves in the Act. For it
was made Treason, to Act, Plot, Contrive, or speak against this Fag End of the
Parliament, or their Government, and all Endeavors against the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, and the Council of State, to subvert them, as now
Constituted, and that shall be hereafter Constituted by Parliament, (what an
individuum vagum is here?) and for every such Act, etc. to forfeit Life and
Estate: And also to anove, and stir up the people against them, was declared
Treason, nay so much as to endeavor to withdraw any Soldier, or Officer from
their obedience to their Superior Officer, or from the present Government
aforesaid. Also to Counterfeit their great Seal is by this Act made Treasons.
Are not these in the mean time excellent Conservators of the Liberties of the
Nation? And a very Tree State? Lilburn in the Tower was kept from Pen, Ink and
Paper, and all allowance for Meat and Drink taken from him, tho he petitioned
for it, so that he was kept three days with half a Meals meat, and in a close
Chamber, none suffered to come at him: This under a King had been Tyrannical,
but is Prudence in this free State. About this time also orders were given to
certain Committees, to inquire upon Oath, and to Certify the improved vallue
of every man's Estate, both Real and Personal, which they intended thorowout the
Kingdom, following the Conqueror's steps, to have by them a Doomsday Book, that
they might the better load the people with Taxes, and free Quarter, in this
their new Subjected and Conquered Kingdom, called a Free State. Here the House
enables their Committees to give Oaths, when they had not Power to give any
themselves, Contrary to that Maxim, None can give what he has not: or more
Power than is in himself. These are the men that were so much troubled with the
Oath ex Officio, and yet require Oaths against a man's self: Nay, the Scriveners
in London were commanded by these supreme Governors, to show their Books, that
they might inspect, what and whose Money they had in their Hands, the better to
come at it themselves. And that they might grasp at all, they were Contriving
to seize all the Tithes of the Kingdom into their own Hands, and to make all
Ministers their Stipendary Lecturers, and to depend upon the State, that they
might Preach no Doctrine, but what should be agreeable to themselves, or in
justification of their Actions. This was a politic Device.

Oliver before he went for Ireland, took all the politic Care possible, to
keep up the Greatness he had acquired; and to secure this Junto of Men, which
he made use of only to set up himself, besides the Bridle he had already made
them, the Council of State, Composed of his Creatures, he picks out of the Army
left behind in England, the chief of his Creatures, and Constitutes them a
Council of War, or a Council of Officers, to overawe all with the Power of the
Sword, for silent Leges inter Arma, and now silet Justitia inter Leges, and
silet Jus inter Judices. The Government was now a Cerberus with three Heads, a
Parliament, a Council of State, and a Council of War. Many Scruple to pay their
illegal Tax of ninety Thousand pound a Month, for the Army, and therefore have
their Goods taken from them by Violence, and sold, tho they exclaim against it,
as not done by Law. Mr. Prin declares against it, and shows it to be against
the Statutes Magna Charta, 29.30.25. Ed. 1 Chap. 5.6.34. Ed. 1.21. Ed. 3.25. Ed
3.45. Ed. 3.11. Hen. 4. 1. Rich, 3. The Petition of Right, and many more; and
it was observed to them, that no Tax was to be imposed but upon necessity and
for the good of the People, 25. Ed. 1. Cook Just. but for the keeping up an
Army when the Wars were done, was the bain of the People, and that more Taxes
had been raised in eight years, than in all the Kings Reigns since the
Conquest. A hundred and fifty thousand Pound was advanced for Oliver's
expedition into Ireland, who was to be accomptable only of part of it, the rest
to be disposed at his Discretion, for the use of the Commonwealth.

And now this Junto begin to think of adjourning themselves according to
Oliver's desire, and in the mean time, things to be left to his two Caballs or
Counsels, That of State, and that of War: but this was a bitter Pill, and they
knew not how to leave their old Seats, where most of them were grown very warm,
and tho urged to it by the Counsels, and that some trouble was given to
Lenthal their Speaker, by Articles drawn up by his Council of Officers; but
they fearing, lest they might not get together again, if once separated,
desired time to finish some Acts they had upon their Hands, and then they would
adjourn themselves; by which you may see, how free these Keepers of the
Kingdoms freedom were. First down went the King, and his Power lapsed into the
two Houses, down went the House of Lords, and then all Power was in the House
of Commons, now they are going down, and the supreme Power is in a Council of
State, who must down too, and then the Wheel turns round, and all the Power
will be in a single Tyrannical person and Usurper. Some of the Acts that lay
yet on their Hands, and which they promised to dispatch, were, That all Acts
concerning Loans, Moneys, Excise, Sequestrations, Goldsmiths-Hall,
Haberdashers-Hall, Assessments for England and Ireland be passed; so that they
intended a Continuance of the Peoples Slavery and Burdens. Also an Act for the
settling the Militia throughout the Kingdom. An Act for punishing re^olted
Seamen. An Act for the relief of well affected Tenants, against Malignant Land
Lords. An Act for suppressing Malignant Pamphlets, aspersing the Proceeding of
^his Parliament, Council of State and Army. An Act for the suppressing of
seditious Preachers. An Act for the tak^ng away of a Clause of the Stat. 25.
Eliz. and the 1. Jacob. against Sectaries. An Act of general Pardon and
Oblivion, to all Persons except such as should be nominated therein. An Act for
relief of poor Prisoners. An Act to secure the Soldiers their Arrears. Then
they were Considering of some orders which the Council of State were to put in
Execution (and which the said Council desired of them) after their recess, 1.
That they might appoint Commissioners in every County to make an Estimate of
all Tyths. 2. That the Council of State may consider of settling future
Parliaments, and the constant time of Calling, Sitting, and Ending, after this
Parliament shall Dissolve themselves. 3. That they shall consider an Act for
regulating Proceedings at Law, and to prevent tediousness of Suits. 4. That
they should consider what Laws are fit to be repealed. Thus they were Cutting
out one another Work.

In the mean time Oliver Cromwell, with a brave Army lands at Dublin, the whole
Kingdom being reduced under the Kings obedience, most of the Irish coming in,
except the Ulster Irish, under Owen Roe Oneal, being prevailed with by the
Popes Nuncio, (Contrary to his promise,) not to come in, and underhand there
was a Confederacy driven between our new Republicans, and this Nuncio, but on
what Conditions was kept Private, for their Assistance of reducing that Kingdom
under their obedience, tho this being laid in their Dish, they impudently
denied it afterward. Some of the Propositions were, That all Laws and
Penalties against the Popish Religion should be taken off, by Act of
Parliament; and that Act to extend to them and their Heirs for ever. That an
Act of Oblivion should be passed, to extend to all of his Party, for all things
done, since the beginning of the year, 1641: So that the horrid Massacre of the
Protestants, should have been forgotten. That Owen Oneal should have a
competent Command (...) the Army. That they should enjoy their Lands now i^
Possession, and that rightly they might claim from their Ancestors. That all
Acts of State that incapacitate^ them, to be taken off. That Oneal should in
regard of hi^ Merit, and good Service to the Parliament, in joynin^ with them,
have all the Estate of his Ancestors, or some Estate equivalent to it, in the
Counties of Tyrone, Ar^^magh, or Londonderry. And that his Army should b^
provided for, etc. So that the sweetness of ruling an^ getting Ireland into
their hands, as well as England, mad^ them thus treat with the Popes Nuncio,
and a most no^^torious Rebel and Papist, to join with them: But the^ who had
Confederated with the Devil, might well joy^^ with his Holiness, to subdue the
Cavaliers, and yet a^^ the same time these men cried out upon the Duke (...)
Ormond, for joining with the Irish, for the reducing tha^ Kingdom to the
obedience of the King. And some (...) Cromwell's own Soldiers, hearing of this
Confederacy, a^bominating it, deserted him, which made him to cert^fie to his
Journey-men in London; and caused them t^ null their Debenters for all their
Service, which were sta^ted before the Expedition. And this Agreement with
Oneal went so far, that the said Oneal assisted Sr. Charl^ Coot, in raising the
Siege of Londonderry, as may appea^ by his Letters to the Parliament, says the
Author of the History of Independency; However they fell to pieces a^^terwards,
but this is enough to show by what Principle they Acted, and how much they
valued Religion, when Gain and Dominion stood in Competition.

Oliver is successful in Ireland; at the taking of Tredag^^ a strong place
twenty miles North of Dublin, in which were the Flower of the Irish Army, where
he put to th^^ Sword all persons whatsoever, without Distinction (...) Age or
Sex, and lasted for three days; he slew about three thousand of their best and
stoutest men, with their Governor Sr. Arthur Aston, Sr. Edmund Varny, Collon^^
Warren, Colonel Dun, Finglus, Tempest, and others, wha^ all fell by his Fury,
which so affrighted the lest, that h^ no sooner appeared before a place, but it
was surrendered to him. The next place was Wexford a considerable Town, by the
Sea, South West of Dublin, which was betrayed to him, and where he after a
barbarous manner but to the Sword two Thousand more; and among the rest two
hundred of the chiefest Women of the place, fled to the Market-Cross for
shelter, and there put to the Sword, by his Command, tho several of his own
Soldiers, who had before given them Quarter, refused to obey his Bloody
Commands. After which, he took Ross, Carick, Kilkenny, Clonmel, and other
places in Munster. Thus with extraordinary diligence, and great Slaughter, in
less than a year, that he staid there, he subdued the greatest part of Ireland,
and killed and exterminated most part of the Irish, leaving his Son-in-Law
Ireton, to complete the Conquest, as Governor, or his Lieutenant, who there
died of the Plague, before he had quite finished his work.

In the mean time the King being in Jersey, received a Letter from the Scots,
by Mr. Windram, with several Conditions; the chief of which was the
acknowledging them a Parliament, and particularly the two last Sessions of that
Assembly, and then they would treat with him at Breda concerning his coming to
Scotland, owning him for their King. But those about his Majesty, having no
good Opinion of the Scots, were fearful of having him to put himself into their
Hands, but to trust to Montross, whom with a Commission he had sent before into
Scotland, his valiant Service being most remarkable there, for the King his
Father, and they now hoped from him the like success: However the King
dispatched away Windram with a Letter to the Scotch Parliament, wherein he
concedes to have them to send Commissioners to him to treat at Breda, which
they did, and on the 16th. of March they met, where the Agreement was made, and
it was concluded, That they should enjoy the Presbytery throughout the Kingdom,
the King himself and Family not excepted, but bound him to the Covenant,
Directory, and Catechisms, which the King, his Affairs in Ireland being
desperate, and his hopes i^ England as little, many Noblemen and Gentlemen fly
in thence from the bloody Tyranny of the States, he wa^ forced with great
Reluctance to Consent, and then o^ their parts they Covenant, That his Majesty
should be admitted to the Throne of Scotland, That his Right should by
Parliament be recovered out of the Hands o^ Usurpers, and That they would
assist to bring to Condig^^ Punishment, the Murderers of his Father, and to
restore him to his Kingdom of England.

But in the interim of this Treaty, the gallant and renowned Montross, being
landed in the Islands of Orkney with a few German Soldiers, accompanied with
the Lord Trendraught, Sr. John urry, Henry Graham, Colonel Johnson, George
Drummond of Ballack, and other Persons his Friends and Confederates, he begun
with great Resolution and Courage to levy men, notwithstanding several Losses
of Arms at Sea, and disappointments of Men and Moneys, which he had exspected
from other places Having raised what men he could in the Orcades, he left some
men to keep the Island, and transported the rest to Cathness in the uttermost
North-west part of Scotland, where he hoped to have met some men, whom he
expected Pluscardy should have raised, but the Parliament of Scotland having
notice of his Landing, was so vigilant by their Correspondence and Friends in
those Parts, that the High-Landers could not rise as was expected, and
immediately they sent an Army of seven Thousand Foot, and thirty Troops of
Horse to oppose Montross. Davis Lesly commanded the Horse, and Major General
Holbu^^.............. the Foot. These making great speed, struck a dread into
the Breasts of many, who were the Kings friends, and would have appeared, had a
little longer time been given them. Straham, who led the Van, finding
Montrosses party surprised, at their unexpected approach, made use of the
Advantage, and fell in upon them, and the unseasoned Orkney men soon yielded
themselves, and in a short time the Germans, tho they made some resistance;
thus the Earl lost the day, more through the Panick fear of his Soldiers, than
want of Courage and Conduct in himself, who was certainly one of the most
^kilful and valiant Leaders of his Age. There escaped ^ot above an hundred, and
most of his Officers were either taken or slain. He got away himself, quitting
his Horse, Belt, Coat, and Star, in an ordinary High-Landers habit, but it was
impossible for him to get clear away, the Country being every way beset, and
such strict search after him, and rewards promised to those who could take him;
yet for three or four days, keeping in the Woods, with one Companion only, till
almost starved, ^e kept out of their Clutches, till at last he fell into the
Hands of the Lord of Aston, who formerly had adhered to the Marquess, hoping
that he would have Concealed him: But fear being more Prevalent than ancient
Friend^hip, he set a Guard upon him, and delivered him up to Lesly, who in
triumph carried him to Edenborow, where ^his noble Marquess was treated with
the most horrid Barbarity that ever was heard of, and at last hanged on a
Gibbet thirty foot high, his head Cut off, and set on the Talbooth at
Edenborow, and his four Quarters sent to be set up at Sterling, Glascow, St.
John's Town, and Aberdeen, four of the notedest Cities in Scotland. Together
with him were executed, tho not with so much disgrace, Sr. John Urry, Colonel
Spotswood, Lord of Darcy, with some others of note, who came with the Marquess
into Scotland. This was the end of that most noble Peer, murdered by the Kirk
or Presbyterian Party, on the twenty first of May, 1650, even when they were
treating with their King; which indignity his Majesty was fain to put up, tho
he could not but show his Resentment for that faithful Servants Barbarous usage
at their Hands, writing to them particularly about it: to whom they returned
their Excuses, letting him know they did it for the Service of his Majesty,
inviting him into Scotland, and protesting to assist him with their Lives and
Fortunes, to establish him in his Throne.

The King prepares for his Voyage, and notwithstanding Popham one of the
Junto's Admirals was at Sea with a Fleet, hoping to intercept him, he got safe
into Scotland, and Landed in the north Parts at Spey, from whence he went to
Edenborow, where he was received with great Acclamations, and again on the 15.
of July, solemnly proclaimed at Edenborow; but it was not long, before the ill
Nature of the Presbyterians began to appear and they began to exercise their
Kirk Authority, and all Malignants as they called the Kings best Friends,
prohibited to come at him; they lessen his Family, and are angry that Aberdeen
had presented him with five hundred Pound; and lest others should do the like,
They order That what Money or Plate any intended to bestow upon the King,
should be brought into the public Treasury: But the form an Army as fast as
they can, of which the King was to be Generalissimo, and the Earl of Levin
Lieutenan^ General, Holborn Major General, and Lesly Lieutenan^ General of the
Horse, and Mountgomery Major General.

In the mean time, the Junto begin to look about them, ill news comes apace
from the North Quarter, (...) a threatening Storm, and they make ready to meet
it but the Presbyterian Ministers, had been tampering with Fairfax, and had
represented this War with Scotland s^ illegal, being against the Church, that
he being a Presbyterian, made many Excuses, pleading Sickness an^ Wounds, and
desiring to be Excused from commanding the Army, that was to fight against
their Brethren; for now the Presbyterians, not out of any Love to the King but
to themselves, hoping to set up their own Church Government, as they saw it was
like to be in Scotland Confederate privately together, and intend to join with
the Scots. All these things are made known to Cro^well in Ireland, who now
thought it high time to pla^ his Part in England, things still working for his
Advancement; and therefore sending to the Junto for leav^ to come over he
prepares to be gone, but Occasion pre^sing, he stays not for the return of
Letters, but full (...) his great Archievments in Ireland, he leaves it, and
Land^ at Bristow, whence he Posts to London, where he is me^^ Complemented, and
Caressed by the Members of th^^ unto, and the Creatures of his Councils, and
presently, ^airfax still refusing the command of the Army, ^^omwell is by order
of the Rump made General, and ^airfax laid aside. And now with all Expedition
he ^^rms his Army, and draws his Forces together, pre^ares for Scotland, and
about the latter end of June mar^^es to Berwick, whence he sends canting
Letters to the ^^ots, who fearing their people should be gulled with his ^^ir
Words, proclaim it Treason to hold Correspondence ^ith the English. The English
Army was about sixteen ^housand men Complete, with which Cromwell ^arches into
Scotland, most of the Scots having left the ^orders, and waisted the Country,
so that the English ^rmy found small resistance, but much want of Provi^^ons,
yet they had a Fleet who waited their Motions (...) Sea, and Coasted it along
to supply them. The Scotch ^rmy in the mean time, lay encamped betwixt
Edenbo^^w and Leith, being six thousand Horse and Dragoons, and fifteen
thousand Foot. Cromwell advances within ^^ght of the Scots, whom he found
strongly encamped on ^^e Hills, but on the 25th. of July he attempts one of ^^e
Hills, with a small Party, and beat off the Scots, but (...) party of the Scots
Horse fell in upon their Rear so fu^^ously, that they began to be in disorder,
till repulsed ^y Lambert and Whaly, who had the Rere-Guard, in which Action
Lambert had his Horse shot under him, and himself run through the Arm with a
Lance, and ta^en Prisoner, but rescued by one Lieutenant Emson. After this the
English advance toward Muscleborough, where ^^e Scots set upon them, betwixt
three and sour in the ^^orning, with fifteen hundred of their best Horse, un^er
the Command of Montgomery and Stranghan, and ^harged so furiously, that they
had almost Pierced the whole Army, but in their return Okey met with them, and
forced them back to their Camp with as much ^peed, having lost an hundred men
in the Action.

Whilst these things were doing in Scotland, the Junto ^^re Active at home in
suppressing all Persons from ap^earing for the Scots Interest, with all the
Rigor imaginable and Doctor Levens a Doctor of the Civil Law being taken
dispersing some Commissions from the Ki^^ was tried by their Court marshal,
Condemned to be han^ed and Executed accordingly on the 13th. of July on against
the Royal Exchange in London. And further (...) show their inveterate Spite to
the Royal Family, the cause the last Kings Statutes to be broken to Piece and
caused to be written under the Nick where or stood in the Royal Exchange: Exit
Tyrannus Regum ^^timus, Anno Libertatis Angliae restitutae primo, Annoque
Domi^^ 1648. Now also was discovered a design of a rising to be (...)
Lancashire for the King, in which were several of the Pre^byterian Ministers in
London, and others; upon which (...) Cook of Gray's Inn, Mr. Gibbens, Mr.
Potter, Doctor Drak^ Jenkins, and Love, Presbyterian Ministers, were taken, and
for which they were tried by their murdering Hi^^ Court of Justice, and about
the Latter end of Ja^^ Gibbons, Potter, and that Incendiary Love were Executed
wherein it is remarkable that the Justice of God shou^^ so overtake this Person,
so as to bring him to the Blo^^ (for he was beheaded) who by his preaching
against the late King, broke off the Treaty at Uxbridge, and w^^^ the occasion
of bringing that Royal Martyr to suffer under the Ax.

But whilst they were shedding Blood at London, (...) their High Court of
Justice, Cromwell was letting (...) forth in Scotland, with the Sword: for on
the 3d. (...) September, was the famous Battle of Dunbar, which gain^^ him so
much Honor, and established his greatness in th^^ Army, tho his Conduct in
bringing his Army to the Streights they were in, being forced by despair to
figh^ did appear very ill on his side; for Cromwell's Army v^^ry much wanting
Provisions, were so far advance^ that they could not well return without
Hazard, and suppose he engaged himself the more boldly, for that (...)
understood the differences in the Scotch Army, between the Rigid Kirk Party,
and the other more moderate (...) the King, hoping, by his frequent Letters,
and Declarations of his pious Intentions toward the Presbyteria^ (...) bring
most of them over to him, or at least to make ^^ch division amongst them, that
he hoped to obtain an ^^sie Victory. Cromwell had advanced within a Mile ^^d an
half of Edenborow, took a small Garrison, and ^an'd it with English, but being
still pressed with want of Provisions, he draws off to Penkland Hills, and
thence ^o Dunbar, thinking that way to ship his men for England, the Fleet
attending; but the Scots perceiving the Advantage, and that he was in a strait,
follow him lose, and were now in a manner sure of a Victory. The Scots being
about twenty four Thousand men, and double the number of the English, who were
weary and Faint, had they stayed, and not put them into Des^air, no doubt they
had obtained their Desires; but ^earing they should escape them, they followed
them within a Mile of Dunhar, and drew up upon the Hills, at the Foot of which
lay Cromwell, who now saw the streights into which he had brought himself,
having only (...) Neck of Land to encamp on, whose breadth was not a Mile and
an half, the Sea being on both sides, so that they were got into a perfect
Pound, and the Scots having possessed all the Hills, he was in some Amazement;
ship his men he could not without certain Loss: Next morning the Scots drew
down to the Foot of the Hills, but there was a great Ditch between the Armies;
but at a Village called Copperspeith between Dunbar and Ber^wick, there was a
Passage over the Hills, which it seems was strangely neglected by the Scots,
too sure of the Victory: but Cromwell taking hold on the Advantage, having with
his field Pieces secured the Ditch, sent away a good Party of Horse and Foot to
possess it. This gave the Scots an Alarm, and now they saw their Error, and
that of necessity they must let the English pass home, or fight them. The Kirk
Ministers being in the Council of War, were extremely against letting Agag go,
as they called Cromwell, for that God had given him into their Hands, contrary
to the Opinion of the more knowing Commanders: But upon this, there was a
fierce Dispute at this Pass, which the English with much Valor obtained, and
possessed themselves of; The Canon on both sides playing against the Bodies,
the Batt^^ began, the English word was The Lord with us, the Scot^ was The
Covenant. The Scots first Charge put the Englis^ Horse into a little Confusion,
but being stoutly seconded by the Foot, they Charged the Scots so home, that
they put them to the Rout: which put their Foot into such Confusion and
Disorder, that the English gained a ful^ and easy Victory, following the
pursuit for eight Miles and slew and took Prisoners of them as many or more
than they were themselves, there being four Thousand slain, and nine Thousand
taken Prisoners, with all their Bag and Baggage, ten Thousand Arms, and all
their Ammunition, and with the loss of not above three hundred English. The
Colors and the Purse and great Seal of Scotland there taken, were sent up to
London; where was no small rejoicing among the Rumpers for this Victory: And
the Colors ordered to be hung up in Westminster Hall. Some of the Scotch
Ministers engaging were slain, in this fight. Cromwell it is said, in his great
Necessity and straits before the fight, prayed to God and promised him, That if
he would be pleased at this time to deliver him, he would in return of the
Favor, as soon as he came into England, take away Tithes. A pretty Vow to
commit Sacrilege to obtain Mercy.

Upon this Loss, Cromwell pursues his Victory, and possesses himself of Leith
and Edenborow, which the Scots had quitted, the King being retired to St.
Johnstons, where were assembled their Committee of States. The Kirk Party began
to lay their misfortunes upon the King, and said God had disowned them for
bringing him into Scotland: And showed so much insolence and ill behavior to
him, that he was no longer able to brook it, and therefore one morning, taking
Horse as if he had been going to Hunting, he went privately toward the North,
but the Scots fearing lest he should join with the High-Landers, and being
somewhat humbled by Cromwell, they sent after him Major General Montgomery, to
entreat him to return, but with such a force, as it was ^hought, would perform
it by Compulsion, if he would not do it by Entreaty. But the King persuaded,
returns ^o St. Johnstons, where the Committee of Estates being somewhat more
Compliant, (thank Cromwell for that) many of the Kings friends were admitted to
him. This made many dissatisfied Ministers withdraw themselves unto the West,
as Guthery, Gelaspy, Rutherford, and others, where they put forth a
Remonstrance against the Proceedings of the Assembly, in the Admission of
Ma^ignants to Power and Employment, and with these Ker, Stranghan, Lord
Warreston, Sr. John Cheisley, Sr. James Stewart, and others, join in
Confederacy. These Broils made well for Cromwell, who found small Opposition.
He took Ken Prisoner, and Edenborow Castle was surrendered to him on the 24th.
of December 1650. This very much troubled the Scots, for after that Cromwell
succeeded so well, that he took in all the Forts on this side of Sterling. In
January the Scots Crown the King at Scoon, the accustomed place for the
Coronation of the Kings of Scotland, which is not far from St. Johnstons, with
great Pomp and Solemnity.

In the mean time, the Junto in England still sat, and Voted Liberty of
Conscience to all, which was a most distasteful thing to the Presbyterians.
Also they fell to levying of Soldiers, giving the Command to Harrison, now
made Major General, a fifth-Monarchy man, most of these men being raised by
those sort of men, and the other Sectaries, with which this Army swarmed, and
the Presbyterian Interest daily declined, every where being called a most
horrid Tyranny, and worse than the Prelacy. They also about this time formally
receive Ambassadors from Portugal, and Spain, who for Interest acknowledge
their Power. All they did besides, was the constant Persecution of the Royal
Party after their Tyrannical manner, Colonel Eusebius Andrews, a constant
Loyalist, and firm to the interest of his King, being by Profession a
Councellor of Gray's Inn, having been underhand Contriving some Insurrection, in
the behalf of the King, was betrayed by some of his Confederates and taken at
Gravesend, and after sixteen Weeks being Prisoner in the Tower, and several
times examined, he was brought to his Trial before their bloody High Court of
Justice, Bradshaw sitting as President. Where he admirably pleaded his Cause,
but the Attorney General Prideaux, overruled all, and told him the Court was
not to take notice of his Law Cases, but of his Confession, and tho he had
Acted no Treason, yet he had an Affection for Treason, and therefore deserved
Death: An excellent Mark of the Liberty of the Subject under Usurpers. And upon
this learned distinction, the Bloody Court proceeded to Sentence against him,
that he should be Beheaded: Thus the Will of Usurpers is become Law. This
Heroic Gentleman suffered accordingly on the 22d. of August 1650, on
Tower Hill, where he dyed with much Constancy, Magnanimity, and Christianity.
In October following, one Benson, involved in the same Design with Colonel
Andrews, was tried and Condemned, by the aforesaid Tyrannical Court, and on the
7th. was Executed, being Hanged for his Loyalty. At the same time, was an
Insurrection in Northfolk, which being suppressed, many suffered for the same
in several places. In March following, the Grandees at Westminster, by the same
Arbitrary Power, after the Turkish Precedent, put to Death the Loyal Sr. Henry
Hide, before the Exchange. It was Crime enough that he was a Royalist, and
Brother to the afterward Earl of Clarendon, then with the King. But his
pretended Crime was, That he had been an Agent from the King, after the Death
of his Royal Father, to the grand Signior. He was bred a Merchant, and had a
repute amongst the Turkish Company, and was by them made their Consul at Morea,
and this Gentleman the King sent to the Port, in order to some private
concerns, and not for the Confiscation of the Merchants Estates, as the people
were made to believe: but he being there, the Visiere was privately tampered
with, who betrayed him, and sent him to England a Prisoner in the Ships thence
bound for Smirna, in one of which he was brought to London, and Committed to
the Tower, convented before the aforesaid Court, by whose Power he was
Condemned and Beheaded as aforesaid, on the 4th. of March 1650. And now their
Hands were in all went to Pot that came in their way; the April following
Captain Brown Bushel was the next Criminal they Murdered for his Loyalty: he
had long lain under restraint in the Tower, and almost starved for want of
Sustinance, and at last being put into their Bloody Roll of such as were to be
Tried, he was called to their Bar, and Condemned. But his Wife solicited very
hard for a Reprieve, which at last they promised her, with which joyful News
she repaired to her Husband, Comforting themselves together till four a Clock
in the Afternoon, but had no sooner left him, with those flattering Hopes, but
the Warrant came for his present Execution; they finding it seems that he was
too well beloved by the Seamen, and wree in Fear of him, and so about six of
the Clock at Night they put him to Death, on the Ground under the Scaffold on
Tower Hill; which he suffered with much Resolution.

In the mean time Cromwell was very watchful and Diligent, and endeavored all
he could, tho not with any ^uccess, to engage the Scots Army, which was drawn
up ^t Sterling, where the King was with them* But the King having a Design to
pass into England, waved engaging, with as much Care, as the other, flushed
with Victory and Success, sought it, who was come within ^ight of the Scotch
Army. In Lancashire several expected ^is coming, and were ready to rise upon
his approach, ^ho disappointed by the Rumps Vigilance: Cromwell, for want of
Provisions, was forced to remove, and attempt^d to get over to Fife side: It
was about this time, that several rude fits of an Ague shook him so shrewdly,
that there was an equal engagement of Hopes and Fears ^n the side of either
party, of his marching into another world; Doctor Write and Dr. Bates, two
eminent physicians, being sent from London, to administer Physic ^o him, being
brought very low. But at last by the help ^f these Doctors, who had the charge
of him, by the Junto's order, he recovered, to the sorrow of the Roya^ Party.
At last, the English under Colonel Overton, wit^ about fifteen or sixteen
thousand Foot, and four Troop of Horse, with much difficulty, forced their
Landing Cromwell drawing up close to the Scots at the same time with all his
Forces, with an intention to fall upon the^^ Rere, if they should attempt to
beat them out of Fife Yet the Scots sent four thousand Horse and Foot, under
Sir John Brown, which Cromwell having notice of, sent ove^ Lambert and Okey,
with two Regiments of Horse and Foot, and engaging with him, defeated him, took
him with many others prisoners, having slain about two thousand of the Scots.
This gave the English firm footing in Fife, and they easily took in several
places on tha^ side the Frith. And now the King was necessitated to follow his
design, in marching for England; and whilst Cromwell went about to set upon S.
Johnston's, that he might make himself Master of the Pass at Sterlin, which he
took after a days siege, the King marches for England from Sterlin, by the way
of Carlisle, with about sixteen thousand complete. This News gave Cromwell an
allarm and immediately he dispatches a Messenger with Letter to his Masters in
England, to inform them of it; and to comfort them, believing they would
entertain no pleasant thoughts thereat, giving them an account of his
successes, and that they should have confidence in God, and should improve the
best they could, what Forces they had in readiness, and should raise more, and
not be afraid; for the Enemy was heart-smitten, and were in (...) desperate
condition, with such like stuff. In the mean time, he orders Major General
Harrison, and Collone^ Rich, who were on the Borders, to attend the motion o^
the King's Army, until he were able to come up to them with his Forces. The
Parliament, notwithstanding his canting Letters. began to be jealous of him,
and spoke big words against him, which came to his ears, and which he remembered
afterward to their cost. In the mean time, Lambert, with about three thousand
Horse and Dragoons is speeded after the King; and presently after, Cromwell
himself follows, the same day the King enters England, which was on the sixth
of August, having departed from Sterlin the last of July. On his entering into
England, he was proclaimed as he went, and pardon offered to all sorts of
persons, excepting Cromwell, Bradshaw, Cook, and some others the most immediate
Murderers of his Father. At the same time a Party in North Wales began to
rise, to join with the Earl of Darby, but were broken and disappointed. The
King with his wearied Men, on the two and twentieth of August comes to
Worcester, being beset before and behind, by the new raised Forces, Cromwell,
Lambert and Harrison. The Militia of London, and of several Counties, flock to
Worcester; so that by that time Cromwell was come up to them, they had formed
an Army of forty thousand men, or more. The Earl of Darby brought to the King
two hundred and fifty foot, and sixty Horse; and having raised about twelve
hundred more in Lancashire, and those parts, he was engaged by Lilburn, and
routed, and several persons of Quality taken. By this time, Cromwell had close
begirt Worcester, and the King's Party beheld themselves in a very bad
condition, hemmed in on all sides with numerous Foes, and now too late saw
their error, of not marching directly to London, which was dreaded by the
Junto, and which was earnestly desired and expected by the Londoners, who
wanted only a fuller security of showing their inclinations for the King, being
overawed, and hindered through fear from declaring.

But God did not see it good, that the King should be brought to the Throne, by
any other hand than that of Peace, and by his own Subjects of England,
intending to show him a more immediate care of his miraculous providence, in
his preservation, and that he might not be subject to the Presbyterians for
their assistance, nor beholden to them for his Crown; he was resolved to bring
him in after a more glorious manner.

Notwithstanding the great disadvantages the Scots were in, they were resolved
with much courage to sell their lives as dear as they could, and that the
English should not find it an easy purchase. The first considerable Engagement
was at Upton Bridge, on Fleetwood's side, who was Lieutenant General of the
Army, where Lambert with five hundred Horse and Dragoons, beat Colonel Massy,
who endeavored to maintain it. But the fatal day was on the third of
September, auspicious to Cromwell the last year in his fight at Dunbar. It is
not my design to draw you the Scheme of the Battle, intending only in these
Papers to show more particularly things of another nature: this Action has been
sufficiently made known; therefore I shall only very briefly mention it. The
Scots, to give them their due, and the little handful of English that were with
them, sought bravely, and showed great courage and resolution, disputing every
Field with their numerous Enemies, and coming to the But-end of their Muskets,
and Push of Pike with them, covering the Field, where they stood, with their
Bodies. The King in person charged in one of the Sallies from the Town, showing
extraordinary Valor, Conduct and Courage; in which Charge, Duke Hamilton,
Brother to the Duke that was beheaded, was shot, and died suddenly after of his
Wound. But toward the Evening, the English, charging most furiously, with
Cromwell in the head of them, entered with the retreating Scots into the Town,
and possessed themselves of the Fort Royal: Then it was the King, with the Duke
of Buckingham, the Earl of Derby, and some others, and about sixty Horse fled,
being narrowly missed by Cobbet; but the Foot falling to plunder the Town,
(which they did with great barbarity) kept out the Horse, for fear they should
share with them, which favored his Majesty's Escape, who got that night to
White-Ladies, where he was disguised, and all the rest departing several ways,
he was committed to the fidelity of the Pendrills, being in the disguise of a
Wood-Cutter, with a Bill in his hand, and for some time lay hid in the
Celebrated Oak in Boscobel Wood: thence conveyed to Mr. Whitegrave's at Mosely,
whence, as a Servant to Mrs. Jane Lane, he went to Bristol: but missing a
passage there, after many signal Marks of God's Providence, in his miraculous
Escape, at least fifty several persons having been made privy to it, he at
last, with the Lord Wilmot, embarked at Brightemsted in Sussex, and was carried
over by one Tetersell, Master of the Vessel, who afterward was a Captain of
one of his Majesty's Frigates, and got safe to Diep in France, to the great joy
of all his Friends.

The Scots lost in this Battle, about two thousand slain upon the place, and in
the pursuit, and about eight thousand Prisoners; very few of the Scots got back
to Scotland, being known by their Tongue, and picked up in their return by the
Country: most of the Nobility and chiefest Commanders were taken, and carried
Prisoners to London, with all their Ensigns: many of the chiefest Prisoners of
the Nobility were kept in Windsor-Castle, till the King's Restoration: the
Colors were hanged up in Westminster Hall; and several of the common Soldiers
sold to Merchants, and sent away as Slaves to the Barbados, and other
Plantations. Comwell himself in great triumph passes to London, being met at
Acton by the Speaker, and Members of the Junto, the Lord Mayor of London, and
Steel their Recorder, who in a flattering Speech applauded his great
Atchievments, applying to him the words of the Psalmist: To bind their kings in
chains, and their nobles in fetters of iron.

And now the way to the ambitioned Throne seemed open, few Obstacles remaining,
except the Junto themselves, which he had made so odious to the people, by
their bloody, tyrannous and arbitrary Actions, that he knew it would be very
grateful to them, to have them dissolved. Ireton was dead in Ireland, who had
been a great Assistant to him in promoting him; but it was thought he was so
true a Common-wealths-man, that he would not have suffered Cromwell to have
grasped the Scepter, and to have set up himself in the place of the Monarch he
had pulled down; and since he was now able to act himself without his Councils,
he was but a Rub out of his way; almost all Ireland being subdued, and under
his subjection; Ludlow being Lieutenant General of the Army there, and one
active in the reducing the Remainder left unfinished by Ireton. On the other
hand General Monk, whom he had left in Scotland with seven thousand men, had
taken Sterlin, Dundee, Perth, and all the strong Holds in Scotland; S. Andrews,
Aberdeen, and all the Castles surrendered upon Summons; so that Scotland as well
as Ireland was at his devotion; and three Kingdoms he hoped to make a prey of:
and to make them more sure, and to unite them into one, they entered upon the
project of having each Kingdom incorporated with England, like Wales, by
causing them to elect their several Members to sit in the English Parliament.
And now that he might yet make the Junto more odious, he puts them on the
ordinary Drudgery, of taking away the lives of such of the Royal Party, as he
thought might be any hinderance to his Designs, by their arbitrary way of
Trial, in their High Court of Injustice, or by a Court-Marshal; and thus, as
the saying is, he killed two Birds with one Stone, rid his Opposers out of the
way, and made his Instruments odious, that he might with the more safety lay
them aside, when he saw his time.

The Earl of Derby was the first that felt the bloody severity of these Rulers
at Westminster, who appointed a Court-Marshal to sit at Chester for his Trial,
and several others that were taken at the Battle of Worcester; where he was
sentenced to be beheaded, tho he had surrendered himself upon Articles, and
promise of his life to one Captain Edge; but notwithstanding his plea, the
arbitrary Court condemned him, and he was executed at Bolton in Lancashire, the
fifteenth of October, 1651. And by the same Court, Sir Timothy
Fetherstone-haugh was condemned, and for the same crime of Loyalty, for
endeavoring to bring in Charles Stewart, (as they called the King) and to
possess him (of his Right) the Crown of England, who was beheaded at Chester,
the twenty second day of the same month: likewise by the same Court, Captain
Benbow was condemned, and according to their Sentence shot to Death at
Shrewsbury And Captain Symkins in another place. Many more of note were put
into the Tower, and reserved for a further Exercise of their Cruelty.

And now the way to the Crown did not seem very Difficult, for Jersy, Isie of
Man, and the Barbados yield to their Power; and Oliver in the next place bent
all his thoughts to turn this Kump of a Parliament out of Doors, having done
with them as much Mischief as he well could: He looks now very big upon them,
and had shown by his behavior, the Resentment he had of their former saucy
Expostulation of his management of the Affairs in Scotland, and when he came
into the House they all Crouch'd, and the ^a^ning Speaker made his Panegyric,
with palpable Flattery, norwithstanding it was moved in the House, by some of
his Creatures, that this House should be dissolved, and Care taken for another
to be Chosen; but this was a bitter Potion they knew not how to swallow. And
upon this the Levellers are again set to work and Countenanced, who before were
so much Cried down, that they might bait them to a Dissolution, and that he
might be Lord Paramount in Nomine, as well as he was already in Re. But yet
there were two Obstacles in his Way: The first was, the Duke of Gloucester was
too near him, he was yet a Prisoner in Scarborow Castle; him he causes to be
removed, and sent away into Holland; which was done by the order of the Junto,
to the no small joy of his Friends, that he had escaped out of the cruel Claws
of these Bears with Life. This rub being removed, another more Difficult
appeared, which was the War with Holland, and he very Rationally concluded, it
would be too hard a Task for him, to make War both abroad with them and at home
with his own Commonwealth, which he intended to pull down: Considering what a
small share he had of the Love of the people, and that he was to set up
himself, and Establish his rule and Arbitrary Sway, by the Power of the Army
only: and for this Reason, he was forced to let his Journy-men continue their
Seats a little longer, and wait the Issue of this War.

This War being foreseen, to quiet the Peoples minds, they pass an Act of Grace
or Oblivion, a Pardon for all Hostilities past, with an Intention of forgetting
all Injuries, but upon Condition, of taking an Engagement, which they imposed
upon the People, wherein they promise and Engage, To be true and Faithful to
the Commonwealth of England, as then Established, without King or House of
Lords. But out of this Act, The Lord Goring and his Sons, Sr. John Webster, The
executors of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Murderers of Dorislaus and
Ascham were excepted.

Still several Addresses, Petitions, Declarations, and Desires, came from
diverse Counties, and Places, to the Parliament, for the putting a Period to
their sitting, and for providing for future Representatives, which Perplexed
them; and were very distastful; seeing them so pressing, and after many put
offs, and Reasons for their Continuance, they were forced to comply, and
resolved that the longest Day of their Sitting should be the 5th. of November,
in the Year, 1654. two years too long, as Cromwell thought; for he intended
their Reign should be shorter, but his Projects being not yet Ripe, he awaited
his opportunity. About the latter end of this year, they made an Act to banish
John Lilburn, who was very troublesome to them, and whom it seems Oliver was
much afraid of, Knowing him to be an Enemy to his Ambitious Proceedings, and
very popular. It was provided by this Act, that if he returned without leave
from the State, he should suffer as a Felon.

Preparations for War being made on both sides, the States of Holland, seeing
the English make an Act so Prejudicial to their Trade, and to prepare to
maintain it against them, being somewhat fearful of the Event, sent over their
Ambassadors, Mine Heeren Cate, Vander-Peer, Sharp, and Newport, who found our
English States very high, and made such demands, that the Dutch could not yield
to, and so in the beginning of the year 1652 they get their Fleets to Sea, well
Manned and Equipped, Marten Harpers Vantrump, being the Admiral for the Dutch.
Popham being Dead, Dean and Blake are Admirals for the English, to whom
afterward General Monk was joined, and for that end sent for out of Scotland,
he having quieted all things there. The Dutch knowing the English laid claim to
the Dominion of the narrow Seas, as their just Right and Due, had Commanded
their Captains not to acknowledge their Sovereignty, by denying to strike their
Flag, at the meeting of the English Ships in their own Seas, an Affront they
knew would never be put up by the English, but ever was and ever will be
disputed and revenged; upon this Quarrel the War began, Captain Young who
commanded some of the English Frigots, seeing some Dutch Ships returning from
the Streights, commanded their Admiral to strike his Flag, who did so, but
their Vice Admiral being likewise bid to do the same, absolutely refused, but
after four or five Broad-sides was forced to take it down, and so they parted,
their Ambassadors being yet in Treaty, and in England; Captain Young was
unwilling to Prosecute the business any farther, lest they should attribute to
him the beginning of the War, which thus first began. But not long after they
fell to it in Earnest. It shall not be my Task to give you a particular of this
War, it being besides my Business, in which the English showed great Courage,
and Bravery; and in all Histories the like not to be paralleled, and therefore
I shall not altogether pass it over in silence, but briefly touch upon it for
the Satisfaction of the Reader, who cannot but be pleased at their Success as
Englishmen, tho otherwise Rebels to their King and Country.

The first Engagement between the two Fleets of the two States, was on the
19th. of May 1652; off of Dover Road, Tromp having forty two Ships, Blake but
fifteen Frigots, but after the fight was begun, Captain Bourn came to his
Assistance with eight Ships more, this sight lasted from two of the Clock till
Night; the English getting the better, having not one Ship disabled, tho they
had on both sides Exchanged above two Thousand Cannon shot, one of the Dutch
Ships was Sunk, and another taken: the next Morning Van-Trump sailed for
Zealand. The Holland Ambassadors were yet in London, and dis-avow Tromp's
Action in disputing the Flag. as Rash and without Orders, or knowledge of their
Masters; and desired a Restitution of their Ship, but the people were so
inflamed at the Relation of Tromp's Carriage, that the Ambassadors were fain to
be Guarded to keep them safe from the Peoples rage: And upon this the Holland
States dispatch away an extraordinary Ambassador, Mine Heer-Paw, to endeavor to
make up the Breach, and to Excuse the rashness of their Admiral. The Parliament
hereupon Voted; that, The States General should Pay the Charges they had been
at, and the Losses sustained upon this Occasion. Secondly, That this being
Paid, there should be a Restitution on either side of Ships and Goods taken.
Thirdly, That a League should be made between the two States. These Votes were
sent to the Dutch Ambassadors, and they Communicated them to their Masters; who
liking them not, immediately recalled their Ambassadors, and began Vigorously
to prosecute the War.

Admiral Blake with seventy Ships sails to the Orkney Islands, to disturb their
Busses fishing upon our Coasts, and Sr. George Ascue coming from the Barbados,
with fifteen Ships is recruited and fitted for a reserve. In the mean time
Tromp gets to Sea with a hundred and twenty Ships, and endeavors to engage
with Blake, but a Storm preventing them, they were forced both Home: Blake
carrying with him about nine hundred Prisoners, which he had taker, and six men
of War, which he took Guarding their Busses, This was the first Action after
the War was declared.

The second Engagement between these two States, was on the 16th. of August
following, off of Plymouth, between Sr. George Ascue, who had forty sail, and
De Ruyter who had a Fleet of fifty men of War; and was conveying through the
Channel their Merchant men which were about fifty sail more. Sr. George eng^^ed
the Dutch, with nine of his foremost Ships, and Charged through their Fleet: the
Dutch had the Weather-gage, and night coming on, and the rest of the Fleet not
coming up, Sr. George Ascue drew off and sailed for Plymouth, and the Dutch
into the French Ports to repair their Ships. Sr. George had the better of it,
and had the whole Fleet engaged, it was thought he might have had an entire
Victory. This was so represented to the Rump to his disadvantage, that they
laid him aside, and never after would employ him in their Service, but then
General Monk was sent for, and Voted by the Junto to be joined in Commission
with Blake and Dean. This was the second fight with the Dutch in this War.
About this time Blake lighting on the French at Calis took seven of their
Ships, and assisting the Spaniards besieging Dunkirk, was a cause of the
surrender of the Town by the Service he did.

On the 28th. of October was a Third fight, between the English and the Dutch,
Van-Tromp upon some discontent having laid down his Commission, they made Wit
Wittens Admiral, to whom they joined De Ruiter: Blake had taken from the Dutch
five west India Ships of great Value, and six Steights men Valued at 200000 l.
which losses enraged the Dutch, and put them into Fury to fight. Pen was
Vice Admiral, and Bourn Rear Admiral of the English Fleet, who began this
Battle; great Courage being shown on both sides: the Rear Admiral of the Dutch
was taken, two of their Ships sunk, and a Third blown up; the English* getting
the better, Wittens got off with his Fleet, much shattered and Torn, being
pursued within twelve Leagues of the Maze; and Blake returns into the Downs
Victorious, having made the Dutch run for it.

The Dutch much troubled at this misfortune, persuade Van Tromp to accept of
the Command, knowing him to be an able Seaman; who at last yielded to their
Desires, and hopes to gain honor against the English: with eighty men of War,
and ten fire Ships, he comes to the back of the Godwin. Blake had with him now
not above fo^^y sail, yet with them resolves to give Battle, and seeking his
Enemy began a most furious and obstinate encounter, on the 29th. of November
1652. which lasted from two in the Morning till six at Night. Blake in the
Triumph, with two more of his Ships were engaged at one time with twenty of the
best Ships of the Dutch. Van-Tromp and De Ruyter were much shattered; one of
their Flag ships was blown up, but the Dutch over-powering them, got the
Victory, and had not Night favored the retreat of the English Fleet they had
endangered the whole. The Garland and Bona-venture were taken by the Dutch,
three sunk, and one burnt. Van-Trump kept the Sea, and took some inconsiderable
Prizes; which puff^ him up with so much Vanity, as to cause him hang a Broom at
his main top Mast; saying he would sweep the Seas of the English ship. This was
the fourth Engagement.

The maintaining of this War against the potent Dutch, gained such Reputation
to these English States, as they were called, that the French by the Advice of
Mazereen, sent Monsieur Bourdeaux as an Agent from the French King, to
acknowledge them. This Action of the French gave great distaste to all the King
of England's Friends, but this Peace with England preserved the Cardinal, being
in some danger from the Princes of France. And now to maintain this War the
Junto lay a heavy Tax upon the People of 120000 l. a Month.

Monk and Dean being come out of Scotland are joined with Blake, and the Fleet
equipping with all Expedition; which the Dutch States hearing of, sent away to
Van-Tromp, who was at Sea; Conducting home three hundred sail of Merchant men,
with seventy six men of War; and Commanded him to Block up the Thames, to
hinder the English Fleet from coming forth; but to their great Amazement, the
English got their Ships to Sea, and joining those at Ports-mouth made up eighty
sail, and over against Portland lay half Seas over expecting the Dutch. On the
18th. of February they discry'd them, and about eight in the Morning the fight
began. Blake and Dean who were in the Triumph, with twelve Ships more,
encountered the Gross of the Dutch Fleet; ^ut was relieved at last by Lawson,
who performed his part exceeding Well. The Ship in which General Monk was,
being a slow Sailor could not so soon come up to engage as he would have had
it, but he had a great share in the Fight, and lost many men aboard her. This
Fight lasted three days, and the Triumph wherein two of the Generals were,
received seven hundred Cannon shot in their Hall. The next day being Saturday,
and the nineteenth of Feb. 1652. as soon as the English could overtake the
Dutch, they engaged them again in the Afternoon, which was fought with much
fury, Tromp still endeavoring to save his Merchant Men, fought retreating,
many of them, which were picked up by the English, with some of his Men of War.
The third day in the Morning, being the twentieth, the fight was again renewed,
and continued very fierce till four in the Afternoon; but the Wind being cross
to the English, Van Tromp got at last to Callais Sands, and so tyded it home.
The Dutch lost in the three days Fight eleven Men of War, and thirteen
Merchants Ships, and had killed about fifteen hundred Men. The English lost but
one Ship, but had not many less slain than the Enemy. This was the fifth
Engagement in which the English got much the better, About this time they
erected their High Court of Justice in Ireland, by which many of the Irish
suffered; among the rest the noted Rebel Sir Phelim Oneal was hanged at Dublin.

The year 1652 being worn out, and the Dutch being by their several losses
humbled, the King's Party crushed and impoverished, now the Tax for the
maintenance of the Dutch War coming in, and filling the Treasury, 120000 pounds
every month, the State owned by the French, and himself caressed privately by
Mazareen, with whom he had secret intelligence; but what was more, the
arbitrary Junto perfectly hated by the People, he thought it now a convenient
time to step into the Throne, and to usurp the supreme Power and Authority, and
to take the Government into his own hands. To this end, he holds several
Consults with the Officers of the Army, and much fasting and praying there was
among them, an extraordinary Work being to be done. Cromwell cajoled them all;
Lambert was deceived in his hopes of succeeding Oliver, which he had made him
to believe he intended. Harrison was for pulling these old Representatives out
of their Seats, to make way for the Rule of the Saints. Cromwell knew how to
please them all, that he might by them work his ends. All the Party Harrison
could make among the Congregations of Feak, Rogers, Simson, and the rest of
that Gang, were for Cromwell, and all impatient to have the Parliament outed;
and to help forward, there came forth daily from the Army, Petitions,
Addresses, Remonstrances, and such like Papers, for putting an end to this
Parliament. But notwithstanding all the specious pretenses, for the putting an
end to this Parliament, many of the Officers very well perceived the drift of
Cromwell, and what all would end in, viz. his getting the Monarchy into his own
hands, which troubled them much; and some of them made open protests against
it; for they that could not endure the Rule of a single person, in their Lawful
Prince, could much less endure to be tyrannized over by the arbitrary power of
their equal. The chief of them that opposed his design, were Colonel Venables,
Scout-Master-General Downing, Major Streater and others; Streater went about to
give his Reasons to the contrary, telling them that Cromwell designed to set up
himself, and that it was a betraying of their most glorious Cause, for which so
much Blood had been spilt: but Harrison interrupted him, and told him, that he
was assured, the General did not seek himself in it, and did it to make way for
the Rule of Jesus, that he might have the Scepter. To whom Streater replied,
That unless Christ came very suddenly, he would come too late. For this
opposition, Cromwell looks on him as his mortal Enemy, and claps him up into
the Gate House. The Junto was very sensible of these Actings, but knew not
which way to prevent them, yet they did what they could to make these Officers
understand the inconveniences that would happen, by a sudden dissolving them,
and that it would be the only way to preserve the Nation, to fill up the House
with new elected Members, which would please the people, and their Acts would
be received with greater Authority. But the Army answered them, they were grown
so carnal and corrupt, that the people of God could expect no good from them,
and that they would take care, that the supreme Government of the Land should
be placed ^n the hands of such as truly feared God, and were of approved
integrity.

These Debates between the Parliament and the Army spun out some time, and the
Junto went about cunningly to secure themselves, by preparing an Act for the
filling up their House, wherein such speed was made, that it was near passing
the House. Cromwell being nettled, resolves to stay no longer; and to his
Council of Officers he showed, That if they should let the people to choose new
Representatives, it was a tempting of God, who would save them by the hands of
a few, as in former times, and that five or six godly upright men might do more
in one day, than the Parliament had done, or would do in a hundred. Upon this
he takes with him Lambert, Harrison, and about eight more Officers of the Army,
and on the three and twentieth day of April, 1653, he enters the House, and
there after a short Speech, showing them some reasons for the necessity of
their being dissolved, he peremptorily declared them to be dissolved. But the
Speaker refusing to leave the Chair, Cromwell began to huff, and fall into a
passion, telling them they were a company of drunkards, whoremasters,
Hipocrites, Knaves and Oppressors, and commanded that the Bauble the Mace
should be took from them, and no more carried before them; and Harrison taking
the Speaker by the Arm^lifted him out of his Chair; and having thus turned them
out of doors, he locked them up, and set a Guard of Soldiers at them, and at
all the Avenues, that they might not meet again in that place; and thus exeunt
T^^nni, one Devil driving out another, to make way at last for their Lawful
Prince. This done, Cromwell returning to his Council of Officers, told them of
his Exploit, and let them know that now they must go hand in hand with them,
and justify it by their lives and fortunes, they having advised him to it. He
told them, tha^ when he went to the House, he did not think to do i^ but
perceiving the Spirit of God so strongly upon him he would no longer consult
Flesh and Blood; for the Parliament intended to have perpetuated themselves
This Action of his, tho arbitrary, illegal, and tyrannical, was generally
applauded by all sorts of people, these Rumpers were grown so very odious by
their tyrannie^ Usurpation. And the King's Friends both at home and abroad,
were not a little joyful to see this Turn, and to behold them dethroned and
trampled on, even in the midst of their Laurels, obtained for their Victories
over the Dutch. Grievous Muttering they kept for this violence done to them by
their Servant, as they styled him, thinking it none, when he did the like to
those secluded Members, that would not vote with them against the King: but as
mad as they were, they saw no help for it, and it was not possible for them to
get together, tho they would not own themselves dissolved; and thus our
usurping Junto went out like a Snuff, with a Stink, smelling very unsavourly in
the Nostrils of the whole Nation.

Thus far have I traced out to you, the Lines of the Image of Arbitrary, and
Tyrannick Usurpation, and how ugly and grim a Representation it is, you who
have seen it truly delineated may judge. You have seen this Titular Parliament
unjustly seize upon the Government, by murdering their King, and against all
Laws thrust out two of the States of the Land, the Lords Spiritual first, and
then the Lords temporal, and having now grasped the Government with rapacious
hands, with the like Injustice and Arbitrariness, turn the greater part of
their own Members out of Doors, and rule by a few bloody and tyrannical
Usurpers. You have likewise seen after what manner they have swayed the three
Nation^, by their own Arbitrary Wills and Pleasures, as so many lawless
Tyrants, upholding an Army only to cut the Peoples Throats, and to overawe
them, burthening them with Taxes, and oppressing them with a standing Army, and
^ee Quarter, taking away their lives by an Arbitrary Court of Justice, contrary
to the known Laws of the ^and, and robbing and spoiling all men of their
Estates, hat opposed them, filling the Jayls thorowout the three Kingdoms with
Prisoners: The Liberties of the Subject ^verthrown, Magna Charta, and all the
Laws and Ancient Coustitutions of Parliaments trodden under foot, and
disregarded, so as no man could call any thing his own: And in fine, all the
People of England made Slaves, by these the Keepers of their Liberties; so that
it was no wonder, that there was a general rejoicing at their fall, tho as yet
it was but out of the Drying Pan in^o the Fire, having exchanged two hundred
Tyrants for one, as Lawless, Boundless, and Arbitrary as they; or a Rump for an
Oliver.

I should now proceed to give a further Display of this Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, under the Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell, who had pulled
these down, only to set up himself: but before I enter upon it, I think ^t will
not be ungrateful to the Reader, and not impertinent to my Design, to show you
what a sort of men these were, who had thus long usurped, by a brief Character
of some of the chiefest of them, and what benefit they made of their pretended
Godliness, giving one another Estates, out of the Kings, Queens, Bishops, Deans
and Chapters, and Delinquents Lands.

And I will begin with Oliver Cromwell, the Lucifer of the rest, who outwitted
them all, and ruled by himself, with greater Power, and more absolute Sway,
than ever any Monarch of England did. He was very well descended, of a Knightly
Family, in the County of Huntington, being born in S. John's Parish in the Town
of Huntington, the twenty fifth of April, 1599, being the Son of Mr. Robert
Cromwell: who was the third Son of Sir Henry Cromwell, a Gentleman of great
worth, honored and beloved in Court and Country, whose eldest Son Sir Oliver
Cromwell, a Gentleman well known for his Loyalty, and Uncle to this our Oliver,
was his Godfather, and gave him his Name. His Mother was the Daughter of Sir
Richard Steward, of Ely. They therefore were much mistaken, who said he was the
Son of a Brewer, tho indeed his Mother, (even in his Father's Lifetime) did
manage a Brew House, by their Servants, and after her Husbands death, continued
the same, as an honest means of Livelihood, the Patrimony of a younger Brother
being but small. He was observed in his Youth to be ambitious, willful and
headstrong, which improved with his years, and always, and upon all occasions
exercised the Impostor, under the mask of Hypocrisy. However, he was bred at
School, where he got some smattering in the Rudiments of Learning, but was so
violent and headstrong, and so very prone to robbing Orchards and Dove-Houses,
that he grew the terror of the Country, and past his Tutor's Correction. It was
about that time he dreamed he should be King of England; if it were not more
than a Dream, a suggestion of some evil Spirit; for he would often confidently
report it in his Youth, tho rebuked by his Father for it, and slashed by his
Master Dr. Bernard, for his constant avouching it. And acting in a Play in the
School, going beyond his Cue, he took a Crown, and put it on his own Head, and
as if inspired, spoke some big words with great authority. Thence he was
translated to Cambridge, where he was more noted for Football, Cudgelling, and
Wrestling, than for his Studies, to which he little gave his mind; and after
his Father's death left the University; and returning home, fell to all manner
of Licentiousness and Debauchery, and grew so distastful to his Mother and
Neighborhood, that she sent him away to London, and enters him into
Lincoln's Inn, intending to make him a Lawyer; but finding this place not
agreeable to his humor, he stayed not long before he returned back into the
Country, where he fell to his old Trade of Debauchery, always fighting, and in
Quarrels, tho with Pedlars, Tinkers, and such like Fellows, skillful in
^^^^dling the Quarter-Staff, so that none could over-match him. This kind of
life he led till he had spent his Patrimony, and almost ruined his Mother;
hated by the Country for his many Villainies committed, especially by his Uncle
and Godfather Sr. Oliver, who could not endure to have him named. At last
beginning to perceive his ruin, he feigned a Conversion; went to Church among
the orthodox Divines, and so far insinuated himself with them, that they deal
with his Mothers Uncle Sr. Robert Stewart, a Gentleman of a Competent Estate in
the Country, to take him into Favor, and to declare him his Heir, and who
dying soon after, left him an Estate of five hundred pound a year; which
quickly mouldred away, he having lest of it not above forty or fifty Pounds a
year. He then falls in with the Nonconformist Ministers; entertains them at his
House, has Lectures, and exercises himself in Preaching and Praying, about
which time he marries the Daughter of Sr. James Boucher; her name Elizabeth,
and Kins-woman to Mr. Hambden of Buckingham^hire, and turns Farmer for five
years with ill success, but still continuing his Preaching and Praying, was so
much followed by the Faction; that they by a wile got him to be chosen a
Burgess, for Cambridge, in the Parliament of 1640. when he was at his last
Gasp, and thinking to have Transplanted himself to New- England, and raised
Money for that purpose, which enabled him to stand a Candidate for Parliament
man. And now joining with Hambden, Pym, and the rest of them, he began to blow
up the Coals of Sedition; and to be noted amongst them, tutored by them, till
he grew quickly able to out-Wit them in their own Pernicious designs. But now
having spent the utmost farthing of his Estate, and run in Debt, he was
privileged from Arrests, by being a Member of Parliament; and now he betakes
him into the Army, where he was a Captain under Essex, and where he became so
Active and busy, that he soon advanced himself, to be Lieutenant General to
the Earl of Manchester.

(...) crave Pardon of the Reader for this Digression, for I intend not to
write his Life, but what I have related, may let you see what this great Man
was ab origin, and therefore I shall say no more of his Actions in the Army,
they being sufficiently known in Story, and how gradually he came to his
Command of General, in the Army; part of which, as far as came within my
Province that I have undertook, appears by the aforegoing Discourse, whereby it
is plainly manifested, by wha^ Methods he attained his Greatness and
Usurpation. (...) could say no less of this their Ringleader, who deserves
(...) more particular Character, being so Notorious throughout Christendom, and
Famous for his Actions and Usurpation; I shall not be so prolix in the rest,
but only name them to you. They say his Family descended from a branch of that
Cromwell, in Henry the 8th. days, wh^^ ruined the Abbeys, and was fatal to the
Popish Clergy, a^ this was to the Protestant Episcopacy; and that the Linea^
descent, was from one Williams of Glamorgan-shire, wh^^ marrying the Daughter
of that Cromwell, took on him the Name and transferred it to his Posterity; but
the direct Line of that Cromwell, is continued in the Lord Cromwell, and Earl
of Arglass in Ireland. This our Olive was a man, (as you have found by what I
have related of him) of many Vices, of deep Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, and
tho no great Scholar, of great improved Parts; of a strong robust
Constitution, and naturally Martial, of deep reach, and a great Politician,
after he had Conversed with Ireton his Son-in-Law, who taugh^ him his Art. He
had some Spice of Generosity in him which he showed on some Occasions, whether
it was in his Nature, or Designedly, is to be doubted. But for his Courage and
Resolution, and skill in Martial Discipline* that is not to be questioned; and
tho* I cannot think he really embraced any Religion, as his particular
Judgment, yet he embraced all that he found subservient to his Ends, as may be
perceived by his Actings and Intreagues, with the Presbyterians and
Independants, and all the other Sectaries, which were all alike to him; and no
doubt Episcopacy it self, would have been as pleasing to his Consci^^ce, could
he have Established his Usurpation by it. It was not therefore his Love of
Virtue or Religion, that made him thrust out all Vice from his Army; but that
he ^new it would naturally ruin it, and that a strict Disci^line, and the Face
of some Religion, would preserve (...); so that he never permitted among his
Soldiers, ^wearing, Drunkenness, Profaneness, Murder, Rapine, ^r Uncleanness;
but punishing them Severely, his Camp ^as like a well regulated Commonwealth,
and had he ^ot been a Rebel, and employed his Parts to* so wicked ^n end, as
the Destruction of his King and Country; ^or the setting up himself, he might
have passed among ^ie Worthies of this Nation, and lawfully have become ^minent
in his Generation. He had two Sons, Richard and Henry (besides one that dyed
young) and four Daughters, one married to Ireton, afterward to Fleetwood, one
to the Lord Fawkenbridge, one to Mr. Cleypool, which ^e much loved, and was his
second Daughter, and one to ^he Lord of Warwicks Grandchild Mr. Rich, which
was his youngest. Cromwell as well as the rest had a share in ^he Spoil, before
he came to grasp all into the Paws of hls Protector-ship, to which we have
brought him, but we now consider him as a Rumper, and by an Ordinance of that
Parliament was conferred on him, out of the Marquess of Worcester's Estate
2500. pounds a year; a good Competency, tho some say the said Lands so settled
upon him, at their improved Vallue, were worth to him five Thousand if not six
Thousand pounds a year; besides four or five pound a day coming in as
Lieutenant General, and Colonel of Horse in the Army.

Ireton the Scribe, as some called him, being excellent at drawing
Declarations, Petitions, and such like things, to serve his politic Ends, was
a man of a deep Reach, of much Dispatch, of very dexterous and able Parts, he
was Cromwell's right Hand, and was a great Contriver of his greatest Designs,
and Stratagems; He was a Commonwealth's man of the truest Stamp, and it is
thought, had he lived, Cromwell had not assumed that Power to himself, which he
had helped him to mount to, by destroying the Government, which Advantage,
Cromwell after his death laid hold on: He married Cromwell's eldest Daughter,
and tho poor before the Wars, lived very splendidly kept his rich Coach gilt,
that cost two hundred pounds; and four gallant Horses: He licked his Fingers
with the rest, and had he lived, no doubt, had got more; he died at Limrick in
Ireland, of the Plague, being Deputy there, and was brought over into England,
and by the Junto buried in great Pomp.

William Lenthal, the Speaker of this House of Commons, had at one time given
him by the House six thousand pounds for his good services, besides, as
Speaker, he got two thousand pounds per annum, and as Master of the Rolls,
three thousand pounds per annum, more; besides Sales of Offices. And then he
was for some time Chamberlain of Chester, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, worth to him one thousand two hundred and thirty pounds per annum;
and one of the Commissioners of the Great Seal, worth fifteen hundred pounds
per annum.

Buestrode Whitlock, Commissioner of the Great Seal, worth to him fifteen
hundred pounds per annum; and had two thousand pounds given him out of Mr.
Minn's Estate.

Edmond Prideaux, once a Commissioner of the great Seal, worth to him fifteen
hundred pounds a year. Then by order of the Junto afterward, he was permitted
to practice within the Bar, as the King's Council, worth to him five hundred
pounds per annum; was also Postmaster General, worth to him a hundred pounds
ever Wednesday night, and his Supper; the Earl of Warwick had the benefit of
foreign Letters, which was worth to him five thousand pounds per annum.

Oliver S. John's, Solicitor to the King, afterward made Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, and was one of their Ambassadors to Holland, he had the
passing of all Pardons upon Commissions, worth to him forty thousand pounds: he
was called The Dark-Lanthorn-Man, a knowing Man in the Laws, and had the wit to
keep out of danger, being against the putting the King to death, but a great
Privado of Oliver's, to whom he preferred his man Thurlo, who was his Secretary
when he went Ambassador, and became afterward Oliver's Secretary of State: he
died at Utrecht in Holland, since the King came in, being favorably looked
upon by his Majesty, and honored for his parts.

Roger Hill, a Barrester of the Temple, of no Practice, and little Estate, till
this Parliament, had from the House the Bishop of Winchester's Manor of
Taunton-Dean, worth twelve hundred pounds a year after the lives were out.

Humphry Sulway had given him the King's Remembrancer's Place, worth two
hundred pounds per annum.

Francis Rous was made Provost of Eaton, worth six hundred pounds per annum,
and had a College Lease worth six hundred pounds per annum, more.

John Lilse, a Barrester of the Temple, was made Master of S. Crosses. a place
for a Divine, worth eight hundred pounds per annum, and afterward one of the
Commissioners of the Great Seal. He was one of the King's Judges, and stabbed
beyond Seas since his Majesty's Restoration.

Sir William Allison, an Alderman of York, made Clerk of the Hamper, worth a
thousand pounds per annum, and given to him Crab Castle, worth six hundred
pounds per annum, more, belonging to the Archbishop of York.

Thomas Hoyle, another Alderman of York, was made Treasurer-Remembrancer in the
Exchequer, worth twelve hundred pounds per annum.

Tho. Pury, first a Weaver in Gloucester, then a Country Solicitor, had given
him three thousand pounds, and a place in the petty-Bag Office, worth four
hundred pounds per annum.

Tho. Purey the younger, Son to the former, was made Receiver of the King's
Rents in Gloucester and Wilts, and Clerk of the Peace of Glocestershire, worth
two hundred pounds per annum, and Captain of Foot and Horse; who at the
beginning of the Parliament was a Servant to an A^^orney of Staple-Inn.

William Ellis made Steward of Stepney, worth two hundred pounds per annum.

Miles Corbet, at the b^ginning of the Parliament much in debt, made one of the
Registers of the Chancery worth seven hundred pounds per annum; besides
Chairman for Scandalous Ministers, worth a thousand pound^ per annum, one of
the King's Judges, and afterward advanced to be a Judge in Ireland: executed
at Tybur^ since the King came in.

John Goodwin made a Register of Chancery, worth seven hundred pounds per annum.

Sir Tho. Widdrington a Commissioner of the Great Seal worth fifteen hundred
pounds per annum.

Edward Bish made Garter-Herald, in the place of Sir Ed. Walker, worth six
hundred pounds per annum.

Walter Strickland, Agent in Holland for the two Houses of Parliament, worth to
him five thousand pounds.

Nicholas Love made one of the six Clerks of the Chancery, worth two thousand
pounds per annum.

Sir Gilbert Gerard was Play Master to the Army, had three pence per pound
allowance, worth sixty thousand pounds, and Chancellor of the Duchy, worth
five hundred pounds per annum.

John Seldom had given him five thousand pounds, John Bond, Son of Dennis Bond,
made Master of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge. Sir Benjamin Rudiard given him five
thousand pounds. Lucas Hodges made Customer of Bristol. Sir John Hipsly given
him two thousand pounds in money, and made Keeper of three of the King's Parks,
Maribone, Hampton and Bushy Parks. Sir Tho. Walsingham had the Honor of Elsham.
To Benjamin Valentine given five Thousand pounds. To Sir Henry Heyman, 5000 l.
Denzil Hollis, 5000 l. Not. Bacon 3000 l. John Stevens out of the Lord Astley's
Composition; 1000 l. Henry Smith made one of the six Clerks worth 2000 l. per
annum. Robert Reynolds given him 2000 l. besides Abbington Hall and Lands worth
400 l. per annum. Sir John Clotworthy was made Treasurer for Ireland. John Ash
given him out of Mr. Coventry's Composition 4000 l. out of Sir Edward Moseley
(...) 1000 l. out of Mr. Phillips's 1200 l. out of Sir John Stowells 8000 l.
and Chairman at Goldssmiths-Hall. John Lenthal Son to the Speaker made one of
the six Clarks worth 2000 l. per annum. Francis Allin once a Goldsmiths made
Customer for London. Giles Green Chairman for the Navy. Francis Peirpoint had
the Lands of the Archbishop of York, lying in Nottinghamshire. William
Peirpoint had 7000 l. given him and the Earl of Kingston's personal Estate
worth 40000 l. John Palmer made Master of All Souls in Oxford in Dr. Sheldon's
place, a Divine. John Blackstone a Shopkeeper in New Castle, returned a Burgess
and had 3000 l. given him out of one Gentleman's estate, and out of others as
much as made up 12000 l. a Colemeters place worth 200 l. per annum: and the
Bishop of Durham's Castle at Durham, and Lands to great value. Tho. Ceyley long
a Prisoner for Debt made Recorder of Bridgwater. To Mr. Scawen given 2000 l.
Jsaack Penington once Lord Major of London had 7000 l. given him, and purchased
good store of Bishops Lands. Samuel Vassell, 1000 l. given him. Sir Will.
Brereton had the Archbishops Lands and House at Croydon. Ed. Harvey a Silk-man
made a Colonel and had the Bishop of London's House and Manor of Fulham.
Rich. Sulway a Grocer made a Colonel. Joh. Ven a Colonel Governor of Windsor
had 4000 l. given him. Phillip Skippon Sergeant Major General of the Army,
Major General of London, and Governor of Bristol, had 1000 l. per annum Lands
of Inheritance given him. Tho. Westrow had the Bishop of Worcester's Manor at
Hartlerow. Sir Arthur Haslerig had the Bishop of Durham's House, Park and
Manor of Aukeland, and 6500 l. in money given him. Lord Gray of Grooby had the
Queens manor House, Park and Lands at Holdenby. Sir Will. Constable restored
to Lands, sold to Sir Murmaduke Langly worth 25000 l. Sir Will. Purefoy had
given him 1500 l. Wall. Long 5000 l. given him. Michael Oldsworth keeper of
Windsor Park, and had a share out of Sir Will. Compton's Office, worth 3000 l.
a year, divided betwixt him and his Lord. Tho. Scot a Brewers Clark had Lambeth
House. Mr. Ashurst 1000 l. given him; besides every Member of the House, which
was when full 516 Persons, by their own order allowed themselves 4 l. per. week
a man, which amounts to 110000 l. per annum. They gave to Colonel H^mond
Governor of the Isle of Wight for his Table 20 l. a week, a 1000 l. in money
and 500 l. a year Land. Colonel Mitton 5000 l. in money, Cornelius Holland a
poor Boy and waited on Sir Hen. Vain, when Comptrouler of the Princes House.
Made Commissioner for the Revenue of the King Queen and Prince, Farmer of the
Kings feeding Grounds in Buckinghamshire worth 2000 l. per annum at 200 l. per
annum Rent. Possessor of Somerset House: Keeper of Richmond House, Commissioner
for the Garrisons of White Hall and the Mews, an Office in the Mint which
enabled him to give 5000 l. with his Daughter; this was one of the Kings
Judges. Sir Hen. Vain Senior, had the Bishop of Durham's manor and Park at
Evenwood, and had given him 5000 l. and was Chairman of the Kings Queens and
Princes Revenue. Sir Hen. Vain Junior a subtle Cunning pated Man; a fifth
Monarchy-man, he was made Treasurer of the Navy, worth 6000 l. a year. Sir Tho.
Trenchard given him 1200 l. He marries his Daughter to a Malignant, gives
security for the Payment of the portion being 1200 l. gets his Son in Law
sequestered, discovers the Debt, and has it given him for his Fidelity to the
State: A new way to pay Portions. Will. Bingham Governor of Pool had 1000 l.
given him. To Colonel Joh. Sydenham 1000 l. Joh. Glyn Recorder of London, was
Clark of the Pells worth 1000 l. per annum: and afterward Lord Chief Justice.
Joh. Bell an Apothecary beng entrusted with money was sued and said he could
not answer without breach of Parliament. Sir Walter Earl Colonel of Horse, and
Lieutenant of the Ordnance worth in times of Peace 1000 l. per annum, in War
5000 l. per annum. Alderman Atkins Treasurer at War. Gregory Clemens a Mer^hant
and one of the Kings Judges. John Rowles had given ^im one thousand five
hundred pound out of Sir John Wor^nham's Estate. Edward Ash a Woollen-Draper
Treasurer ^or the providing of Clothes for the Irish Soldiers. Sir ^^hn
Danvers by a Parliamentary proceeding overthrew his ^rothers Will, and got the
Estate worth 30000 l. Hen. Herbert, ^iven him 3000 l. and the Plunder of
Ragland Castle. To Fen^ick 500 l. Gilbert Millington 1000 l. and Chairman to
the Committee of plundered Ministers. To the two Darbys 5000 l. ^obert C^cil Son
to the Earl of Salisbury Colonel of Horse, Ser^ant Wild a Judge, a 1000 l.
given him after the Hanging of Captain Burley, out of the Privy Purse, and it
is said he had ^000 l. more after the aquital of Mr. Rolf who was accused for
^n intention of murdering the late King.

Of the City several Aldermen, Common Counsel, and others, who had great
Benefits by this Parliament some of whom were of it. John Warner Lord Major was
one of the Treasurers of War; and Treasurer of the receipt of all Moneys due
upon the Ordinance of 3d. August 1643. Treasurer of the loan money: Pur^hased
the Archbishop of York's best House, Castle and Mannot of Caywoood. Sir John
Wool^ston Alderman, Treasurer of War, Treasurer for Plate, Treasurer for loan
Money, Say-Master of ^he Mint, Trustee of the sail of Bishops Lands: Purchased
the Bishop of London's Land at High-Gate. Alderman Gibbs got seven or eight
thousand pounds, by melting the Plate and Bodkins at Guild Hall, one of the
Treasurers for 20000 l. to pay the Scots, a Trustee for Bishops Lands and
Treasurer for Rents and Moneys raised by them.

Alderman Fowks a Commissioner for the Customs refused to account upon Oath
because of a tender Conscience, Treasurer for the payment of Wagoners, a
Trustee for Bishops Lands and Controuler of their Accounts, had first 200 pound
per annum, and after by their Additional Ordinance 300 per annum more standing
Fee.

Alderman Pennington was Lieutenant of the Tower, being entrusted with 6000
pound, discovers it to the Parliament, beggs ^it and had it granted. Alderman
Pack Commissioner for the Customs Treasurer at War and bought the Bishop of
Lincoln's House and Manor at Bugden.

Alderman Andrews Treasurer at War, and Commissioner for the Customs. Alderman
Avery Commissioner for the Customs; Tr^asurer for Sequestrations, and Trustee
for the sale of Bishops Lands. Alderman Culham Commissioner of the Excise worth
1200 pound per annum. Alderman Foot the same. Alderman Edmonds the same. Owen
Roe Lieutenant Colonel and keeper of the Magazeen for stores. Alderman
Dethwick Treasurer at War With many more too long to be named.

They allowed for their. Military Officers, a Colonel of Foot 30 s. day; a
Lieutenant Colonel 15 s. a Major 9 s. a Captain 15 s. A Colonel of Horse 30
s. a day for himself, and for six Horses 21 s. a day, a Lieutenant Colonel 15
s. a day for himself, and for six Horses 21 s. a Captain of Horse 24 s. a day,
and for six Horses 21 s. a day. A Colonel Lieutenant Colonel and Major
received their Captains pay besides. So that it was no wonder so many of the
Parliament men got Commands in the Army. It was thought that there was near
twenty Millions shared in Lands, Revenues, Incomes, and money amongst them. To
Bradshaw their President of their High Court of Justice, the Kings House and
Parks at Eltham was given, and to Bulerode Withlock, Greenwich. Barksted
Lieutenant of the Tower, a poor Goldsmith bought at two or three years purchase
as much Bishops Lands as cost 10000 l. Mr. Boon who they say had been a Tapster
a Member of the House, had given him 6000 l. To Harry Martin 3000 l. To
Blackstone's Wife and Children 3000 l. out of the Earl of New Castle and Lord
Witherington's Estates: and 500 l. to his brother. Upon the General, out of the
Lands of the Duke of Buckingham's Estate and his Brothers, the Lord Francis
Villers 4000 l. per annum. Clarendon Park bestowed on the Earl of Pembroke.
4868 l. to the Lord Lisle. Cook for Acting the part of Attorney General against
the late King had bestowed on him St. Crosses Hospital. The new Park in Surry
bestowed on the City: that they might not want Venison Colonel Martin's
account brought into the House 3 d. July 1649. his Arrears amounting to 25000
l. ordered him, and 1000 l. per annum Land to be settled upon him and his Heirs.
To Colonel Feilder 1300 l. To Scobel their Clark once a poor Clark in
Chancery, and wrote for 2 d. a sheet, a Pension of 500 l. a year, and an
Employment in the sale of public Lands worth 1000 l. a year: and 6 s. 8 d Fee
for every Order taken forth. More given to Bradshaw, Somerhill belonging to the
Earl of St. Alben's. To the Lord Brohill 2000 l. I am afraid I have tired my
Reader, in going about to enumerate the many Gifts they ordered one to another,
but the I might name much more, this may suffice to show what this Parliament
did with the Kingdoms moneys, to gratify one another, and to share the prey
among themselves, of the Kingdom, who groaned under Taxes, and of the Kings,
Queens, Princes, and Bishops Lands, of Malignants Estates, Composition, Excise,
etc. The like never was read in History, and therefore you may not wonder, that
these men should be so unwilling to leave their Seats, and disband, but to sit
to advantage themselves if they co^^^ By what you have read, lit plainly
appears also, what sort of men they were, most of them, or very many of them,
of the scum of the people, upstarts, of mechanical breeding, sordid, covetous
Wretches, Hypocrites, pretending Religion, and making Godliness their gain. I
have done with them, and shall name but one or two more.

Dr. Dorislaus, who was Killed in Holland, had been formerly a poor
Schoolmaster in Holland, whence he came to Oxford, and read the
History-Lecture there, in which he then decry'd Monarchy, was complained of,
and forgiven by the King's Benignity. He then became Judge-Advocate in the
King's Army, against the Scots, and had the like Employ afterward against the
King under Essex, and then under Fairfax, gaining well in his employment, and
by that of drawing up the bloody Charge against the King, for which some
Cavaliers (some say Irish, others Scotch-men, in revenge of Hamilton's Death)
killed him. His Wife and Children had allowances by the Parliament: but I
cannot here forbear to mention Haselrig's bloody proposition upon his Death;
who moved, That six Gentlemen of the best quality, Royalists, might be put to
Death in Revenge of Dorislaus, to deter men from the like attempt hereafter.
This was a Rumper's Justice, and may serve for his Character, a blind Zealot,
furious, hotheaded, rash, unjust, and an hypocrite; a great Commonwealths-man,
and an Enemy to Oliver.

Harison was a Fifth- Monarchy-man, a great Speaker, after his Canting way,
acted with Cromwell, till he saw he set up himself instead of King Jesus, and
his Saints, such as himself; then a stiff Opposer of Monarchy, and would again
have brought in Anarchy and Confusion; a man of no extraordinary Parts, but
resolute and turbulent, ever heading a faction, and dyed impenitent, adhering
to his wicked Principles.

Lambert was a good Soldier, had a great designing head, Ambitious, but
outwitted by Cromwell, of great Power in the Army, and beloved by the factious
Sectaries; some have thought he was then a Papist, (for he proved one since)
and carried on the Jesuits designs.

Fleetwood was a person of a pretended great Devotion, but of a secret and
violent Ambition, and it was thought glad of Richard's fall, hoping to succeed,
but fooled by Lambert, as well as formerly by Cromwell; and though General, had
not the resolution of a man in his place, and therefore called the meek Knight.
Jones was a flattering Sycophant. Desborow a sordid Clown. Pride an upstart
Dray-man. Hewson a Valiant Cobbler. Whaly a Merchant. Sir Henry Mildmay an
unworthy Turncoat and Rebel. The rest much of the same stamp. They had their
Clergy too of the same Cloth, as the Post-Priest Vavasor Powel, the Fool
Cradock. The Incendiary John Goodwin. Love, Jenkins, of both sorts
Presbyterians and Independents, who served their turns, to trumpet forth
Sedition to the People, and to extol their Acts, for which they shared in the
prey: But above all the rest, was the notorious and blasphemous wretch, Pander
and Buffoon, Hugh Peter's; and because he was Chaplain in Ordinary to two great
Potentates, Lucifer and Oliver Cromwell, I care not if I give you a little
larger account of the man.

His Father was a Minister of the Church of England, living near Foy in
Cornwales, where his Son Hugh was born, and bred up by him at School,
instructed well in the Principles of the Protestant Religion, sent thence to
Cambridge, and admitted into Jesus College, but was soon Expelled the
University for his lacivious life: He gets to London, and there turns Player in
Shakespeare's Company, usually acting the Jester or Fool; but weary of that, by
means of a Gentleman he became acquainted with, he got a Free School, with the
Stipend of 24 l. a year, at the Gentleman's dispose in Essex. After some time
this Pedant, growing familiarly acquainted with a Gentlewoman near, who liked
his Drolling discourse, and used to entertain him, being one that had an
Estate, he so ordered his business, that he one night surprised her in Bed, and
getting in to her, had a Comrade that came and surprised them, before the
struggling Gentlewoman could get forth of his Arms, who saluting them Man and
Wife, caused the trepanned Woman, to avoid the ^hame, to consent to marry him.
After this he takes Holy Orders, and was by Doctor Mountain, Bishop of London,
Ordained Priest and Deacon, giving the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to
him, which he took. And now beginning to Preach, he grows popular; and was much
applauded among the females, whom he ever sought to please, so that he got to
be Lecturer of St. Sepulchers in London, and continued there near Twenty years.
Here he turns Independent, and his Wife being dead, he lead so beastly and
scandalous life, that being detected, and prosecuted at Law for many
Misdemeanors, he flies over to Amsterdam, where continuing the like pranks, he
goes at last to New England, where he Marries another Wife; but that not
keeping him Chaste, he began to grow odious amongst the Brethren; and the Wars
then breaking forth in England, he returns, and is entertained as a rideing
Parson in the Army, and at last becomes the Parliaments great Zany, Preaching
for the Cause, and juggling the Women out of their Thimbles and Bodkins, by
which means he became Oliver's great Privado, and with Ireton was admitted of
the Cabal in contriving his late Majesty's Death; for which, and his other
good Services, being a Col. under Oliver in his Irish Expedition, he had given
him 300 l. per annum out of the Lord Worcester's Lands, in the Woulds in
Worcestershire, and, as they say, the King's Library at St. James's; and was
Chaplain in Pay to six Regiments. But at last had a more deserved Reward, an
Halter, being taken in Southwark, was at last Executed for his Treasons, and
dyed like a Sot. I shall conclude with him, and now proceed to the second part
of my draught of Arbitrary Government, under the Power and Tyranny of that
notorious Usurper Oliver.

I shall now proceed to the second Act of this Tragical Usurpation, and expose
to your view the Tyrannick Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell; who now as General of
the Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, had the full and sole Authority,
Power and Government, of the Three Nations in his hands. Yet this would not
serve his turn, he must have some splendid Title, and Royal Ensigns, to show he
reigned not by the Power of the Sword, which would render him odious to the
People, though in effect it was the same thing: But there is much in State and
Ceremony, especially where lawful right is not, to give a luster; and the name
of King, with the Ornament of a Crown, is the thing ambitioned, or some thing
like it is to be had, if the other could not be obtained. But this is not yet
to be reached, he must proceed methodically, and like the Tyrant Richard the
Third, entreated much to accept of what he greatly desired. The first thing
Oliver does, after he had thrust the Rump-Parliament out of doors, was to put
forth a Declaration of the Reasons for Dissolving the Long Parliament, who had
designed to perpetuate themselves, desiring all good people to seek God for
him, that he might not do any thing to dishonor his Name, and that they
should peaceably follow their Vocations, as when the Parliament was sitting,
and that all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and
other Civil Officers and Public Ministers whatsoever, should proceed in their
Offices and Places, and that the Writs should run in the same style as before,
of the Keepers of the Liberty of England. And then out of his Chief Officers of
the Army, and his Confidents, he Creates a Council of State, who were to manage
all affairs, till a Parliament could be called. Thus the Laws and Liberties of
the People, and the whole Civil State and Government of England, depended upon
the Sword, and the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of a General, and some few of
(...) Military Officers. These men, to ingratiate themselves with the people,
lessen the Monthly Tax from 120000 l. to 90000 l. a Month; and to keep fair
with the Presbyterian, who yet kept up their form of Church-worship, and the
most of one public persuasion, they prohibited all disturbances in the Church,
which was then frequent, and the Phanaticks Licentiousness in the Army, which
swarmed with Anabaptists, Ranters, Quakers, Seekers, and other strange new
Lights, and who were set a madding after the possession of the remaining
Revenue of Church Lands, Tithes, Glebe, Impropriations, often addressing to
that purpose, as no remains of Dagon might be left. Oliver at this time also
was Courted by the French Ambassador Burdoe, in the behalf of his Master, lest
he should favor his Rebels, and which he gave him assurance he would not do,
and though solicited on the other side, he would not favor Enemies to
Monarchy, already looking upon himself to be a Monarch.

The Dutch thought now to take the advantage of these Divisions in England, and
very early got their Fleet to Sea, but no great Commotion following thereupon
at home, they had leisure to look after their Sea-affairs, and getting forth
the Fleet under Blake, Monk and Dean, on the second of June 1653, they meet the
Dutch on the Coasts of Flanders, Commanded by Van Tromp in chief, and under him
the two Eversons, de Wit, and Ruytier, all stout, expert and able Seamen. Pen
was Vice Admiral of our Fleet, and Lawson Rear-Admiral. The Dutch had One
hundred and four Men of War, Twelve Galliots, and Nine Fireships: the English
had One hundred Ships of all sorts: Monk and Dean were in one Ship; the Fight
begun about Eleven of the Clock at Noon, and the first Broadside from the
Enemy, carried away General Dean, being shot in two by a Cannon Bullet, close
by Monk's side, who flinging a Cloak over his body, bid the Soldiers to mind
their business, and unconcerned applied himself to the Battle, continued with
much fury on both sides, as long as they had light. The next morning Monk
finding himself near the Dutch, they again furiously engaged each other; and
Monk pressed so hard upon them, that he sunk six of their best Ships, and two
others were blown up, and eleven Ships taken, and One thousand three hundred
and fifty Prisoners; and had not the Dutch got upon the Flats near Calais and
Dunkirk, where our great Ships could not come at them, most of their Fleet had
been ruined or taken. The English had not one Ship lost or disabled; and
excepting General Dean, but one Captain lost, and about One hundred and fifty
Men, and few hurt. General Blake came not in till toward the end of the Fight,
with Eighteen fresh Ships. This was the sixth Engagement with the Dutch in this
War.

The English Fleet ride before the Texel and the Vly, and now let the Dutch see
they were Conquerors; which so humbled them, that they sent away a Vessel with
a white Flag for England, with a Messenger to prepare way for two Ambassadors
to Treat of Peace; however that they might make it on easier terms, they
prepare with all speed they can to recruit their Fleet, and on the Twenty-ninth
of July following, in the morning, the English discry them again with One
hundred and twenty five Sail of Ships, divided into four Squadrons, under
Tromp, Everson, Ruyter and Wit Wittens. The English Fleet consisted of One
hundred and six Ships, under the Command of Monk in chief, for Blake was sick,
Pen Vice Admiral, and Lawson Rear-Admiral: the Battle began by six in the
morning, and continued till night parted them, and the next morning again both
fell to it, with that bloody fury, that they made the most cruel Fight that
ever was: Orders being given neither to give nor take quarter. Everson's Ship
was sunk, and he taken, and the famous Van Tromp shot, with a Musket-bullet and
slain on the poop of his Ship, whereby his men were so daunted, that hoisting
out all the Sail they could, they made away to the Texel. The English bought
this Victory dear, having lost Four hundred Men and Eight Captains, and Seven
hundred wounded, with Five Commanders, yet lost but one Ship. On the Dutch side
was lost, besides their Admiral Tromp, Thirty-three Ships or more, out of which
the English saved swiming in the Sea, Twelve hundred Men and Five Captains,
Monk returning victorious with their Prisoners to Solebay; where he stayed not
long, e're he returned to ply upon the Dutch Coasts, and to disturb their
Trade, and to let them see the English were their Conquerors. This was the
seventh and last Engagement in this War. For now the Dutch having enough of it,
made a Peace with Cromwell, which he might have had almost upon any terms, had
he not been so greedy of setting himself up in the Throne, beginning also to
grow jealous of the great Actions of General Monk, whom he had a desire to send
further from him.

But before this last Fight, the Parliament called by Cromwell, under his Hand
and Seal, directed to each man, such as he picked out, godly men as he called
them, fit for his turn, about One hundred and forty-two of them in all,
assembled at White Hall on the Fourth of July, where they chose one Mr. Rous, a
Cornish man, Speaker, one that had been by the late Parliament made Provost of
Eaton. Cromwell in a set Speech declares to them the occasion of their Meeting,
with his old way of Canting full of Scripture. To these men a company of
obscure fellows, most of them great Phanaticks, the Council of State surrender
up their Power, that they might afterward give it to Cromwell. These Adjourn
themselves to Westminster, where they sit and call themselves the supreme
Authority of the Nation, and begin to form Committies for the dispatch of
Business. But this Parliament called Barebones Parliament from a Leatherseller
a Member thereof, and consisting as I have said of such obscure Persons, that
most of them were hardly known in the Counties where they were born, began to
make such ridiculous Acts, and so displeasing to the people, that some thought
Cromwell had called together this little Parliament to bring Parliaments into
contempt, the better to devolve the Ruling Power on himself as a Monarch. One
of their Acts was, that none should be married without a Justice of Peace, and
the Banes asked in the Marketplace three several Market-daies. Thus the
Priesthood was invaded, and placed in the Civil Magistrate. Then they took off
the Penal Law of the Engagement, to acknowledge the late Rump, whereby it was
ordered, that no man should be admitted to sue in Law, in any Court, that had
not taken it. They voted against Tithes and the Universities as Antichristian.
They also were going in hand with cancelling the Law, and all Law Books, and so
make a new Code more befitting their own turns, and for the establishing of the
Saints, as they called themselves. They were also upon making an Act, that one
parliament should upon their dissolving, have power to call another, and so to
make Parliaments perpetual. This was not to be endured by the Oliverian Party,
who expected now to solace themselves under the shadow of his greatness. And on
the twelfth of December this Party in the House with the Speaker, made a Motion
for their dissolution, declaring that their sitting any longer would not be for
the good of the Nation. Many of the Committee Blades hardly warm in their seats
were startled at it, these began to stand up, stiffly pleading for the Cause of
God, as they called it, and showing they could not leave the Commonwealth and
the People of God committed to their charge so soon, which would leave them to
utter ruin: and Harison and Squib a great Sequestrator, were very zealous in
defense of their own Authority. But Oliver's Party, being the greater, arose,
and with their Speaker Rous left the House, and the Fifth-monarchy Saints
sitting in it, who having sought God, resolved to continue sitting. Rous in the
mean time with the Mace before him, and his Followers, go to Whitehall, and
there resign to Oliver the Instrument of Power he had given them, that made
them a Parliament, with notice how they had left their fellows sitting. Oliver
returns them his thanks, and kindly receives their Present, and presently
dispatches a Confident of his, Colonel White, with a Guard of Red-coates, to
turn the fag end or Rump of this little Parliament out of the House; who
entering the House commanded them in the name of the General to depart,
declaring them to be dissolved; but they told him they were upon earnest
business, and therefore desired that he would not disturb them; for they were
seeking God: to which he replied pish, is that all? it is to no purpose, for God
has not been within these walls this twelve years, and so fairly compelled them
to go out of the House, and to seek God somewhere else.

About four days after, the Officers of the Army, had prepared an Instrument of
Government, on which foundation they erected their new Dominion in a single
Person, entreating their General to accept of the Government, under the Title
of Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland; and thus a
Rotation is made from a Republic, to a single Person; and Arbitrary Tyranny,
not the Monarchy is restored, and instead of the many Tyrants, one as boundless
is constituted by a Military Power. Good man, with his usual dissimulation and
Hypocrisy he refused it, with much seeming modesty, what he so long had sought
and ambitioned, but being pressed, and by being made sensible of the great
necessity of it, for the upholding the Nation, he at last accepts it, and is
installed with great pomp in Westminster Hall, attended by the Lords
Commissioners of the great Seal, all the Judges in their Robes, the Sergeants
and learned Counselors at Law, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of
London, in their Scarlets, and all the chief Officers of the Army: Being seated
in a great Chair of State, and the Instrument read unto him, this Oath was
administered. I promise in the presence of God, not to violate or infringe the
Matters and things contained in the Instrument, but to observe and cause the
same to be observed; and in all things, to the best of my understanding, govern
the Nation according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs thereof; and to seek
their peace, and to cause Justice and Law to be equally administered. But how
well he kept this Oath you may perceive by the sequel of his Reign. Having
taken this Oath, putting on his Hat, the Commissioners surrender into his Hand
the great Seal, and the Lord Mayor the City Sword, and Cap of maintenance,
which he respectively returned to them again, and then returned in the same
pomp to Whitehall. The chief Heads of this Instrument (as they called it) of
Government were. First, That a Parliament should be called every three years.
Second, That the first should assemble the third of September, 1654. Third,
That no Parliament should be dissolved till they had sat five Months Fourth,
That such Bills as should be offered to the Protector by the Parliament, if he
assented not in twenty days should be Laws without him. Fifth, That his
Council should not exceed the number of twenty one, nor be less than thirteen.
Sixth, That immediately after the death of the present and succeeding
Protectors, the Council shall choose another Protector, before they rise.
Seventh, That no Protector after the present should be General of the Army.
Eighth, That the Protector should have power to make War or Peace. This they
denied to the King. Ninth, That in the Intervals of Parliaments, the Protector
and his Council may make some Laws, that should be binding to the Subject. Here
is a prerogative granted beyond any of the Kings of England. Tenth, That in the
Parliament should be four hundred English, thirty Scotch, and thirty Irish. The
summons for the Parliament to pass under the Great Seal to the Sheriffs of the
Counties; and Elections to be made more equally than formerly. If the Protector
deny to issue out Writs at the time appointed, then the Commissioners of the
Great Seal to do it without him, under the pain of High Treason. No Royalist,
Irish Rebel, or Papist to be elected, and if they were, they were to forfeit
two years Revenue, and three parts of their Goods. None to be elected but such
as feared God: and none were capable to elect that were not worth two hundred
pound. A Revenue to be raised for the constant maintenance of ten thousand
Horse and fifteen thousand Foot, and the Navy not to be lessened. All forfeited
Lands unsold to belong to the Protector. All Places of Trust to be in his
disposal. All Laws in favor of Episcopacy and Popery to be abrogated, and
besides them, a tolleration to be granted. And presently upon this he puts
forth a Proclamation, declaring the dissolution of the Parliament, and his
being made Lord Protector of the three Nations, commanding and strictly
charging all Persons of what quality or condition soever, and to take notice
thereof, and to conform and submit themselves to the Government so established:
And that all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. are required to publish this
Proclamation, to the end none may have cause to pretend ignorance in this
behalf. Now he begins to show his Authority. The Presbyterians were rather
tolerated than countenanced; yet some few of them that would comply and fawn
on his Greatness, he showed some favor to, though he boasted he had brought
under the Pride and Arrogance of that Sect: The Independents and Anabaptists
were more in his favor, being then of most command in the Army, and most ready
to support his Usurpation: yet the Fifth-monarchy Men, who had helped to raise
him, he could not endure, and therefore he imprisoned Feak and Rogers in
Windsor Castle, where he kept them for a long while: Then he set Feak's Party,
and Kiffins the Anabaptist, one in his favor, together by the ears, and raised
equal divisions between the Presbyterians and the Independents, as a balance,
the better to secure himself. These Tryumphs of Oliver so disgusted Harison
that he turned Preacher, or Railer, openly against him and his Government: All
the old Commonwealths Men were discountenanced, as Vain, Hazelrig, Bradshaw,
Scot and others, so that he was at this time to strengthen himself with the
Sectaries whom he courted. His first Council were Colonel Mountague, Lambert,
Viscount Lisle, Desborow made one of the Generals at Sea, Sir Gilbert
Pickering, Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, Sir Chapter Woolsley, Major General Skippon,
Strickland, Sydenham, Philip Jones, Rous the late Speaker, Colonel Lawrence,
and Rich. Major.

The first thing this Protector did, was that he clapped up a sudden and
dishonorable Peace with the Dutch, who were brought so low, that it was
thought, they could never have been able to have set out another Fleet, though
they had made Opdam Admiral in the place of Van Trump: and therefore they send
over Newport, Youngstal, Bevering, and Vander Perre, Ambassadors to his
Highness, with whom he made peace, they owning the Right that the English had
of the Sovereignty of these Seas, and acknowledging it by striking their Flag,
the restitution of the English Ships taken by the Danes, and some compensation
for the charges of the War. Thus he prospers, Spain, Portugal and France
courting him by their Ambassadors. His Son Henry he sends into Ireland with
Fleetwood Lieutenant, and some time after made him Lieutenant of that Kingdom,
where he lived in great splendour. Lieutenant General Monk he sends into
Scotland, to preserve that Nation in obedience. Whitlock he sends Ambassador to
Sweden, who concluded a League with that Queen. Then Maynard, Twisden, Nudigate
and Windham, were made Sergeants. A private Article also in the Dutch Peace
was, that the Prince of Orange should never be restored to his Dignities,
Offices and Charge, his Ancestors had enjoyed.

On the eighth of February being Ashwednesday, of all days of the year, the
Protector is feasted in great state by the Lord Mayor, at Grocers Hall, the
Streets being railed from Temple Bar thither, the Liveries, and Gownmen, and
several Companies, standing waiting on him. Alderman Viner being Lord Mayor,
who bore the Sword bareheaded before him. At his return about Saint Clements
Church, a Brickbat was flung at him, which light upon his Coach, but did no
hurt, except affrighting him. Search was made after him who did it, but he
could not be found.

And now, as usually Tyrants do, he began to entertain fears and jealousies of
all persons, especially the Royal Party, and therefore to affright them, and
secure himself, he will cement his Throne with their blood: And by cunning
trepanning Agents, he had formed a Plot against his Life, and several persons
were laid hold on, and accused for a design of murdering him. This was one of
the Machivilean Policies of him, and his Secretary Thurlo, by whose means he
drew in several Gentlemen, as if they were to have assassinated him, though no
such thing was really intended, they disavowing it at their deaths. One of
which was Colonel John Gerard, brother to Sir Gilbert Gerard who was also
imprisoned in the Tower about it, and his Brother Mr. Charles Gerard a very
young man, one Mr. Vowel a Schoolmaster, and one Fox. These men being taken and
examined about it, much ado was made, and some were suborned to swear against
them, but Cromwell contrary to the Oath in his Instrument, durst not try them
by a legal way, but set up the Arbitrary Court of Justice, which the Junto had
been condemned for; of this Court Lisle was made president, a man fit for the
work, for die some of them must, out of a politic Terror. Mr. Charles Gerard
upon promise of life confesses the fact, out of fear, and accuses his Brother,
and Fox does the like, who are both pardoned, but Colon. John Gerard and Mr.
Vowel were condemned; and a blind man brought in evidence against Mr. Vowel,
being only words casually in discourse, concerning the coming in of the King,
which they had so aggravated and perverted, that at the trial, upon their
recital, the blind man utterly denied them to be his, which gave a great
trouble to the Court, till at last (though the innocence of the Prisoner
appeared, and the juggle amongst them) Lisle told them, that the blind man had
been tampered with, and that though he now denied his evidence, ye^ his former
examinations should stand, and so according to this most excellent Arbitrary
Law, against the mind of the Witness, the Court proceeded to sentence, and
Vowel was condemned and hanged at Chairing-Cross, much pitied and lamented; and
a Ladder not being able to be procured, they were forced to mount him on a
Joynt-stool, and hang him after that fashion, where he dyed with much innocence
and resolution on the 10th of July 1654. And on the same day Col. Gerard was
beheaded on Tower Hill, presently after Emanuel Say the Portugal Ambassadors
brother, put to death for killing one in a fray in the New-Exchange, this Col.
Gerard being the chief man that opposed the said Ambassadors brother at that
time, with the hazard of his life, yet both came to suffer in one day, upon one
Scaffold, for different Crimes; For this Colonel suffered only for the Crime
of Loyalty, and was sacrifised to Oliver's Fear and Policy. He dyed with great
bravery, courage and undauntedness.

This was Cromwell's first bloody remarke, and like an Usurper; who must
maintain his illegal greatness, by illegal Arts. But dominion founded in
innocent blood, cannot long stand, before the Avenger for blood visits it in
his wrathful Justice. About this time he takes care, there shall be a
faithful ministry, to his interest he means, therefore he sets up a Company of
Tryers, the chief of which were Nigh, Goodwin, Hugh Peter's, Manton, and others
named as Commissioners. These make a Reformation among the Ministry, for humane
Learning was rather a Crime than an help to any, for the question was, had they
Grace in their hearts? Many good Livings were disburthened of their Pastors,
and others of more Grace, and less Knowledge put in. I heard of one who had
been Hebrew and Chaldee Reader, in Oxford, and knowing in all the Eastern
Tongues, put out of a good living for insufficiency: He had it seems not Grace
equal to his Learning, or his Living had more Grace than he. But such as agreed
with Nol's Principles, and were ready to maintain his Government, to be jure
divino, were put into the best Livings throughout England, and the favorers of
the Church of England, though they had conformed, every where thrust forth.

In Ireland all was subdued, and he sent Cook over as a Judge, who with a kind
of Itinerant Court of Justice, hung up many of the Irish Rebels at Dublin,
Waterford, Kilkenny and in Vlster, and those that escaped of the Irish were
confined to the Province of Conaught, and the rest banished. But in Scotland at
the mediation of Argile, whom he had tied to his Interest, and by whose power
he held a great part of the Highlands in subjection, the Presbyterians were
allowed their Religion, and had their own Kirk Government, and the power of
Excommunication, but the rigor of it was taken off, for such as were
excommunicated, were not only forbid the Communion, but they had all their
Estates confiscated to the Church, which was not allowed them, nor the meeting
of their general Assembly.

Cromwell was jealous of Lambert, and of the Love he had among the Sectaries of
the Army; so that as yet he was forced to caress him, and to delude him with
vain hopes of succeeding him in the Protectorate, and therefore made him
Commander in chief, of the Army, next himself, with the allowance of 10 l. a
day. Abroad he confederates with most of the Potentates, and upon his making a
Peace with France, the King is obliged to leave that Court, where he had been
near two years, and had done many good offices for that King, with his
neighbor Princes; but Interest sways more than Gratitude. He retires into
Germany, where all his designs, and private Councils in his Cabinet, were
betrayed to Cromwell by one Manning, who was Clerk to his Secretary, bribed by
the Usurper, who had a knack that way, of expending vast sums for
intelligence, and by this means, many of the Royalists designs in England came
to be discovered, and many brought into trouble about it, but at last the
Traitor was detected, and shot to death for his perfidiousness. About this
time he sends over 6 Counselors for Ireland, Steel who was made Lord
Chancellor there, and Pepys Lord Chief Justice there, Miles Corbet, Robert
Hamond, Matthew Tomlinson and Robert Goodwin. About June this year, Cromwell
seeing he was able to rule 3 Kingdoms, believed he was as well able to govern 6
Horses, sent him by the Count of Oldenburg, and in a frollick being in Hide
Park, leaving his Engine Thurlo alone in the Coach, he gets into the Box, and
would needs play the Coachman, but the Horses feeling the lash, and not so
well yoaked as his English Slaves, ran away with Coach, Coachman, and Thurlo,
and at last dismounted him from his Box (an ill omen of his fall) and had like
to have broke his Neck.

And now according to the Instrument, on the 3 d of September, the Parliament
was to meet, and great care was taken by Oliver, that none of the Cavaliers
should be chosen: Writs were issued out in his name, and Elections made as
heretofore, only the Burrows sent but one Burgess, and there were 6 or 7
Knights for some Shires, all of them under sure qualifications: Scotland and
Ireland also, according to the Instrument, sent their number, most being
English Commanders. The day came, they meet, and in Westminster Abbey Marshall
gave them a Sermon: The next day, the Protector went to them in great state in
his Coach, attended by Cleypool, Master of his Horse, Strickland, Captain of
his Guards, bareheaded on both sides, and at his entrance, Lambert carried the
Sword, and Whitlock the Purse, and in the painted Chamber he made to them a
Speech after his old method, with God in his mouth. He told them this was an
healing day, for before there was neither Nobleman, Gentleman, nor Yeoman known
by any distinction, nor was there any bore rule or authority, but the
Magistracy, and Christ's Ordinances were had in contempt; that the fifth
Monarchy was highly cried up, by such persons as had a mind to assume the
government to themselves. Then in an extolling way, he showed what great things
he had done during his Government, and then he told them they were upon the
edge of Canaan, and that he spoke not as their Lord, but Fellow Servants; And so
dismissed them to choose their Speaker, which they did, without presenting to him
his name. Their Speaker was Lenthal, the Speaker to the old Long Parliament.
This Parliament began to be very brisk upon the Government, and fell upon the
Instrument, on which they made so bad music, questioning Oliver's power, that
he could not endure it, and immediately sent them a Recognition, for every
Member to take, before they sat, whereby they were not to meddle with the
Government, as it was settled in a single person, and the Parliament, nor with
the militia, nor with perpetuating Parliaments, nor taking away Liberty of
Conscience. He told them also, that a Free Parliament was but a term of
Reciprocation, for that power which made him Protector, made them a Parliament,
and therefore he was sorry, they went about to destroy the Settlement, and was
forced to send them a Recognition, for every Member to sign and seal, to
prevent it. This startled most of them, especially the Commonwealths men, who
all flew off, and of 400 scarce 200 appeared, though at last several came
dropping in, and made up 300, but they fell again upon the same disputes,
notwithstanding the Recognition. A little before their sitting down, Oliver
publishes several Ordinances of his own, which bearing date before, past as
Authentic Laws and Ordinances by the Instrument; one was for the payment of
moneys into the Treasury, raised for the propagation of the Gospel in Wales.
Another for the turning forth of Scandalous Ministers, that is, such as had
used the Common Prayer, and had good Livings: Another for making Soldiers free
of Corporations; Another for surveying the King's Lands, and for doubling upon
Deans and Chapters. This was to let the Parliament see, that he took the Acts
made by himself, by power of his Instrument, as good and authentic as theirs.
Mark here, whether the most arbitrary of our Kings, ever assumed such a power,
and yet these are days of freedom and liberty.

Lambert was very busy in this Convention, endeavoring tooth and nail to have
the Instrument confirmed by them, for that the Protectorship being made
elective, he himself stood most fair to be the next Candidate, but finding they
would not drive, but began to be as unruly, as Cromwell's German Horses, that
flung him out of the Coach-box, he threatened them, that he would call 4 or 5
Parliaments one after another, but it should be done, following Oliver's
menacing steps to the Junto. There were some Commonwealth Officers in the Army,
that had designed to have seized on Lambert, but Col. Pride betrayed them, who
was privy to the business; and Cromwell seeing he could do no good with his
Parliament, as soon as ever the 5 months were out, dissolves them; and then he
takes from these, who had conspired against Lambert, their Commissions, and
seises on several others Commonwealths men, and Royalists, among whom was Major
Wildman, who was drawing up a Declaration, to show the lawfulness of taking up
Arms against Cromwell: and of the Royalists there were Sir John Packington, Sir
John Littleton and others, which he imprisoned for a new Conspiracy (as he
said) against his Life: and Sir Tho. Harris was taken having a design of
surprising of Shrewsbury. Penruddock and Grove at Salisbury, and in several
other places, as at Hexam Moor, in Northumberland, and in Yorkshire, where Sir
Henry Slingsby was taken, all their designs being beforehand betrayed to
Oliver: and many Prisons in the West were filled with the common sort of
people, from which, and from the Tower, and other places, many of them were
sent away to Foreign Plantations, and sold for Slaves, and many forceably
carried away in Pen's Expedition, to be knocked on the head by the Moors. Thus
he endeavored to secure himself, by a bloody and arbitrary way of proceeding,
as all Tyrants are forced to do.

Having thus suppressed this Insurrection, which he knew of beforehand, and was
prepared for, severa^ of the chief that were taken, were brought to their
trials, the chief of which were Mr. Penruddock, who^ was a Captain, and Mr.
Grove another Captain, 16^ more were executed, of which 9 at Excester.

Both Penruddock and Grove when taken; surrendered themselves to Vnton Crook,
upon promise of having their lives, but what signifies such Promises with such
Persons, who never kept their Faith; these were brave and active Loyalists, and
therefore must not escape out of the bloody Paws of the Usurper: They were both
condemned at the Assizes at Excester, being indicted for Treason against the
Usurper, and endeavoring the bringing in (of their lawful King) Charles
Steuart, and on the 16th of May 1655 were both beheaded in that City. Mr.
Penruddock at his execution spoke very boldly, and with much zeal against the
iniquities of the Times; and told them among other things, that Treason was in
that Age become an Individuum Vagum, like the wind in the Gospel, that blows
where it lists. And Treason was then what the Ruler pleased to make so, and
lighted upon whom he would have it: And by this (said he) you may see, what a
condition you are in, when you have no Law to protect you, no Rule to walk by;
with many other bold Truths, which made them suppress his Speech and forbid it
to be published, that they might conceil as much as they could, their illegal
and arbitrary Proceedings: For indeed one of the Jury, that found him guilty,
being demanded afterward, for what reason they brought in their Verdict
guilty, against Mr. Penruddock and Grove, Answered; That they had resolved to
hang them, before they saw them. A pious Resolution. His Judges were Lisle,
Glin, Roles and Nichols who denied to give him their advice in point of Law,
because they said they were Parties; and if so (as indeed they were) it was
contrary to all Law, for a Judge being a party to sit upon the Bench. But these
were lawless Times. Some others suffered at Chard in Somersetshire, one
beheaded at Salisbury, and 3 hanged, and thus this Insurrection was quashed.
But not long after, he crowded the Tower with many Persons of note Prisoners,
upon suspicion of having an hand in this Plot, or Treason as he called it, and
among the rest were the Earl of Lindsey, The Lords Willowby of Parham, Newport,
Maynard, Faulkland, Lucas, Petres, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, Sir Jeoffery
Palmer, Sir Rich. Wingfield and others, too long to relate; but these were
never brought to any trial, but it was thought convenient to secure them,
though nothing appeared against them.

Cromwell now the Dominus fac totum, beholding himself mounted in the Throne of
the Monarchy, makes Leagues, and War and Peace abroad as he pleased, and as we
have said, having made an impolitick Peace with France, losing thereby the
balance he had in his hand, and giving too much to that Growing Monarch, he
designs a very unjust War, without any provocation, against Spain, having a
thirst after that King's Gold and Treasure at St. Domingo, in the West Indies:
But this design was kept very secret, and a great Fleet was equipped, to the
wonder of his neighbors; yet that he might not lose his wonted exercise of
Hypocrisy, he gives out, that it is for the propagation of the Protestant
Religion; though besides the insatiate hunger of Gold, he might have some
politic Reasons to move him to this dishonest breach, which might be, by this
means, a getting rid of a great many of the troublesome Sectaries in the Army,
whom he found still pecking against his power, and endeavoring to alienate the
minds of the Soldiers from him: But now he showed his Art in draining them for
this expedition, whereby he might sit the quieter at home. Venables was made
Commander in chief of the Landforces, and Pen of the Sea, being made General,
and on the 27th of December set sail from Portsmouth, with about 10000 Men, on
the 28th of January following they put into Barbados, and on the 30th of March
sailed for Hispaniola, where they Landed their Men without opposition; but
whether it were the imprudence and ill management of the Generals, or that God
resolved to blast so dishonest an attempt, I shall not determine; but
Englishmen never received such a foil, and by so few enemies, since they wore
the name; for having lost near a thousand Men, by an handful of Spaniards,
Negro's and Molatto's, they were fain to retreat, and losing all hopes of
getting the Spanish Gold, most shamefully return to their Ships; and, that they
might be said to do something, they set upon Jamaica, and take it, and which
we have kept ever since. Venables after his return was frowned upon by Oliver,
and for a while sent to the Tower, but afterward was released. The Hopes of
this Gold had made Oliver King it very much, being served with much State and
Ceremony. He had his Halberdeers in guarded gray Coats, over whom Strickland was
Captain: His Lord Chamberlain, who was Sir Gilbert Pickering. Two Masters of
Requests, Mr. Bacon and Mr. Sadler, and the Master of his Horse, his Son
Cleypool, and all other Officers of Honor both to his own Person and his
Wives, who very finically acted the Princess, White Hall and Hampton Court he
had saved from sale, for his own convenience.

The baffle at St. Domingo, and the loss of his hopes of his Gold, made him now
project some other ways to fill his Cofers, to maintain his Greatness: his
merry devil left him, and he began daily to grow more austere and tyrannical,
being full of fears and jealousies, as he had reason; for he had not only the
Royal party against him, whom he kept under with much cruelty, but the
Commonwealths-men of his own party, and the Fifth-Monarchy-men, countenanced by
Harison, were highly displeased with him, and began to Conspire against him. He
therefore lays Harison and Rich aside, and not long after he Committed them,
with Carew and Courtney into several remote Castles: Overton was seized in
Scotland, with Bramstone, Holmes and other Officers who were cashiered, fined,
and good security taken for their good behavior: Overton was sent to the
Tower, and his Regiment given to Col. Morgan. Okey's Regiment also was taken
from him, and given to another. Joyce had the confidence to upbraid his
Highness to his face, but escaped unpunished, Cromwell saying he was a Madman.
About this time he began to interest himself for the Protestants abroad, and to
be their Protector. The Protestant Subjects of the Duke of Savoy, in the
Valleys of Piedmont, having been cruelly treated by that Prince for their
Religion, Cromwell sends to make application in their behalf; but his
Messengers being slighted, he caused Contributions for their relief to be made
throughout England, and Viner and Pack were made Treasurers for the Money; by
which means a considerable sum was Collected, but what share they had of it,
is not known. The Spanish War now Commenced apace, Cromwell resolving not to
hearken to Peace, nor to the restitution of three Ships he had taken of the
King of Spain's before he had declared War, pretending them Hambourger's, and
Confiscating them, being laden with pieces of Eight, to the sum of Four hundred
thousand pounds Sterling, which was minted in the Tower, though the Spanish
Ambassador Alonso de Cardenas protested against it, and did all he could to
hinder the injustice, which was returned on our Merchants, by that Kings
seizing on their effects in Spain, and by the loss of 1500 English Ships, great
and small, taken from us in this War, as appeared afterward, according to the
report made in Richard's Parliament.

This sum of money being spent, he had with his Privadoes thought of another
way of recruit, which like their Usurpation, was the most Barbarous and
Arbitrary as ever was heard of. See now what was become of the Liberties of
English men, when he following the Example of the Grand Seignior, set over the
Land a company of Bashaws, with the same power, under a new title of
Major-Generals. He had Cantoned England and Wales into 11 Provinces, joining
the Counties together for the convenience of this Turkish sway, over every one
of which he appointed a Governor or Bashaw, called by him a Major General. The
Names of these Tyrannick Princes were, Kelsy, Goff, Desborow, Fleetwood,
Skippon, Whaly, Butler, Berry, Worsley, Lambert and Bark stead, who was also
Lieutenant of the Tower. These in their respective Principalities, lived like
petty Princes or Bashawes, domineering and lording it over both Nobility and
Gentry, and according to the Command and Order of their Grand Seignior Oliver
Cromwell, (which was then esteemed Law) all the poor Cavaliers, that is, all
such who had served in the Wars, for King Charles the first, and also all those
that had declared themselves for his Son, King Charles the second (our now
Sovereign) were by these Bashaws to be decimated, that is, the tenth part of
their Estates were to be taken from them, besides banished from London, and
within 20 miles of the same, disarmed and prohibited to be Elected into any
Parliament. And as for the Clergy, they were turned out of their Livings, and
kept from all other way of livelihood, unless they would work with their hands,
so that many were ready to starve, for they were prohibited any Cure, or to be
Chaplains to any, or to keep School. The power of these Decimators was great
and boundless, Oppressing, Robbing, Spoiling and Decimating whom they pleased,
according to their own Arbitrary Will; for none durst say, Why do you thus?
They kept a Roll of all persons within their Precincts; and if they suspected
any to favor the King, he was called to account by these Military-Lords, and
Caution taken by them, to keep them from acting against the State, binding them
to reveal all Plots that should come ^o their knowledge, and made them engage
the like ^or their servants. They also hindered them from their disports, and
prohibited all Horse-races, Cock-fighting, Bull-baiting, or any thing that
should cause a Concourse of people: and those who refused, were presently
imprisoned and decimated; so that the free people of England were become as
absolute Slaves as those living under the Turkish Government, where none can
call any thing his own. By this means the Usurper easily informed himself of
the value of all ^he Estates in England, and of the behavior and af^ection of
every Person of Quality throughout the Kingdom. Such vast Powers were given to
these Major-Generals, that there was nothing they might not do, and indeed did
not do; they using it to ^he full. And for this purpose these Major-Generals
had an office in Fleetstreet in London, as other Courts had, where their
Recognances were entered, and all other concerns and dependances belonging to
them ^ecorded or registered. Of some they took yearly the ^0th penny, of others
they took a sum of money for Composition, usually at three years purchase,
which many were willing to pay, who had money, rather ^han to be continually
troubled with them.

And now the year 1656 Commencing, which by ^he Instrument was a
Parliamentary-year, in July Oliver issues out his Writs for his second
Parliament, to ^it on the 17th of September following. But in the mean time
Rear-Admiral Stainer, with six other Ships of the English Fleet, met with the
Spanish Fleet near ^adiz, returning from the West- Indies with Plate, where he
sunk several of them, with great treasure, and took others, which he brought
away, with two Millions of pieces of Eight, which amounts to 400000 pounds
Sterling. There were several Noble men and ^ons of Spain, taken Prisoners, whom
Cromwell treated ^andsomely, and after a little while generously sent them home
without Ransom.

And now on the 17th of September 1656, the appointed time for the Meeting of
the Parliament, those who were Elected met, and chose for their Speaker Sir
Thomas Widdrington. The Major-Generals had a great hand in choosing this
Parliament, who by their Arbitrary Power and Authority, caused whom they
pleased to be chosen, and it was thought it was one of Cromwell's policies to
Constitute them for that end, wanting a Parliament that might give him money:
And also by their most tyrannical sway they had rendered themselves so odious to
the Royalists, that they desired rather any other Government should be than
these Bashaw's; and it was indeed thought to be one of Cromwell's policies in
their Constitution, that their tyranny might cause his Iron yoke alone to sit
more easy about their necks, for he gave them up to the Parliament who
abolished them.

His design of making himself King, and of wearing the Imperial Crown, and of
becoming a legal Monarch and of transmitting it to his posterity, now plainly
was manifested, though God did not see it good, to let the Iniquity of the
Nation run on so far, as to disinherit the right line, having in his Wisdom
resolved to continue it, to the posterity of Charles the Martyr; for though
Cromwell knew, he had more Power, and greater Dominion, and was more absolute
than any King of England, yet the glorious Title of King, and the wearing of a
Crown, was the desire of his ambitious soul, not that it could add more to his
Power, but he imagined, that by that means, he should be accounted more legal,
for that the Crown takes away all attaint, and that perhaps he might be able to
transmit it to his posterity, and make it he reditary in his own line. He knew
his tyrannic^ Usurpation was against all the Laws of the Land, and that he
could hold what he had got, no longer tha^ the Army pleased to stick to him,
who, like an head strong beast, was grown so skittish, he had much a do to
master it; but by settling the Crown on his ow^ head, he thought to reduce every
thing to its old channel, the race of the Stuarts only changed, for that of
Cromwells; and for this end he now began all he could, to court the Nobility
and Gentry of the Royal Party, after he had sufficiently humbled and crushed
them, and made them poor, all to sweeten them against his assuming the Crown,
having got, as he hoped, a Parliament for his purpose: for none were admitted
into this Parliament, after their Elections, but such as the Council allowed
of, and many persons, that Oliver durst not trust, were in this Parliament, and
that he thought not sit to sit, till some Laws were first made, for the
strengthening his Authority, and carrying on of his design. There was therefore
a Recognition of his Highness Government by a single person, placed ready with
a Guard of Red-coats, to be signed before any of the Members went into the
House, and such as refused to sign it were dismissed, and not suffered to sit;
by which means near 200 at the first were excluded, those that sat taking no
notice of this most horrid force. And now let those who so much stand up for
Law and Justice, and cry out upon Arbitrary Rule tell me if ever a greater
could be acted upon the Liberties of the People in denying them their freedoms
in the sitting of their Representatives in Parliament, and if any of the most
Arbitrary Kings of England ever did or durst attempt the like? But what might
not, and what did not this Tyrant and Usurper do?

At first this Parliament went on very smoothly, and to the content of their
Protectorian Master; the first thing was, they made a Vote declaring his War
with Spain to be just and honorable, with a resolu^ion of assisting him in it:
Then as a Grand step for him to Mount the Throne, they make an Act for the
^enouncing the title of ^harles Stuart, and the whole ^ine of King James, unto
the Crown of England, Scot^and and Ireland; seconded with another, for the
se^uring his Highness Person, and the continuance of the Nations peace, which
was bound up in it. And this last Act was made by reason of a Plot then
discovered against his Person, by one Syndercomb, or rather a Contrivance of
his Secretary Thurlo's, to further his designs. This Syndercomb was a Leveller,
or Fifth-Monarchy-man, and disbanded by Monk in Scotland, who being a resolute
fellow, and disgusted, was drawn in by two of Thurlo's Creatures, one Cecil and
Toop of Cromwell's Lifeguard, who pretending a Male-contentedness, easily drew
him in to a design of Murdering the Tyrant, there being about that time, a
book printed and published, with the name of Allen to it, a disbanded Leveller,
called Killing no Murder, which with notable Arguments proved the Lawfulness
of Killing Cromwell, as an Usurper and Tyrant, which book almost scared him out
of his wits, and made him ever after afraid of every strange face that came
near him; and made him betake himself to these artifices, to affright
assassinates by his severity. Syndercomb being thus trepanned and drawn in, by
his Instruments, had prepared a Blunderbuss, and had placed it to shoot him in
his Coach going to Hampton Court; and if that failed, he was to have fired
White Hall, by placing a Basket of combustible matter in the Chapel, with a
train, all which is discovered; Syndercomb and his Companions seized, the
Lifeguard men confess the Plot, and are pardoned, Syndercomb is tried for it
at the upper Bench-bar, (as they then called it) and convicted by the Witness
of his fellow Conspirators, he was Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered
at Tyburn, but before his Execution he was found dead, and poisoned in the
Tower, by himself as the Inquest of the Coroner found it, though by others
suspected to be a sineness of Thurlo's; however, as a felo de se he was drawn
at an Horses tail to Tower Hill, and there put into the ground under the
Scaffold, and a Stake driven through his Body. This occasioned the Act to be
hastened for his Highness preservation, and a thanksgiving Voted for this great
delivery, the Parliament attending him at White Hall in the Banqueting House,
where a Congratulatory Oration upon this occasion was made to him. The next day
the time being very convenient, Alderman Pack started a motion, that for the
better and more sure settlement of the Nation, the Protector might be desired
to assume the style and title of King, as the most known and most agreeable
Government to the people of England: this was hotly pursued by the Court-party
of the House, which after several hot debates produced, The Humble Petition and
Advice: of which we shall speak anon.

The horrible licentiousness of these times, had ripened the birth of strange
and monstrous Opinions and Heresies, and all places swarmed with these kind of
creatures, of an hundred different persuasions: The Ranters grew numerous, and
committed their beastialities under the notion of Liberty of Conscience
publicly, turning debauchery and all manner of wickedness into a Religion;
some lying with their Wives, or other women openly in the Marketplace,
several, both men and women running stark naked, without the least rag to hide
their shame, about the streets, and into Churches, pretending a Command from
the spirit for these Actions. Then the Socinians increased, who denied the
Divinity of Christ, one Biddle being infamous for those Opinions: and one
Erbery, once a Minister, for Ranting. Then the Quakers began to grow numerous,
under George Fox their head, and so troublesome, that they disquieted Oliver
himself, who liked not their Antiministerial principles. But above the rest,
James Naylor was at this time remarkable, who grew to that height of delusion
and frenzy, as to personate our Savior, and procured a divine worship or
adoration to be given to him, by some women attending him. He had been formerly
a Soldier under Lambert, who stickled much to save him from punishment, but the
Parliament now sitting, take the matter into their cognizance; being sent up
from Bristol, where he was he appears before them with a composed countenance,
his hair hanging after the fashion of those pictures made for our Savior, and
with a forked beard, often answering the questions put to him with Thou say
it. He was accused of Blasphemy, and for assuming to himself divine Honors, he
having had Hosanna's sung before him, and such expressions used to him, as the
people of the Jews used toward our Savior, when he rode into Jerusalem, a
little before his Crucifixion. He used several evasions, but the House
sentenced him, to be, both at London and Bristol, publicly Whipped, through both
the Cities, to stand in the Pillory, to have his Tongue bored through, and to be
stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B, for a Blasphemer; and then to
remain in Bridewell during pleasure: which sentence was with great severity
inflicted upon him, and which he underwent with a more than ordinary patience
and resolution.

The Parliament having made an Act, for Preventing of Multiplicity of
Buildings, within ten miles of London; and that every house within that
compass, built upon a new foundation, should pay a years Rent to the Protector;
'they fall upon the Petition and Advice. In the mean time, Cromwell designing
the Succession of his Usurpation for his Son Richard, begins to show him to the
World; but that he might give Lambert no Umbrage of his Intentions, he keeps
him for some time in the Country in Hantshire, where he had Married the
Daughter of one Major, with whom he had a plentiful Fortune. Here he grows
familiar and kind to the Royalists, insinuating into them by his debonare
Carriage, and serving many of them in several requests to his Father,
endeavoring to get their good liking, by his Civilities, and affable
Disposition. The first public Honor done him, was in making him Chancellor of
Oxford, which his Father had resigned for that purpose; then he was Sworn a
Privy-Counsellor, and made a Colonel in the Army, that he might have an
Interest in all Parties, and not long afterward was made the first Lord of the
other House, after the re-meeting of the Parliament, and styled the Noble Lord
Richard. Cromwell, to prepare his way, had likewise his News-writer
Marchiamount Needham, who tells the people there is no everlasting principle in
Government, which is but a temporary expedient, and that in the hazard of a
Commonwealth, the next shift might be made use of; which was a King, as most
agreeable and necessary. He had likewise an ill Poet, Pagan Fisher, who in a
Rodomontado style, sung his Achievements in Latin Verse, together with the
Virtues of the pious Bradshaw.

Oliver having prepared things for them, as well as he could, the Parliament
proceed hotly upon the Petition and Advice, which was their new Model of
Government, and with which on the 9th of April 1657, the Parliament having
desired a meeting with the Protector, they wait upon him in the
Banqueting House at White Hall, where Sir Thomas Widdrington in a set Speech
commended the office of a King, as settled here ever since Christianity,
approved by our Ancestors, agreeing best with our Laws, and temper of the
People; a Model of which Government, as most proper for the good and security
of the Nation, he there presented him with. The old Fox returns, That it is a
weighty Matter, and therefore desired time to seek God in it; for without his
Assistance, the charge would be too great for him to bear. That the English
were the best people in the world, and therefore all tenderness imaginable
should be showed to them, and nothing done without due consideration of their
benefit: with much more of the like nature. The next day a Committee was
appointed to attend him for his Answer; which being delivered after a dubious
manner, they resolve to force it upon him, and adhering to their Petition,
frame a Committee of near half their House to attend him, both to hear and give
satisfaction to his doubts and scruples, in this case. The chief of these were
Whitlock, Lord Chief Justice Glyn, Lord Broghill, Lenthal, Lisle, Philip Jones,
Fiennes, Strickland, Thurlo, Sir Richard Onslow and Sir Charles Woosley.

And now it might be wondered at, that Cromwell having this fair opportunity,
did not accept of this proffer, so much urged; no doubt but he most eagerly
desired it, yet was he so cautious and fearful, lest that, like the Dog in the
Fable, he should snatch too greedily at the shadow of Royalty, and should lose
the boundless power or substance of his Tyranny, or in seeking to fortify his
title, lose his tenure: for he well understood the temper of the Army, and that
by the means of Lambert (who began to smell out his design, and fearing to lose
the Succession promised him) was ready to Mutiny; which if he should lose, he
were undone, knowing all his title was maintained, by the power of their
Swords, and that therefore he must wear such title, as they please, or would be
contented with; therefore considering, that it would not be safe for him at
this time to accept it, he was forced with reluctance to put it off to a more
convenient season. Many meetings and debates however they had about it, and
many Arguments held Pro and Con between them: The Committee alleged that the
title of King had been confirmed by Parliaments, for above 1300 years, and that
neither the Person or Name of King had been displeasing to them. That it was
interwoven with the Laws, and was most necessary to be assumed: For that the
Title ought to be accommodated to the Laws, not the Laws to it; as they must if
he continued the name of Protector. That new titles were ever suspected, and
that the name of Protector had still been unfortunate to the Kingdom, and to
themselves: That it being given him by the Soldiers, it smelt too much of
Conquest: That the Roman Empire never thrived so well, but was alw^ys full of
confusion, under the titles of Consuls, Dictators or Prince of the Senate, as
it did under the title of Kings, until Caesar came to settle the Empire: they
also laid before him the reasons for the changing the Title of Lord to King of
Ireland, in the time of King Henry the 8th for the better and more regular
Government of the Nation. But their main Argument was drawn from the Statutes
of 9 Edw. 5. and 3 H. 7. by which all persons were indemnified that took up
Arms for the King in being, and would be a great security to himself and the
people, to have it thus settled upon him by Act of Parliament: But for all this,
for the Reasons aforesaid, his fears surmounted his Ambition, he at last gave
them a peremptory Refusal, telling them that it was against his Conscience, and
that he could not offend so many Godly men and Officers of the Army, who had
declared against the title and office of King; but he desired that the Title of
Protector, and the Government by a single person, might be confirmed by consent
of this Parliament.

Upon this his refusal, which was cried up as a great Virtue, and sign of his
Humility, the Parliament confirm him in his former title and dignity, and an
explanatory part to the Petition and Advice was prepared, in respect of the
Protectors's Oath, his Counsels, Members of the House of Commons, and of the
other House (as they called it, instead of the House of Lords) which were to
sit, and to consist of 60 odd Lords of Cromwell's making. The chief heads of
the Petition and Advice were, 1. That he should exercise the Office of Chief
Magistrate under the Title of Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and
to govern according to the Petition and Advice, and that in his lifetime he
should appoint his Successor. 2. That a Parliament should be called every three
years at farthest, and that it should consist of two Houses. 3. That the
Members of Parliament legally chosen, should not be secluded the House, but by
consent of the House (notwithstanding this he did not re-admit the secluded
Members of this House which he had cast out) 4. Showed certain qualifications
for the Members to be chosen. 5. The power of the other House was declared. 6.
That no Law should be altered, repealed or made, but by Act of Parliament. 7.
That the constant yearly Revenue of the Army and Navy be settled, and that to be
a Million of Pounds Sterling, and 300000 l. more for the support of the
Government, besides other Temporary supplies, as the House of Commons should
see necessary and fit. 8. That the Protector's Council should not exceed the
number of 21, nor to be under 9, and 7 of them to be a Quorum. 9. That the
chief Officers of State to be chosen or approved by the Parliament. 10. That
his Highness should encourage a Godly Ministry. 11. That the Protestant
Religion should be professed, and that he should cause a Confession of Faith to
be made, and that none should be permitted to reproach it, or revile it by
words or writings. With some other matters of less importance.

With this, the aforementioned Acts, with an Act for Assessment of 60000 l. a
month, for three months: Another Money Act for 50000 l. for England, 6000 l.
for Scotland, and 9000 l. for Ireland, with some others concerning Trade, were
presented to Cromwell to Sign by the Parliament: To whom, returning them many
thanks, he said, That he perceived that among those many Acts they had made,
that they had taken great care to provide for the just and necessary support of
the Commonwealth, by those Bills for Levying of Money, and understanding that
it had been formerly the practice of the chief Governors, to acknowledge with
thanks to the Commons, their care and regard to the Public, therefore he very
heartily thanked them, and acknowledged their kindness therein. And after he
had signed these Bills, and the Petition and Advice, and Articles therein, He
told them, That he had undertaken one of the greatest burdens that ever was
laid upon the back of any humane creature, and therefore he asked their help
and prayers to God, that he might have the divine Assistance, for the
discharging of this great trust. And that for his part, nothing should have
induced him to have taken upon him this unsupportable burden to flesh and
blood, but that he had seen in the Parliament a great care of those things,
that might make clearly for the Liberty of the Nations, and for the Interest of
such as feared God: And if that the people were not thank full to them for
their great care, it would fall as a sin upon their heads. With much more of
the same nature.

This being done, they prepare for the Solemnity of his Inauguration or
Investure anew, for though he was before solemnly inaugurated into the
Protectorate, as you have heard, according to the Instrument, yet it was
thought fit that it should be done again, for the greater confirmation of the
business, because the Articles of this Petition and Advice were different from
the former Instrument: For now there was to be another House; and whereas
before his Council was to name his Successor, he had now power to do it
himself, so that he was an absolute Monarch, and might leave the Succession to
his Son if he pleased. A Committee being appointed for this purpose, on the
26th of June 1657, before a great assembly of people, and with much more
Ceremony than before, he was installed in Westminster Hall, under a great
Canopy of State, in great pomp and much magnificence, too long for me here to
relate; the Great Seal being carried by the Lord Commissioner Fiennes, and the
Sword by the Earl of Warwick The City Sword by the Lord Mayor Tichbourn, all
bare-headed: The Dutch and French Ambassadors being also present. The Speaker
of the House of Commons presenting him with a Robe of Purple Velvet, a Bible, a
Sword and a Scepter, making a Speech to him in presenting them: Telling him,
that the Purple Robe was an Emblem of Magistracy, and imported Righteousness
and Justice: The Bible containing the Holy Scriptures, was Christ Veiled and
Revealed, and contained both Precepts and Examples for good Government: The
Scepter not unlike a Staff, was to show he was to be the Staff of the poor and
weak, of ancient use; for that the Scripture says, The Scepter should not
depart from Judah, and that Kings and Princes were called by Homer
Sceptre-bearers: That the Sword was not only a Military, but a Civil Sword, a
Sword rather of defense, than of offense, to defend himself and his people:
Upon which he would presume to write this Motto, Ego sum Domini Protectoris ad
protegendum Populum Meum. I am the Lord Protectors, to protect my People. This
being ended, he gave the Protector his Oath on the Bible, and Mr. Manton made a
Prayer, wherein he recommended the Protector, the Parliament, the Army and
Government to God: which done, the Trumpets sounded, and the Heralds
proclaimed him Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging. After which he returned in great State, the Lord Sherrard
and the Lord Roberts his eldest Son carrying his Train. The Pageantry being
finished, the House having done like good Boys, have leave to play, for
returning to their House, they adjourn themselves to the 20th of January
following.

Being thus settled in his Dignity, he began to live more splendidly, and like a
King, having a very full Court, and after a Monarchical Manner, all his
Officers of State. Steel was made Chief Baron, and Lambert Warden of the
Cinque Ports; but that would not satisfy him, for he was not a little
disgusted, that Cromwell had power given him to nominate his Successor, and he
now plainly perceived his Intentions of settling the Succession in his Children,
for which he now resolves, if he can, to ruin him with the Army. But Cromwell
is vigilant, and had on the 19th of April, at a certain house in Shoreditch,
taken several of the Champions of the Fifth-Monarchy men, among whom was one
Venner, a Preaching Wine-Cooper, Ashton, Gowler, Hopkins, and Gray their
Scribe, these were to have risen, and with them was taken a considerable
quantity of Arms, and their Standard, with a Lyon-Couchant, Guiles, in a Field
Argent, with this Motto: Who shall rouse him? The late Vice Admiral Lawson and
Major Danvers were secured: As also Major Wildman, who was taken at Marlborow
drawing up a Declaration against him, and clapped up in order to his Trial. And
hearing of private Subscriptions to Petitions and Addresses to the Parliament,
carrying on in the Army against Kingship, he peremptorily sent to them to
desist upon their peril, and so over-awed and dashed them, that they durst not
go on with their attempt. There was no body now very considerable of their own
party, that could give him any disturbance but Lambert; and to secure himself
against him, he followed the example Lambert had set him before, in securing
himself against the Rump Parliament, and caused all the Army, by his Privado's,
Regiment after Regiment, to subscribe Addresses, Congratulating his legal
Authority, and declaring their readiness to stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes.

This year, on the 20th of April 1657, that great action of General Blake was
performed against the Spaniards, at Santa Cruze, in the Island of Tenarif,
where he burnt their whole West India Ships, being 16 in number;
notwithstanding they were barracado'd in the Haven, and defended by a Castle
well fortified, and 7 Forts, and got forth of their Haven without any loss; for
which considerable service the Protector and Parliament ordered him a Jewel of
500 l. and gratuities to the other Officers and Soldiers. But this Valiant and
Renowned Seaman did not long outlive this his memorable exploit, dying at Sea,
as he was entering the sound of Plymouth: Never any Seaman performed so many
Actions, redounding to the Glory of the English Nation, as he did; and it was
his only misfortune, that he served not a lawful Prince.

And now the 20th of January being come, at which time the Parliament was to
re-assemble, they met accordingly, but they now were quite another thing, than
what they were before; for according to the Clause in the Petition and Advice,
That the persons legally, Chosen should not be secluded, but by the consent of
the House; those Members that Cromwell had before kept out by force, were now
readmitted, though against his mind; who presently gave him a disturbance.
Then according to their new Model, there was the other House, for as yet they
did not dare to call it a House of Lords, which consisted of his chiefest
Favorites of the Army Officers and others, and many picked out of the House of
Commons, some of them being of the excluded Commonwealths-men, whom he hoped to
draw to his party by this obligation, about half a score likewise of the old
Nobility were nominated, thinking to draw them in, but they refused to come.
The Houses being thus altered in their Constitution, quickly let Cromwell see
he was deceived in his hopes, for Hazelrig and others disdaining his proffered
Baronage, took their seats in the Commons House, where they thought they should
do more good; and by which means the Commonwealths-men grew so high, that the
other House was not taken notice of, but fell to questioning all their fellows
had done, during their Seclusion, and had the Messages of the other House in
contempt and derision. And now the Humble Petition and Advice was like to be
overthrown. The news of their proceedings so enraged the mind of Oliver, seeing
his great Hopes of being King so suddenly dashed, that contrary to the advice of
his Council, he goes to them, and for haste takes an Hackney-Coach, and entering
into the other House, and standing under a Canopy of State, he sends for the
Commons to come to him; who being come, with much eagerness made them a long
Speech; which being remarkable, I shall recite some few heads:

That the Lord was his witness; his desires of carrying on the affairs of the
Nation, were for the ends of Mercy, Truth, Righteousness and Peace, which he
desired might be improved. That there was not a Man or Woman treading upon
English Ground, could say that he sought the place of Protector, but he thought
the Nations happy therein. But that he was Petitioned thereunto by them, who
had the Legislative Power, to take up a burden too heavy for any creature,
therefore did look they should make it good to him. That he could say in the
presence of God, before whom they were all but poor creeping Ants upon the
Earth, he had rather have kept sheep, than undertook such a place of Government
as that was. That he had told them he would not undertake it, unless he might
have men that should go between him and the House of Commons, to prevent
tumultuary spirits; which was granted, and the had named another House, and
that it was not Titles or Lords that they valued, but a Christian and English
Interest, who would be a balance to them and themselves, and of their own rank
and quality, whilst they loved England and Religion. That he thought he had
been doing his duty, and that they would be satisfied; but if they were too
high and too low, they would not be satisfied. That God knew he had taken an
Oath upon condition, expressed in the Government, and thought he had been upon
a sure foundation, and that the consequence had been confusion if he had not
done it. That there were no hereditary Lords or Kings settled, the power
consisting in the two Houses and himself, and that God would judge between them
and him. God was his witness, that there was a seeking of a new settlement in
the Army, that he spoke not to those Gentlemen, (meaning his Lords) or what
they would call them, but to them the Commons that advised him to tha^ place;
yet that instead of owning him, some of the^ must have they did not know what.
And that the^ were running the Nation into confusion again, by their intention
of devising a Commonwealth, that some of the people might he the Men that might
rule all, and tha^ those things were not according to God and according t^
Truth; pretend what they would, it was a playing (...) game for the King of
Scots, if he might call him so and therefore he thought himself bound before
God to do^ what he meant to prevent it. God was his witness, he told them what
was true, the King of Scots had a^ Army at the waterside, ready to be Shipped
for England* and that he had the knowledge of it from an eyewitness. That they
had not only been endeavoring to pervert the Army, to draw them to a
Commonwealth, but some of them, while sitting, had been listing of persons by
Commission from Charles Stuart, to join with any insurrection that should be
made; that if this was the end of their sitting, and that if these were their
carriages, concluding, he thought it high time to put an end to their sitting;
and therefore, by the living God, he declared t^ them, that he did Dissolve
that Parliament. To which many of the Commons cried out, Amen. And thus ended
this Parliament crossing and vexing Oliver to the heart, for he expected more
supplies of Money.

Oliver having thus dismissed this Parliament, and rid himself of that fear,
begins to fortify himself against the Royalists, who had indeed formed a new
Plot, for the bringing in their King, but were betrayed by Willis and one
Corcar a Minister of Sussex, who had been long employed by Cromwell for that
purpose: The Royalists were glad the Parliament was dissolved, for they feared
a Commonwealth much more than Cromwell; not that he was less Tyrannical, or had
used them more favorably, but for that the other sort of Government had
rendered it self formidable, and was in danger to have been more permanent ^han
Oliver's Kingly Protectorship could, for they be^ieved, as they well might,
that King Oliver would never be long endured by the people, whose eyes must
^eeds be opened, and see that he was got into the Throne, and exercised the
same power, and far more ^han the Kings of England ever did, and whom they ^ad
flung out only to make way for a Tyrant, and that they would never suffer a man
of their own quality and rank thus to play the King amongst them, and to be
their Lord, without endeavoring to fling ^im out. Besides, they found Lambert
and the Army so much disgusted, that they would rather have ventured all than
not to have seen the downfall of Cromwell: so that the Royalists thought all
things to be favorable to their design: But Cromwell having timely notice of
all things by his Agents, among them, he takes care to prevent them, and
sending ^o his right hand Tichbourn, Lord Mayor, causes him ^o double the
City-Guards, and to make great changes in the Militia, turning out all he
suspected, and presently seizes on Sir William Compton, the Earl of
Northampton's Brother, Mr. Russel, the Earl of Bedford's Brother, Sir William
Clayton and many more: The Marquess of Ormond, who on the design had lain ^id
for some time in London, hardly escapes his hands. Also he seizes on Mr.
Mordant, the Earl of Peterborough's Brother: Mr. Manley, Mr. Baron, Mr.
Stapely, Mr. Mansel, Mr. Woodcock, Mr. Carent, Mr. Jackson, and one Mallory,
who was thought to be a decoy to ^he rest, being pardoned after Condemnation.

And now, to give more terror to the Royalists, Cromwell resolves again to new
dye his hands in Blood, by the old Arbitrary and Tyrannical way: Up goes the
High Court of Justice, and its bloody President Lisle, who on the 25th of May
1658 sat. Cromwell had picked out two Eminent Men to begin with, one Layman Sir
Henry Slingsby, imprisoned ever since the West-Rising, and one Clergyman, the
Reverend Dr. Hewet. Sir Henry Slingsby was accused (though falsely) to have
endeavored to betray Hull, whilst a Prisoner there, and for holding
Correspondence with Charles Stuart, for which h^ was Condemned for a Traitor,
and sentenced to be be-headed, which Death he suffered on Tower-hil^ on the 8th
of June following, though great application to save his life had been made to
Cromwell, by his Nephew, and Cromwell's Son-in-law, the Lord Faulconbridge; but
the Tyrant was inexorable, having beforehand with Thurlo resolved on the Death
of these two men. The next was Dr. Hewet, wh^ was accused before the same
Court, for Conspirin^ against the Government, and holding intelligence with the
King. But the Doctor Demurred to the Jurisdiction of the Court, citing diverse
Law-Cases; and giving many Reasons against their authority, desiring them to
evince to him the legality of their Court and he would plead to his charge. But
this the^ would not, nor were able to do; and whilst he disputed with them,
they took the advantage of demanding his Plea three times; after which, though
he then desired it, seeing they would record him a Mute, they would not admit,
for being designed for slaughter, had they admitted him to plead, he would have
escaped them, for want of Witnesses, which it seems failed them at that time.
The Doctor had an Eloquent Tongue, was of great esteem and abilities, and
Preached long at St. Gregory's, where he sometimes could not forbear to deplore
the misery of the Kingdom, so that Cromwell had a particular desire to rid him
out of the way, as a most dangerous man, and took this occasion to do it;
upbraiding the Doctor with very bitter and unbecoming language, when he was
brought before him to be examined. However, though he was Condemned as a Mute,
yet he had the favor to be beheaded, and suffered the same day with Sir Henry
Slingsby; where he prayed almost an hour with great zeal and fervor of spirit,
having his head severed from his ^ody, he dyed with much Christian Magnanimity.

The next that came to his Trial, was Mr. Mordant, who at first denied the
Jurisdiction of the Court, but was by his friends at last persuaded to plead,
and was quitted by one voice only, for very fortunately Col. Pride being taken
with a fit of the Stone, went off the Bench, to the saving his life. Then Mr.
Woodcock and Sir Humphrey Bennet, were tried and acquitted: Mallory confessed,
was condemned, but not executed. Then Mr. Carent was tried and acquitted. Mr.
Henry Friar was condemned by them; but when going to be executed in Smithfield,
he was reprieved: the like happened to John Summer, who was condemned to dye in
Bishopsgate-street, and Oliver Allen in Gracechurch-street, who had their
Reprieves brought them: Baron, Manly, Mansel, with one Seymour and Carlton, all
imprisoned on the same account, made their escape, but were arraigned, though
absent, and condemned.

But Edward Ashton, John Bettely and Edward Stacy were also tried before this
Court, for the same Crime, of raising War, and seeking the Death of Cromwell,
where all three were Condemned, with little or no proofs against them; Col.
Ashton was a known Cavalier, and a Prisoner for Debt in Newgate; but being
permitted by favor to go abroad, fell into the company of one of Cromwell's
Trepanners, who went stroling about for prey, who informs the Secretary of
dangerous words spoken by this Ashton, for which he was tried and condemned,
though he denied them at his Death, and was hanged, drawn and quartered in
Tower-street, the Tyrant making all parts of the City his Shambles, of humane
flesh, for the greater terror: this was his bloody policy. Mr. Bettely was in
like manner betrayed, and falsely accused by these Ruffians, the Emissaries of
Cromwell and Thurlo, condemned upon their Oaths, though he protested his
Innocence, and was executed in the midst of Cheapside, being hanged, drawn an^
quartered: After he had been a long time dead, a^ they thought, on a sudden he
lift up his hands, an^ pulling off his Cap, looked upon them, staring wit^ his
eyes, to all their amazements, till the Execution^ dispatched him. These
suffered on the 2d of July 165^ and two days after Mr. Stacy was only hanged
Many more, who were imprisoned and designed t^ death, escaped by Oliver's
Death, which was not very long after.

He was no sooner rid of the fear of this Plot, by these Executions, but he was
again troubled by Lambert's Cabal, who had inveigled both Fleetwood and
Desborow, Cromwell's near relations, with their Commonwealth Principles, though
Lambert intended only the setting up of himself, in Cromwell's stead. Bu^
Cromwell now dallies no longer with them, but taken away Lambert's Commission,
and lays him aside, and disposes his Regiments to others, whom he could better
trust, and sends into the Army several Spie^ and Eves-droppers, to let him know
the temper and behavior of the Officers, and of their inclinations whereby he
might the better reform them.

This bloody Tyrant, becoming Sanguinary, (as al other Tyrants do) grows very
fearful and suspicious, and began to dread every strange face that came near
him, which he would fix his eyes upon, and intentively view, for fear of an
assassination; for that Book of Killing no Murder still ran dreadfully in his
mind, and made him to take all the care he could of himself, oftentimes
shifting his Lodgings; to which he passed by twenty several locks, and usually
had four or five ways out of them: He seldom went and came the same way between
White Hall and Hampton Court, and always by private and by-ways, and in a great
hurry, his Guards before and behind, still on the Gallop, and his Coach
(especially the boots) filled with armed men, and began to be of very difficult
access to all persons. Yet this year he had access in Flanders, and Dunkirk was
surrendered into is hands, and Lockhart General of the Forces there, and his
Kinsman made Governor thereof.

And now the Exit of this great Tyrant and Usur^er draws near, being ushered in
with a Prodigy ^hree Months before; for on the 2d of June a great Whale came up
as far as Greenwich, and was there ^illed. His beloved Daughter Cleypool, not
long before him also dyed, with an Ulcer in her Bladder, which caused such
acute pains, that put her into a Fever, and in her raving Fits she much called
upon that bloody Tyrant her Father, for she had been (...) Suitor for Dr.
Hewet's life, knowing his Innocence, ^ut was denied, which gave her a great
disturbance, ^eing sensible of her Father's Tyrannick sway, and Murtherous
projects, and of the Peoples hate toward him. Her Death, as they say, went
near his ^eart, being about the beginning of August, which, with the troubles
he saw were about to rise from the Officers of the Army, fomented by Fleetwood,
who ^ad Married his Daughter; and Desborow, who had Married his Sister, gave
him a fit of sickness, being ^t Hampton Court, which he thought at first would
pass over, being only a Tertian fever, and his private Chaplains fasted and
prayed with him; and Goodwin openly declared, that God had heard his ^rayers,
for him, and he was assured he should not dye that bout; but he was a false
Prophet, for his Fever continuing with very ill symptoms, the Physicians not
so confident as the Priests, caused him to be removed to White Hall, and he had
been there but few days, when they saw very plainly, that he had but few days
to live; and this being made known to his Privy Council, they were all very
much startled; he finding himself now drawing toward his end, on the 31 of
August he caused all people to go out of his Chamber, but Goodwin and Thurlo,
to whom he declared, that he nominated his eldest Son Richard Cromwell to
succeed him; but these thinking it too great a thing to be communicated to them
alone* advised him to have more Witnesses, lest they should not be credited in
so great a concern: He then bid them to send for the Council of 9, which were
those he privately managed his more secret concerns by, and these were
Fleetwood, Fiennes, Desborow, Whaly, Thurlo, Lawrence, Berry, Cooper and Goff;
most of this Junto being come to him, he declared that it was his will, that
his Son Richard should succeed him as Protector: Fleetwood bit his lips, having
been fooled into hopes of the Protectorship, as well as Lambert, but little was
then said, and on the 3d day of September 1658, memorable to Oliver for two
great Victories, Dunbar and Worcester, he yielded to the great Victor Death,
and marched off the Stage of this World in peace, after he had trod it in
Blood, War, Rapine, Oppression, Cruelty, Usurpation and Tyranny. Though the
report went, the Devil fetched him away in the storm, which the night before
his Death was so violent, that many of the great Trees in St. James's Park were
blown up by the Roots, and that he had seven years before made a Compact with
the Devil, that he might obtain the Dominion of the three Kingdoms, and not be
prevailed against: but these are Stories, and God's Providence unsearchable.

I have already given a character of this Man, and a short account of some
passages of his Life, before he ascended to his Greatness. He was, no doubt, a
man of extraordinary parts, and raised up by God for such great undertakings,
as a scourge to this Nation, which was full of evil humors, and had
entertained a spirit of Rebellion against both God, the Church, and the King;
and that they might behold their errors by those dismal effects that followed
upon their unnatural Rebellion; and perceiving them, might not in the same age,
at least, run into the like, nor pull the like fatal consequences upon their
heads, as Usurpation, and Arbitrary Rule and Tyranny either in many, or in one,
which God avert, and send peace and tranquillity in our days. But yet the
Memory of this Man is adored by many to this day, and he is the Idol of some,
who will yet speak great things of him, though without reason, and putting our
decay of trade upon the present ill management of affairs, when indeed it is
but the consequence of our Civil Wars, and the great expense of Money, drained
away from the Royalists, the vast sums raised on the people by Taxes,
Assessments and Excise, which coming into the Soldiers pockets, they set it
going into motion; which with the vast sums raised on the sale of the Kings,
Queens, Princes, Bishops and Delinquents Lands, made a flood of money for the
present, and nothing of want then appeared, which was the effect rather of the
Tyrant's rapacity, than good management; for when this glut began to fall again
into the private sinks of rich men, who lived by the use of money; and others
who had any great sums fallen to their shares, fearing the iniquities of the
times, and knowing no man could promise himself to be long master of his own,
especially money, where the Will of the Tyrant was Law, and whom to disoblige
was fatal, they remitted vast sums for their security into the bank in Holland,
making them rich, by trading with our money, whilst we sat contented with 3 l.
per cent for to be secure; so that our trade fell, and in some time after a
scarcity of money appeared, which such who only look on the present time, and
considered not truly the reason, attributed to the ill management of the
present Governor, or of those who sat at the Helm. And therefore we may say,
that the low ebb of Trade in our time had its beginning in Oliver's time. And
we may likewise consider, that in his short Usurpation, which was but four
years and nine months, there was shown so much Tyranny, Oppression and
Injustice, as (excepting the time of the Rumps sitting) was not to be
paralleled in any of the Kings since the Conquest. Besides in his latter
days, when his fears began to render him cruel, he valued neither honesty or
honor, when they stood in the way of his Ambition, and therefore to me it is a
wonder, for what it was they admired this Man; and must be caused either by
partiality or ignorance. As for his Politics, his Peace with France, and his
War with Spain, was certainly against the Interest of England, in lessning the
latter, and making the former too great for Christendom, and loosing the
balance which England ought carefully to keep between those two Monarchs, And
then his impolitick Peace with the Dutch, on so easy terms, when brought with
great expense of English Blood and Treasure, to that extremity, that England
might have had what terms they would, so that the whole world thought him
infatuated, in losing so great an opportunity of doing good to this Nation.
Then there is nothing more certain, that all the Persecution that has since
happened in France, of that King's Protestant Subjects, was the effects of his
joining in a League with France at that time; by which means that King humbled
Spain, and made way for his Conquests in Flanders since achieved, and enabled
him to subdue all Factions at home, which were then arising, and brought him
into a condition, to need none of them, being grown since the scourge and
terror of Christendom. His shameful defeat at Hispaniola, with the loss of
1500 Merchants Ships to the Spaniard in that War, as was made appear to
Richard's Parliament, and in his spending such vast sums of money, and yet
leaving a vast debt upon the Kingdom, as appeared by the Accounts brought into
Richard's Assembly, may stand in balance against his Victories, and show that
he was not always successful, and that he had not managed his affairs with
that frugality and wisdom, as some have thought he did, when as by his own
accounts it appeared, notwithstanding the great incomes he had, and the many
Parliamentary supplies, he had contracted a debt of no less than 1900000 l. As
for his Tyranny and Oppression, it is needless to mention it, that may be seen
throughout this History. Yet I cannot but instance here, that injustice of his
to John Lilburn, who had been tried for his Life by the Long Parliament, and
acquitted, and by them discharged; yet because Oliver knew him a dangerous man,
and one that might give him a trouble, caused him to be tried a second time;
and though then also cleared by the Law, yet according to his own Arbitrary
Will, against Law, and with all injustice and cruelty imaginable, kept him
close Prisoner so long, that he was almost consumed by sickness, that he turned
him out only to dye. Again, What greater injustice could there be, than that
shown to Mr. Cony, who being a Prisoner at Cromwell's Suit; and being brought
to the King's or upper Bench-bar, as they called it, by an Habeds Corpus,
causes his Counsel to be violently taken from the Bar, and sent to the Tower,
for no other reason, than the Pleading his Clients Ca^^^^; such an Act of
violence, as cannot be paralleled in all the History of England. Yet this
blessed man is admired. As for his ingratitude that appeared to Sir Henry Vain,
who above all persons in the world was the cause of his advancement, and had
long espoused his Interest, yet he studied to destroy him both in his Life and
Estate, because he would not adhere to his perjury and falseness: And because
Vain opposed him, he imprisoned him, and would have proceeded farther against
him. In Richard's Assembly, upon the complaint of several Prisoners, kept close
in the Tower, many being sent away most inhumanely, and sold for Slaves beyond
Seas; the Lieutenant being sent for, and demanded by what Authority he had kept
those in his custody so long Prisoners, he produced a Paper written all with
Oliver's own hand; in which were these words: Sir, I pray you seize such a^^
such persons, and all others, whom you shall judge dangerous men, do it
quickly, and you shall have a Warrant for it after you have done. Upon which
Richard's Assembly Voted this Commitment of the Complainants, to be illegal,
unjust and Tyrannical as no doubt it was. This was a spice of his Justice
whereby any man was rendered obnoxious not only to himself, but to the malice or
spleen of his Lieutenant, though he were never so innocent: And a^ this rate,
he might take up and imprison whom he pleased, and no man was in safety, and
that by the chief Governor's Warrant, who by Law can Commit no man by his own
Warrant: And this too without any cause shown, why or wherefore. And the same
men Voted, that those banished or sent away were unjustly, and against all Law
so sent away, for the Law says no English man ought to be banished, by less
authority than by Act of Parliament: and ordered forthwith the Prisoners to be
set free, without Fees or Charges; and had they sat longer, had undoubtedly
punished the Lieutenant too. Then after public faith given, and the party
restored to Common Privileges, he caused that most horrid Orde^ of Decimation
to be put in execution, on the poo^ Cavaliers by his Janissaries, which was by
the ensuing Parliament damned as an unjust and wicked breach of Faith. This
however is the great, the just, the brave, victorious, pious and most renowned
Oliver, who, as I have said, is yet by some remembered even to a kind of
Idolatry; but I shall leave him having long since received his deserved reward,
an^ conclude with the rapture of Sterry, who Preaching his Funeral Sermon, had
these blasphemous expressions of him: As sure (says he) as this is the Bible
(which he held in his hand) the blessed spirit of Oliver Cromwell is with
Christ, at the right hand of the Father; and if he be there, what may not his
family expect from him; for if he were so useful and helpful and so much good
influenced from him to them, when he was in a Mortal State, how much more
influence will they have from him, now in heaven; The Father, Son and Spirit,
through him bestowing Gifts and Graces upon them. I shall now proceed to the
second Scene of ^his single Usurpation and Tyranny, which brought ^is Son,
short-lived Dick, upon the Stage.

Oliver being thus dead, on the 3 d of September, about three of the Clock in
the afternoon, he was opened and embalmed; but he stunk so filthily, though
wrapped in Cearcloths and Lead, with Aroma^ick Spices, that they were fain to
bury him private^y; but a Coffin was carried to Somerset House, where after
some days, with his Effigies made for that purpose, he seemed to lie in great
state, pomp and magnificence, to which sight crowds of people daily pressed.
The out-rooms all hung with black, with Scutcheons, hanging on the Walls, but
the room where the Effigies lay was hung with black Velvet, and the Ceiling of
the same, having a large Canopy of the same deeply fringed: the Effigies being
Robed in Purple Velvet, ^aced with Gold Lace, and furred with Ermins, with
strings and tassels of Gold: In its right hand a Scepter, in its left a Globe,
on his head a Velvet Cap furred with Ermins, and behind his head placed high on
a Chair of Tissued Gold, was set an Imperial Crown: Eight Silver Candlesticks
of about five foot high stood about his Bed of State, with large white
Waxtapers burning, of three foot long, all environed with Rails and Ballisters
covered with Velvet, within which stood men in Mourning bare-headed, which was
continued for many weeks, and then the Effigies was removed into another room,
and vested as before, set up in a standing posture, with the Crown upon his
head; which it seems he now obtained, though he could not wear it while alive.
Thus they continued this Pageantry to the 23 d of November following, when his
Funeral was made, and he carried in great pomp to Westminster, with more cost
and state than ever was bestowed on any King of England; costing they say 26000
l. or more, and at last was interred among the Kings and Queens of England,
where he lay till the 30th of January 1660, when he had Resurrection to another
Exaltation at Tyburn, where he was a second time interred under the Gallows,
according to his demerits, with his great Counselors Ireton and Bradshaw.

But we will leave the dead, and relate, in brief, the Transactions of the
living. Oliver being gone, the Privy Council met, and a search was made in the
Protector's Cabinet, for a Paper safely laid up, wherein he had nominated
Fleetwood for his Successor; but it was no^ to be found, therefore they send to
him and Desborow to know, if they did acquiesce in the Declaration of the late
Protector, which made his Son Richard Cromwell Protector. To which Fleetwood
sent word that he cordially acquiesced in that Declaration of the late
Protector's, concerning his Son's Succession, though any other Paper should be
found, in which he had been formerly nominated his Successor. This done, the
Council wait upon Richard, to Condole with him for his Father's Death, and to
Congratulate him as Protector Then Skippon and Strickland were sent to the
City, to acquaint them with what was done, and the next day they caused a
Proclamation to be made, subscribed by ^hiverton, Lord Mayor, the Council of
State, and several Officers of the Army, at White Hall, Charing Cross
Fleetstreet, and several places in London, Proclaiming Richard Cromwell
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. After which the City-Sword by
the Lord Mayor, and the Seal by Fiennes were resigned to him and his Oath was
given him by Fiennes, one of the Commissioners of the Great Seal, in which he
Sword to maintain the Protestant Religion in its purity, and to govern the
three Nations according to the best of his power and skill, according to the
Laws. After which he dispatches Messengers to Ireland, to inform his brother
Harry, Deputy there, and to General Monk in Scotland, to inform them, and to
know how they stood affected to his Advancement. And presently he receives
Addresses from most of the Counties in England, contrived and made at
White Hall, and Protestations from the Armies in England, Scotland and Ireland,
to live and dye with him: Also Addresses from the Independent Churches, as
Goodwins, Nyes, and the rest of them, many giving Adoration to this rising
false light, forgetting the true Sun yet in Eclipse beyond Sea; and the fawning
Poets, Waller and Dryden, among the rest praised to the Skies, in their Elegies
the dead Tyrant: Richard was proclaimed both at Dublin and at Edenborough, and
all things ran smooth on his side. But however General Monk liked not the
Tyrannical sway of the Army in England, but so early began to form the happy
project of his Majesty's Restoration, without which he well perceived these
Kingdoms would not be in any settled posture, but be still subject to any
Usurper or Usurpers, the Army should set up: but this was a great work, and
time not yet ripened for it, he kept the secret in his own breast, and intended
to take opportunity by the forelock, complying for the present as others did,
but in the mean time with great diligence he reformed his Army, and purged it
from those ill humors, as he knew would soon bring it to destruction; but this
also he did wisely and cautiously, and by degrees, for fear of causing too
early jealousies of his design.

Richard seeing the many Addresses made to him from the People and Army, and
the caresses and flatteries of great ones, being a man of no great reach,
thought all had been real, and now began to form to himself an Imagination of
settling himself in his Usurpation, and to look somewhat shy on those of the
Royal Party he had before caressed, and done kindness for, showing more state
and greatness than formerly, and growing more reserved to his familiars. But
moneys growing scarce, his Council advises him forthwith to call a Parliament,
and accordingly Summons are issued out for this Convention to meet at
Westminster on the 27th of January. Elections being made after the usual
manner, tho some would have opposed it, and by sending Writs to the several
Boroughs, they thought they should get a Parliament to their minds, but were
deceived. Ireland and Scotland also sent each 30, according to the Model of
Government, and for the upper House the chiefest Officers of the Army were
pitched upon, but many of them were of such base extraction, that the Commons
could hardly be brought to own them. Richard began to have some jealousy of
the Army, and finding many of his Council too great favorers of them, and of
their power, he began to cast about to have brought in others of his friends to
balance them; but he found such opposition, that he could not bring it about.
On the other side, the Army and Sectarian Officers began to be afraid of the
ensuing Parliament, and therefore some of them advised him to follow his
Father's steps, who was accustomed at such a time to cause the chiefest
Officers of the Army to come up to London, and to be assistant to him on such
occasions. This startled Richard, being as much afraid of the Army, as they
were of this approaching Convention, yet wanting his Father's courage and
resolution, he sent for many of the Army to Town from their Commands, where
they had the opportunity of Caballing and laying designs for his destruction.
Besides, Lambert, by the favor of Fleetwood, was got again into Command, and
had a Regiment given him, and was as much in the favor of the Sectaries as
ever. Richard was as yet General, when Desborow and others would have persuaded
him, that the Army being discontented, and ready to mutiny, the best way for
him would be to settle it on some known Officer amongst them, and nominated
Fleetwood: but Richard it seems was not so very a fool as to divest himself of
that Command, but told them, that by his Father's example, he would keep that
for a security both to them and to himself, without which he could not protect
them, and that the Parliament which was suddenly to meet, would give them
satisfaction as to their Grievances, to whom he should remit them.

And now at the time prefixed, the Parliament meet, consisting of two Houses,
the other House beginning ^ow to be called the upper House; for the Commons was
chosen, Mr. Chute a Lawyer, as their Speaker; who sickning, Long, Recorder of
London, was chosen ^ro tempore in his stead; and for the upper House, Na^haniel
Fiennes, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal was their Speaker. The first fortnight
was taken up about the Recognition, with which they were awhile entangled, ^ut
at last they Vote; and it was Resolved on Monday 14th of February, That it be
part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness, Richard, Lord
Protector, and chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, Scot^and and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories ^hereunto belonging. Resolved, That
before this Bill be Committed, the House do declare such additional Clauses ^o
be part of this Bill, as may bound the power of the chief Magistrate, and fully
secure the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties and Rights of
the People; and that neither this, or any other previous Vote, that is, ^r
shall be passed in order to this Bill, shall be of force and ^inding to the
people, till the whole Bill be passed. This ^one, a Committee of Inspections is
settled, to take a ^iew of the Accounts and the Revenue of the Commonwealth: of
which Mr. Scowen was Chairman. The Commonwealths-men, who were considerable in
this Convention, cunningly put in many Debates to gain ^ime; which they did,
though the Protectorian party were the major, and so could effect little; yet
they ^ad hopes of the infection of the Army, which they ^new by means of their
Emissaries spread much; for ^t Wallingford-house, Fleetwood, Desborow and
Lambert, ^ith several others, held their Consults for the dispos^essing of
Richard, and Fleetwood was courted to take ^he Protectorship upon him: Richard
had notice given him of their proceedings, and some of his friends advised him
to cut them off, and profer'd to do it if he would be Resolute, and stick to
them; but Richard was timorous and fearful, and had not courage enough to give
them such a Commission, and so lost his opportunity of settling himself.

In the mean time the King had sent a Commission to Arthur Anslow, now Earl of
Anglesie, to John Mordant, Brother to the Earl of Peterborow, Sir John
Greenvill, Sir Tho. Peyton and William Leg, giving them power as his
Commissioners, to treat with any of his Subjects of England (excepting the
Regicides) and to offer them his pardon, if they would now join together for
his Restoration, and also to assure them of Rewards and Recompense, for any
service done for the future toward the bringing in of his said Majesty, and
that whatever those his Commissioners should promise in his name, he would
ratify and confirm. This was dated at Brussells 11 March 1659. By this means,
and by the wary management of these Gentlemen, the King designs began to thrive
better than formerly, being stil^ betrayed by Thurlo's Agents. So that now
there were several Interests at work, and bringing several design to the Anvil:
The King's for his just Rights and Re^stauration. Richard's for the settling
himself in his unjust Usurpation. The Commonwealths-men to regain the lost
Dominion and Tyranny; and the Army to keep their Rule, and the people in
slavery, and to set up Governor of their own, and that might be only rule by
their Power. These have all their several close Ca^bals, and all strenuously
busy one against another.

Upon a report made by Secretary Thurlo, concernin^ the State of the War
betwixt Sweden and Denmar^ the Parliament send General Mountague with a
conside^rable Fleet into the Sound, but so straightened in Com^mission, that he
did little good. The Military-Coun^^ of Officers were very high, and favored
much by th^^ upper House, which much distasted the Commons and made them Vote,
That during the sitting of the Parliament, there should be no general Meeting
or Council* Officers of the Army, without direction, leave and authority of the
Protector, and both Houses of Parliament. Richard upon this, by advice, sends
for the Council of Officers, and dismisses them. And the Commons proceed to a
farther Vote: Resolved, That no person should have or continue Command in any
of the Armies in England, Scotland or Ireland, etc. that should refuse to
subscribe, That he will not disturb or interrupt the free meeting in
Parliament; of any of the Members of either House, or their freedoms in their
Debates or Counsels. This was transmitted to the other House, who now began to
be jealous of a Combination between Richard and the Commons; against the power
of the Army, and that they sought to weaken and divide them, so that they did
not readily assent to this Vote. Besides, they were not a little displeased at
another Vote of the Commons, concerning their Transacting with them as another
House; which was, That the acknowledgment of that House for another House of
Parliament, should not prejudice the Peer^age of the Land, or their Privileges.
And further the Commons Voted, That they would receive no Message from those of
the other House, but by some of their own number. Neither would they treat with
this upper House, as an House of Lords, but found out a new word, to transact
with them, and that upon trial, and during this present Parliament, which they
foresaw would not be long, ^n continuance. The chief of the Officers of the
Army were for the Protector, but the more numerous being ^ectaries or
Phanaticks were for Fleetwood, Desborow and the Wallingfordians; who had made
them to believe, that Richard had an intent to cast them out of Commissions,
and that he would put the Army into the No^ilities and Gentries hands, who
would bring in the King, and destroy the Liberty of the Gospel they had ^o long
fought for.

Thus all parties being highly jealous one of another, one knew how it would
end; but since the Power of ^he Sword, and the Arbitrary and Tyrannick sway of
^he Army was greatest, it might be well expected they would prove the strongest
party for the rest, having not an Oliver to deal with. However the Commons like
English men, went on, resolving for many good Acts, might they have been
permitted to sit to finish them. One was (as they thought) pleasing to the
Army, that care might be taken for the payment of their Arrears. They began to
assert their Interest in the Militia, and had under their Consideration an Act
for the taking away of the Excise and new Impost, and concerning Customs,
Tonnage and Poundage after three years. Likewise they Vindicated the Peoples
Liberties, by setting Overtor and other Prisoners at liberty, imprisoned by
Oliver, and declared against the illegality of sending men away to Foreign
Plantations, out of the reach of the Writ of Habeas Corpus, whereby an English
Subject could no^ have the benefit of the Law. And a strict Bill was preparing
against it, with an intent to have punished that cruel Jailer Bark stead; also
they had ordered an Impeachment to be drawn up against Butler, one of
Cromwell's Bashaw's, for his many Insolences put upon Magistrates, and for his
breach of all Laws, and his most Tyrannical Actings, equal to any Turkish
Bashaw. The Committee of Inspections also brought in the State of Accounts,
Military and Civil; whereby it appeared, that the yearly incomes of England,
Scotland and Ireland, were Eighteen hundred sixty five thousand seven hundred
and seventeen pounds: and that the yearly issues amounted to Two millions two
hundred and one thousand five hundred and forty pounds: so that there was a
yearly debt contracted upon the Kingdom of 301540 l. double the Revenue that
ever any King of England enjoyed. Besides, to maintain the Conquest of Scotland
more than its Revenue was expends 163619 l. These people acted fairly and
squarely, and might they have sat* would have done much good; they gave one
another no Gratuities, nor Offices, nor granted any Money from the People,
which was more than could have been said of any Parliament for a long time
before them.

These Actings of theirs, and seeing the People began to have them in esteem,
caused now the Protector, as well as the Army, to grow jealous of them, as well
as of one another, so that constant Guards were kept by Richard and the Army,
for fear of one another; and though the House expected a Dissolution, they
could not yet tell which way it would come, or which party to fear most: In the
mean time they give order, for the drawing up an Act of Indemnity to quiet
peoples minds. But on the 22d of April, Fleetwood, Desborow, and other chief
Officers, followed by a great part of the Army, repair to Richard at
White Hall, with a Commission ready drawn, and directed to Fiennes for
Dissolving the Parliament, giving him several Reasons for their so doing, but
for some time he obstinately refuses, and was advised by some of his Confidents
to cause his Troops to be drawn up, and to appear in the head of them; but he
was fearful and irresolute, and the other party violent and insolent; for his
Uncle Desborow told him, that unless he would consent, they would do it
without him, and so by threats and importunities he signed the Commission for
Dissolving this Parliament. This is sent to Fiennes, who twice sent the Black
Rod to the Commons, who scorned the Message, and would not admit him; but
hearing there were Guards of Horse and Foot drawn up in the Palace-yard, and
that there was like to be a force put upon them, they adjourned themselves for
three days, and the Speaker was attended by all the House to his Coach, through
all the Soldiery. Upon this they cause ^he Proclamation, which they had ready
for the Dissolving the Parliament, to be published, and declared them
Dissolved: and thus Richard dethroned himself; and though Fleetwood and
Desborow did not think to ^o so far, as utterly to deject him, not having yet
agreed what Government to set up; yet after this was done, ^he more numerous,
though inferior Officers of the Army would not hear of a Protector any more,
crying that vast allowance allotted for him, would go a great way in the
maintenance of the Army, but resolve for the present that Fleetwood should have
the chief Command of the Army, and to dispose of all vacant Offices till
further order, and till they could consider of a fi^ Model of Government. Thus
Richard fairly is laid aside, and quietly marches off the Stage, not long after
retiring into the Country, having a promise from them, that they would take
care for the payment of his debts, which by reason of his Father's Funeral
charge, were very great.

This was a kind of Interregnum, all was in confusion, and no man knew what to
do. The Parliament after three days repair to their House, but they find the
door^ locked, and guarded by Red-coats, and all the Avenue^ stopped with
Soldiers, who denied them entrance, telling them Richard's business was at an
end, as well as theirs by whose power they sat: and thus ended this Parliament,
who were not able to struggle with armed Power Fleetwood and Desborow had their
hands full, and they had, as they say, pulled an old house upon their heads for
Lambert, tho at first he appeared for Fleetwood and his party, designed nothing
less than the serving of them and since he was not able, but by some other
Authorit^ to get into the Supreme Command of the Army, which he aimed at for a
further advance of himself, by h^ party he caused the Rump Parliament to be
propose again, to a great Consultation of the Officers of the Army meeting at
St. James's, where they were seeking Go^ for a Government, with Dr. Owen and
other Indepe^dant Ministers amongst them, which affected them ver^ much. But
this alarmed Fleetwood and his party, wh^ found the Army mutinous and
troublesome, and not t^ be governed now by their Commands, and the few day they
reigned, the Government lying like an heavy but then upon their shoulders, they
were forced to comply and follow the stream; and in order thereto, the
Protectorian Colonels, as Ingoldsby, Howard, Falconbridg, Bridge Whaly, Goff,
Norton, Smith and others were put out, an^ Commonwealths-men or Rumpers put in
their stead And thus fully ended the Usurpation and Tyranny (...) the Cromwells.

And now we may say, we are come to the third Act of ^yranical Usurpation, and
the many-Headed Monster ^he Rump Parliament arises again and shows it self,
after ^av^ing been so many years defunct. For the soldiers, (...) I have said,
not knowing what to do, send now for ^^eir old drudges to sit again, whom they
had formerly ^^all'd out by the Ears, with so much Infamy and ill ^^nguage, and
after several private Conferences among ^e Chief of either side, and articles
proposed for the curing the Army (for the Rump would sit upon any ^rms) a
declaration of the Army came forth, inviteing is Rump to return to the
exercise of their charge, and ^ust: telling them, in many canting terms, of the
dangers ^^d deliverances God had brought them through, and ^rceiving now with
Grief, that the good spirit among ^^m did daily decline, so as the good old
cause became a proach: and now calling to mind that the long Parlia^ent,
consisting of those members who continued siting (...) the 20 th. of April
1653. were eminent asserters of ^^at cause, and had a special presence of God
with them, ^^d were signally blessed in their work, they judged it ^^eir duty
to invite the said Members to the discharge of (...) i^ trust, for the settling
and secureing the peace of the ^^mmon wealth, promissing to be aiding and
assisting to ^^em, etc.

And now all the Members in Town, the Jailes being ^^rch'd for some of them,
who lay there for debt, get ^^gether on the 7th. of May in the Painted chamber
at ^^stminster, accompanied with their old Speaker, Lenthal, (...) the number
of about 42, who for haste having the ^^ancery Mace carried before them, stole
into their house ^^fore expected; not a little glad to have gotten into ^^ir
old nest, after so many years exclusion. The names (...) these famous men were,
Lenthal, their Speaker, Lord ^^son, Harry Martin, Lisle, Whitlock, Chelenour,
Wise Alder^^ Atkins, Penington, Scot, Holland, Vain, Prideaux, Sr. James
^^rington, Ludlow, Oldsworth, Hazlerig, Jones, Purefoy, White, ^^ry Nevil, Say,
Bennet, Blagrave, Brewster, Serjant Wild, ^dwin, Letchmore, Skinner, Downs,
Dove, John Leathal, Saloway the Grocer, Corbet, Wallon, Millington, the Church
snuffers, Gold, Sydenham, Bingham, Air, Smith, one of the 6 clarks, Ingoldsby
and Fleetwood. These Rumpers being thus reestablished, and addressed by sundry
Addresser from the Counties, which afterward stood them in (...) much stead,
as those which were made before to Rich^^ Cromwell did him; They cause the
Officers of the Arm^ to resign their old Commissions, and to receive new on^
from them, which they thought no small tie; but C^lerates met with Menalcidas,
as atferwards it proved. So^^ of the old Members who had been secluded in 1648.
(...) quired to be admitted with the rest, hopeing that the^ presence might
prevent much mischief, though they h^^ little or no expectation of doing much
good, by reas^ the Armies backing the other party. The names of (...) secluded
Members that now sought for admittance we^^ Mr. Anslow, Sr. George Booth, Mr.
James Herbert, Mr. Pry^^ Mr. Montague, Sr. John Eveling, Mr. John Herbert, Mr.
Ga^^^ Mr. Eveling, Mr. Clive, Mr. Kniqgtley, Mr. Hungerford, (...) Harley, and
Mr. Peck. But these could not be admitt^^ into the house, but were stopped in
the Lobby, on^ Mr. Prynn and Hungerford getting in, and beginning dispute with
them upon the point made them adiourna^ loose a days time: after which
attempting the like, the found a Troop of Horse and two Companies of (...)
Coats, the Keepers of the liberties of England, to k^^^^ them out, so that they
were forced to return, seeing the was no good to be done with these persons, who
be^^^ to follow their old stepts, of trampling the priviled of Parliament under
foot, the ancient Laws and Co^tutions of the land, and the Liberties and Rights
of people. For they forthwith ordered, That such persons (...) ^ofore Members
of this Parliament, as have not sat in this P^^l^ament since the year 1648, and
have not subscribed the Enga^^ment, in the Roll of Engagement of this House,
shall not (...) this House till further order of Parliament. They had the (...)
day of their sitting put forth a Declaration, among (...) other things,
declareing, They would apply thems^^^ faithfully to the discharge of their
trust, and to the setl^^^ the Common Wealth, as might establish the Property
and Liberties of the people, without a single person, Kingship, or House of
Peers, and vigourously carry on a Reformation, that there may be a godly and
faithful Magistracy and Ministry in the Nation, to the praise of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the reviveing and making glad the Hearts of the upright
in the Land. See the holy Cant, and what good words they use, having ^ot forgot
their old Trade of cutting the peoples Throats with good words; nor their old
way of helping one another: for on the 29th of May, they order, That all such
as shall be employed in any place of Trust or Power in the Common^ealth, be
able for the discharge of such Trust, and that they be ^ersons fearing God, and
that have given Testimony to all the people of God, their faithfulness to this
Commonwealth, according to the Declaration of the 7th of May. Here are ^he
Godly now setting up themselves again, in their old Throne of the Good Old
Cause, that had been so abomina^ly distastful to the whole Nation. And
forthwith this ^odly Party, as they nominated themselves, begin apace (...)
thrust one another into all Offices of the State, and for ^^at end they appoint
a Council of State, into whose ^ands they put the dispose of all places of most
Prosit and ^rust; yea of the Command of the wealth of the King^om: These Godly
ones of the House were, the Godly ^^r Arthur Hazlerig, the pious Sir Henry
Vain, the Holy ^an Ludlow, Jones, Sydenham, Salaway, Fleetwood and the ^haste,
Mr. Scot, with Walton, Nevil, Harrington, Chaloner, ^owns, Whitlock, Morley,
Sydney, Thomson, Dixwel, Rey^lds, Oliver St. John's, Wallop, and without the
House were ^^e like Godly Men, Bradshaw, Lambert, Desborow, Fairfax, ^^rry, Sir
Anthony Ashly-Cooper, Sir Horatio Townsend, Sir ^^bert Honywood, Sir Archibald
Johnson and Josiah Berners. These, under the Mask of the Good Old-Cause, begin
to ^^n afresh to their old Villainies, and to the enriching ^^emselves, with the
poor remainers of the spoils of the ^^ple. On the 12th of May, Lambert,
accompanied with ^sborow, Barksted, and 12 other Colonels of the Army, ^^esent
a Petition to the House from the Army, contain^^^ their desires concerning the
Government. That the Government might be a free State and Common Wealth,
without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Peers. That there might be a due
regulation o^ the Laws. That an Act of Oblivion might be passed. Th^^ the Laws
and Ordinances made in the several changes (...) the Government, and not
repealed may be good in Law That the public Debts might be paid. That a
Liber^^ of Conscience be granted to all, excepting Papists an^ Episcopists.
That a godly Ministry be encouraged. Tha^ Universities and Schools of Learning
be countena^ced, and Reformed. That all Royalists be discountenanced and not
suffered to have any place of Trust. Tha^ none may have places of Trust, but
such as are emine^^ for Godliness, Constancy, and Faithfulness to the goo^
Cause and Interest of the Nations. That a provision (...) made for Succession
of Parliaments. That Fleetwo^^ may be the Lieutenant General of the Army. That
t^^ Legislative power may be in the Representatives of the People, consisting
of an House successively chosen by t^^ People. That the executive power may be
in a Coun^ of State, consisting of a certain number of qualified persons. That
the Debts contracted by his late Highn^^ and his Father, might be paid; and
that a Revenue 10000 l. per Annum, might be settled upon the late Pr^tector and
his heirs for ever; and 10000 l. per Annu^ more during his Life, and 8000 l.
upon his honou^^ble Mother during her Life, etc. This was the Arm^^ project of
Government, for which they receive the that of the House by their Speaker, and
are told there a many weighty things contained in it, which they wou^^ take
into their Consideration. And upon this, before they would make any settlement
upon the late Protect^^ they send to him for an Acknowledgment of his submit on
to the Government, which he formally sent them hopes of the Settlement, with a
Schedule of his De^^ But they refuse to pay them, and delay making any
S^tlement either on Him or his Mother, for they were sort of Persons who never
loved to give away more from themselves. Yet to please him, and to remove him
(...) ^^her from them, they give him 2000 pounds to discharge some part of his
Debts, and required that he and all his Dependences remove from Whitehall in
six days. Fleetwood began to grow discontented at this slighting his Bro^her:
but to please him, they Vote him to be the Commander in Chief of all the Armies
and Landforces in England, Scotland and Ireland, for one year; and that he
should have power to Sign Commissions, and nominate Officers under him, as
should be approved by the Parli^ment. But upon the second Reading of the Bill
for this purpose, they altered their minds, and ordered all Commissions for the
Land and Sea-Forces to be Signed by the ^peaker, and delivered to the Officers
Gratis. They also Order the Government of Ireland to be by Commissioners, and
Henry Cromwell to be removed. It Is thought if he had ^^irred at that time, being
much beloved by the Officers ^f his Army there, he might have disappointed this
Par^iament of any further proceedings, but being over per^uaded, he quietly
left his Authority. Scotland was yet trouble to them, which they knew not how
to get into their hands: for General Monk kept all things in so great Order and
quietness there, and was so prudent in all his ^ctions, that they could not
find fault with him, nor mis^^ust him, but believed him really their Friend.

They now begin to proceed vigorously, and cause the Protector's Seal to be
broken, and confirm their own old ^^e: of which Terryl, Fountain, and infamous
Bradshaw are ^ade Commissioners, very busy they are of preferring ^^e another
to places of pro^^it: and about the beginning ^f June, keeping close to their
Good Old Cause of Gain, ^hey o^dered a Bill for public Sales to be brought in
and now White Hall, Somerset House, Hampton Court, and ^^l that Cromwell had
kept for himself, are ordered to be old for ready money. And beginning with the
Deer, ^^ey fall to selling them, by five or six Brace at a time. and that no
Stone might be unturned, for the getting of ^oney, they project to make all
such persons, who had ^ssumed Dignities or Titles of Honor, heretofore
con^^rred on them by the late King, taken away by Act of Parliament, to pay the
sums forfeited by the said Act. Then they offer at an Act for the making all
honor; conferred by Charles Stewart void and nu^l. Then they fall to their old
trade of raising moneys by Assessments, and continue the Excise and Customs to
the 1 st. of Octeber. And that they may hook in all they can, they authorize
the collecting of an Assessment granted by the Parliament 1656 for 3 years, one
year of which was yet behind and uncollected, this was 35000 l. a month on
England, 6000 l. on Scotland, and 9000 l. a month on Ireland: thus they owned
not the authority of that Parliament, yet they owned their money Assessed by
them, and put it into their own pockets. They next revive their. Committee of
plundring Ministers; and make an order for impressing of Seamen which they
wanted. Then they make their speaker Custos Rotulorum of Oxford shire and
Berks. Sir Hen Mildmay of Essex, and several other places to the chief of their
members; following their old vocation of shareing all among themselves. The
Governmen^ of Jersay to Coll. Mason; Cooper, Zanker, Sadler, and Lawrence have
Regiments given them in Ireland. Al^ things seem to submit to their power, and
Fleetwood* Lambert, Desborow, and the rest, are forced to receive their
Commissions from their General Mr Speaker, which though dissatisfied,
dissemblingly they submit to.

It was very much admired that the Parliament should imagine, that the Army
would be true to them, or tha^ any Oaths would hold them, when they had seen
them s^ often break their former Allegiance to themselves, and to their late
Protector: and on the other side, it was as much admired, that the Army would
thus trust this Parliament or Junto, they had so grossly abused: for they could
not believe, that the Junto would not remembe^ their doings, and so provide for
their own security and establishment, as to ruin the Army if they could. But
out of all this evil God was now a forming good. For the Government of the
Army under the Speaker the General, they made 7 Commissioners, namely
Lieutenan^ General Fleetwood, Sir Hen. Vain, Sir Arthur Hazleri^^ Colonels
Lambert, Desborow, Ludlow, and Berry. These were very active in their
authority, placeing and dis^lacing many Officers in the Army, by the
Parliaments consent. All things seem succeed to very fortunatly to them, and
Lockchart Governor of Dunkirk submits to them, to whom they send over Peirson,
Ashfeild, and Racker, Colonels. To Ireland they send their Commis^^oners
Steelones, Thomljnson, and Goodwin, and for the command of the. Army Colonel
Ludlow with the title of Lieutenant General. Ambassadors from the United
Provinces come over to congratulate them, and to offer their emity, as also
from many other places were coming; ^o that they now began to think themselves
sure. They ^ad a mind to new model Monk's army in Scotland and were provideing
to do it, which Monk had timely notice of by his Agents in London, which made
him write to the Parliament, in which he told them, that he thought himself fit
to be credited in the qualifications of his own Officers, whom he assured them,
were honest and ^out men, and for whose fidelity he would be engaged. ^his
letter troubled them, being the first rub they had met with, yet they hoped to
get over it: for they were now more eagre to have creatures of their own ^^amp
in that Army, and think with good words to pacify Monk, letting him know as
to his own Regiment, they would make no alteration. But Monk was not satisfied
with this, but sent up some Officers to so^^cite at London in behalf of
themselves and the rest. ^hen the Junto made an Order, that such Officers as
were in Ireland and Scotland, because they could not receive their Commissions
of the Parliament, should receive them from the hand of certain Commissioners
^amed for the civil Government of both Kingdoms. But those for Scotland were
not yet named, and Monk still continued his old Officers.

In the mean time, Somerset House was exposed to sail, (...) the yearly value
of 233 l. the gross value of mate^^als at 5545. st. 1 s. 3 d. to he had not
under 13 years ^^urchace. And now, that they may seem Kind to poor dick who
began to fear an Arrest for the mourning too^ up for this fathers funeral, they
give him a protecti^^ from all Arrests for 6 months, and take into
consideration how that debt might be paid without charge (...) themselves.

And now these Tyrants who hold their fellow subject in slavery had some
inck'ling of a Cavalier-plot, which made them very jealous of every body; so
that few coal^ meet upon any occasion but they were disturbed an^ some of them
clapped up, for Conspirators. In July they p^^ out their Act of Indemnity; but
none were to have th^^ benefit of this mock Act, but such who being above i^
years of age subscribed an Engagement against a singl^ Person, Kingship and
House of Peers. And all Cavaliers a^ would not take it were to be banished out
of England and if afterward seen there to be proceeded against a^^ Traitors,
and 10 l. reward to the discoverer of suc^ person, or persons. And now the poor
Royalists were in a worse condition than ever after all their losses (...)
sequestrations, decimations, and plund'rings, the^ must either go against their
consciences or leave the land.

The Harvest was great and the laborers few, and i^ August the weather being
sultry hot, many of the Ju^^ were retired into the Country; so that they could
hard^^ make an House: upon which they make a strict Ord^^ that all (rotten)
members attend the House, and that no^ depart without leave of the House. And
now they ord^^ a Fast and day of Humiliation, and to show that they we^^ the
same bloody men they were formerly, they pr^clame J. mordant Esquire. with several
others* Traitors, an^ order the Lady Howard, Sr E. Byron, and Mr. Sumner (...)
be brought to a trial for treasonable designs. Th^^ seize upon persons, horses,
and arms throughout London, increase and double their Guards, stop passengers
the Council of State sitting night and day, and all the M^^litia in the City,
and throughout England were order^^ to be drawn up for their security: for they
were in (...) great consternation about a plot, and began to court t^^ people
in their canting way, by their preachers, one of which said: The Lord stir up
the Hearts of his people, and fill them with unanimity and courage at this evil
time, against the common Enemy, Charles Stewart, and that desperate Crew of
ravenous and unreasonable men, who, should they get in, to satisfy ^he rabble
of his followers would enslave you, and with your goods maintain forraigners,
and the pomp and pride of a luxurious Court, and an absolute Tyranny.

And it was not without cause, that these persons were ^ut into such afear, for
there was a general riseing to have been thorowout England, of all parties
against these Rumpers: for the Presbyterians, and discarded Protecto^ians,
began now to see their slavery, and to tack about, ^eing a necessity of joining
with the Royalists, and some of the greatest amongst them sue for the Kings
pardon, and obtain it, and hereupon they cement with the Ca^aliers, and the
famous plot, or St. George Booth's riseing was then formed; the King lying
privately at Calais ready ^o have come over on the first geting together of any
con^^derable body: But the design was too Early preven^ed, by being some way
discovered to Scot, and some others, and by an intercepted letter of the Lady
Mary Howards, who was clapped up with others about it; M^ssy ^s taken in
Gloucester shire, but being carried behind a Trooper, by a party of Horse in
the night, he took his ^^me, and with a sudden jerk flung the trooper before
^im, and himself into a precipice, whereby he escaped; ^eing better acquainted
with the ways than they were The Rumpers had got some knowledge of the design;
and ^ith their diligence had prevented it in many Counties. ^et Sir George
Booth rose in Chesheir, with a considerable ^artie with Sir Tho. Middleton,
Ma^or General Randulph, ^gerton, and others, they surprise Chester, Liverpool,
Chirk, ^astle, and some other places, declaring only for a free Parliament: so
that they had gotten together about 3000 ^hen, but few well armed: presently
the Rump proclaim ^^em Rebels, and Traitors: and Lambert comes against them
with 3 Regiments of Horse, as many of Fort, and ^^ne of Dragoons, besides a
Train of Artillery. Some of these should have joined Sir George Booth, had they
seen that they had been in a capacity of doing any good, and of proceeding
unanimously in their design; but in stead thereof there fell out unseasonable
contests, between the old and the new Cavaliers, and the private animosities of
the Gentry hind'red much: every one that brought but 30 men would be a Captain,
or take it very ill, so that by their unseasonable punctillio's, the public
interest received damage: and besides, it was no small daunting to them,
finding that the design of Riseing was quasht in all other Counties, nor could
they reduce the Castle of Chester, which Colonel Croxton held out against them.
But so soon as Lambert came up with his forces, the raw men, that made up the
body of the force of Sir George Booth being also ill armed, were soon defeated
at Northwich, August 19, Captain Edward Morgan was slain upon the place;
Egerton fled, but was pursued and taken; Sir Tho Middleton got over sea: Sir
George Booth escaped as far as Newport Pannell; where he was taken in disguise,
and soon after committed close prisoner to the Tower of London, for committing
Treason in learying war against the common Wealth; and Sir Hen. Vane and Sir
Arth. Hazlerig sent to him to take his examination. Lambert retakes all places
that they had taken in, and by an order of Parliament disarmes the Counties;
They send him 1000 pounds, for a gratuity, which he, having other aims,
distributes among his soldiers. Then they give order for a day of Tanks
giving, for their suceess-and presently prepare a new Oath of Abjuration; not
thinking the Engagement sufficient, to be enforced upon the nation; wherein
they are to abjure the whole line of King James, and tell the people they will
now set themselves to do something extraordinary toward the setlement of the
Government. But Money, the Diana of the Ephesians, and the Idol of the filthy
Rumpers, is that they want; and therefore now impose a new tax upon the people
of 100000 pounds a month, confirm the Excise, fine tho^^ that failed to supply
their new molded Militia with horses and arms, and under color of a
sanctimonious care of the poor, they make an inspection into the revenue of all
Hospitals, prohibiting the Masters and Governors of them to renew any Leases.
General Monk upon the riseing of Sir George Booth, was in a readyness to have
marched, but was provented by their being so suddenly suppressed; the Rump had
some jealousy of it, but he had carried his design so closely, and discovered
it to so few, that nothing could be made appear against him. He was not a
little troubled at these disasters, and finding the Junto busy in displaceing
those he most trusted at Col. Daniel; Governor of St. Johnstong, and many
others fearing he should at last be outed by them of his command, and hopeless
of doing good as he intended, he sends up a letter to the Parliament for a
dismission from his command. This letter was, by his friends in London who had
intimation thereof, suppressed, for some time, and his friends in the House so
ordered it, that when it was delivered to the Speaker, the reading of it was
deferred for ten days, till a packet came from Scotland to contradict it: though
Vain and others who hand an incling of it, called often to have this letter
read, which they suspected. But the Speaker being persuaded to it by his
friends, under the color, that if it were read, and that they should take him
at his word, it would cause a general defection in the Scotch army, among whom
the famous Monk was so well beloved, and might ruin their affairs, he being
also true to their interests, though discontented at the displaceing his
Officers: This prevailed with the Speaker, wholly to suppress that Letter, and
so the buisness passed over, the Junto being extreme busy about many matters,

In the mean time Lambert and his Army being astote, upon their late success,
are provideing other employment for the Rumpers. Quos Deus perdere vult,
dementat. The whole Nation had long wished for the ruin of both, and now their
own dissentions will make way for it. Lambert, whom Cromwell had laid aside for
his ambition, had his heart still full of the same. He keeps a mock Fast with
his Officers, an infallible token that some grand design was hatching, he had
still a mind to the Protectorship, and in reference to that he and his
accomplices remonstrate the necessity of the Armies being g^verned by general
Officers, as it was before the Speaker had m^^^ him self General; and requested
or p^^i^ioned that Fle^^wood (whom Lambert doubted not to serve as Cromwell h^^
done, Fairfax) might be made Lord General, and th^^ himself might be Leiutenant
General, and Desber^w Major General of the Horse, and Monk Major General of the
Foot, till he might have a good opportunity of laying him a side. This
Remonstrance being drawn up into form, and signed, was sent up to London to the
general Council of Officers, whether Lambert was privately gone, and by some of
them the Junto came to hear of it, who were startled at it, how ever they diss
mble with the Officers, and order, Ashseild, Cobb^t, and Duc^enseil^ to attend
the House, with the petition, which they did After the reading of which they
adjourned till next morning, when, assumeing the debate, they vote. That t^
have any more General Officers in the Army than are already, settled by the
Parliament, is needless, chargeable, and dangerous to the Common Wealth, and
that Fleetwood should acquaint them with this Resolve. This was ill ressented
by the Army, and though for the present they seemed to acquiesce, (because their
design was not fully ripe) and helped the Junto, in a friendly manner, to
devour a Thanksgiving dinner, at the Cittys co^^ and charges, which was then
governed by Ireton and Tichbourn, and their gang; yet it was not long before
they presented a new Address to the same purpose, on the 5th. of October, by
Desborow and many Officers attending him. To this the Rumpers very gravely
answer, checking them for not submitting to their judgment formerly declared in
that case: but knowing that the army Officers would not be so satisfied, and
expecting no less than another interruption they passed an Act against raising
of monys on the people without their consent in Parliament, declareing all such
persons as should assess, levy, collect, gather, or receive, contrary to this
Act, to be guilty of high treason, and withal ^ac^^^ing and disanu^^^ing all
Orders, Ordinances, and Acts, made by any pretended authority, since O^v^^
^u^^^d them out of doors in ^653, unless allowed and co^^^^^d by them. And now
having given such a ^^l^^ng blow to the soldiery, and made the br^^^^ (...),
they ^^^^d that the Commissio^^ (...), D^^^^^^w, Ber^^, Kels^^ ^sh^^ld, (...),
and Cr^^d (...) Colone^^ excepting the (...) who was a Ma^^^^ to be (...); and
c^n^^^ure 7 Commi^^^^^ners to govern the A^^ie* Viz. L^^^ren^^r G^ne^^^, C^^^
(...), L^^ute^^^ G^neral Ed^^^d ^ud^^w, G^^^^al (...) Monk, Sir (...) Col.
(...). W^^^^^ Col. H^^b^^^ Mor^^, (...) more of them to (...) to this by a
priva^^ (...) from Gen^ra^ Monk, (who (...) of all that hap^ned, and of which
(...) made his advantages) which was, that if the Parliament would be ^^^o^ute,
he would asserting th^^ (...) auth^rity against the Ar^ie, he would assist them
in it, and if (...) thereto he would march into England in their d^^^nce. This
made them very brisk, and now be^^iving there might be some opposition made by
the Army, they cause Morly's and Messel's Regiments to be drawn up into the
Palace yard, for a G^ard to the Par^iament. It was now high time for Lambert to
look about him, and not being idle, thought it best to play his part wh^^e he
had power: and therefore he, on the 13 of October with the other discharged
Officers, draw a part of the Army into Kings street, and possess themselves of
all the avenues to the House, and the Speaker Lenthal going thither at his
usual time in his coach, was stopped, and after some expostulations, was forced
to return. And thus their sitting was prevented. Both parties of the soldiers
kept their stations most part of the day, and every minute ^t was expected they
would have engaged, whilst the amazed inhabitants dreaded the issue: But
Lambert having effected what he intended, procured an Order from the Council of
State, then sitting at Whitehall, for all to draw off to their quarters, which
was accordingly done, and so this periculous adventure, of a second time
unnesting these Rumpers was finished.

Thus you see, some more bold touches of Arbitrariness, Usurpation, and Tyranny
in this second, though short, Reign of these Rumpers, who sat only from the
7th of May to the 13th of October: in which time they discovered themselves to
be the same Covetous and Rapacious Tyrants they were before in all their
Actions, and had they time, would have appeared to have been as bloody; for
they were preparing to bring the late Delinquents, as they called those engaged
in Sir George Booths Rising, to a Trial, and they had got Lists of most of the
persons, Nobility, and Gentry throughout England, that were engaged in it,
whose Estates were to be confiscated and sold, and out of whose Estates they
promised to satisfy the Soldiers, and to gratify themselves, which was always
the chief thing aimed at, but being thus interrupted as you have heard, they,
in haste, marched off the State.

And now again. the Kingdom is without any kind of Civil-Government, for the
Usurpation was divolved on a few Officers, who whilst they Reigned, Ruled by
the boundless Arbitrary Power of the Sword; which confused Authority, that
lasted not long, we may call the fourth Act of this our Tragical Usurpation
upon the freeborn Englishmen; Yet still under the notion of Liberty.

The next day after the turning forth of the Rumpers, diverse of the Chief
Officers of the Army meet at White Hall, where the Soldiers soon grow Friends,
only Colonel Morley was turned out of Commission for standing, so stiffly
against the Wallingfordians: and now for the management of the Government, and
the Affairs of the Commonwealth, reduced to an Anarchy, they chose ten
persons, till further Order, which were Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborow, Whitlock,
Sir Henry Vain, Sir James ^^rington, Major Salway, Berry, Sydenham and
Archibald Johnston a Scotchman, known commonly by the Title of the Lord
Warriston. The Officers now Lords Parramount, meet the same day at
Wallingford-House, where they give to themselves what they could not obtain
from the Juncto by their Addresses, a General to their own mind, Fleetwood,
whom they nominate Commander in Chief, and Order Lambert to be next, and
Desborow Commissary General of the Horse, and that all the other Officers in
the Army should be constituted by Sir Henry Vain, Fleetwood, Desborow, Ludlow,
and Berry, and took care for the drawing up Articles of War, for the good
Government and Discipline of the Army. Barrow they dispatch into Ireland, with
Reasons for what they had done, and Cobbet on the like Errand was sent to
Scotland, where he was committed to Custody. For noble General Monk, whose
Study to repare his Countries Breaches, was as great as Lambert's to oppress
it, only waited for a fit opportunity, and judged this to be a most convenient
time to bestir himself, in so honorable a Cause, and whom the Officers of the
Army in England had neglected to put into their Council of State, believing he
would, as he had hitherto, still submit to the Change of the Government; and by
his stopping of the Packets they had not heard as yet, how he had forbid the
getting of Subscriptions in his Army, as they had done in England and Ireland.
Though his Design then was the bringing in the King, and the restoring the
three oppressed and enslaved Nations, from the Arbitrary Rule, of Tyrannical
Usurpers, of the scum of the people; and also from the power of the Sword and
Arbitrary Sway of the Army; yet he was very close in all his Carriage, and few
were acquainted with the thoughts of his Heart: but taking this opportunity to
oppose the strongest Power, the Army, he seems averse to their doings, and
appears wholly concerned for the Rump, or Parliament so called; and therefore
that their Emissary might not corrupt or do any hurt among his Soldiers, he
secures him, and by Letters signifies his dislike of the Armies proceedings in
England; tells them of their violation of Faith to the Parliament, and declared
his Resolution of endeavoring to restore them to their Powers; this arrived to
them on the 28th of October in the Evening, which put them to much Confusion.
Fleetwood, Desborow, and Lambert meet about it, and about midnight send for
Clarges, to expostulate with him about it, who was wary, and could say little
to it; however they order him with one Col. Talbot to repare presently to Monk,
that they might prevail with him for a Treaty, to prevent effusion of blood, of
which Clarges was glad, being desirous to get out of their power fearing a
worse treatment.

In the mean time, the Council of Officers meet at Whitehall, in order to
Setlement as they called it, and of frameing a Government, that should be
lasting and against all attempts whatsoever: but having found most of the
Gentry of England, to be one way or other involved for the King's Interest,
they were projecting to seize all their Estates, and to divide them among their
own Party, and so to put the riches of the nation into the hands of persons
irreconcilable to Monarchy; and then to have set up Harrington's model of a
Common Wealth, or ruled themselves by the sword, or thought of some other way,
they knew not what: This advise if followed, had been very fatal, and might
have laid such a foundation of slavery, never to have been subverted. But God
had otherwise designed: on the 16 of the same month October, the
Wallingfordians choose a Committee of Safety as they termed it, consisting of
23 persons, who were Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborow, Whitlock, lately made keeper
of their great Seal, Steel Chanceller of Ireland; Sir Hen. Vain, Ludlow,
Sydenham, Salaway, Strickland, Berry, Lawrence, Sir Jo. Harrington, the Lord
Warreston, Alderman Ireton, Tichbourn, Col. Hewson, Cleark, Bennet, Lilburn,
Thomson, Cornelius Holland, and Henry Brandrist. These, without any President,
in any Age or History, were empowered, by the army Officers, to call
Delinquents to account, and to bring them (...) Justice, to give Indemnity to
all that had acted for the Common Wealth, since the year 1649. to oppose and
suppress all Insurrections, to treat with foreign States and Princes. To r^ise
the Militia in the several Counties, to dispose of all places of Trust, and to
make Sales and Compositions of all Delinquents Lands, and to execute all the
powers of the late Council of State; that is, to do what they please. Surely
never any free Nation was so abused and imposed upon by a company of false
pretenders to Sanctity?

The news of General Monks actions in the North, alarmed them, at their first
siting, for he had casheired all those Officers in his Army; who would not
join with him, and imprisoned some of them; and, had seized Berwick, and
several others strong Holds, and was likely to march into England, which put
them to their wits ends, knowing how highly the people were incensed against
them; and about the same time, as a presage of their dying power, Brad, shaw
who had passed the traiterous Sentence upon the King, departed this life, the
last day of this month, to receive sentence himself from the King of Kings.
However this Committee with a new name, put forth a Declaration, in with they
null and make void the pretended Orders, Acts, and Declarations of the late
Junto, made on the 10th. of that instant October, and on the Teusday and
Wensday following; and likewise all Acts, Orders, and Proceedings thereupon, in
as full and ample manner, as if they had never been: See now what may not these
people do, when they can null and make void the Acts of that power themselves
adored, set up and submitted to, not long before calling them Saints, Godly,
Upright, and Religious men, persons fearing God, and seeking the good of the
Nation, yet now vacate their Acts, that were displeasing to them, or restrained
their power. Yet the same men declare a liberty to all the freeborn men of the
Nation, whom they had thus enslaved, and with the next breath ^^^mise to
maintain a painful Gospel-preaching Ministry, to be encouraged by some other
way, less troublesome than that of Tithes. Then they declare against a single
person, Kingship, and House of Peers, and that the Common Wealth shall not be
governed in a Military way, but by the Civil Government of the Committee of
Safety, who shall prepare such a Form of Government as shall best suit with a
free State, or Common Wealth: then end with a long cant of godly and scriptural
expressions, of their sincerity and uprightness, to Cajole the godly Party, and
to make them think well of their Saintlike Actions.

This done, in order to Government, in the beginning of November, the Safety men
nominate Fleetwood, Lambert, Vane, Ludlow, Desborow, Hewson, Holland, Salaway,
and Tichburn to be a Committee, to prepare a form of Governenmt, in the way of
a free State, or Common Wealth; and Whaly, Goff, Carill, and Barker, are
dispatched to General Monk to seduce him to join with them, and to do as they
intended, to tyrannize over a free born people; and arbitrarily to murder them
for the avoiding of effusion of blood; and the Officers at London wrote to his
Officers to the same purpose, remonstrateing with much zeal, how necessary
brotherly Union was to uphold their Domination. General Monk, who had good
Intelligence from England, seeing the Northern forces were in a posture to
resist him, and Lambert comeing down to them with more Regiments out of the
South, thought it his best way to win time by procrastinations, and therefore
desires a Treaty, which was readily accepted of by those in England, and upon
this he sends up, as Commissioners, Col. Wilks, Leiut. Col. Clebery, and Major
Knight, to tranfact with the like number of Officers at London. These had power
only to treat, but not to come to full agreement without orders, but they
exceeded their Commission. By the way meeting Lambert at York, they gave him so
full satisfaction in hopes of concluding all things amicably, by this Treaty,
that he advanced no farther northwards. The Commissioners on both sides meet at
London, and Wilks not following his directions, went beyond his Commission, and
being overforward to end the Treaty, concluded upon certain Articles very
distructive to Monks designs. They were briefly these. 1. That the pretended
title of Charles Stewart, or any other clameing from that family should be
utterly renounced. 2. That the Government of these Nations should be a free
State or Common Wealth, and not be a single Person, King, of House of Lords. 3.
That the Ministry should be maintained and encouraged. 4. That the Universities
should be reformed and countenanced, 5. That the Officers and soldiers, and
other persons, on either side, should be indemnified for things past, and all
unkindness between them buried in perpetual oblivion. 6. That the Officers
which were made pris'^ers in Scotland, should be forthwith set at liberty. 7.
That the Armies be presently dispers^d into quarters, 9. And a Committee of 19,
whereof to make the Quorum, should meet about qualifications for suceeding
Parliaments. 9. That the proportion of money out of the Assessments of England,
formerly appointed for the supply of the forces in Scotland, be duly paid. The
ratification of which Articles by Monk's Commissioners, strangely amazed the
City, who had had private assurances from the General of other things, and made
them not to believe some later letters sent them, to continue their Hopes, but
flung them away at fictitions, and caused the messenger to be imprisoned. Monk
was also as much perplexed when he had the news of it, and when his
Commissioners returned imprisoned Wilks, for going beyond his Commission, and
by advice from his Officers demurred to one clause in the 6 Article, which was,
That all the Officers displaced by General Monk, might be in a capacity of
being restored to their commands, and all those put in by him, in their places,
to be removed; by which means he should ruin and disarm himself. And therefore
The treaty was not wholly disaprov'd of, but wisely Monk desired, that two more
might be added to the former Commission as, to meet with the like number of
theirs, to put a more absolute ^eriod to their differences; for that there were
certain poyn^s to be treated on not yet agreed to, and others wanted
explanation. This letter subscribed by Monk and many of his Chief Officers, and
sent to London, put Fleetwood, Lambert, and the rest to much confusion* seeing
Monk thus refuse to ratify the Treaty: and thereupon many expostulatory
Letters passed between them* which gained time, the thing Monk intended: he
having sent letters and messengers into Ireland, from whom he had favorable
returns, which encouraged him to proceed. And this also put new life into the
City, who now began to revive their Hopes. He also had privately letters from
the Lord Fairfax, and other persons of quality in England, of their resolutions
of standing by him; though upon all this, he still kept himself reserved, and
very few knew his intentions, which made many of his friends very doubtful of
him: but by this artifice and closeness he effected his business, and got into
the opinion of the Rumpers, whose quarrel only he seemed to espouse: And being
thus encouraged by his actions, nine of the old Council of State get privately
together, viz: Scot, Morley, Reignalds, Wollop, Nevill, Hazlerig, Walton,
Cooper, and Berners, who send a letter to Monk, assuring him, that his service
was highly acknowledged by them, in asserting their Liberties, and also was
extremely well resented by all the sober and uninterested persons in the
nation, that love a Common Wealth; assureing him they would adhere to him, and
stand and fall with him, and that they would assist him with all their might,
for the removeing of the force was put upon them by the English Army, that
they might sit in freedom; praiseing his wisdom and conduct, and the like. This
was no small encouragement to the Officers in Scotland, for they might
rationally conclude, that their party was increased in England, or else that
they would not have so openly acted. This beforementioned Council of State,
framed a Commission, wherein they constituted General Monk absolute Commander
in Chief of the Armies in England and Scotland, dated 24 of November sealed
with their seal, and given to Clarges to send by a safe messenger to Monk.

And now General Monk, upon Lamberts advance into Northumberland, ordered a
considerable part of his forces toward Berwick: and then caused an Assembly of
the Nobles and Gentry, to convene at Edenburg to whom he made these proposals.
That he having a call from God and man, to march into England they would
therefore, during his absence, preserve and secure the peace of that Nation.
That they would supply him with some money for his undertakeing, which he
engaged upon his honor should be to their satisfaction; and that if any
troubles should arise, they would assist him in the suppressing thereof. That
they would advance, and raise what money they could for his entreprise before
hand. To these they returned answer by their chairman, the Earl of Glencarn;
that they were not in a condition to engage for preserving the peace of the
Country in his absence; because they wanted Arms: Yet they would endeavor it
with all faithfullness: That they thought it not prudent to engage themselves
in a war, which if unsuccessfull would be their ruin, or if prosperous they
knew not what advantage should thereby accrue to them. But to show their good
opinion of his fair intendment, they were content to levy moneys, and to
advance a year's Tax beforehand. Hereupon the General empowered the Lords and
Gentry to arm themselves; and some of them he privately satisfied with his
design, and thankfully accepted the year's Tax. But yet to win time, he holds a
second Treaty with Lambert's Commissioners at Newcastle upon Time; where he
still insisted with a seeming zealousness, upon the readmission of the Rumpers:
And this produced its wished effects. For whilst Lambert trifles away his time
unprofitably, Monk posts himself at Cold-stream, a notable pass upon the Tweed,
where he kept his head Quarters, and being winter, where Lambert could not,
without danger, come to disturb him. And on the other side Hazlerig, Morly and
Walton get into Portsmouth, where they prevail with the Governor Col.
Nathaniel Whetham, and the Garrison, with the Town, to declare for he Junto,
against the Safety men and Army Officers, and no Contribution could be gotten
from the Country; who armed themselves with the late Act of the Rumpers before
their exclusion by Lambert; and the Counties every where bodly meet to draw
Remonstrances; but especially the City was so highly incensed, that the Lord
Mayor, Allen, was hardly able to restrain them from flying to arms; which so
perplexed him that not knowing whom to please, and fearing bad effect if he
should displease either, he went to Wallingford House to represent the postures
of affairs to the Gang, to try if he could persuade them to reason: But he was
affronted all along as he past in his coach, in the streets, by the Common
people, who called him a deserter, and told him he was not like Sir William
Walworth in the time of King Richard the second; which was a notable evidence
of the inclination of the Generality.

In the mean time, that we may see and be astonished at the impudence of these
men, or monsters, called the Safety men: they had ordered a Committee (whom we
nominated before) as mad as themselves, to sit at White Hall, to find out a new
Government; whose wits being not so accute as their swords were quickly
confounded in the building of their Babel. Sometimes they would have a Senate,
and another time they were for Conservators, which should be much like the
Rumping Custodes, to keep the Liberties from the people: But at last to please
the Nation, this Mounthain brought forth its Mouse; a Vote viz: That a
(convention which they styled a) Parliament qualified according to their
humors, and elected by persons so qualified, should be called and appointed to
sit in, or before February next. But in the first place 7 fundamental
principles are agreed upon, by the Wallingsfordians, which must needs be as
unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians. These are, 1 That no
Kingship shall be exercised in these Nations. 2 That no single Person shall
exercise the Office of Chief Magistrate here. 3, That an Army be continued,
maintained, and conducted, so as it may secure (that is imprison) the peace of
these Nations, and by no means be disbanded, nor the conduct thereof altered,
but by the consent of such Conservators as should be appointed. 4, That no
imposition may be upon the consciences of any but the Cavaliers, 5, That there
be no House of Peers. 6, That the legislative and executive power be distinct,
and not in the same hands. 7, That the Assemblies of Parliament shall be
elected by the people of this Common Wealth duly qualified.

But these Gimcraks would not satisfy at all. But the Treaty still being in
hand, they were lulled into a security, and began, after the old manner of the
Rumpers, to share among themselves the Chiefest Offices and places of Trust and
proffit; and to his end Fleetwood, Desborow, Sydenham, Saloway, Holland, Clerk,
and Blackwell, or any two of them are appointed Commissioners of the Treasury,
and to manage the public revenue, with power as large as they could wish or
desire. But being disturbed with the peoples drawing up of several Petitions,
and getting Subscriptions, issue forth a Proclamation against all such
petitioning, and call their petitions undue and dangerous papers, and prohibit
all persons to subscribe any such papers, and if offered to suppress them, and
to cause all persons so endeavoring to get subscriptions to be apprehended,
upon account of being enemies and disturbers of the peace. Thus you see, these
very men, who had fet examples of this nature so frequently by geting
Subscriptions to Petitions and Remonstrances, to the Authority then in Being,
could not endure it, now it twarted their humors and interest; and what in
themselves they indulged and pleaded for, as their right, they will abhor and
will punish in others. Mind therefore the Justice of these men.

But this Prohibition of theirs did but the more enrage the people, and the
Londoners, especially the Apprentices, vere in an uproar, and ready to mutine;
whereupon Hewosn the one eyed cobbler, has order with his Regiment of foot, and
some horse to march into the City: where he killd a Cobbler, and one or two
more, and wounded several, so that the Citizens shut up their shops; yet rather
madded than daunted thereat, there were continual bickerings between them and
the soldiers; neither could Desborows, canting speech at Guild Hall work upon
them, but that sometimes multitudes would flock together and affront the
soldiers, and though they were often dispersed yet they would gather head again.
And now the Common Council, in which at that time were many stout and honest
men, began to give ear to the Apprentices petitioning for a free Parliament;
being thereunto encouraged by an offer of 3000 valiant Seamen to aid them, from
Vice Admiral Lawson: who in this juncture was come up the Thames, and had
surprised all the Forts and Blockhouses in the way: Vain and Salmon were sent
to confer with him, but nothing would prevail with him, unless the
Wallingfordians would readmit the Rumpers to sit again.

And besides all this, Hazelrig, Morley, and Walton, at Portsmouth, had so
wrought upon those Regiments which were sent against them, that they all came
over to their side. The Safety men and Officers at White Hall perceiving
themselves to be generally hated and slighted, and wanting money to pay their
soldiers and uphold their interest, being withal beset on every hand with
enemies; both City and Country being ready to rise upon them, found a necessity
of submiting to the Rumpers, for fear, lest while the two Currs strove for the
bone of Government, the Royal Lion should come in and destroy them both; they
finding the pulse of the whole nation (tired with the various fits of arbitrary
sway) beating toward the return of the King, and to their old and equal way of
Government; and the late reconciliation between France and Spain (in which his
Majesty was very instrumental) seeming to presage some danger to them; the
Chief of them then go to the Speaker Lenthal, and cry peccavimus; where
tenderhearted Fleetwood meekly weeping, gave a full testimony of his sorrow
for his reiterated defection, saying: That the Lord had blasted their Counsels
and spit in their Faces ('it is his own rhetoric) and therefore desires, him and
the rest of the members, to return to the exercise of their Trust, for the
Government of the Nation. And the same day the soldiery being drawn up in
Lamolns-l^n-feilds owned the Junto again for the supreme authority, now they
saw they could keep it no longer themselves. The Speaker went presently to the
Tower of London, the care of which and Government whereof, he committed to Sir
Antony Ashly-Cooper, Mr. Weaver, and Mr, Berners, and two days after, being
the 26th. of December, this never dying Rump resumed their old places; and thus
ended the Government of the Army, which lasted only from the 13th. of October
to the 26th. of December following.

And now, almost tired with relateing, tho briefly, the several sorts of
Arbitrary and tyranical usurpations, we are come to the last Act of our Tragedy
or Trage-comedy since it ends happily, and after the trial of so many ways of
Government, almost to the ruin of the Nation, they return to the good old way
of Monarchy; as the only just, equal, and legal way of Government for these
Nations, and for the ease and free-dom of the people But let us pursue our
story, and see the last struggle and gasp for life of this Monster, or Dragon,
of a Common Wealth ruleing by their Arbitrary wills, backed by the power of the
sword, of a standing Army, who like the Turks Janizarie Keept both the people
and their Masters in awe; tho they knew the one, was not able to stand without
the other.

Soon after this revived Junto, to their great joy, had met, Hazelrig, Morley,
and Walton, came to their Companions, being attended from Portsmouth by those
forces, that were led by Desborow to reduce them; who being then deserted by
them, hasted back to London, and from thence to St. Albans; whence he wrote an
humble letter to his restored Masters, craveing pardon, and telling them, that
he had procured his own Regiment, which was at that time quartered there, to
return to their Obedience. From S. Albans, Desborow went into York sheir to
Lambert, who was now in a declineing condition.

General Monk finding things go to his mind in England now broke of the treaty
he had yet continued at York, and had planted his army very advantageously
along the River Tweed, on the Scotch side, in such a prudent manner, that in a
few hours he could have all his Forces together; and lay so well posted, that
the enemy could not make their way to him without extraordinary disadvantage:
and if Lambert should have attempted to have got to him by the way of Carlisle,
he would by that means have gained several days march before him toward
London; being also well assured, the Country would come in a pace to him.
Lambert was about 13000 strong, and far superior to General Monk (in numbers)
especially in Horse; which made that famous and experienced commander decline
engageing.

The Rumpers, as soon as got together, order Popham, Thomson, Scot, Okey,
Ashly-Cooper, Alured, and Markham, or any 3 of them to be Commissioners to
Order, Direct, and Conduct the forces of the army; these write to Lambert to
disperse his forces, but they were doing that themselves before, and the Irish
Brigade that came over to his assistance under Redman and Bret submitted to the
Junto; a pardon being sent to Lambert, and for all others that should submit to
them by the 9th. of the same month: by the example of the Irish Regiments,
diverse other Regiments also forsook Lambert, who headed by the Lords Fairfax
and Faulconbridg lately came to them, seized York, for the Junto. Lambert upon
this marches from the borders Southward, his soldiers forsakeing him so fast,
that by such time as he came to North-Allerton, he had not above 50 Horse
remaining where upon both he and they concluded to lay hold on the offer of
pardon, and so dispersed, which being done, those at York likewise departed to
their respective Quarters. Windsor castle also was surrendered to them by the
means of Col. Ingoldsby: all things thus prospering, they fall upon the Oath of
Abjuration or Renunciation of the whole line of King James, which they h^^ been
hammering at before, but now nominateing a Council of State; they order that
none of them should Act, till they had taken this oath, which was now formed
more strict than ever; and it was also proposed, that all the member of the
House should take it: but this was strongly opposed by many, for that secretly
diverse of them had sought their pardons of the King, and seeing that he would
inevitably come in the wisest and least obnoxious of them, endeavored to save
themselves, and to be instrumental in his Majesty's Restoration, among whom
were Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, St John, Ingoldsly, Morley, and others. But the
Oath was this: I do hereby swear, That I do renounce the pretended title of
Charles Stewart, and the whole line of King James, and of every other person,
as a single person, pretending or which shall pretend to the Crown or
Government of these nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland or any of them,
and the dominious and territories belonging to them or any of them. And that I
will by the grace and assistance of almighty God, be true, faithful, and
constant to the Parliament and Common Wealth, and will oppose the bringing in
or setting up any single person, or House of Lords and every of them in this
Common Wealth.

A third part at least of their Council of State refused this Oath, saying it
was a snare and a confining of Providence, and so were not permitted to sit.

The secluded Members, would not yet give over their Right of sitting, and tho
they knew and had declared, that the Parliament was legally dissolved by the
Death of the late King, yet they, upon the resitting of the Rumpers, require
admission, whereupon it was again resolved that they did stand duly discharged
from their sitting as members of that Parliament, and that writs should be
immediately issued out, for the electing of new members in their ^laces. Thus
they are still provideing to perpetuate themselves. And then falling to their
old trade of divideing ^he spoil, and to let them see how much they were
offended, they order the Estates of Sr Georg Booth (a ^ecluded member) and all
his adherents to be forthwith sold.

General Monk who kept a correspondence in Ireland, ^eceived the news that his
friends had surprised Dublin, Castle, and that most of all Ireland had declared
for him, and the Parliament to sit again, but he was surprised at the actual
siting again of the Rump, having other designs in his head, than their
restoration, and therefore thinks it now high time to march, though in the midst
of winter, and great snow: yet on the 2 of January he begins to set forward,
resolving for London. In the mean time the Junto knowing that both City and
Country were highly exasperated, who would not be satisfied with any thing, but
the restoreing the old members, or a free Parliament, and having also had
experience of the Armies stubbornness, and aptness to mutiny, therefore to
provide for their own Safety, which was very dear to them, they make Morley
Lieutenant of the Tower, and ordered a letter of thanks to be sent to General
Monk: which was accordingly done, and which the General received being upon his
march; and caused it to be read to his soldiers at the head of their
Regiments, whilst they stood up to the knees in snow. This letter was but cold
comfort, and they feared lest it should have hind'red their march; for the
soldiers longed to be at London, and the Messenger told Monk, that Lambert's
forces were dispersed, and all things quiet, yet the General would not
understand him, but continued his march Southwards, for he said he would see
them settled, and take care no more force should be put upon them: and by a
messenger of his own, sent them a letter, much to the same purpose, with a
return of thanks for the honor they did him, and of professions of fidelity to
them; and that they being in an unsettled condition, he thought it best to see
them settled, etc. with several other things, which he recommended to them, both
as to the soulderie, and the people. The General had left Major General Morgan
behind in Scotland, with sufficient force to keep that nation in quiet, who
were now in great expectation of the issue of Monks march into England. All the
way as he marched he was highly caressed by the Gentry, and addressed by the
Counties for a free Parliament, to whom he was very reserved though civil, so
that many scruples and doubts arose concerning him some suspecting him a
Royalist, others a Rumper, and others believing he intended to set up himself
in Olivers place. The City likewise sent their Swordbearer to complement him,
and to offer him their service, and then by 3 Commissioners requesting the same
thing, the readmission of the secluded members, without any previous Oath, or a
free Parliament, either of which they knew would bring in the King, though they
durst not yet speak out. Monk observed all, and though inwardly glad, he knew one
error might spoil all, therefore he still kept his mind to himself, and
answered them, that he would see the Parliament freed from all force, and the
House filled, and good provision made for future Parliaments. But the Rumpers,
who had also received the like declarations from the Country, doubting what
those caresses might produce, sent two of their subtlest members, Scot and Luke
Robinson, in show to wait upon Monk, but in effect to watch and observe him,
and to give them an account of all his actions, for their Jealousy of him
daily increased. The General came to St. Albans upon the 28 th. of January, and
there made an hault, sending from thence a letter to the Junto, which he had
framed beforehand as Nottingham, in which he desired to have his quarters
assigned him, according to the list he had sent, ready drawn in his letter, and
that those forces that were now there, might draw forth and march to several
Quarters, far enough a sunder, as he had also by his list enclosed appointed or
desired, telling, them he did it upon mature consideration, of the present
posture of their affairs, that those places he had assigned to them, who were
to march out, might be secured for them, he having intelligence of their
distempered condition, and that he presumed with submission, that it would not
be for their service, that those soldiers then in London lately in Rebellion
against them, should mingle with those of his approved faithful Regiments,
till they should, by their new Officers put over them, be reduced to a more
assured obedience to them. Colonel Morley's and Colonel Fagg's Regiments were
excepted, he having an assurance of them. This letter was sent by Colonel
Lydect, who was allied to the Speaker. This letter caused a violent dispute,
which lasted from 8 in the morning; till 12 at noon, the result of which was;
That the Parliament did agree with the distributions of the soldiers according
to the Lists, and that the Soldiers be forth with distributed accordingly. The
General was not a little glad to hear of this, for by this he did his business,
and it was of great consequence as to his design, in thus getting the sole
possession of London and Westminster into his power: Fleetwoods army marched
out of London, having a months pay assigned them, but this did not satisfy,
nor keep them from grumbling, and some of them mutined at Somerste-house, but
at last were fain to follow their fel-lows. The Junto would have given the
General a 1000. pounds a year out of Sir George Booths estate, but he refused
it; and then they grant him St James's park dureing their pleasure.

Upon the 3d of February, having sent his Lady and family before him, he
marched into London, with his Army, entering by the way of Grays Jnn-lane and
so through Chancery lane and Temple bar, into the Strand, where, about Somerset
House he was met by the Speaker, where they complemented one another, and
because he would not fall more under the suspicion of his Jealous Masters, he
is content to accept of the Lodgings they had appointed for him at White Hall.
Goeing to the Parliament House on Monday the 6 of February he received the
thanks of the Junto, and afterward made a speech to them, standing at the back
of a velvet chair they had placed for him within the Bar, in which he thanked
them for the Honor they had done him, and among other things, after he had
give them an account of Affairs, he humbly desired them to satisfy the
expectation of the Nation, in the establishment of their Laws, Liberties, and
Properties, o remove the Conceit, which the people had of their in^^ (...)
ending to perpetuate themselves, by their determining ^thir own Session, and
for providing for future Parliaments, and the fewer qualifications the better;
entreating them to use the Nobility and Gentry civilly, and telling them that
the Phanaticks were as dangerous as Cavaliers. This speech of his was no good
Music in their ears, and some of the hasty rash ones among them, had much ado
to forbear interrupting him, however, though galled, they dissembled a while, for
that the City still continued refractory, and had passed a Vote in Common
Council Feb. 8. Not to pay or levy any Taxes till they had a full and free
Parliament. Upon which the Junto thinking this to be highly derogatorie to
their Authority, the Council of Sat order the General, the next morning to go
into the City with a part of the Army, and to seize on 11 of the most active
of them, and to pull down their Posts and Chains, to unhinge their Gates, and
take away their porcullissis. The Generae was surprised at this order, knowing
it would render him odious to the Citizens, and suspected that they designed by
this means, to make an utter breach between the City and Him, that they might
tie him the surer to their own party. He was one of the Council of State, but
did not sit among them, because he denied to take the Oath, yet he went to
them, and debated the business with them, til midnight, divert but he found
nothing he could say would their resolutions. They also ordered him to quarter
his soldiers upon them, till he had brought them to obedience. He saw he was
now forced to obey, or quit his Command; and to do the latter at this time,
would spoil all he had labored for; and openly to make an interruption had
then been equally dangerous, being not yet fully assured of his soldiers:
wisely therefore he resolves to obey these orders, and by this means to try the
spirits of the soldiers, and of the Citizens, and also to quash the suspicions
of his Masters. His Commission being now expireing. The next day therefore he
marches to Guil-Hall, and peremptorily demands the Assessment. They plead Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right and the Act of the Junto made the day before
Lambert turned them out, that they were not to pay Taxes without their Consent
in Parliament, which they had not, for they had no Burgesses in the House. Upon
this refusal, the General seises 9 of the 11 they had appointed him, and to the
amasement of the Citizens, who had thought him their friend, and to the
soldiers, who obeyed his orders very unwillingly. He pulled down their Posts
and Chains; and applications being made to him by some of the most sober of the
Citizens, he could not but testify how ungrateful the Action was to him, but
that he was under Masters, whom he was bound to obey, but promised he would
write to them the next day about it, as he did, giving the Junto an Account,
how he had obeyed their orders, as to seizing the persons they had commanded
him to seize, and had pulled down their Posts and Chains, but had not as yet
meddled with their Gates, because the Common Council were appointed to meet that
morning, and he doubted not, but that all things would be composed to their
satisfaction, and the Assessment paid. But the Junto, upon the reading his
Letter, grew higher and more violent than before, and without other answer,
sent him a peremptory order, not only to unhinge their gates, and take away the
porcullisies, but to break them all to pieces: and likewise ordered, That the
present Common Council of the City, should be dissolved, and declared them null
and void, ordering him not to let them meet. Vexed at his noble Heart the
General was, to see himfelf, made the Junto's Executioner; but least they
should at this time vacate his Commission, which he thought they sought at
present for; he fully executed their Orders, to the great Grief of the City,
and for a time to the utter loss of their Affection, and he perceived also the
temper of his own soldiers, who many of them utterly refused; though they told
him they would dye for him in Battle: but this was a work unworthy of
soldiers, to a City that was their friend. He as secretly rejoiced, to find
how well they agreed, though he made show to the contrary; but this was the last
service he ever intended to do this Junto: for on the 10 of February, his
Commission was at an end, and he expected they would have renewed it, and
returned to Whitehall, but in requital of this service, his ungrateful and
ungracious Masters fearing too much greatness in any one Man, instead of
renewing his Commission, they had made him a Colonel again, and joined 4 others
with him, equal in Command. This was an hand some occasion for Monk now to
begin to unhood himself, and being wisely managed, might be a good means of
induceing his Officers to join with him in his business. He represents the
matter to them, and they unanimously conclude, that the Junto did intend at
length to supplant them all, and impose upon them, and the whole Nation. The
same day the City Gates were beat down, Praise God Barebone, with a rabble of
Phanaticks, present the Junto, with a Petition, that none might be employed in
Civil or Military Offices, until they had taken the Oath of Renunciation, and
had the Thanks of the House.

The name of those joined in the Commission with General Monk were, Hazelrig,
Morley, Walton, and Alured, 3 of which were to be a Quorum, and when it was
moved by Monk's friends, that he might be always of the Quorum it was carried
in the Negative, which so exasperated the General, that having tried his
Officers, he secretly ordered all the Army to be drawn up, and having prepared
a Letter, signed by himself and the Chiefest Officers of his Army, in which
they Complain of the Junto's Countenanceing Lambert and Vain, and permitted
Ludlow to fit with them, tho accused by Sir C. Cect of high Treason they
conclude that by Friday next, they should issue out writs for the filling up
the House, and when filled, should rise at their appointed time to give way to
a free Parliament.

The Letter they sent to the Junto sitting, and immediately march into London,
to shake hands with the City: on the 11 of February the Army is drawn up into
Finsbury feilds and the General being invited to dinner, by the Lord Major, who
at first was very shie, not knowing how to believe what some of Monks friends
had told him of the General's Letter to the Junto, and of his resolving to
declare for a free Parliament, but before they parted, the General himself gave
him, and the rest of the Citizens, such satisfaction of his Integrity, that,
overjoyed, they caused the soldiers to be feasted, and Quarters in the City to
be provided for them, the Bells in all the Churches to ring, and at night
Bonfires to be made in every street, declareing for a free Parliament.

In the mean time the Junto read the Generals and his Officers Letter, which
caused a very great disorder in the House: however they thought it best to
dissemble, and secretly resolve to ruin Him, if they can, though openly they
Vote him the thanks of the House, and send away Scot and Robinson to give it
him, and to let him know they were about qualifications for members to be
Chosen, for the filling up their House. But when they heard of what was done in
the City, the Rumpers gnashed at it, and angry they were, that they could not
take revenge on the subscribers of the late Remonstrances for a free
Parliament, whose Estates they earnestly longed to be dealing with. And now in
the nick of Time comes a Declaration from Ireland, where they had secured Sir
Hardress Waller a Rumper, which was of the same nature with those of the
English Counties; but more bold and resolute, speaking their Minds freely, the
Lord Broughill being one of the Chief promotors of it. His Excellency having
waited some days for an answer to his Letter, and receiving none, but what Scot
and Robinson brought him, who durst not stay in the City, for fear of being
stoned; and finding nothing done in reference to the filling the House, he set
himself about considering some way to dissolve the Junto, without force or
violence. In this juncture, many of the secluded Members were in and about the
City; Some of whom addressed themselves to the General, who procured a
Conference between ten of them, and ten of the Junto; where, the one party
challenged admission as Members of the House, unjustly forced from it before;
the others refused it, unless they would confirm all that was done since by
them, or at least engage as they had done against a single person, and House of
Lords; but when they could not agree about these points; Monk who was present
both times, (for they had two meerings) clearly discerning more of
self-interested wilfulness than any Reason in what the Rumpers urged, a day or
two after sent for the Secluded, and demanded if they were of the same mind,
and resolved not to engage against a single person, to which they answering
affirmatively, and professing to be immovable therein, he got above fourscore
of them together to Whitehall, where recommending the care of Religion, and the
State to them, and telling them how suitable Physic a full and free Parliament
would be for the crazed body of this Nation, he told them the House was open to
them, and prayed for their good success, and so on the 21th of February they
went and took their places in the House; which was managed so secretly, that
the Junto knew nothing of their coming, till they appeared; which so surprised
them, that they could not tell whether they had best sit still, or leave their
places. The moderate among them stayed, but the grand sticklers for a Common
Wealth, knowing now they should be out-Voted; and that they should be able to
do no good, or rather further mischief, quitted the House.

Whilst these things were transacting, the Junto had endeavored all ways
possibly, to have gotten Monk out of the City, that they might have had him in
their power; inviteing him to fit in the Council of State, and had sent Colonel
Alured to persuade him; but he was too wise to trust them, for he had secret
intelligence of their intentions of sending him to the Tower, or of serving him
worse; for they foresaw their own ruin: he excused himself by his care of
secureing the City by his presence, who were full of disturbance, and ready to
mutinee. But now the secluded Members, having gotten in, eleven years after
they had been kept out, being double the number of the former sitters,
out-Voted then as there was no interruption. They had long been standers by,
and had seen more than the Gamesters, andd now they mean to improve their
animadversions and experience to the doing of a great deal in a little time.
They fall to work presently, where they were abruptly forced to break off
December 1648, confirming their Vote made then by another now. That the
Concessions of his Late Majesty, were a sufficient Ground to proceed on, for
settling the peace of the Kingdom. Hereby Vacateing all that had been done
contrary thereunto, dureing their Recess. Brave Monk is by them constituted
Captain General of all the forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and He
with General Mountague, made Admirals at Sea. Sir William Waller is made
Lieutenant General of the land forces: Colonel Edward Rossiter General of the
Horse, and Vice Admiral Lawson Continued in his Command. Severel Gentlemen
committed by the Rumpers order were then released, and among others Sir George
Booth, who took his place in the House, and the City Gates, Portcullisses,
Posts, and Chains, were ordered to be repair d at the public charge. Then
they provided to secure the Nation by two seasonable Acts, the one for an
Assessment, the other for the Militia, and past some Acts concerning Ministers.
Lastly they consult about dissolving themselves, to which the Rump party, were
very unwilling, and therefore many of them intended to be absent, when that
business should be debated, because they would not give their consent: But the
others smelling their design, watched a convenient time, and issuing out writs
in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties, etc. for a full and free
Parliament, to convene on the 25th. of April following, saveing to the House of
Lords their Rights, notwithstanding the Commons in this Juncture had been
necessitated to proceed without them: They upon Friday the 16th. of March 1659,
when the greatest number of the Rumpers were present, dissolve themselves by
Act. Thus was an undeniable Period put to this Tragical long Parliament, by
their own Vote, though it was legally ipso facto dissolved before, by the Death
of King Charles the 1st. whose writs had summoned them together.

But before they dissolved themselves, they settled a new Council of State, to
govern in the intervall of the Parliaments, and abrogated the Oath of
Abjuration, and the former Council. The chief of these were General, George
Monk, General Mountague, Mr. Annesly, President, the Lord Fairfax, Sir William
Waller, Mr. Hollis, Pierpoint, Rossiter, Saint-Johns Widdrington, Sir Anthony
Ashly-Co oper, and others, to the number of thirty in all, who behaved
themselves with much circumspection, setting forth a Proclamation against all
disturbers of the Peace either in Action or Speech, and tendering an Engagement
for peaceable demeanor, to be subscribed by such as they suspected, which
Lambert refusing was committed to the Tower, disarming the Phanaticks every
where, they purged the Army of Schismatical Officers and Soldiers, taking care
of the Garrisons. Overton, a Fifth-Monarchy-Man, was removed out of his
Government of Hull, and Colonel Charles Fairfax was placed in his Room:
Colonel Rich made some stir about St. Edmunds-bury; but Colonel Rich.
Ingoldsby quieted his Soldiers, and seized him, and thereupon was restored to
that Regiment, from whose Command the Walling for dians had put him by, when
they degraded young Cromwell.

Thus ended the Arbitrary and Tyranical Usurpation of the Rumpers, by the great
providence of God, and the good Genius of Englands means, in raising up the
Great and Renowned Monk to be a Savior to his Nation, and to reduce the
Monarchy, to its legal, ancient, and happy state again, and that the torrent of
violence and Arbitrary Tyrany, that had so variously overrun and spoiled the
Land, might be lost and sunk into the Earth, whence it sprung, and the Stream
of Government, bounded by Laws and ancient Customs, might again run in its
right Course and ancient Channel, from whence it had been diverted. And now I
should conclude, having fully finished my Draught, or Picture of Arbitrary and
Tyranical Government, which I have taken from the Life, being the true History
and Resemblance of the Monster, now so much feared, and which no Man that is a
lover of the Peace of this Nation, and that has his Sense and Reason, can
behold without Horror and Indignation, and resolve in himself to suffer much,
rather than to run the hazard of raising up this Ghost, to the rain of three
Kingdoms and the Lives and Estates of so many persons as must be devoured for
daily food, to maintain the Life of such a Monster; the remembrance of which,
moved by the sight of this very Picture of it, is enough to affright, I shall
therefore only, as the last touches to this piece, show you as it were the last
struggle or gasp for Life, of the overthrown Monster, and so finish my Design,
and that in few words.

Lambert, whether by neglect, or Treachery of his Keepers is not known, escapes
out of the Tower, and soon after appears in Arms, with a party of his Cashired
Officers and Soldiers, once more to embroil the Nation, but he was proclaimed
Traitor, and the whole Nation beginning to hope for a settled Peace, were
unanimously bent to aid the General (if need were) against him: He had chosen
Edg-Hill near Keinton in Warwickshire for the place of his Rendezvous, hopeing
it would prove as Ominous to the Royal Interest, as it had done before; and in
all probability, there would have been a great Confluence of all sorts of
Sectaries to him in a short space, and he was not without hope, that if the old
Soldiers were sent against him, many of them would turn to him, but he was
eagerly pursued by some parties of Horse and Foot, and Colonel Charles Howard
had almost overtaken him; but it was Colonel Ingoldsby's, good hap to light
upon him near Daventry in Northamptonshire, where Lambert was surprised with a
strange Consternation, and durst not engage tho he was nothing inferior in
numbers to the others, which his followers observing, some of them went over to
his pursuers, others slunk away and himself taken by Colonel Ingoldsby the 22d.
of April 1660. and with Colonel Cobbet, Major Creod, and Captain Haz erig, son
to Sir Arthur, was sent up to London, and two days after, passing by Hide-Park,
he saw 20000 Horse and Foot of the City Regiments, and Auxiliaries, there
Training, with diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, trailing Pikes
voluntarily among them, and the same day he was committed to the Tower.

General Monck Marching into London.

Monck and his Soldiers pulling down the City Gates posts and chains.

A free Parlyament Voted the King to be sent for

The K: and 2 Dukes Riding (...) through London attended etc. Arbitrary
Government, abolished.



This ended, toward the settling of the Peace of the Na^ion. His Excellency had
wrought his Officers to declare, they would with him acquiesce in the Resolves
of the Parliament, appointed to meet the 25th of April, 1660. who accordingly
met, the Lords and Peers in the upper-house taking their places, by virtue of
their Birthright, who soon, according to the whole Nations expectations and
Prayers, restored his Majesty to his Right, his Crown and Dignity; the Nobility
to their ancient Birthrights and Privileges, the People to their property,
freedom, and liberties, and the Laws to their ancient course and boundaries;
the three Kingdoms rejoicing and a long Peace, quietness and tranquillity
succeeding; which yet is grateful to the memory of all Loyal and good Subjects:
therefore however of late our old Jealousies and fears are increased by our
secret Adversaries, yet let all people remember what has past, and by viewing
this Picture of the most horrid and devouring Dragon, called Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Usurpation; let them abhor it, and beware of falling under the same
power, and into the same snare by any specious or colorable Pretense
whatsoever; and continually pray that the Peace of the Nation may be continued,
with the Life of his most Gracious Majesty, whom the King of Kings preserve
both in the Throne and in the Hearts of his people. Amen.

Upon the late STORM, and of the DEATH of his HIGNNESS ensuing the same, by
Mr. Waller.
WE must resign; Heaven his great Soul does claim
In storms as loud, as His Immortal Fame;
His dying groans, his last Breath shakes our Isle,
And trees uncut fall for His Funeral Pile,
About his Palace their broad roots are tossed
Into the air; So Romulus was lost:
New Rome in such a Tempest mis't her King,
And from Obeying fell to Worshipping.
On Oeta's top thus Hercules lay dead.
With ruined Oaks, and Pines about him spread;
Those his last fury from the Mountain rent,
Our dying Hero from the Continent
Ravished whole Towns; and Forts from Spaniards reft
As his last Legacy, to Britain left:
The Ocean which so long our hopes confined
Could give no limits to His vaster mind;
Our Bounds inlargment was his latest toil;
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle;
Under the Tropic is our language spoke,
And part of Flander's has received our yoke.
From Civil Broils he did us disingage,
Found nobler objects for our Martial rage,
And with wise Conduct to his Country showed
Their ancient way of conquering abroad:
Ungrateful then, if we no Tears allow
To Him that gave us Peace, and Empire too.
Princes that feared him, grieve, concerned, to see
No pitch of glory from the Grave is free.
Nature her self took notice of His death,
And sighing swelled the Sea, with such a breath
That to remotest shores her Billows rol'd,
The approaching Fate of their great Ruler told.
Upon the late STORM, translated out of Mr. Waller's fine Piece of FLATTERY.
THen take him Devil, Hell his Soul does claim
In Storms as Loud, as his King-murthring Fame.
His cheating Groans, and Tears, has shak'd this Isle,
Cleft Britains Oaks, for Britains funeral Pile.
Now at his Exit, Trees uncut are tossed
Into the Air; So Faustus once was lost.
Rome mist her first, so London her last King,
Both killed, then wept, and fell to worshipping.
We in a Storm of wind our Nimrod lost,
King'd him, then Sainted him, then cursed his Ghost.
In Oeta's flames thus Hercules lay dead,
In Worcesters flames, he on his raving Bed.
He some scragg^d Oaks, and Pines, from Mountains rent,
This stole two brave Isles from the Continent.
Ravish^d whole Towns, and that his Spanish Theft
As a cursed Legacy to Britain left.
The Seas with which our hopes God had confined.
The Devil made too narrow for his mind.
Our Bounds enlargement was his greatest toil,
He made our Prison greater than our Isle.
Under the Line our enslaved cries are spoke,
And we and Dunkirck draw but in one Yoke.
From broils he made, he best could dis-engage,
From his own head diverts our purchased rage:
And by sine State-art to his Country showed
How to be Slaves at home, and Thieves abroad.
Confederate Usurpers quake to see
The Grave not under the power of Tyranny.
Nature shrunk up at this great Monster's death,
And swelled the Seas with much affrighted breath.
Then to the Bounder'd Shore her Billows rolled
The approaching fate of Europes troubles told.
ENGLAND Still freshly lamenting the Loss of her KING, with several of her
Dearest CHILDREN; which have been beheaded, hanged, and shot, by O. CROMWELL,
and the Long-Parliament. In a Brief Collection of the remarkable Passages that
have happened to this Land, from the year 1640, to the year 1660.
IN sixteen hundred thirty nine, we then
Did think, and say we were unhappy men,
Because that we in many years before
Had not a Parliament; nay I Will say more,
We then did murmur, and we did complain
Of many pressures, we did them sustain:
Ship-mony then a burden was unto us,
O Lord, these taxes, we cried, will unto us;
This coat and conduct money, is unlawful,
Lord, sent a Parliament, to make us joyful:
Shall we be made such slaves unto the will
Of such a King, that seeks out lives to kill,
And our estates will take away by force,
Yea, our Religion, which of all is worse,
A Parliament Lord send us, was the song,
Of rich and poor, the old, and eke the young.
Well, God did hear us, and into the heart
Of our late King, did put it, (to his smart)
To call a Parliament, as I remember,
For to begin the third day of November; (1640.)

Which is now nineteen years ago complete,
And does sit still; with grief we may repeat.
Then presently the Taxes down were voted,
Which were so great, as I before have noted:
Sear-chamber then, and high Commission Court
Were then put down, it is true what I report.
Then did the King grant unto them to sit,
In Parliament, so long as they thought fit:
And then for a Triennial Parliament
An Act was made, mistakes for to prevent.
Then joyful were we, this same news to hear,
Rung Bells, made Bonfires, as it did appear;
But now behold, consider, and look back,
And see how we have been put to the wrack,
For first a hundred thousand pound was raised,
To give the Scots, at which we were amazed,
For their good service done some time before,
This recompense they had then for their lore:
Besides in sixteen hundred forty six,
Just twice as much the Parliament did fix,
And give unto them, 'cause they should deliver
The King unto them, the like I think was never.
Thus was the King by our dear Brother sold,
For no less money than before was told;
Likewise an hundred thousand pound, scarce less
Was raisd, the Irish Rebels to suppress,
And after that, above three thousand pound,
Was raisd for Soldiers, which was quickly found,
And listed were, to fight against the King,
What think you now, was it not a goodly thing?
The fifty subsidies, were raisd, beside
Pole money also, which men did deride;
And other Sums of money freely given,
Tot set out Ships for Coals, they were so risen;
Then did they order every one to bring
His Plate to Guild Hall: to the very Ring,
Bodkin, and Thimble, brought to maintain the cause,
All which was done; and that with great applause,
And those that would this order not obey,
The twentieth part of his Estate must pay.
Such was the greedy Appetite of those,
Who seemed our Friends, but I think were our Foes:
Besides all these; yet see how great vast sums,
From every Hall and Corporation comes;
And other places which if I should name,
'Twould add, no glory to them, nor good fame.
Then was there not a far more worse device
Laid on our Backs, a thing called the Excise,
For we Excise did pay for meat, and drink,
And all things else, that they upon could think;
Besides at Brainford, when there was a fight,
We sent the Soldiers with such great delight,
Cart-loads of victuals, with great store of Clothes,
With Shirts, Shoos, Hats, and many a pair of Hose,
And money too, by some was freely given;
By those who thought thereby for to gain Heaven;
All which was done, as they said, with intent,
To bring the King unto his Parliament,
And make him glorious, and a happy King,
This was the cry, though they meant no such thing;
Likewise in sixteen hundred forty three,
The Parliament did order there should be,
The worth in money of a good meals meat,
For every one that was in the house did eat,
For half a year together it was paid,
Oh was not this a very gallant traid?
Likewise in sixteen hundred forty five.
'Twas ordered also every man to give,
A penny a week of every Family,
For one whole year together, it is no lie;
And this was sent poor Ireland to relieve,
If those that ordered did not us deceive:
Then after this they laid on us great Taxes,
To hew us down as if it were with Axes,
And sixty thousand pound a month, a year,
They made us pay, as it did well appear,
And some years ninety thousand every month was paid,
For a whole year together undenayed;
Besides, a hundred twenty thousand pound,
Was paid a month by all, a whole year round,
All which to many millions does amount,
Far geater than the wit of man can count:
And whosoever did not pay his Seasement,
Was either plundered or imprisoned without releasement,
And by such means, some thousands are undone,
And knew not how, or which way for to run;
And children likewise are made furtherless,
That knew not how their wants for to express;
With multitudes of widows, that none knows
The number of them, or their wants disclose.
Besides the maimed, that want hands or feet,
And wounded so, 'twould grieve one for to see it:
And yet besides, the thousands that are slain,
Which cannot be numbered, for it is in vain.
Then burning houses followed outright,
With castles wasted, and demolished quite:
And Towns and Cities are by wars undone,
The soldiers spoiling all that they had won:
And every place is so impoverished,
For want of trade, to buy the people bread.
The Churches likewise they were much defaced,
And made like stables, wherein horse were placed:
They took away the vessels every one,
And ornaments, I think they left not one.
Thus did the Churches their privileges lose,
And sects, and errors were brought in to choose:
And God's true worship it was laid aside,
And in blasphemies they did take a pride;
And toleration of such things that is evil
Was given them, the like did not the Devil.
Thus have you heard the truth of things in brief,
And yet not half, nor do I think the chief
Of what they did; in twelve years time they sat,
But if you will mind, the next shall tell you what.
The first beheaded on the Tower Hill,
Was Earl of Strafford, (14 May 1641.)
sore against his will.
(23 December. 1641.)
Sir Alexander Carew was the second,
That lost his head, for so it must be rekon'd:
And Captain Hotham after him succeeded, (1 Jan. 1644.)

His Father also next day after bleeded.
(2 Jan. 1644.)
The Bishop then of Cantorbury next
That was beheaded, (10 Janv.
after he preached his text.
But now my heart does fail, (1644.)
the next to tell,
That lost his life, since which we ne re, were well:
O Gracious God, was ever such things known,
(30 Jan. 1648.)
A King so killed by subjects of his own.
May that accursed act of killing Kings,
Drink deep the dregs of the infernal stings.
Lord Capel next, Duke Hamilton another,
The Earl of Holland also was the the other:
(9 March)
These three together at Westminster were headed,
For being true to the King, (1648.)
this Parliament did it.
Next Colonel Andrews, (22 Aug.)
and then Sir Henry Hide,
Both on Tower Hill were headed, (1650.)
and there dyed;
(4. March 1650.)
And Captain Bushel in that very place,
(29 March
Was headed there when he had run his race.
Next Mr. Love, and Gibons, (1651.)
in one day,
(22 Aug. 1651.)
Were both beheaded of a truth I say;
Lo here 14 to the dozen in 12 years,
Beheaded were by these sad Parliamenteers,
Besides what others, in far remoter places,
To us unknown who never saw their faces:
Next you shall know, how many we have seen
Hanged in the City, and shot to death have been.
First, Challoner, and Tomkins, in one day,
Were hanged in London, (5 Jul. 1643.)
this is truth I say,
Tomkins at Fetter-Lane, the other at the Change,
Thus did their madness round about us range,
About some four months after was another,
Hanged at the Change, (19
whose name I mean to smother,
And then another, ( July 1650.)
whose name I forgot,
(28. Nov. 1643.)
At Westminster was hanged for I know what;
(1 Ap^il 1644.)
He was a Spy they said came from the King,
And he must suffer therefore in a string:
The next in order, though not he himself,
Was Sir John's Greenevils picture, (1 March 1643.) foolish Elfe,

That hanged was at the Exchange; for why?
Cause he left us, and to the King did fly:
Then Poyer, Pitcher, Lockier, (29 De. 1648.)
went to the pot,
These three at several times, (21 Ap. 1649.
to death were shot
All these near London, (27 Apr. 1649.)
and near thereabout,
Were hanged, and shot to death, which they found out;
Besides all others throughout the Land,
If It could be known, we should amazed stand:
They having sat twelve years, then comes Cromwell,
And turns them out; which Act, it does please some well,
But he his part does play, as did the rest,
And falls to heading, hanging, like a Beast.
The first was Gerard, (10 July 1654.)
that did feel the smart
Of his keen Axe, which went unto the heart.
(8 June 1658.)
Next Doctor Huit in that very place,
With Henry Slingsby Knight of comely grace;
Both in one day, but who can tell for what,
'Twas never known, nor never we shall that.
(10 July 1654.)
Then Mr Vowell was hanged at Charing Cross,
(10 Aug. 1654)
And Marston also hanged to his friends loss.
(7 July 1658.)
But after all comes Betterly on the stage,
Who in Cheapside was hanged in Cromwell's rage,
And afterward his bowels burnt in fire^,
'Cause they against him, He said, did conspire.
And then another hanged was in Tower street,
And at the Change another, (9 July 1650.)
we did see it.
These eight by Cromwell in the City died,
But God does know how many more beside
Were hanged, and headed within these three Nation^,
Of whom I cant make any true relations.
POSTSCRIPT.
FRom the 3 November 1640. to the 20 April 1653. when Oliver Cromwell turned out
the long Parliament, there has been: 29 Thanks giving days for several
victories obtained by them against the King: and at least 15 days of
Humiliation, besides the monthly Fasts, which was once a month for very near 8
years, being cast up together, is at least 90. which in all make 105. And from
the time of the^r turning out, to the 25 December last 1659, there has been 10
Fasting days and 6 Thanksgiving days, so that the total number of the Fasting
days to the 25 December. last is 15. and the Thanksgiving days are 35.

In the late wars has been killed above 100 Lords and Knights. above 400
Officers, besides the common Soldiers: above 1000 Ministers put out of their
places and died of grief.

FINIS.

