AN ACCOUNT OF Monsieur De Quesne's Late Expedition at CHIO; TOGETHER With the
Negotiation of Monsieur Guilleragues the French Ambassador at the PORT. In a
Letter Written by an Officer of the Grand Vizir's to a Pacha.

Translated into English

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tonson at Grays-Inn-Gate in Grays-Inn-Lane: And
Jacob Tonson at the Judge's-Head in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street, 1683.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord MARQUESS OF HALLIFAX Lord PRIVY SEAL, etc.
My LORD,
IT is not that this little Piece is thought to deserve so Great a Patron, that
it presumes to wear your Lordships Livery: But as Epicurus neither Worshipped
the Gods for any good he expected from them, nor feared them for any harm they
could do him, but Adored them for the Excellency of their Natures: So for the
same reason is your Lordship chosen the Object of this Dedication. It is a
Novelty, so may be endured; short, therefore cannot be extremely Troublesome:
And relating to Affairs of State, knows not where so Naturally to apply it
self, as to your Lordship, whose steady Maxims, and direct Counsels, have in a
short time put out of breath, a Headstrong, Pampered, and unruly Faction, more
then all the Doublings, Windings and Turnings of some Apish Politicians could
have done in an Age. Your Services to the Crown, and Merits from the Nation are
so great, that Time and the Memory of them must be of equal Durance: And but to
mention them here, would appear gross Flattery; a Crime, which could the
Dedicator be guilty of, it must be merely for guilt sake; since Fortune has
placed him below Hope, and his small Philosophy beyond Fear: But your
Lordship's Admirers being no fewer then all those who wish well to their King
and Country; He presumes in that huge Crowd to place himself, being

Your Lordships Devoted Servant.

TO THE READER.
IT seems to be a kind of Law of our Natures, that our Minds should be often
busied about things, which do not immediately, or perhaps not at all, relate to
our own proper Happiness, which is an Extravagancy we find nothing but Man
infected with; Other Creatures desires, and endeavors being confined to their
Necessities or Pleasures: But this afflicting quality of ours, never appears so
much a Disease amongst us, as when it is employed unseasonably in matters of
Government; nor never, I believe, was more Infectious in one Nation, then it
has been lately in ours. To search for the Cause, or prescribe a Remedy, would
in a Man of my Station only prove it Epidemical, and my self full of the
Tokens: But however being one of these thinking things, I have followed the
Dictates of my Being. And meeting with this Letter in French, have made the
Sense of it English, I had no purpose in doing so, but that being retired and
indisposed, I had nothing else to do; I publish it, as well to show the Pride
and Insolence of Humane Nature, when Ignorance is possessed of Absolute Power, as
the Dissimulation, Fraud, and Corruption of any Sect, who pretend to be God's
Elect, or only chosen People, which the Mumelans do: Such ever claim, by the
Title of Gods Children, a right to every thing; and consequently think nothing
unjust that puts them in possession of their own. There may too by this piece
(as the French Translator says) be seen, the perfect manner of Negotiating
with the Turks; their Pride and good Fortune; and the Judgment of God upon the
Christians, who contribute so unreasonably to the increase of a Power which
tends to nothing so much as to their own Destruction. The Government of that
People, though Arbitrary, shall not be censured by me, since I never read they
employed the Terrible Mute and Bow-string on any Man, who like my self,
pretended to no Power amongst them. Nor indeed can I discern the difference of
being Nooz'd without noise or with it: for if I am unjustly to be put to Death,
Twelve Mutes or Twelve sworn Enemies to me or my Principles, who can talk me to
a Hangman, are all one. And I have cause to believe some wretches we have heard
of, might have been making Silver Bullets, and charging Guns without Powder
there till Doomsday, before their Names had been Registered amongst unfortunate
Statesmen: But it is no miracle in England, that poor crawling Creatures should
be rankt amongst Politicians, and busy their no Brains about Turning of States
and Kingdoms; since it is to such, under the notion of the People, that all our
half-witted Republicans Appeal, in their whims of Reformation: But that
Pestilence being a little stopped at present, I hope will never in my time so
rage again, as to be the most devouring of Plagues, which it proved to be
within these last Forty Years. So

Farewell.
A LETTER FROM One of the Principal Officers of the GRAND VIZIR, Written to a
PACHA, Concerning the Business of Monsieur Guilleragues.
HAVING prostrated my Face to the Ground, and being Rubbed with the dust of the
Feet of my very good and happy Lord; to whom God will grant a prosperous End: I
shall give him an Account of what has Arrived to the Glory of our most
Invincible Emperor, King of Kings, Mehemet Khan; to whom the Divine Bounty
will subject all the Countries of Infidels, to place him at last in Paradise,
with his Glorious Ancestors.

You know, my most fortunate Lord, that the French Infidels, whom God will
Extirpate; a restless People, being never quiet, came to Chio, under the
Command of an Old Captain, in a brave Gallion, Guarded by five or six others,
where they Fired during four or five hours on the Vessels of Tripoly in
Barbary: They also damaged the Fortress and the Mosques; nor had they then
ceased, but that the Cannon of the Faithful (with Bodies of Brass, and Wings of
Draggons Vomiting Flames and Bullets) accomplished upon them this Expression of
the Noble Scriptures; He threw Fear into their hearts.

Terror having in this manner seized on these Accursed; to whom Hell must be
the last Stage; they were no longer able to use open Force; yet ceased not
however to keep their Station before the Port of Chio, stopping all Merchant
Ships that brought assistance to the Tripolines; there sailing up and down like
Madmen, making mighty Threats. But their Brains seemed to be more settled,
when the Capoudan Pacha, Turkish Admiral.
absolute Lieutenant to the Emperor of the seven Climates, over the Seas of
this vast World, had honored the Rode of Chio, by bringing thither the Galleys
of the Emperor of the Earth, whose Glory shall be perpetual.

This Sovereign of the Seas, whom God will always favor with Winds and
Happiness; for the propagation of Muslemanisme, and the Grandeur of the
Invincible Rewarder our Master, had no sooner stopped his Conquering and
Formidable Course, by casting Anchor, but the French Admiral (that the end of
his days which are not far off might be happy) sent one of his principal and
most trusty Captains, to deliver his Submissions and Respects, as well as to
discourse him of some important Affairs; and to assure him, of his desires to
do nothing that might make the least breach of their Amity, which had for more
then one Age been Established, between the Great and Sovereign Emperor of the
habitable World; and the Greatest Emperor of all the Potentates of the belief
of the Messia; to whom be Salvation.

This Ambassador, an able Man, and worthy so fair an Employment, having rubbed
his Face on the Vest of the Lieutenant Sovereign of the Sea; and well acquitted
himself of his Commission, appeared not at all astonished, when after the
welcome of the Safa Gueldy, pronounced with that gravity and decency, peculiar
to him, and which makes him be obeyed by Sea; he heard these words: What sign
of Amity do thou bring us, to have rashly affronted the Mosques, where we
Adore the great God of Heaven and Earth, without giving him Companions, or
defacing his Worship by Idolatry: And where is the proofs of that Respect you
boast? Is it to have Fired on the Fortress of the Emperor, refuge to the
Princes of the World? You may perhaps be able to batter down a corner or two;
but God by the Faith of Abraham, which we defend, and from whom we draw our
Original, can from those tumbling Stones raise many Thousand invincible
Defenders. Tell thy Commander, I advise him as a Friend to have recourse to the
Imperial Clemency, by procuring the French Ambassador to supplicate for him at
the Port of Felicity.

The Christian Captain Accused the Tripolines of all the misfortune, who being
Enemies to the French, violated on their Merchants the surety of the
Capitulations. Then promising to consider of the Advice had been given him, he
entreated the Capoudan Pacha to Negotiate at the Port, as well concerning those
of Barbary, and the damage at Chio, as about the Audience of Monsieur
Guilleragues; desiring him besides, to dispose the Tripolines to make Peace.

During this, the Grand Vizir (who is the Rule and Order of the World, and who
can fully finish all Causes, to whom God perpetuate his Grandeur, and redouble
his Power) was in dispute with the French Ambassador about the Sofa; Chief
Customer.
it being the Grand Dowanier that Conducted that Affair, who likewise served
himself of other Persons therein, which were the French Interpreters: It being
below the Dignity of the Emperor of the World, that one of his considerable
Officers should go to an Ambassador, unless it were to conclude a business.

It was a long time, that this Mediator had amused the Ambassador, by sending
him Discourses, that the second generally destroyed the first; repairing those
again, perhaps by a third, which just signified nothing: Sometimes the
Interpreters would tell him, That the Dowanier saluted him, and said, he had
good hopes: The next time they would bring him word, That he appeared Shagrin,
tho he failed not to salute him; and perhaps might have some particular Affair
of his own that disquieted him; but that he had too insinuated, that the
Ambassador did himself no good Office by being so Obstinate in the Point of the
Sofa; Two last Gand Vizirs.
for that Kieupruli the Father proceeded as the Vizir pretends: And though
Kieupruli the Son did give the Sofa during his latter time, it was at
Constantinople, where he was in a manner Incognito; and not at Adrianople,
where indeed there is no Sofa in the Chamber of Audience: Another day would
bring him news, That the Dowanier appeared very merry, and did not cease his
endeavors, but returned him thanks too for the Wine he sent him daily.

He likewise sent his Interpreters to the * Kaihaia of the Vizir and the Lord
of the Clerks, Chief Secretary.
who bid them Salute the Ambassador on their parts, and assure him, they took
pains for him; saying too, That the Dowanier was his sure Friend, as well as
themselves.

The Interpreters coming another time from these Officers, would tell the
Ambassador, that they could not yet find a proper time to speak to the Vizir,
because that Minister is ever busied about the great Affairs of the World;
which tumble in upon him every moment of the day; sometimes like the Waves of
the Sea, assaulting him with fury; but are by him resisted, and drove back, as
by an unshaken Rock, surmounting all difficulties by his Grand Genius, which
penetrates and resolves, with ease, the most Mysterious and Doubtful Matters:
That it was necessary, great Affairs should precede small ones, and that this
of the Ambassadors, would have its time; for which he should not be impatient.

The Ambassador knocked too at other Doors, as at that of the Chief Gardiners;
who likewise amused him, and found his account in this Negotiation: He
attempted the Mediation of the most Illustrious Governor of Constantinople.
Kaimmakam, formerly Kahaia or Chief Secretary to the Sovereign Vizir, who
appeared with a frowning Countenance to the Interpreters, with difficulty
permitting them the Honor to kiss the bottom of his Vest, and deliver the
Complement of their Master; which when he heard, appearing astonished, though
he knew all the business before: How! says he, have you not yet finished this
matter? On what can you think, that you make not your Ambassador resolve? He
cannot of himself be so Obstinate; it must be you that give him ill Counsel,
contrary to your own proper knowledge; for you cannot be ignorant, how things
have past, at former Audiences: beware of your heads. They excused themselves
by saying, Their Master was resolved rather to dye, then be wanting to the
Orders of the Emperor of France: And that for themselves, they were only poor
Interpreters, always ready to receive the high Commands of the Sublime Port;
and to report back, the most humble Reasons of their Ambassador; to whom they
would most faithfully Relate what it pleased the most Illustrious Kaimmakam to
Command them, who stroking his Beard brought it together; then pulling it a
little, and casting down his Eyes, as if he were thinking, Very well, says he,
Salute the Lord Ambassador on my part; bid him be Obstinate no longer, for it
is not his best way of Serving the Emperor of France.

They were forced to return to the Kehaia of the Vizir and the Or Lord of the
Clerks.
Reiseffend, who told them they had spoken to their Master in Favor of the
Ambassador, (God knows in what manner,) and that his Answer was, He would speak
to the Sultan Emperor of the World; the Issue whereof they expected with good
hopes.

The Interpreter of the Port of Felicity was moved in it too, who Employed all
his Eloquence to engage the prudence of the Ambassador, to take the best
course; assuring him there was no better then to yield; for in giving
satisfaction to the Vizir in this, he would oblidge a Lord, able to return it a
hundred times double in other occasions. One could make the Ambassie of
Monsieur Guilleragues Glorious, so as to deface the Memory of all his
Predecessors: In fine, this was no longer the business of the Grand Vizir, but
the Sultans.

The return again to the Kehaia and Reiseffend, who told them their Master had
not yet spoke to his Highness; The Clerks too sent some Complements to the
Ambassador; from whom one of his Interpreters came one day to tell him, as a
thing had been Communicated in good Will: That if he would relax his pretense
to the Sofa in all other things, he would have more honor then he could
desire. Sometimes the Interpreters told the Ambassador, that having been
delivering the Petitions to the Grand Vizir, concerning the ordinary Affairs,
they had been well received by him, who had asked News of their Master, and
made some advances, which seemed Demonstrations of plain dealing: So that if
things were not ended before his going to Adrianople, all would be agreed at
his return. In fine, my most Honored Lord, whilst this Affair remained int he
Clouds of Retardment, even after the Vizir's return, we had the news of what
had past at Chio.

The Grand Vizir was in a Rage, but as his great Soul never yields to the
extremest difficulties, so it submitted not at all to this, which was but of
the middle ones: He exposed it at the Foot of the Throne, of the Sovereign
Master of the World, where having prostrated himself, and received his Orders,
he returned to his House, and sent for the Grand Dowanier, Commanding him to
let the French Ambassador be told, That it was no longer his business (at least
at present) to dispute the Sofa, but to repair the Mischiefs done at Chio, as
well to the Mosques, as Fortress; and to try by all manner of Submissions to
obtain a Pardon From the King of Kings, for that Action: And that in the first
place he should begin by a Letter to the French Admiral concerning what he had
done; and to Command him to do no more, nor come nearer Constantinople, till
they tried to obtain his Pardon: For if not, the Sultan would let loose his
just Indignation, and stop his Ears to Mercy, to the utter Destruction of him
the Ambassador and the whole French Nation: That they knew he had exceeded his
Orders; The Emperor of France being too great an Emperor, too Just, and too
Good a Friend to Command an Enterprise so contrary to the Ancient Amity.

The Dowanier Replied, That the Head of our Invincible Master, and yours, may
be at Repose; I dare answer for the Ambassador in this: I can oblige him to
submit to any thing you please: If he make some seeming Resistance, it will
only be for Form-Sake. He has no desire to Engage himself in any thing may put
him out of his Employment: He is for getting of Money, as his Profession, and
manner of Living demonstrate; and has been here too small a time, to desire to
be gone so fast.

These words were not given in vain, for the Ambassador writ diverse times to
the Admiral, who thereupon remained without doing any thing, like a Lion bound
in Chains; These Letters were full of real Fear, and perfect Terror lest his
doing more, might displease the Sultan in the least. But to hasten things the
Ambassador went himself to the Kehaia of the Grand Vizir, who made him
thoroughly sensible of the mighty Crime the French Admiral had Committed, able
to overturn the whole Negotiation, and reduce into Captivity all the French
within the Ottoman Empire; was there not some reason to hope that he as a
Prudent Ambassador, would procure Mercy, and Forgiveness from the most happy
and most Invincible Emperor of the Earth. The Ambassador would have defended
himself, by pretending that nothing past at Chio, could in the least be
interpreted to intend a Breach of the Ancient Amity: That if they had Fired on
the Fortress, and hurt some Houses, it was but by accident, and in a Just
defense: since those from thence, had first Fired on the Ships, belonging to
the Emperor of France. That this Storm of the Just Indignation of his Master,
had been restrained for a long time by his Natural Moderation; but must at
last, by Gods permission, fall upon the heads of those Thieves, Rebels to the
Grand Seignior himself; The Trippolins unworthy to enjoy the Protection of his
Highness; They who had taken the Merchants Goods and Vessels of the French,
entering the Ports of the Ottoman Empire; Nay, in the very Ports themselves, and
under the Command of the Sultans Forts. That these Pirates only were
responsible for all pretended Damage, since only they were true occasions of it.

But the Kehaia made answer to the Ambassador, Let us separate the Tripolins
from the injury done to the Sultan, they are your Enemies I allow: But the
Emperor of the World, is he your Enemy? Does he not give you daily convincing
proofs of the contrary, by his Imperial benefits? You are you say, carried on
by the Force and heat of a Just vengeance to pursue your Enemies: But on the
other side, could not the Respect due to the King of Kings, our invincible
Master, who had protected the Tripolins under his Forts, stop it? was there no
middle way to be found, as well to preserve the Submissions due to the
Sovereign of the World, who has the Universe in his Guard; As likewise to
prevent the escape of your Enemies? There appears to me one, very easy, persues
the Kehaia, which is to have kept the Tripolins Besieged, till you had sent to
the Port of Felicity, to Implore the High and Sublime Justice against them:
Then had that been refused, there had been some pretense of Reason perhaps, for
coming to that extremity you have done. The Ambassador strove to support
himself by many weak reasons; And though he often protested he had something
Essential to offer: All he could say appeared mere Amusements, which obliged
the Kehaia, to stop his Mouth, with these words.

The Emperor of France, which we distinguish Infinitely beyond other
Potontates, as the most Powerful, best Born, and ancienest Friend to the Port
of Felicity, the end of whose days be happy, who surpasses all his Ancestors in
Strength, Wisdom, and every sort of Merit; and who is formidable to all
Christendom: Would he take it well, if we should do to him, as his Admiral has
done, to the true Kalise, or Successor, to the greatest of all the Prophets:
the Sultan Elbarrein, and Khaijan, and Bahrein, King of the two Continents, and
Emperor of the two Seas, the Cayzar Cezar, the Distributer of the Crowns of
Cozroes. To whom God perpetuate his Grandeur, to the very day of Judgment.

If one of our Invincible Armies (as Numerous as the Sands in the Sea) should
Attaque our Enemies, under one of your Masters Forts, what would he say? What
Complaints had he not reason to make? Is it not known, that the Commander of
our Galleyes, let escape from his Fury, the Ships of the Enemies of Cheincha,
King of Kings, because they took Sanctuary, under the Standard of Padicha,
Emperor of France? And was it not done as it should be? Could I, Lord
Ambassador, produce a more pertinent Example? But yet take another, that may
guide you to take right measures, in seriously thinking, how to conclude this,
and to bring your self out of the present danger: We have heard by certain
Confused reports, That some Soldiers, belonging to a Spanish Garrison in
Flanders (a Land of Vices) Encouraged by the strength of the Place, which they
thought Impregnable, had grown so Insolently Foolish, as to go forth like
Furies, Meriting Hell, to Attaque and Rob some French Soldiers, immediately
Retiring with their Booty, into that Center of their Cowardice; much mistaken
in thinking they were there Safe: For the Emperor of France, resolving that
this Injury, which hurt the Peace should be repaired: Reserved the Conquest of
the Place, whence it was done, to another time; It being not yet predestined
to be his: Therefore remaining Embarrast in the Clouds of certain delays, he
contented himself, that they should make amends for the Rashness of these
Madmen, undoubted Limbs of the Devil, by Money. We know, continued the Kehaia,
that the Governors of this Country, by Order of their Master, thinking
themselves happy, in not seeing Roll in upon them, the mighty Forces of the
Emperor of France, whose very shadows make them Tremble; delivered Hostage, and
sent the money agreed upon, with Solemn Presents: which he was pleased to
accept, not for their Value, but as proofs of their Homage, Submissions, and
Reparation they were forced to make: He made this little Sacrifice Considerable
by his acceptance, and Imperial Clemency: Here was nothing but a few French
Plundered to contest about, but we have the Faithful Killed and Wounded, who
call for Revenge, and the Holy Stones that demand it, which are Rent from some
of our Mosques: There must be Blood, or Repentance, by Submissions, Exposed to
the view of the Public, or your Person must answer all, and be Liable to great
extremities: Therefore think well of all these Circumstances. Thus ended the
Discourse of the Kehaia to the Ambassador, who pretended, that the last
example, was not truly Reported: He affirmed that the Emperor of France, always
Invincible, never amused himself about trifling Presents: And that he knew how
to make his Enemies, render true Homage, and ever punished those, that violated
his Amity without a cause, by Fire and Sword; Not forgeting neither a Generous
Clemency, truly Noble, and dissinterested, when he thought it convenient to
suppress his Anger. In fine, the Ambassador concluded, That he had no fear for
his Person, sufficiently protected by the Power of his Master, and the Right of
Nations: Saying, He had nothing to give. The Kehaia told him, He had time to
think, because the Sovereign Vizir, stayed for the Answer of the Capoudan
Pacha, Admiral of the Seas, to know truly how all things past at Chio;
Whereupon he would receive the Orders, given at the Fleet of the Sovereign, who
pronounces the destiny of the Universe: There upon the Ambassador Retired to
his House at Pera.

The most Serene and Illustrious Vizir, who knows how to make use of his
Prudence, and his Force, as is most proper, contented himself not to hasten the
Matter. His faithful Councellor the Grand Dowanier Negotiated constantly by the
usual Persons with the Ambassador, who gave him positive assurances of his
yielding; and that he would oblige him to submit, assuring him, he had made the
Ambassador sufficiently apprehend a Rupture, as a thing would be of little
advantage to the Affairs of France in General, or his own in particular.

But during these delays, the Capoudon Pacha, obedient to the Orders of the
Sovereign Vizir, had entered the Port of Chio, the better to understand the
cause of the Disorder; and fully to inform himself of every particular, that he
might the sooner Contribute to the Peace he intended: There he was informed the
that Cursed Old Admiral of the French, who surely knows how to live by Air, and
takes pleasure to dance on the most Enraged Waves of a Tempestuous Sea; living
on them as on the most Firm Ground; and like a perfect Fish values neither
Winter nor Summer.

This Man who ceases not to Live, though a hundred years Old; and four score of
them has made good provision in the Market, where they Sell Cheats, Tricks,
and Fourberies cheap: Took advantage of the Narrow entrance into the Port of
Chio. And after having made so many Compliments and Civilities to the Capoudan
Pacha, did now entreat him, not to think of stirring out till he had Surrendered
the Tripolins, or obliged them to submit. Nay more, this daring Old Man, who
seems to forget Death, and yet remains in Life, by the permission of God,
merely to augment his Crimes, the more to Burn in Hell, had the presumption to
search several Turkish Galleys. The Capoudan Pacha had not failed to go out to
punish his Insupportable Insolence, had not the Sea and Season Inconvenient for
Galleys prevented it; so he could do no more then give Advice of all, to that
High Tribunal whose Foundations are unmovable.

The Grand Vizir whose Angellick understanding knows a perfect remedy for every
thing, had no sooner notice of the vain Glory, Presumption and Ill-Built Pride
of this Old Commander of the French Galliens, in presuming to keep (as it were
Imprisoned) the Admiral and Galleys of the Emperor of the World; but he sent
for the Grand Dowanier to debate the Business, between whom it was thought
convenient, that the Ambassador should be Frighted; they both being Confident
he would yield, rather then expose himself to the Affronts to which Revenge too
much Engaged their Master; and that all the Pride of which he made so great
appearance, was only to save his Honor, and preserve a Profitable Employment.

We now ended the Moon worthy of Blessing, which is that of our Fast of
Ramazan; it being the Eve of the Feast of Bairan, which is begun by rendering
thanks to God for giving us the Grace to Fast thirty days complete: The Grand
Vizir Indefatigable in the Obedience he pays, as well to the Great Master of
Nature, who has no Companions, as to his Lieutenant on Earth, his most Perfect
Image; the Emperor of the Mussulmans, Revenger of the Divine Unity: This Grand
Vizir having kept so long a Fast, was come to the thirtieth day, which he had
past, without Eating or Drinking, from the Rising of the Sun to its going down:
ceased not however to preserve his full Strength and Prudence, of which he gave
convincing proofs to the French Ambassador.

He sent for him in the Evening before the Feast of Bairan, just as the Canons
ending their Fast, denounced the next days Solemnity; so that he who does not
too well understand our customs arrived at the Grand Vizir's in the midst of
that Thunder, sufficient to terrify him, as being the presage of that Rage and
Threats, was going to fall upon him. They made him attend above an hour in a
Chamber, whilst the Grand Vizir was doing his Devotions; where some moved him
to accrept his Audience below the Sofa, which he absoutely refused, proposing
to remain where he was, or in some other Room, from whence he would answer the
Vizir by Message. But this Lieutenant to the Emperor of the World was resolved
to discourse him face to face; that he might dart at him, Glances like
Lightning from that Majestic Presence, Adorned with Eagles Eyes. He placed
himself on a Seat prepared on the Sofa, having first Gravely returned, by an
almost Imperceptible declining of his head, the Submissive Reverence the
Ambassador made him: You must know this Christian had but few with him, many
not deserving to enter that Place: he was invited to sit below; But having
Generously resisted several Motions, something Violent, by which they attempted
to Constrain him; and seeming as if he would Revenge by Blows the Force, they
desisted: By which he had Liberty to deliver a Letter from the Emperor of
France, to the Vizir, concerning the Sofa; It was considered too, that
remaining standing as he was, it seemed to be in a posture more Respectfull,
and readier to obey the Orders he was about to receive: It was then agreed,
that the Interpreter of the Port should explain for the Vizir, and the
Ambassadors for him.

The Discourse of the Vizir touched the Grandeur of the Emperor of the
Mussulmans, of the respect due to him, of the Danger to offend him; of the
necessity readily to make Satisfaction for such a Crime: And Lastly, Of the
Goodness and Clemency of the Master of the World, willing always to Pardon
those that humble themselves, and repair the Injuries done to his Slaves:
Adding these words, It is for thee therefore L. Ambassador.
Estchibeig, as the Surety of the Emperor
Gadicha of France, thy Master; and Hostage residing at the Sovereign Port of
Felicity, for confirmation of the Peace, to repair all that weakness it, during
the Embassy. It is for thee then to pay the Damage at Chio, for the death of
some Faithful: The Breaches in the Mosques, and the Mischief done to the
Citadel; I demand of thee for this, three hundred and fifty thousand Crowns:
And a due Submission to such an Emperor as my Master, who is Protector of the
true Belief. This thou must perform or go to the seven Towers, I tell thee as a
Friend, thou must obey the Inevitable Doom of the Great Master of the World,
pronounced to me, when prostrated as his Slave at the Foot of his Throne, the
perfect and bright Resemblance of the Celestial one. The Ambassador by
Amusements sought to alter the Vizir's Resolution, alleging the necessity of
obeying the Emperor of France, who had Commanded his Admiral to pursue to
Death, the Thieving Tripolins, Enemies to France, and Rebels to the Port; a
People unworthy the Protection of his Highness, having Seized the Merchants
under the Forts of the Ottoman Empire: And taken the Consul of Cyprus out of
his House, where he ought by the Capitulations of Peace to have been safe: He
then alleged, that if he was to be considered as a Hostage to Answer for what
should happen on the Emperor of Frances part; It could only be Intended to
relate to things Ordinary, and not to those that were out of his Power, as the
business of Chio was: The Circumstances too of which, he said, were
aggravated: He professed himself troubled, that Chance and a Lawful defense
against the Fort, which had first Fired on the Standard of his Master, should
produce some Disorder; But protested too that he could promise nothing was
demanded for it, and had only power write to France the true State of things,
and wait his Answer thence. That as to the Seven Towers, it was easy to send
him thither, but it was the way to make a Rupture: He then declared he would
meddle no more in any thing, for a Prisoner contrary to the Laws of Nations, was
no longer Capable of Negotiating: The Vizir having declared he knew nothing of
the business of Cyprus, said, they might have Besieged the Tripolins in the
Port of Chio without Fyring into it; and that during his Imprisonment, the
Commerce should continue, provided there arrived no other Acts of Hostility;
telling him too, that other French Ambassadors had been Imprisoned, which the
Emperor of France had not taken ill.

The Ambassador Replied, That his Master had not foreseen this Accident, which
was indeed Morally Impossible he should; that if the same usage had been to
some of his Predecessors, it was not totally without cause, as in the Case of
Monsieur La Hay, who was Imprisoned, as a Spy for the Venetians: But for
himself he had Prerogatives above other Ambassadors, and had been ever Faithful
to the Port: That, in fine, He was Ambassador of France, and it behooved them to
consider well, before they did any thing might wrong that Character.

The Grand Vizir demanded Proofs of this great Fidelity he boasted; does it,
says he, consist in Consederating with the French Admiral? to demean himself
as Enemy to the Grand Sultan of the Osmans: And how shall we discern this
mighty Prerogative above other Ambassadors, in one who can merely complain
concerning Trifles, with which the Port has such constant Troubles; and
pretends no Power to treat about an Affair of Importance, wherein they had Just
cause to complain.

The Ambassador urged, That the business of Cyprus, and many others, concerning
which he had delivered Memorials to the Vizirs Officers, were no Trifling
matters; and that he had no knowledge of the Orders which the French Admiral
had, more then what he had received from him, by Letters. But the Vizir
remained firm to his Resolution, repeating to him, Pay or thou go to Prison:
what I say to thee, is nothing but an effect of my Friendship; take time to
consider of it, and do thy best, before there happens to thee some great
affront. But the Ambassador persisting in the same useless Reasoning; was by
the Grand Vizir thus admonished.

It becomes a Servant like thee, who Mediates Affairs, between a Mighty and
Invincible Emperor, and thy Master the King of France, whom we distinguish much
before all other Christian Kings, to behave himself with all Care and Wisdom,
having ever before his Eyes the danger of suffering any thing to slip between
them, might occasion Enmity or Coldness; to the end that the Subjects of two
such great Monarchies may be free from Trouble: think therefore of Submitting,
and speedily paying, or thou go to the Seven Towers.

The Ambassador having no more to say, retired; but instead of sending him to
the Seven Towers, they conveyed him to the little Lobby of the Chamber
belonging to the Chiaoux Barhy: So he stirred not out of the Vizir's House,
Chief Usher.
but there remained Prisoner, soon comforting himself, as we may think in that
Consinement, since he boasted, that he had prevented being sent to the Seven
Towers: One may indeed rationally conclude, That he thought of nothing but the
Prison, with which he was threatened; and therefore seemed not to resent the
other, in which he was kept. He seemed to be pleased, and studied to appear
free, refusing all was sent him from the Vizir's Kitchen, and eating nothing
but what came from his own. He showed too a kind of false Resolution, to be
steady, against all the Overtures were made him, to accommodate the matter,
declaring by Reiterated Protestations, that he neither could nor would give any
thing, except some Curiosities he had by him: Whereupon the Vizir sent him this
Message, The Amity I bear thee, and my most earnest Solicitations, have almost
prevailed to make acceptible thy most humble Discourses, before the Foot of the
Imperial Throne; an Object worthy all the submissions and respect of Mortals:
Thou shall therefore within six Months of this time, cause to be brought hither
some Curiosities of France, worthy the Acceptance of the Sublime Majesty of the
Emperor of the Believers; with a Letter from the Padicha of France, Emperor.
by which he shall declare to the Sultan his ignorance of the Fact that has
(...) committed; and that he did never intend his Ships should have done any
thing, could alter the Ancient Friendship: And that if by chance something had
happened at Chio, contrary to his intention, he was troubled at it. The
Ambassador explained himself on the Message, not allowing any Crime, but said
he would procure such a Letter as was proper in the Case: And that for the
Presents, they should be in his own Name, and not in that of his Masters.
Things being thus prepared, they brought the Ambassador, the fourth day of his
Imprisonment, to a Chamber of Liberty, which was that of the Kehaia, to which
the Interpreter of the Port conducted him: There he met the Kehaia and the
Chiaux Barhy, who first magnified the kindness of the Vizir, and his dexterity
in appeasing the Rage of the Sultan; and then mutually fell to commending their
own, as well as the endeavors of the Dowanier. They seemed to approve too, the
Conduct of the Ambassador, but would not confide in his word, saying, it was
necessary to be cautious in things relating to the Great Emperor of the Osmans:
And therefore the promise of the Ambassador must be in Writing under his Hand
and Seal.

There happened some dispute in forming it, but at last it was agreed, That the
satisfaction should be expressed, to intend a reparation for the mischief done by
the Emperor of France's Ships at Chio: They would have ascertained the
Presents, but the Ambassador would only promise they should be honest or
proper; and undertook too, for a Letter from the Emperor of France, in which
consisted the Matter of the Writing he gave for his Liberty; whereupon he
departed to his own House; however protesting before he went, That he would
perform nothing, except the Sofa were granted him: And that the Tripolins were
obliged to make a Peace: They bid him be contented, and not doubt of
satisfaction.

There was, indeed, effectual Orders sent to the Capoudon Pacha, to conclude
the Treaty with the Tripolins, since the Ambassador had promised to repair the
damage at Chio; the Treaty was Concluded at the Foot of the Throne of Heroes
who have the World in Wardship; and ended to the satisfaction of the Old
Admiral of the French Fleet; whom it had been well to have sent dead into his
Country; for instead of retiring thereupon as was expected, he demonstrated a
Resolution of making a longer stay, and of keeping in the Gallys, covering
however his actions with a pretense of Civility and Fair dealing; sending word
to the Capoudan Pacha, that after so sure a proof of his great Genius, in
reconciling him and the Tripolines, it was unjust he should be stayed longer
there, desiring him therefore to procure satisfaction might be given to the
Ambassador, or that he might have leave to return, declaring he was bound to
stay till one or the other was granted.

The Vizir considered, as he ought, the Resolution and Boundless Obstinacy, of
this Old Captain; who though he had many causes hourly to fear death; yet acted
as if death were afraid of him; negotiating like one of Thirty or Forty, that
had hopes of many years to live.

The Grand Vizir making just reflections on the steady Obstinacy, meriting Hell
of this Old Seaman, sent for the Domanier, who as a Secret, I must needs say,
my most Honored Lord, is a true Devil Incarnate; to whom this Illustrious and
Fortunate Lieutenant to the Emperor of the World thus expressed himself: If all
the French were as Resolute as this Old Admiral, we should be hard put to it to
find the Moments of their wavering, and ordinary inconstancy. But if on the one
side, the great God gives us this proof of their steddiness; he shows us too on
the other their Natural Genius, in the facility of changing the Ambassador.
Should we employ the Invincible Naval Forces of the King of Kings, the success
would be doubtful, for the French lie too far from us; but easily approach our
Fortresses, having the Christians Harbors for their Succors: This makes me
think my self predestined for another Conduct, which will be more to the
purpose then hazard, or to say better, the assistance of God, which is never
wanting to the Faithful, will divide the French Councils, and make them Combat
one another, as they did at Candia: Do you therefore to this purpose Negotiate
with the Ambassador, who believes you his friend, serve your self with all your
understanding, upon his Credulous Temper, to divide him from this other
Frenchman, who is a thorough-pac'd Infidel, covetous of Blood and Slaughter,
and one who seems to have forgot his Country, so Jealousy between the two
Infidels.

The Dowanier is one full of the Slights and Tricks, natural to those of his
Race, Gypsy, or Fortune Tellers.
being by Birth a Chinquene, who has improved his Subtleties and Fourberies by
his Employment in the Customs; so he received the Orders of the Sovereign
Vizir, with great Submission, promising, at the peril of his Head, to execute
them.

He made it be told the Ambassador, that now things were in a good way, this
Old Mad Admiral would spoil all; and it was to be feared by his restless
Temper, produce an absolute Rupture: That he was an Ambitious, and Aspiring
kind of Genius, that could not be contented to have ended the Affair of the
Tripolines which only concerned him, to his own hearts desire, but must now be
meddling too with that of the Embassy, that the glory of gaining all Points
might seem to be his; and that since all things were adjusted, only that Point
of the Sofa, which the Vizir was resolved to grant too, it was necessary to
remove this busy Obstacle, to a perfect Reconciliation.

The Ambassador gave credit to this Man, whom the Musulman's themselves believe
but by force; he therefore writ to the French Admiral to depart to Milo, on
pretense of refitting, and to return again, if things were not accommodated as
he expected: This Letter made him separate from the Sea of Chio, which he
seemed before to have espoused; first sending his humble request to the
Capoudan Pacha, that he would Mediate at the Foot of the Sublime Throne, that
satisfaction might be given to the French Ambassador.

The most fortunate Vizir, whom God will always prosper, was not a little
pleased, to see enter into Constantinople the Fleet which had been so long
detained at Chio: And was extremely well satisfied with the Conduct of the
Dowanier, whom he ordered to continue his usual Amusements to the Ambassador;
who for four or five Months was perpetually Imbarrast with delays: He boasted
mightily of his Fidelity to the Sublime Port, in having put a stop to the
violent Resolutions of the French Admiral (though before he had pretended to
have no power over him) he therefore continually urged their keeping promise
with him about the Sofa; sometimes it would be promised him, and then again
made doubtful: Then it would he suggested as designed in a Chamber without
Sofa, to be purposely dedicated to the Audiences of the French Ambassador: But
at last he was plainly told, nothing at all could be done in it, till he had
performed his promise concerning the Presents; and that then they would think
of contenting him.

The French Admiral, during these delays, was returned again, near to Chio,
being at the Isles of Ourlar, on the Coast of Smyrna: where the wise Vizir by
the help of the Grand Dowanier found means a long time to amuse him. But the
Ambassador beginning to discover, that he was deluded, writ to this old Madman,
to approach to the Cape of Janissaries, near Smyrna: But commanded him too not
to come nearer the Dardanelloes, those Keys of the World, assuring him if he
did, it would prove the destruction of all the French Fleet; And then these
would be no Quarter for the Merchants, nor Ambassador himself We knew these
Circumstances by reason the Dowanier, at the beginning, whilst the Matter of
Chio depended, had so possessed the French Ambassador with the assurance of that
danger; that, that terror still possessed him, which had prevented the French
Admiral coming nearer them before: And was now again the Cause that he only
came to an Anchor, as I said before, at the Cape of Janissaries, which is the
entrance of that Gulf which Conducts one by a space of seven or eight Miles to
these Castles, which are the first Keys of this vast and strong City: the
desire of Kings, the splendid and proud Town of Constantinople. The Dowanier
had likewise received intelligence from Smyrna, that the French Admiral was
troubled, he had obeyed the Ambassador, declaring he knew that was not the way
to do themselves good. You must know too, my most Honored Lord, that the Grand
Vizir was assured that this French Admiral, had received Orders to make a
speedy return Home, to go against Algier. The Theater of War and Foil of a
Mighty d' Gachar of Germany who now burns in Hell. But be it as it will, as a
secret I assure you, the most Serene and Illuminated Vizir resented the whole
matter with great satisfactions, in having it Conducted so that he hazarded not
the Reputations of these two Castles, which are the Jaws of this great Giant of
Constantines: Caesar Charles the Fifth.
But that they appeared Formidable to the very French, the most powerful of all
Infidels; who seem to fear neither Storms, Famine, Fire nor Water. Their
Admiral being thus as it were Chained from passing the Cape of Janissaries, was
certainly as we are informed all fury for being forced to return so soon; and
that he must be reduced to Prayers for having been obedient to an Embassy. He
therefore against his will Writ a most submissive Letter to the Supreme Vizir,
Entreating him that satisfaction might be given to the Ambassador by having
Audience on the Sofa, or that he might take his leave; He being obliged to stay
to carry him back. The Messenger who brought the Letter was one of the Captains
of the Gallions, and one we knew to be a most particular Friend to the
Ambassador.

This Envoy came to Constantinople well perpar'd with many good reasons to have
offered to the Supreme Arbitrator of the affairs of Mankind, the Lieutenant to
the Emperor of the World. But being unworthy to appear in his Presence, that
Honor was refused him, and he was referred to the Chief Steward of the Household
of this Councellor, full of the Glory of the King of Kings.

The Grand Vizir who knows well how to preserve the Honor of his Supreme
Dignity, refused to receive the Letter from the French Admiral, declaring he
would have no business with him. And as to two sent him by the Ambassador of
France, wherein he desires leave to depart except he might have Audience on the
Sofa, Alleging it was the Order of his Master: He made no other Answer but
commanded him to send him those Orders of the Emperor of France. But the most
Illuminated Vizir having made them to be Interpreted to him, returned them
without saying one word; which obliged the Ambassador to a Third: Wherein with
Counterfeit earnestness he desires leave to retire, pretending that the French
Admiral was bound to stay for him. This useless refinement caused the Grand
Vizir to smile, who knew that General was immediately to depart, and that the
Envoy from him hourly pressed the Ambassador to dispatch him away.

The Wise Vizir perceiving the subtle design of the Ambassador, who made not
the least mention of discharging the Obligation he had given in Writing, sent
him this Answer. The most happy Port, which is the Sanctuary of the Empires of
the Age, is ever open to all those who desire the Glory to enter: And those
that would have the shame to depart, we never detain by Force, except they be
Debtors. Thou may then be gone; But first think of Paying thy Debts, comply
with thy obligation; make thy Money and Presents to the value of three Hundred
and fifty Thousand Crowns be laid at the Feet of the Emperor of the Osmans. And
with this Atonement, for the business of Chio (unworthy our Master, but which
he is pleased to accept as a Mark of thy Humility) thou shall have leave to be
gone.

The Ambassador, who it seems, had not before, well considered the consequence
of his promise, not dreaming perhaps it extended so far; protested he had
nothing came near those demands. They told him he was bound by his Writing to
make honest Presents to the Grand Seignior; demanding of him, what that word
Honest Implied: Declaring to him in Fine, that since the six Months time agreed
upon was past, he was obliged to perform his promise. He declared that those
Curiosities he had provided were rare and rich, worthy the acceptance of the
Invincible Emperor. It was then required that they might be Viewed; to which
purpose some Persons were sent by the Sovereign Vizir: But upon their
description contained in a Catalogue upon the first sight of them, the value
the Ambassador set upon them, and his offer of some small Sum to Augment them,
were both rejected. But there being no other way to conclude: The Envoy of the
French Admiral was forced to be gone without taking with him the Ambassador,
whom he was constrained to leave as a Debtor at the Port of Felicity.

The Grand Vizir whom nothing escapes, understanding the hasty departure of the
French Captain, to join his Admiral to Sail with him for France: was then
Confirmed in the advice had been given him of the speedy departure of the
French Fleet; and though he knew well enough that the Ambassador did not intend
to fly stripped away, yet he counterfeited a care to prevent it, as a thing
unjust that he should go without paying.

The time came on which makes it necessary that the Naval Force of the Emperor
of the World should go forth; Of which the Grand Vizir took particular Care;
going himself diverse times to the Arsinal about it: So when it was ready to
Sail and Salute with all its Cannon and Artillery, the Sovereign of the Earth
sitting upon his Throne of Felicity, the Admiral went to prostrate himself
before the Invincible Emperor, and to receive his Orders. He was commanded to
shape his Course for the Archipellagues, and to receive the submissions of the
French Admiral as he past: who would not as the Ambassador promised, (fail to
do his Duty:) After which he was to proceed as occasions required. All was
performed as was Ordered. The Capoudan Pacha doubled the Point of the Seraglio
with his Fleet: and having past the Jaws or old Castles, came to an Anchor at
the Mouth of the Gulf, where having received the Respects of the old French
Admiral, he weighed and continued his way: It seemed as if this French Admiral
only waited for that happy moment, for it was no sooner past but he hoysted
Sail for his own Country: very joyful no doubt to escape that just punishment
his rashness had merited.

The most honored Vizir well satisfied so to have mortified the Old Man,
applied all his Thoughts in contriving the reparation was in Public and Solemn
Pomp, to be made in the presence of the August Monarch of the Universe: To
which purpose he sent for the Grand Dowanier, merrily asking him, when he would
make an end of his very good Friends business; adding, though with Authority,
that it must now be dispatched. They both were of opinion there would be little
difficulty in bringing it about, being certain the Ambassador would not be
sorry to get forth of the trouble; especially now, when the Admiral was gone:
But they thought some Arguments would be necessary to persuade him; as first,
That he was obliged by his promise, made as Ambassador, to repair the damage
done by his Master's Ships: That there was an appearance too of Orders come
from France, which left it to his discretion, as things should occur upon the
place; upon which, and other Arguments, they both concluded, that if he was
pressed and threat'ned he would yield. But the Dowanier went on with the
Discourse to the Vizir in these Terms: I can assure you, my most happy Master,
that the Ambassador demurs not but only for appearances; he disputes of the
quality of the Presents and quantity of Money, that it may not be supposed in
France he yields too easily; give him a little time to please his fancy with
feigned resistance, and he will make the less Reflection on the manner he is to
make his Submissions; he desires to have it thought, that he gives no Money,
and desires extremely to have that remitted or concealed; but how can that be,
when it must be borrowed of the English and Hollanders? He would have it
likewise thought, that he Augments not his Presents, when already they are
increased, and trust to me shall be more yet; I know besides, says the
Dowanier, that there is a Letter come from the Emperor of France, containing
excuses for the business of Chio; therefore there will be no more to do but to
hasten him: They then consulted the manner of proceeding; first, he had been
told beforehand, that it was a Custom to send to Debtors, even Ambassadors
themselves, a Chiaux to mind them of what was expected from them, that they
might comply: But to amuse the Ambassador, they concluded to give him occasion
to feed his vanity, by the quality of the Messenger was sent unto him, which
would be a little comfort to him, for what he was to suffer. They sent
therefore an Officer, that is, him who is Judge of the Chiauxes; which indeed
was contrived to make the business more public: When he came to the
Ambassador, accompanied by the Interpreter of the Port, and had Communicated to
him the Imperial Orders for payment, and the necessity of appeasing the
Sultan's wrath, by public Submissions and Satisfactions, capable to procure
the effects of his Clemency: He again flew back to his former Allegations and
Imaginations, desiring to defer the business, protesting he would not in the
least increase his Presents. But they being sensible of his dissimulation,
advised him as soon as might be, to get out of the difficulty: Which done the
Judge of the Ushers, and the Interpreter of the Port left him: His Interpreters
too, received daily the same advice, with frequent Threats of the Seven Towers:
yet still the Ambassador seemed both by Discourse, and a Letter he writ to the
Kehaia, to be ready to suffer every thing, even death it self, rather then give
ready Money, or indeed any other Presents, then what he had offered. But the
Dowanier assuring the contrary, made it be judged a fit time for Conclusion,
which it was necessary should be made with Solemnity. And because it was judged
to be too much honor for the Ambassador to agree it with the Vizir, it was
resolved it should be with the Prime Secretary to this Lieutenant to the
Emperor of the World.

Your Lordship is to consider, that the Ambassadors of France did not use to
attend the Kehaia, but Incognito, and Clothed in Turkish Habit, with few
followers, pretending it to be a Condescension below them, only complied with
to expedite business. But now it was judged necessary to change that Custom,
and oblige the Ambassador to come in his own Habit, with his Interpreters,
Secretaries, Merchants, and Footmen; that all the Town might know it was the
French Ambassador, who came publicly to attend the Secretary of the Vizir, to
end the business about the Pardon for the attempt at Chio, and to agree the
reparations for the damage done there. He made no difficulty to come publicly
as was desired, though perhaps he might be ignorant of the Cause. The Kehaia
proposed to him the Augmentation of his Presents, which he pretended to refuse;
they seemed earnestly to press him, and he as earnestly to resist; but all his
seeming Obstinacy, and their Reiterated Instances to persuade him, was no more
but a mere Comedy, for the Sum to be presented the Sultan was adjusted before:
And the Dowanier had undertaken for the Augmentation of the Presents. So the
Ambassador went back with an Imaginary satisfaction of a Mock-bravery: He had
caused a Rumor to be spread, that he was to be sent to the Seven Towers; that
coming back to his House, it might be thought his Conduct had preserved him,
which would make both that, and his Courage be admired at by Strangers: To
which vapor of Vainglory for his comfort we may quietly leave him; whilst the
most prudent Vizir thought of nothing more then the manner to make most
visible, most submissive, and most acceptible, his Sacrifice of Expiation for
the attempt at Chio: It was first resolved to take the opportunity to reduce
the French Ambassador, by this occasion, to a custom refused by all his
Predecessors, and to which none of them would ever submit; which was, to have
their Presents seen and valued before they were offered: It was supposed the
Ambassador would hardly refuse it, if his Interpreters did but tell him it was
the Custom; And we were very desirous he should yield to it at this time, the
more because the People would the sooner think he was ready to Augment his
Presents, in case the Sultan should not in his Clemency agree to accept those
he had prepared: He yielded the Point, and now nothing was in dispute but the
place where the Presents, the Money, and the French Emperors Letter should be
received, who should receive them, who should carry them, and in what manner
they should be presented. The Great Divan was thought one, as the place where
Ambassadors are received, the Army paid, and Justice distributed: But this
proposition was rejected, as not public enough; and because that things, which
were to pass in the Submission, might be confounded with the Ceremonies of the
Ambassadors Audience, which he ought not to receive till some time after he had
expiated that disorder at Chio, the only thing able to render him worthy the
presence of the Emperor of the World. There were diverse other places proposed,
but after full Consideration, that the injury for which Reparation was to be
made, had been done on the Sea, in the Port of Chio, in the sight of many
Nations, and in a manner at the very Gates of Constantinople; it was by all
agreed, That no place was more proper to receive satisfaction in, then the
Palace of Cara Mustapha, most advantageously situated on the Sea side, at the
Entrance of the safest and largest Port in the known World; a Port which is the
Theater of the Maritine Strength of the Great Sultan of the Osmans, and the
Refuge of the French, English, Holland, and Venetian Merchant Ships; a Port,
which is at least a third part of it, incompast about by the incomparable City
of Constantinople, standing in manner of an Amphitheatre for five Miles
together on its Banks; on the other side being seen many Cities and Towns fit
for Capital Cities to great Realms: On the Waters whereof may be constantly
seen an infinite number of Vessels filled with People from every Nation of the
World. All these Reasons made the Dome of Cara Mustapha favored with so
advantageous a situation, and exposed to the view of most of the Ambassadors,
Ministers, Residents, and Agents of the Christian Princes, be thought most
proper; that they as well as all the People and Grandees of the Empire might
see, that none could with impunity offend the Sovereign Majesty of the Emperor
of the World. They likewise the sooner agreed on the choice of that place, as
being a sumptuous Palace, including the Maritine Throne of the Emperor of the
two Seas; where the Music that diverts him, is that of Trumpets, Kettle-Drums,
and Cannons; which, with the noise of Oars, and continual hurry of Ships and
Galleys, fills the Air with an agreeable Confusion: It is in this place too the
Admirals pay their Homage, bringing thither the proofs of their Victories, in
the Spoils of the Enemies of the Faith. So there being no place more proper for
the Design of the Supreme Vizir, it was agreed, that if the Sultan did not
choose it of himself, it should be proposed to him. It was then debated, who
should receive the Submissions of the French Ambassador; and some proposed
either the Kehaia or Intendant of the Grand Vizir: But because the Enterprise,
for which Pardon was to be demanded, regarded directly the Person of the
Sultan; and that it belonged to none but him, to sit upon the Throne of the
Sea, the Vizir resolved to take the time when this Sovereign of the World was
come (as he often did) to this Dome of Cara Mustapha: That he would know in the
mean time, if His Highness were ready to receive the most humble Repentance of
the French Ambassador, who till then should be kept in suspense of that happy
Moment: It rested then to determine, how the Ambassador should perform his
Duty: about which some were of Opinion he should do it in Person; But because
he had not yet received Public Audience from the Vizir, it was concluded he
should send his Principal Officer, that was his Secretary, to make
satisfaction, by carrying and exposing the Presents, and Money, and to deliver
the Letter from the Emperor of France. They had a President of the like nature
with the * Bailo of Venice, Or Ambassador.
about the Vallone, where the Venetians had attack't those of Barbary. As
likewise the yearly practice of the Secretary of that Republic, when he brings
the Tribute of five thousand Chiquins. In fine, they promised, the Vizir so to
conduct all things, that it should appear a perfect Submission, or Public
Penance for what had past at Chio.

The Grand Dowanier, who had charged himself with every thing, Congratulated
the Sovereign Vizir that the business was so well adjusted: You have, says he,
My Lord, part of what you desire, and shall have the rest; whilst we leave the
Ambassador the vain satisfaction to repent and say, That his Condescentions are
only Personal, and his Negotiation as a private Man, That it was for his own
proper account he made his Presents; That the Money is for another occasion,
and that he has Writ nothing to France of all this bustle, All these Pretenses
are but bad Colors, and worse shadows, agreeing ill with the quality of him
they are designed to serve: For if he be not Ambassador, can he be worthy to
rub his Face with the Dust of the Feet of the Invincible Sultan, whose Grandeur
God will increase to the very Day of Judgment? Is it not certain, it was not
the Ambassador who fired the Cannons against Chio, but the Emperor of France's
General, pursued the Dorwanier? And is it not as plain, that he for this, as
Ambassador must submit? He is obliged to it by Writing, in which he engages to
procure his Masters Letter of excuse, and in six Months time to have Presents
brought from France? These are here and not intended for his Audience: he has
too procured the Sum of Money agreed upon. I know he boasts that all has been
done is agreeable to the Emperor of France: From whence may be concluded that
his Imprisonment, his promise of Presents, and of a Letter of excuse to the
Sultan, are agreeable to the Emperor of France: And that it is time therefore
to come to a Conclusion. Let the Ambassador then, say what he pleases, and form
to himself pleasant Chymera's: Provided the Reality of his Submissions
conformable to our Customs and Manners, which ought to be a Law to the World;
clears away the shadow from the true Throne which is the Sanctuary to the
Emperors of the Age; surrounded by those Mountains on which stands the Capital
City, from whence the Noise and Reputation of the Action will fly to the rest
of the Earth. This was very near the Discourse of the Dowanier, who said too
that he would go and send for the French Interpreters, and command them to
insinuate to their Master; that all things were contrived for his Honor, as
would appear to the astonishments of all Strangers; that the Presents and
Respects would be received by the great Emperor of the Osmans, and that perhaps
he would come for that purpose to a place where he only goes for extraordinary
Ceremonies, they shall advise him too, that for his greater Glory he must
entreat as a signal favor, to have his Presents carried by his own People, as
his Secretary and some Merchants. The Dowanier having said this kissed the Vest
of the Sovereign Vizir, and retired. He performed all. The Interpreters found
the Ambassador ready to put in Action every thing he advised him, and extremely
earnest quickly to receive the imaginary Glory was promised him.

There were some days past since the visit of the Ambassador to the Kehara of
the Vizir: That he might not therefore be in doubt, word was sent him that his
Affairs were in so good a posture, and so near a Conclusion, that he would soon
see a glorious end of them: It was then insinuated to him that the grand
Dowanier was one of the most considerable Officers of the Empire; That he
commanded all the Seas, from the Basphore to Smyrna and Chio: That all
Merchandises and every Slave of the World, as well Male as Female paid him
Tribute: That he had the Honor to provide for the pleasures of the Sultan, by
whom he was sometimes visited, being looked upon as one of his Favorites. This
was suggested to make the Ambassdor know, that if the Dowanier visited him, it
was a particular Favor, and a Prerogative with which the P^rt would honor
him: And that though the Merchandise and Wealth of all the World found Legs to
attend this Officer to obtain leave to be Sold, or the Honor to be detained
for the Sultan: He himself would come to the Ambassador to see and examine his
Presents, and to contribute all he could to make them in some measure worthy
the acceptance and clemency of the Invincible Emperor: The conclusion was, That
he was not only to receive the Grand Dowanier with demonstrations of
acknowledgment and Friendship; but with all kind of Honor, being to be attended
by his principal Officers, Turks and Jews; that is to say, those of his
Tribunal, proper for the business he was sent about.

The Interpreters that were instructed in the main Circumstances, were the
first that by Order of their Master, put them in execution: One of them went to
fetch the Dowanier from his House; bringing with him a Horse of the
Ambassadors. He was received at the Gate of the French Palace by the Secretary,
Chief Interpreter, and other Domestics; the Ambassador met him in the Hall,
and led him upon the Sofa, where being placed in a Seat of Honor, the first
Interpreter having kissed his Vest, said to him: That the Ambassador considering
him as one of his best Friends, bid him heartily welcome, That he was extremely
pleased to see him, after all the trouble he had given him, That he might
personally return him thanks, which he did sincerely; That he had often, and
would continue to inform the Emperor of France of all the good Offices he daily
did his Subjects, in point of Commerce: That all the Factory as well as the
Ambassador himself, were indebted to him for the conclusion of a business, had
made so much noise. To which the Dowanier made Answer; I boast, says he,
nothing, but am a Friend at need; God knows what I have done, and shall do: you
have many Enemies, those of your own Religion, So the Turks call all Western-
Christiars.
and Francs, as you are, do not much love you, nor are they much troubled to
see the French ill used, some of them gave continual Intelligence of things
might have angered the Vizir, if his Moderation and Prudence had not retained
him: He has not long since had assurances, that the Padicha of France sent to
the Emperor of Germany; offering him assistance, in case our Master the
Invincible Sultan, broke with that Prince, or to make him if he could declare
War by way of Advance against us: Others on the contrary side would persuade
us, That the French would suddenly be at War, both with the Germans, and most
part of Christendom: But the Grand Vizir confider'd all these reports as the
mere effects of base Envy, and sordid Jealousy, being resolved (pursued the
Dowanier) to give you proofs of his Friendship; I come therefore to tell you,
he as presented the offer of your Submissions to the Imperial Estrier; and
conjectures they may be near acceptance, that is, of being acceptible. The
Ambassador denied all those things which seemed to wound the Reputation of his
Master: And the Dowanier seeming to believe him, changed the discourse, saying,
come let us to work, I have brought hither my Officers that value the Customs,
to make Estimation of your Presents according to usage; and offer you my
advice, as a friend, wherein to augment them, that they may in some degree be
worthy to be offered the Emperor, Supporter of the World; and that we may the
better prevail with him to accept them. They thereupon brought the Dowanier
into the fairest Chamber of the French Seraglio, where he was much surprised
not to see the Principal Wall garnished with Looking-Glasses: But applying
himself to the Observation of the Presents, and advising with the Praisers, he
told the Ambassador that these he brought with him, but he must add to them
those he had since sent for from France, besides some Jewels: These last the
Ambassador desired him to buy for him, which he promised to do: He mentioned
too the ready Money, but the Ambassador protested he had none, and entreated
him to lend him some; which he consented to do: But the Ambassador desiring
that the Money might be delivered secretly, could obtain only a doubtful answer
from the Dowanier; though to comfort him he readily granted him another
request, which was, That his Presents might be carried to the Sultan by his own
People. This, though the surest proof of his Submission, was by the Dowanier
magnified to him as an exceeding favor, who told him, it must be done then by
his Kehaia, Clerks, and some Merchants; who must be well Instructed, to comply
with all the Ceremonies would be taught them; and to behave themselves with
Modesty, Silence, and Gravity. He then mentioned the Letter from the Emperor of
France, which the Ambassador would have excused, but at last promised to
deliver. This whole Intertainment, and great Negotiation, was mingled with
those ordinary ones of Cahu, Sherbet, and Sweet-water, and more then one
Collation of Fruit. The Ambassador often reiterated his Protestations of
Friendship and Acknowledgment to the Dowanier; the Praisers neither were not
forgotten: So when it was time to part, the Dowanier bid him fear nothing, for
he would go to the Grand Vizir, to know whether he had received Orders from the
invincible Emperor, for ending the business: The same honors were done him
going, as when he came, with repeated entreaties for a speedy Conclusion: He
came immediately to the Sovereign Vizir, and gave him a pleasant account of all
had past; but above all, they were pleased at the Ambassadors have, whom
therefore they agreed should be made solicit some days; which he did to the
Dawanier earnestly for the three following, receiving only dilatory Answers:
But then the Dowanier went to his House again, and carried with him the Jewels
he had bought with the ready money, receiving the same Honors, as at first,
but could not appoint a positive day for a Conclusion; pretending the Sultan
had not yet appointed one; but he persuaded the Ambassador not to be
discouraged, but in the mean time send the Letter and Presents to the Grand
Vizir's, that the manner of carrying them might be Regulated, which was
immediately done: They brought too the ready money, having in some manner
agreed it should be received privately. There was in the mean time a certain
Memorial presented to the Emperor of the World, sent him by the Grand Vizir in
this Form: My most Magnanimous, most Valiant, and most Happy Emperor, be
pleased to behold what is brought before you by the greatest of your Slaves; It
is that your Slave the Ambassador of France makes continual Supplications, to
implore Pardon for what past at Chio: He has never since that misfortune
ceased to use his utmost endeavors, to escape the terrible Grief of
Chastisement, so great a rashness Merited; and to preserve the whole French
Nation from the extirpating furious Sword of the Monarch of the World: To which
purpose he is fled to the Citadel of Submission, and there humbly waits for
the happy Moment, wherein he may be admitted to rub his Face with the dust of
the Feet of your Invincible, and ever Triumphant Highness: He begs you would be
pleased to cast an Eye tending toward acceptance, both on the Letter of the
Emperor his Master; and on the Money and Presents he (according to the Orders
he has received) is ready to expose at the Foot of Your Sublime Throne: And
which at present are in the possession of me, who has the honor to be Your
Slave: He confesses them to be mean, if considered with the Majesty of the
Person they are designed to, but hopes they may become of value by the
Acceptance, being sure proofs of his Vassalage, and Testimonies of his most
Submissive and respectful Repentance, for the disorder at Chio. It remains in
the breast of your Highness to Command any other thing you please, which your
Slave the Ambassador is ready to perform.

The wise Emperor, who penetrates into the most secret and difficult things, to
whom the Almighty God grant for ever a Happy and Glorious Reign, Commanded the
Grand Vizir to appear at his Foot; of whom he Inquired, Whether all he writ was
sincere; and whether there was no Trick, by which those Infidels might shelter
themselves in the Valley of Treachery and Insolence. The Grand Vizir assured
him he had reason to believe, that the Ambassador was in earnest: Whereupon
this Sovereign, who is the Delight and Glory of the World, spoke thus: The
French, though obstinate in Error, are nevertheless protected by our High and
Imperial Power, in hopes we may one day reduce them to receive the true Faith:
Their Emperor boasts to be our most Ancient Friend, yet have they acted like
Traitors, and Enemies at Chio: But because they readily humble themselves, I
submit to the most high and absolute Commands of the holy Prophet, which says,
When you have Power over your Enemy, pay me the Tithes of the Victory, by the
Pardon you shall give him. I am therefore disposed to Pardon and forget the
Ingratitude of these Infidels, whom I have loaded with my Sublime Favors;
having granted to their last Ambassador, with considerable advantages, the
Renovation of the Capitulations denied to so many of his Predecessors. The
Emperor paused a little, and then addressing it to the Grand Vizir, who durst
not yet speak, pursued thus: Let the Ambassador be well instructed in the Glory
he is going to receive by his Submissions, Humility, and Public Repentance;
whereby he not only disarms our Rage; but procures to his Master the
Confirmation of a Friendship, and Alliance, to him so Glorious, that it will
render him terrible to his Enemies.

The Grand Vizir with a most submissive bow, entreated the mighty Sultan of the
Osmans to appoint the place, where he would have his Slave the Ambassador make
public to the World, his Repentance and most submissive Respects, with the
proofs of a Fidelity, should be no more subject to a change the Emperor
Replied, he would send his pleasure in Writing; which came in this Form: I
shall God willing, to morrow, and next day divert my self with the noise of the
Waves of the Sea; to reflect my Grandeur in that Liquid Crystal Miroir; and to
delight my ears with the Artificial Thunder and confusion of Voices, which
Reigns usually on that Element. I go to Seat my self at the Entrance of the
Port on my Maritime Throne, Palace.
in the Kieusk of Mustapha Pasha; where the Sea seems to be summoned into a
long and large Court, only to do Homage to my Imperial Seat, the vast City of
Constantinople. It is there, its natural inconstancy cannot hinder it from
rendering me perpetual Homage, in the name of other Seas: And to glory in
bringing me Tributes and Submissions constantly, from all the Princes of the
World. There I inspire my Officers, with power of Gaining Victories with ease,
in granting them the glory at setting forth, to prostrate themselves at my
feet: And there at their return I receive the proofs of those Victories they
have gained in my name. It may be truly called the Abridgment of the World;
Being the refuge of all the Nations of the seven Climates, who think themselves
happy in bringing thither their most precious Merchandises, for the use of me
and my Slaves. Nature alone contrived this Royal Port, which is constantly
covered with vast numbers of Ships and Galleys, and Beautified by those
Mountains clothed with Mosques, Towns and Forests which encompass it about;
Whilst I there divert my self, true Emperor of the World, and make reflections
of what I owe to God, the unchangeable Lord; for giving me so beautiful a
Residence in this perishing World; as an earnest of that he has prepared for
me in the other, which shall never end: You may cause to be brought before me,
the submissions of the French Ambassador; in a manner, as much proportioned as
can be to our Grandeur, and ^he quality of Protector of the true Faith, a Title
we more esteem than that of all our Dominions: This is what we Ordain; And thou
who art our Grand Vizir, and Counselor, full of Glory, must give odedience to
this.

The most discerning and prudent Vizir, was extremely pleased, that a Soul like
his, so much Inferior to that of our most invincible Master; should enter into
Sentiments so agreeable to the clear thoughts of that incomparable Emperor. He
sent presently for the Dowanier, and Communicated those Orders to him, which
none must disobey without the danger of being lost: He assured the Grand Vizir,
that he was continually solicited for a dispatch by the French Interpreters,
who were scarcely ever from him. So it was concerted that the next day but one
all should be finished; of which the principal Officers of the Port had notice:
And things were so ordered that the Common People might not be ignorant
neither. The Emperor of the two Seas, being accordingly come to the Kieusk of
Mustapha Pasha, there took for some time the pleasure of a true Emperor; and
being set at Dinner, they caused the French Ambassadors Presents to be brought
from the Grand Vizir's; where, as I before told your happy Lordship, they had
been deposited three or four days; and placed them in a House near the Palace,
under the conduct of an Officer of the Port; And over against the Kendi, were
exposed to public view the Ambassadors People, his Secretary and chief Clerk,
a Merchant and three Interpreters, who were the principal together with ten or
twelve Footmen: These had waited with great impatience from day break,
expecting this happy moment; Then by Order of the Principal Usher, Master of
the Robes.
and Master of the Caftans, the six first had each of them a Castau or Vest of
honor delivered them; Thus with the Interpreter of the Port, and a Turkish
Officer, in Caftans at the head of them, they marched followed by the Footmen.

These eight in Robes with the rest of the Ambassadors People, took each of
them a part of the Present, and fyled one after the other, with all the
Gravity, Modesty and Silence, becoming a business of that nature: They were
made stop at one of the corners of the Palace: And being drawn into a Rank,
with their Backs toward the Seraglio, and Faces to the Sea, Eyes cast down,
their Feet straight and closed to one another, each man held his part of the
Present, elevated with both his hands, as high, and as much exposed to the
public as might be; in which humble posture having stood a sufficient time for
the People to view and distinguish every thing, they were discharged from that
honor by the Officers of the Emperor, supporter of the World.

It is not certainly known, how many Purses of Money were amongst the Presents,
but some there were, and these carried to his Highness, by him who had Ordered
the whole Ceremony, Master of Kequests.
which is the Telkedgi. The Emperor of the World cast one corner of his Eye
upon them, which Communicated to them all their value and esteem they ought to
have: This Corifee and Master of the Kings of the World, This mighty Emperor of
the Osmanli; had the pleasure to read the excuses of the Emperor of France, in
his Letter delivered him by the Grand Vizir; in which he assures him, he had
given no Orders to his Admiral to disturb the Ancient Alliance, but on the
contrary to strengthen it; But if in pursuing and fighting the Tripolins his
Enemies there had happened any wrong to his Highness's Territories, he was
troubled at it, and desired him not to take it ill; but consider that those
Thieves had before set upon the French Merchants in his Highness's Ports: That
though he had great reason to complain that the Fort of Chio had fired upon his
Flag, yet he freely forgot it, to show to what degree he would be a Friend to
the most invincible Emperor of the Musulmans. Whilst his Highness was
accepting these protestations of Fidelity, which he believed sincere; to prove
them so, the Telkedgi and Interpreter of the Port appeared, followed by the
three Interpreters of France; who being come to a certain distance stayed, and
had the honor to touch the Ground of the Field, before the Sultans Throne with
their Faces; there holding them as long a time as is required to boil an Egg:
In this manner, without being held, they saluted the Emperor; being by Birth
Slaves to the Grand Seignior: But the Kahaia, and Clerk to the Ambassador, with
the French Merchant, who are only to be reckoned Slaves by Force, and
Representers of their Master; were held by two Ushers, each in Vests of
Ceremonies, who extended their Arms with one hand, and carried in the other
Silver Staves which they often rubbed on the ground with great noise, and a
certain Motion of Grandeur and Ostentation. These Conductors who led their
Slaves like Victimes in seeming have, made them stop as suddenly; saying to
them in a rude Tone Stand.
Dour. When the Telkedgi, and Interpreter of the Port, with the three French
Interpreters had done prostrating; then might be seen these chief Porters or
Ushers, like Maskers of Ceremonies, so well instruct their Frenchmen, that
without quitting their Shoulders or prejudicing the extension of their Arms,
they all kneeled softly down, and imprinted their Faces in the Dust, in the
open view of the Sun, remaining in that posture so long as it pleased the
Emperor of the World; who being well satisfied with so full a reparation, made
a sign almost imperceptible for taking them away. Porter^.
The Capidges are so perfectly instructed in these Ceremonies, that the least
motion of the Field is to them enough, so they raised hastily these prostrated
Slaves, and made them return back without giving them time to behold the
sublime Majesty of the Emperor of the World, who was seated at a great
disttance. Thus the Frenchmen performed their Commission in representing the
true submissions of their Ambassador.

The August and terrible Sultan of the Osmanli, was Seated on his Throne at the
entrance of the open Gallery, which Ranges on that side of the Kieusk, which is
toward the Sea: The * Chesade was by him; His eldest Son.
For tho the Emperor his Father does not yet admit him to his Councels or
Divan, but keeps him in a plain Equipage, having him only often with him at
Hunting, Walking, Riding, and other diversions; yet his Highness would have him
with him, to be a Witness of the respects, submission and public Repentance of
the French Ambassador; to make this young Prince sensible how much the name of
Osman, which he must one day support, was revered through the whole World,
since the Emperor of France, the greatest Monarch of the belief of the Messia,
and terror to the rest of those Infidel Princes, whose Armies and Garrisons are
innumerable, and Treasures inexhaustible, did permit this Ambassador to make
such full satisfaction for what past at Chio: There was beside ranged about the
Throne in respectful posture the principal Boys of the Court.
Itheoglans: The Grand Vizir attended too on oneside near a corner of the
Gallery, with his hands closed, his Feet straight and joined, and his Eyes cast
down: there was neither Whispering.
Kalibulick, Noise, Crowd or Confusion, but an awful silence, which expressed
that it belonged to none but the Master to speak or give leave to them that
should. Thus my most honored Lord, you see the particulars of this most
remarkable Affair: the chief Circumstances whereof are Recorded in the
Registers of the Empire. The great ones, nay the very People talk of it with
delight in Constantinople, and the news of it is gone to Persia, Armenia, and
the Indies; the Interpr^ters.
Droguemans of our Friends Allies, and Tributaries of the Law of Messia, are
well instructed in all particulars, to the end they may inform their several
Masters; many of the Secretaries and Clerks of the Imperial Register* have writ
exactly to the Pachas and Beglarbeigs of this vast Empire, preserved by God,
concerning it. And I think my self happy to have been chosen to Communicate all
these glorious circumstances to my most honored Lord. The matter is in it self
so splendid, that it needs no more but the pure and simple relation to make it
be admired; and Eloquence would but serve to hide some part of the Luster: I
have therefore used no disguises, nor indeed hesitated to mix some particulars
in my relation which deserve to be kept secret; so that I have made this rather
a little Book then a Letter, nor have I yet fully done, having forgot to relate
to you the satisfaction of the Ambassador in having got out of so difficult an
Employment: he magnifies his own Conduct, and has writ about it to his
Country, as well as given an account thereof to the Ministers residing from
other Princes, at the happy Port. And he is so strongly persuaded that he has
done his Master considerable Service; that he has sent proofs of his
acknowledgment to all those he thought instrumental in procuring so mighty an
advantage as the Pardon of the most invincible Emperor of the Musulmans.

The most discerning Vizir, so conducted this whole affair, to the sole Glory
of our invincible Suitan; that there is not the least Circumstance, or most
minute passage can be Interpreted to the contrary, except by men of shattered
understandings; we are therefore confirmed by it, in that esteem which is due
to his Merit: and may avow with justice the most submissive acknowledgments and
thanks given him by the Ambassador, which were accompanied with Presents that
testified the Gratitude due to this Minister, for so well reestablishing the
Negotiation, Trade and Alliance with the French, which without his Mediation to
his Highness, was in hazard to have broke: The effects whereof could not have
been otherways then Bloody.

The Ambassador believed himself much honored by certain words of Gratitude,
which looked a little like thanks from the Grand Vizir: Nor has he wanted to
acknowledge the pains and endeavors of the most illustrious Kehaia, the
Resefendi Lord of the Clerks of the two Registers.
Teskeredgis, Chaoux Pacha, Principal Usher of the Interpreter of the Port, and
many others of whose Friendships he makes sure account. The Dowanier who
mediated all, did not labor for nothing: his reward was not forgotten, nor
will be wanting hereafter for the proofs he will daily give the French,
Merchants of his Friendship to them, or rather that he bears to himself.

I must, My Lord, say one word or two concerning the many mercies which God
pours forth, on the Mighty Sultan of the Osmanli; of which, though we have a
thousand Examples, in my opinion none are more visible or stronger proofs, then
the Jealousy he is pleased to sow amongst Christian Princes: We know some of
the effects this passion produces in the Countries of those Infidels: But if
our Grandeur and Power, which is arrived to so great a height, makes us not
neglect to enter into the thoughts of this Subject, in certain particulars,
which we have now before us, and which will instruct us in many things; we
shall easily perceive it to be the perfect hand of God, which in Mercy to us so
blinds the Christians, that most of their Princes are reduced to the necessity
of seeking the friendship of the Port, to divert from them the fury of those
Armies which Command Victory. And there may be discerned amongst the Christian
Ambassadors a most particular Application for the destruction of one another.
They seem indeed only so many spies, not upon our Government, but of what
passes in the Countries of their Neighbors: And above all of any weakness
amongst them, of which they think themselves so happy to Inform us, that they
even make us deaf with their news; and so the Glory of our Master, which
permits not that we should have Ambassadors rende in their Courts, does not the
least prejudice to his Affairs. This Curse of God upon the Christians has
gained us many Victories, and gives us easy Conquests: And you may discern a
part of their Conduct, by what I have said about the business of Chio; and I
may add truly, that there never appeared so much Zeal amongst the Christian
Ministers against those of France as then.

They would come and tell us. That the Emperor of France is an Ambitious and
restless Prince, very Powerful and Fortunate, who disturbs all his Neighbors,
and gives them great trouble by his Victories and Money, that he would seem to
be a friend to the Port, whilst he gives great Succors in all places against
it; that he values himself to the Pope by the great designs he has against the
Turks; that we ought to consider him as a dangerous Enemy, and the greatest
Politician of the World; that all the rest of Christendom was Confederating
against him; and that the King of Germany expected but the renewing of the
Truce with us, to put himself in the Head of the League against him. The
Venetians, though for their particular Interest they should desire a War
between us and the Germans, yet nevertheless have not ceased to excite as much
as possible, the hatred of his Highness to the French; and it is certain the
Hollanders and others did the same: They would all have engaged us in a Rupture
with France; but the most discerning Vizir, who knows how to make his advantage
of every thing, is very well pleased with the Reparation of the French
Ambassador. He can likewise, when he pleases, sell very dear to the German
Minister, the Renewing the Truce; and in appearance preferrs doing so to that
of the War, notwithstanding the interests of those would persuade the contrary:
He will Attaque the Venetians sooner then they dream of, and not fail to draw
Money from the others: He hears when he pleases, and sometimes lends an Ear to
a business of which he will seem to understand nothing: He will cast out hopes,
when necessary, the more easily to deceive believing that most of those
Negotiate with him, do but watch for opportunities to Cozen him; so it is very
difficult to please him with any thing: Delays, spinning out time; a hastiness
like Anger, and haughty Fierceness are to him Natural, and of great Advantage:
He never Treats directly, in the beginning of a Negotiation, but leaves it to
be managed by his most experienced Creatures, the better to take his Measures,
for its Conclusion: If he loves Money it is to Augment the Treasures of his
Master; As his reason is Infinite, and capable of discerning what is in his
Power, and what not, so he governs with an absolute Authority, and cuts off the
heads of any dare oppose him; and this way cannot choose but be good, and
pleasing to God, since it is for the Preservation and Propagation of the true
Faith, and for increasing the Glory, and Prosperity of the Emperor, who is the
Protector and Defender of the Divine Unity; and the most worthy Successor of
the greatest of the Prophets, Mouhamet Moustafa: I have thus weakly mentioned a
few of those Qualities, which recommend our Grand Vizir; and I is may safely
add, that it impossible but he should be a very able Man; having been Educated
under the Conduct and Authority of the blessed Kedgia Mhammed Pacha, and of his
Son Ahmet deceased, which were the Two Kieupruli's; He Acted and Governed under
these two great Men: But to complete his Character, we need only say, he is the
Choice of the Emperor of the two Continents and two Seas; the Possessor of the
two most August Cities, our Master; the Kalise of the Age, who has Conquered
the Realm of Candia; and the most Impregnable Fortress of Cameniek, whose
Grandeur God will increase, and give him a blessed end: See my most honored
Lord all I have to write to you: I beseech the most High God to fill you with
his Grace, and to grant me that of ever serving You.

AN OBSERVATION By way of Continuation of the former Letter, concerning the
Negotiation of Monsieur Guilleragues.
THe Affairs of the Port may justly occasion very serious Reflections, since it
is very visible, That the Motions of the Sultan, and his Grand Vizir, do hold
all the Christian part of Europe in suspense: We have seen on the one side the
Emperor hope with a little too much Confidence the renewing the Truce; but he
had certainly obtained it without all those pains he has taken, if he had not
so long given Ear to those Politics, which advised him not to draw the Forces
of the Ottoman Emperor too hastily upon him: His Imperial Majesty without this
fear, had vigorously opposed the Progress of the Malcontents in Hungary: A
Resolution so necessary had subdued those Rebels, and made the Infidels know he
was ready to receive them: but whilst that Court became Balanced with a desire
of carrying the War another way, they delayed both; and through an untimely
Fear of the most remote danger, stood still in an unactive Speculation, which
perhaps may draw upon them Enemies from all sides. Sultan Mehemet the Fourth is
in Warlike Pomp set forth from his Capital City, followed by Count Alberte
Caprara, whose Negotiation appears to be brought to Extremity: But because
there is often seen strange Changes in great Affairs; he flatters himself with
hopes that some remedy prepared upon the Frontiers, may work effectually, even
when the Disease appears most desperate: The Grand Seignior in the mean time,
has remained certain days in the Camp of Davont Pacha; and notwithstanding his
obstinacy of remaining in his Tents, in defiance of Eighteen hours violent
Rain, he was at last forced to quit them, and the danger he ran of being
drowned, fell upon three or four of his People, who were lost at a passage
through certain Waters, where the Bridge was broken down: There was also lost
several rich things, both of his Highness and other great ones, who accompanied
him; but this Emperor after a little rest, to give time to the Waters to fall,
continued his march to Adrianople. The Grand Vizir, who has been in his Tents
ever since the march of the Emperor from Constantinople, began to follow on the
Nineteenth of October very early in the Morning, to join his Highness; carrying
with him the satisfaction of having deluded Monsieur Guillerdgues to the very
last: But may not one think that this Minister deceives himself in that
pleasure, since it is apparent, that Ambassador has contributed more then he
to his being cheated by him.

He Negotiates no longer about the Firing at Chio, that business was determined
sufficiently to his Glory, if you will credit the Paris Gazette; Or as it is
well Explained by another, It is the business of the Sofa continues.

We must remember that whilst Monsieur De Quesne, besieged the Galleys in the
Port of Chio, to oblige the Vizir to grant the Sofa; that Minister being much
astonished discoursed as if he was resolved to give that honor, as soon as the
Galleys were returned to Constantinople: Monsieur Guilleragues, who believed
him, procured them liberty to come; but the Promise, which was the Foundation
of all, remained unperform'd. See then how this Minister deceived himself in
letting escape a sure way of obtaining his desires; and in believing the Turks
capable of fair dealing in a nice Rancounter.

It is known how long the time was delayed before they came to an end of the
business of the Presents, that is to say, the Reparation for the attempt upon
Chio: But the more we perceive the Turkish Ministers to have a desire to finish
it, the more, it is evident, he should have refused to put an end to that fine
business, without having first the Sofa: But Monsieur Guilleragues is content
with the words they gave him on this Subject, and post pones the matter, till
after delivery of the Presents, which was executed; he remaining still without
the Sofa: There we see him cozen himself the second time.

There has past a long time since the glorious Victory on the 21st of May, the
day on which they Triumph over the Grand Seignior, in forcing him to come
himself to receive their Trifles, even to the Sea side; and since the fifth of
June, the happy day on which Monsieur Gilleragues's promise in writing was
restored; and the 29th of the same Month when the Presents were sent by him to
the Grand Vizir; to the 19th of October, the day whereon this Minister began
his march for Adrianople. All this time of five or six Months was vainly
employed to soften this Minister in the point of the Sofa: Monsieur
Guilleragues the more pressed it, to the end he might obtain it before the
departure of the Vizir: And being necessitated to use all Peaceful ways, having
let slip those of Force, which struck at the Interest and Glory of the Turks:
He has not Hesitated to hazard a second Letter of his King's, which remains as
well without Effect as Answer: He delivered the first himself, and had a verbal
Answer to this purpose, That he ought to be contented with the great Honor the
Sultan had done him in receiving his Presents, and not to pretend to a thing so
extraordinary as that of the Sofa; and that it was not usual with the Port to
grant so many advantages at one time. It is true, he insinuated that his
Masters Fleet would return to fetch him back; But he that had sent it away
before, and rendered it useless when there, where it might have procured his
pleasure, had not his Bravadoes much valued; but at the same time there was a
certain Rumor spread, as if he was to repair the Subjects losses at Chio,
pretending that was distinct from the satisfaction made the Grand Seignior.

All this was not able to discourage him; he applies again to his incomparable
friend the Dowanier, who as readily undertakes to cheat him; so his
Interpreters must make many useless Journeys to the Vizir's Camp, in the last
of which they presented a Request from the Ambassador, wherein he Remonstrates
to that Minister the necessity of his Retiring, for which purpose the King's
Fleet would come to the Dardanelloes to fetch him; he therefore entreats Order
might be given to the Kaimmakam of Constantinople, not to hinder his departure,
grounded upon so indispensible Necessity, it being not just, that the
Ambassador from the greatest, and most powerful Monarch of Christendom, and the
Antientest Friend of the Port, should stay longer without those distinctions of
Honor and Prerogatives, which were his due; that in all things besides the
Vizir might use his pleasure.

The Grand Vizir took this as a conclusion for all requests, and thereupon
plainly declared his pleasure, That he would neither grant the Sofa, nor should
the Ambassador go till the Grand Seignior pleased; and in case he continued
obstinate, they should take good order about him.

The Interpreters hearing these angry Menaces, found a way to soften them by
the Kehaia, who, as was pretended, had moderated the Vizir, so that he declared
himself willing to give him Audience in his Pavillion upon equal place, to let
it be seen, That he understood well the Grandeur and Power of the Emperor of
France, above other Christian Princes: But for granting Audience, on the Sofa,
it was not in his Power; The Grand Seignior, having ordered that Ambassadors
should receive it, below, even all, not excepting that of France.

They pretend too, That the Grand Vizir after his Avowing, this indeed wilful
want of Power; should say he would try to alter his Highnesse's Resolution, as
soon as he came to Adrianople; where he was going to find that Emperor: And
that in the mean time he entreated Monsieur Guilleragues, that as he had not
come to the Port without leave of his Highness, so he would not go without it:
finishing all this fine Discourse with many offers of Service to the
Ambassador; as well relating to his own particular, as to that of Trade.

Monsieur Guilleragues, came not of his Embassy by leave of the Grand Seignior,
nor is the Vizir accustomed to entreat this Ambassador; such Discourses are not
common with that haughty Minister, no more than his offers of Service: And
promise of Audience on equal Seats: Nor can we unriddle the Mystery of saying,
The French Ships should come to the Dardanelloes; since why not to
Constantinople? But in fine we may conclude, That if Monsieur Guilleragues
expects the Vizir should intercede for the Sofa, he is cheated the third time.
For it is certain, the depriving him so long of it can justly be imputed to
none but himself, who in that is Master. Therefore his best excuse will be to
say that his Interpreters surpised him: But all these Cheats would appear but
Trifles, so he be not cheated too by the renewing the Truce with the Emperor.
And should there be a War, it would advantage him but little; and it is plain,
nothing would be of more use to him, then the playing again, the Cannon of his
King; It must not be forgotten that the Ambassador would have it believed, that
he had ended the great Business at Chio, for Baubles, even just nothing: And
that he had in a manner forced the Grand Seignior to give Audience to his
Servants. This ridiculous Report, and groundless Vanity, is come to the Ears of
the Grand Vizir, to whom they Interpreted the Paris Gazets, that are filled
with the Glory of Monsieur Guilleragues; and seem to insinuate a low
Condescension in the Port: But since this Infidel Minister knows the folly of
these Brags; which he sees destroyed by the Relations Printed in other
Countries: They serve only, for a Subject to augment his Pride; and gives him a
Pleasure, the mor to Chagrine and Mortify the French Ambassador.

FINIS.

