AN ANSWER TO THE Letter to a Dissenter, Detecting the many UNJUST INSINUATIONS
Which highly Reflect on His Majesty, As likewise the many false Charges on the
DISSENTERS.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing house on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

AN ANSWER TO THE LETTER to a DISSENTER,
SIR,
THE Letter to a Dissenter upon occasion of his Majesty's late Gracious
Declaration of Indulgence, I have in obedience to your Command carefully
perused, and must assure you, that the returning an Answer, though very easy, is
yet unpleasant: For, as its Author has not offered any thing that is close and
nervous, yet he has larded his Discourse with so many unjust Insinuations of
what highly reflects on his Majesty, and with so many false Charges on the
Dissenter, that a rehearsal of 'em, which is necessary for the Answerer to
give, cannot well be, unless with such smart Repartees as may look over-severe,
at least to some of the Author's Admirers.

There is nothing more hateful unto me, than the dropping one word in any
Concertation, that may look hard, and finding it impossible to give a full
Answer to this Letter, without expressing those just Resentments the whole
Contexture of his Harangue have made necessary, I should have been very glad to
have been Dispensed with. But the Consideration of the Service I may do his
Majesty and the whole Kingdom, by detecting the Vanity and Folly of the Author
in connection with your Injunctions, has emboldned me to Resolve on as calm a
Discussion of this Letter, as the Subject matter of it will admit.

The whole of this Letter I find may be reduced to these Heads: False Charges
against the Dissenter, Vile Reflections on his Majesty, and An Intimation of
the Church of Englands Repentance, with some little Artifices made use of to
inveagle the Dissenter to act contrary to his avowed Principles, and real
Interest.

This I take to be a full Account of the Pamphlet, to all which I will give my
Replies distinctly.

To begin with his Charge against the Dissenter, as what is of least moment,
and at which the Pamphleteer would only glance, and introduce it by way of
Supposition, that, if possible, whenever occasion should make it necessary, he
might, by saying he did not positively affirm it, fetch himself off from the
reproach of being a False Accuser; but this way of reproaching the Innocent is
so common, that by wise Men the very Insinuation, where the Charge cannot be
made good, is looked on as very Unjust and Abusive. However, after this manner
the Exclusion and Late Rebellion is laid at the Dissenter's Door, and their
Ministers supposed to have Money sprinkled amongst them, to engage the People
first one way, and now another, and therefore their Reasonings are not to be
regarded, especially if they preach up Anger and Vengeance against the Church
of England; That their Addresses don't flow from a Sense of his Majesty's
Kindness, but from the Persuasions or Threatenings used to obtain 'em; that though
the Dissenters are against SET-FORMS of Prayer, yet are now content the Priests
should indite for them; and instead of silently receiving the benefit of
Indulgence, they set up for Advocates to support it, and become voluntary
Aggressors, and look like Counsel Retained by the Prerogative against their old
Friend MAGNA CHARTA.

This is one part of the Gentleman's Letter, and these are the chief Reasons he
presses the Dissenters with, to engage them against an accepting the Liberty
his Majesty has most Graciously given them. It Is this that is at bottom; for,
(says he) It might be wished that they would have suppressed their Impatience,
and have been content for the sake of Religion, to enjoy it within themselves
without the Liberty of a Public Exercise, till a Parliament had allowed it. But
I Will appeal to any considering Man of the Church of England Communion, whether
the Method this Gentleman has taken to wheedle the Dissenter, be either
Christian or Prudent: For, what of Christianity is there in charging the
Innocent, as being guilty of the most odious Crimes; or what of Prudence in
railing on those whom they would ensnare into a Compliance with them?

In the first place the Exclusion is charged on the Dissenters, and (as another
Pamphleteer has it) it is the Nonconformists that by their meddling in the Matter
of the Exclusion drew a new Storm upon themselves. And why must the Matter of
the Exclusion be charged on the Dissenters? Was not that thing managed in the
House of Commons by the Sons of the Church of England? Were not the chief
Speakers in that House Church of England-men, and those who made up that House,
ten to one, of her Communion? It has been, I confess, a common Practice for the
Church of England, to do a bad thing, and throw the Odium on it on the
Dissenter; but is this fair or just? If going ordinarily to the Common Prayer,
and taking the Sacrament according to the Usage of the Church of England, be a
Test by which we may know one of her Communion, the Matter of the Exclusion
must lie at her Door; And if thus much be not enough to Characterize a
Churchman, what is? She Will not (I hope) insist on the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, as what is peculiar to Men of her Religion, lest thereby the
new Masters of the Ceremonies, that are for a Repeal of the Test-Laws, be
included within her Pale.

The same may be said of the Rebellion, but the Replier to the Oxford Clergies
Reasons against Addressing having fully cleared up this Matter, I will wave it,
being assured that the Church of England has no reason to Glory, as if none of
her Sons nor Clergy had any hand in it.

Ay, but the Dissenting Ministers have Moneys given 'em to carry on the Design.
But where is the Man who has received one Farthing from the Roman-Catholic for
carrying on any Popish Intrigue? This looks like an old Story, which some Years
ago was spread by a Dignified Clergyman within the Line of Communication, who
was so bold as to fasten it on a worthy Gentleman now dead, but who at that
time gave Challenge, which was not during his Life, nor to this hour, taken up.
And what is it that tempts this sort of Men to talk after the old rate? Have
they any new Instances that makes 'em so brisk in their Accusations? Let them
make it out against one Nonconforming Minister, or forbear this Invidious way
of casting Reproach on the Guiltless.

However, for once let us suppose that some Dissenting Ministers have received
Money from those in Authority for some Service they did the Government, What is
this to the promoting a Popish Design? Multitudes of the Church of England have
been raised to great Preferments for the Services they were supposed to have
done the Government, but was it in good earnest because they promoted Popery?
This Letter insinuates, as if the Papists also promoted the late Persecution
against Dissenters, and yet we remember well, who Preached up Persecution
before the Lord Major of this City, and who also was made a Dean: But was it
because he designed Popery? Moreover it is well known, that a certain Bishop in
the World, if one under a suspension still bears that Name, who procured at
least 200 l. to encourage a Church of England Doctor to persecute the
Non-conformists, and was this for the sake of Popery? In a word, we give the
Challenge to any Man to prove that the Papist did at any time give one Farthing
to a Dissenting Minister; or that the Dissenters did Receive from the
Government the fortieth part that Church of England Ministers have received.

If any Church of England Men have been sensible of the Miseries they have by
their severe Laws exposed the Dissenters unto, and in compassion have given
some Relief, the Dissenters no doubt will thankfully acknowledge it, but then
they must add, that unless the Church of England Men must be esteemed Papists
because of the Alliance there is between their Principles, this is not a
receiving Money from Papists: But let the Truth be brought to Light, and let the
Church of England Charity to Dissenting Ministers be discovered, and 'twill
appear that it is not to be compared with what the Church of England has taken
from 'em. Moreover it is well known, that when some Gentlemen on their Dying
Reds to express their Affection to Dissenting Ministers have given 'em
Legacies, they have been deprived of 'em. And where is the Dissenting Minister,
who Preaches up Anger and Vengeance against the Church of England? Name the
Man, that we may know who he is, and what repute he has amongst the party; and
'twould be also an Act of Justice in him to direct us to the People who
received their Addresses from a Priest, and to the Priest that made 'em.

If the Gentleman cannot clear up these Points, as I presume he cannot, how
specious soever his pretenses may be, his untruth will not much advantage the
Church of England, nor will that Church have much cause to Glory in such an
Advocate, who does not only charge her for Persecuting the Dissenter, but makes
no other Plea, but what leans on the ^eeblest Foundation, even on Injustice and
False Accusations. And if this be her best Refuge, her Quarrel with the King
(it is hoped) cannot hold long, for these generally are the last.

And what is it that provokes the good Man to persuade us, that the Dissenters
Thanks are Extorted? Does he think that the being delivered from a violent
Persecution is so inconsiderable a kindness, that the Dissenters cannot be
sensible of it? Are grievous Imprisonments, the spoiling 'em of their Estates,
the ruining of their Families, such small matters, that the Deliverance cannot
Merit the Name of a favor? Or, are the Dissenters so used to such Calamities
and made so Brawny, that they are not capable of perceiving so much? Is it
impossible for them to distinguish Ease from Misery? If so, whose fault is
that? Is it not the Persecutors that have so ill entreated them? It Is true the
Church of England did by her Rigor, so over-aw them, that they durst not
Petition the King for ease; and after his Majesty most Graciously gave it them,
the Dread and Confusion they remained under was so very great, that the
Dissenters could not easily recover themselves, and make that have they should,
to render the King their humblest thanks. But this is not for the Honor of the
Church, first to frighten the Dissenter and make him move slowly, and then
reproach him for not making more haste. And this is not all, for the Dissenters
do no sooner Address, but they become Voluntary Aggressors, and look like
Counsel retained by the Prerogative against Magna Charta. This is a run from
one Extreme to another, they are first charged for not rendering thanks
willingly, and yet then are made Voluntary Aggressors for rendering such
unwilling thanks, who look like Counsel retained against Magna Charta. Are not
the Dissenters then in a most deplorable condition? If they do not Address,
they are a People that can never be obliged by benefits, nor fit to be
Tolerated, as one Church Doctor assures them; if they do Address, they are for
Prerogative against Magna Charta. And why against Magna Charta? Is it against
the Great Charter of England, that a good Subject enjoy his Civil Rights, and
Properties? The Dissenters, at least the greatest part of 'em, take the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, and thereby show themselves to be good Subjects,
and why then must they be deprived of their Civil Rights, for the sake of a
Religion that hurts not the Government? Some say, that by the Fundamental
Constitution of our Government all Laws against the Law of God are ipso facto
void and null, and may not the King prevent the Execution of such vacated Laws?
Others tell us, that to be of this, or that, or the other Religion, is not a
Crime at Common Law, it is but Malum Prohibitum, and yet Religious Meetings
have been made Routs and Riots, (even the supposed Intention to serve God, has
been thus interpreted) which are mala in se. And why may not the King prevent
these abuses of the Law? The Dissenter is also told, that it is against Magna
Charta to disseise the Subject of his Freehold or Liberty, but by Lawful
Judgment of his Peers, and yet by the Conventicle Act, and the Oxford Act, the
Dissenters have been disseised of both without any such Judgment of their
Peers, and may not the King hinder this? There have been also great Lawyers who
aver, that the 23d. of Elizabeth affects not a Protestant Dissenter, and yet
many have been ruined by this Act, and may not the King put a stop to this
Injustice and Violence on the Subject? It Is also told them, that it is against
Magna Charta to Amerce a Freeman any other ways than after the manner of the
fault, saying to him his Contenement and Freehold, and yet Convictions have
been, unknown to the accused party, Recorded, and Warrants have been granted
out for 8, 10, 12, or 14 Conventicles at once to the Disseising the Freeman of
all he has. It Is true, a great Lawyer declared, that no Conviction could be
Legally Recorded until the party accused was summoned to show cause; but
another yet living was of another Opinion, and gave life to Clandestine
Convictions, as a Justice of Peace and a great Lawyer did grant out Warrants on
Prophetic Oaths, that a Meeting would be the next Day or Week following; But
the King has delivered them from all these Miseries, and yet may they not give
thanks, unless they set themselves against Magna Charta?

Furthermore it must not be forgotten, how much the Church of England have
exalted the Prerogative when they were in hopes of having it employed against
the Dissenter, and nothing more certain than that Qui sentit commodum, and
incommodum sentire debet, and therefore how much soever the King Exercises his
Prerogative, in this respect the Churchmen must be silent, and that in matters
Ecclesiastical the King can dispense, no Man of Learning that I could ever hear
of, but does acknowledge it, and others affirm, that the King can in matters
Civil dispense with whatever is but malum Prohibitum. But for these things
consult Nye's Discourse, and the Replier to the Oxford Reasons against
Addressing.

In a word, if the King had been of the Church of England's Religion, not only
the Dispensing Power, but the Legislative would have been (as heretofore it has
been affirmed to be) lodged in the King's Breast; but if the King be of another
Religion, he must be deprived of all his Prerogatives: But whatever the present
sentiments of the Church of England are, it is very manifest, that according to
the frame of our Government, as described by the Church of England Men
heretofore, the King could not only dispense with Laws, but the Prerogative is
so very much above all Laws, that even those Commissions granted by Prerogative
against Statute Law must be regarded more than that Law. It is not therefore
the Prerogative that our Churchmen are angry with, but the Exercise of it to
the Relief of others. It Is the Dissenters Liberty that vexes them.

For though it be known, that the Dissenters lie under manifest Convictions of
Conscience, that it is their Duty to worship God in their Way, that their
Privacy was but the Effect of a Violence laid upon them, which is no sooner
removed, but they return to their Duty; yet for the sake of Religion, contrary
to their Consciences, they must lay aside the Public Worship of God, and all
this to gratify their Persecuting Friends of the Church of England, and must
wait till a Parliament, that is against Liberty of Conscience, give 'em
Liberty. For the great thing the Dissenters desire, is a Parliament that will
concur with the King in Establishing Liberty by a Law, and for desiring such a
Parliament they are exposed by our Gentleman to the severest Censures.

But let us suppose that to gratify their Persecutors, the Dissenters would
venture on one stretch of Conscience; and tho when they could not Worship
Publicly without Trouble, yet were resolved to hold on in that Worship, and
will now, whilst they may be at ease, leave off all Public Worship, I say, for
once let us make the Supposition: But then would not this be sufficient to
justify all the Clamors, they have been loaded with above Twenty Years
together, of being the most giddy and obstinate People alive, who know not how
to live, but in contradiction to the Government; and would not this provoke the
King to conclude, that it is not Religion but Faction and Sedition they are for?
And would not our Clergy have endeavored to fix such Thoughts of the
Dissenters on his Majesty's Mind? And might they not have continued their
Privacy till Doomsday for any Relief a Parliament would give 'em? How then can
any Man of Conscience, or of mere Humanity, be angry with this persecuted
People, because they thankfully accept of Liberty, and are desirous that it may
be Established by Law? But this is not the worst part of the Pamphlet, there
remains what cannot but turn the Stomach of any Loyal Person against it; for
Reflections of a more odious Nature cannot be cast on any Man of Honor, than
this Pamphleteer has cast on the King.

In the First place, he insinuates that the King gives not the Dissenter this
Liberty, of Inclination, but of Necessity. These New Friends, says he, by whom
he must mean his Majesty, and those of his Religion, did not make you their
Choice, but their Refuge, they have ever made their first Courtships to the
Church of England, and when they were rejected there, they made their
Application to you in the Second place; that the King being a Papist, is not to
be believed; for the Papists are no more able to make good their Vows, than Men
married before and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
Besides, he further suggests, as if his Majesty would imitate a Neighboring
Prince, in destroying all Protestants; for he says, If in the Height of this
great Dearness, by comparing things, it should happen, that at this Instant
there is much a surer Friendship with those who are so far from allowing
Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant under them: Let the Scene
lie in what part of the world it will, the Argument will come home, and sure it
will afford sufficient ground to suspect. And in another Page, the Prerogative
is brought in retaining Counsel against Magna Charta, and in answer to an
Objection, in which it is said, that the Church of England is never humble, but
when she is out of Power; The Reply is, That this is not so in FACT; For
whatever may be told the Dissenter at this very Hour, and in the Heat and Glare
of their Sunshine, the Church of England can in a moment bring Clouds again,
and turn the Royal Thunder upon their Heads, blow 'em off the Stage with a
breath, if she should give but a smile or a kind word, the least glimps of her
Compliance, would throw them back into the State of Suffering, and draw upon
'em all the Arrears of Severity, which have accrued during the Time of this
Kindness to them. But this is not all, for it is further insinuated, as if the
next Parliament shall be chosen by the King, and not by the People, that no
Liberty of Debate shall be left the Members of either House, but the Roman
Consistory shall be made Lords of the Articles.

All this, and much more is to be found in the Pamphlet, and what can be the
meaning of all this, But that the Bigoted part of the Church of England, if
ever they were Loyal, are fallen from their Loyalty, and have outdone the most
Seditious Scriblers? For what can be said worse of any Prince? What was ever
said worse of Charles the Second, by any Factious Party? Or what can be said
worse of any Man living? The Lashes given our King are most severe, and look
like an Interpretation of their Doctrine of Non-resistance. And if a Fear that
others shall enjoy but a like Ease with themselves, stir up all this Choler
against their Sovereign, may we not fairly conclude, that if they had been in
that Suffering Condition the Dissenters have been for Six and Twenty Years
together, they would have stirred up many a Rebellion? And what shall we think
of those, who so very much applaud all this, as too many of the Church of
England Communion have done? But do these Gentlemen think that this is the way
to take with Dissenters? Will they, who by their Sufferings for many Years
together could never be provoked, will they (I say), now their Sorrows are
removed, imitate such Churchmen, and fly in his Majesty's Face for the Grace
he affords 'em? If you think they are so like your selves, Time will
demonstrate your Mistake. For to be under a Prince of a Different Religion from
themselves is no new thing to them, they have known how to suffer under such,
and how to enjoy Peace and Quiet when it is their Princes Pleasure to give it
'em, and they cannot but pity you, to see how you wince and kick, as soon as you
find your Prince does in good earnest dislike your Religion and Conduct.

And how is it that this Gentleman dares to contradict his Sovereign? The King
declares that it has been a long time his Principle, that Conscience ought not
to be constrained, nor Men punished for m^er Religion, and that it has been
against his Royal Inclination to persecute any for their Consciences, and also
his Resolve that if ever it came into his Power, he would put a stop unto it,
as he now has done, and whose Word is to be regarded? That of a Prince, who
knows best his own Heart, and whose Word, till the Time that he showed Mercy to
the Dissenter, has been entirely depended on by the Church of England, or this
Gentleman's, whom we have found to insinuate several Falsities in this very
Pamphlet?

But he says that in the first place they courted the Church of England. And
for what? Was it not to press them to be willing, to take off all Penal Laws
and Tests, in pursuance of his Majesty's most Christian Principle? And if your
Church of England has been so obstinate in opposing not only so great a Prince,
but so Christian a Principle, must the Dissenter take pett, because they were
not first Courted? No Sir, the Church of Englands rejecting the Applications
made to her sufficiently discovers her Resolution to abide by her old Doctrine
of Persecution, and therefore the Dissenters have the greatest Reason in the
World to beware lest they lose this Opportunity, and fall under the lash of
your Penal Laws once more. They cannot forget how often you have said, that the
Papists are much better than the Presbyterians, and that you would rather turn
Papist than Presbyterian, and they are still afraid, that your not complying
with the King, is, because you long for another opportunity to persecute afresh.

It Is true we know that amongst the Gentry of your Communion there are many
Resolved to do their utmost for the Ease of the Dissenters, and they have, as
there was occasion, expressed their Dislike of violent Methods to convince
rational Men; but amongst the Clergy, there is only a sprinkling here and
there, and at this very Time many cannot forbear their Railing against
Dissenters, but of this more by and by.

You in the next place tell us, that Papists are no more able to make good
their Vows, than Men married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their
Contract with another. And is this consistent with your Addresses of Thanks for
his Majesty's Declaration by which he promised to protect the Church of
England? What, are there no Men of Honor amongst the English Papists? What, no
Regard to be had to the Word of a King if a Papist? Is not this a casting dirt
in his Majesty's Face? Were it needful, I could give you several Instances of
Men of Honor and Truth to their Word amongst Papists, and I know of none that
ever doubted it, when it was for their Interest as it is in this Case.

But who can without horror consider that wretched Insinuation by which our
Prince is linked with another who will not suffer a Protestant to live within
his Government? Methinks this Liberty which so very much displeases the
Gentleman, should convince him of his Madness. Our Prince is not only of a
contrary Principle, but has had the Advantage of seeing the mischievous Effects
of Persecution, not only at home, but abroad, and therefore takes quite
contrary measures, and yet he is to be suspected. Verily if a Dissenter had
said half so much of Charles the Second, every Pulpit would have rung on it, and
have condemned him for a Traitor, a Rebel, and what not, and that without the
Help of Innuendo's. They would have said, What can more evidently discover the
Designs and Purposes of their Hearts, when they represent their Sovereign under
so black a Character? But these very Men think they have a Privilege and may
innocently Revile the Lords Anointed, and therefore they go on to tell the
World, that the Prerogative is retaining Counsel against Magna Charta, as if
the King intended nothing less than the Ravishing his People of their Civil
Rights and Privileges, even because he endeavors strenuously their
Restoration and Establishment.

The King would have all things reduced to the ancient Constitution of our
Government, therefore would have none of his good Subjects deprived of their
Civil Rights for the sake of their Religion, and would by all means have
Liberty and Property to be looked on, as too Sacred to be touched for an
harmless Opinion, and yet because this displeases our persecuting Clergy it
must be interpreted a setting up Prerogative against Magna Charta.

And that the Dissenter may understand the Reason of all this Boldness with
their King, the Gentleman assures us they have him at their Command. He is
perfectly a Dependant on them, and that because they frown, the King runs unto
the Dissenter for Refuge, but if they would but smile, or speak a kind Word,
'twould be enough to engage Him to forget all his Promises and turn the Royal
Thunder against the Dissenter. Thus he first represents the King's Religion to
be such as rases all Principles of Honor and Truth out of his Royal Heart, and
then tells us, that the King's Case is so desperate and deplorable, that tho he
is now gone to the Dissenter for Shelter, yet if the Church of England, will
give him one smile, he will break all the Promises he made them, and
notwithstanding the King has promised his Pardon for all that is past, their
smile, or a kind word from them would draw upon the Dissenters all the Arrears
of Severity. But who can read this with less Horror, than I am in at the
writing it? If this be Church of England Loyalty, I must make use of this
Litany, From Church of England Loyalty, good Lord deliver me. For after what a
dismal rate do they paint out our Prince? and if our Prince had been such an
One, in what a calamitous Condition would the English be? I dread the Rehearsal
of it, and therefore I will only apply my self unto the English Gentry, who
most undoubtedly will discover their Abhorrence of all such scurrilous
Pamplets, and must beseech them to consider what a plunge this Gentleman would
hurry both them and the Dissenters into, could he but obtain his aim;
especially considering how he would persuade us to believe that the King
designs to send down his Conge d' Eslire to every County, City, and Corporation
in the Kingdom, for the Choice of Parliament Men, and take away the Liberty of
Debate from the Members of both Houses.

The Truth of it is, the Gentleman has not spared to blacken the King, and
thereby has acted the part of a brisk Clergyman very notably; for who could
believe what this Man says, and not immediately endeavor a present Freedom
from the Oppression that he must have in prospect? But the Dissenters knowing
how much he loads them, and their Ministers with his false charges, and feeling
the Grace and Clemency of the King in rescuing 'em out of the Hand of the
Church of England, are abundantly satisfied both of the Impudence and Ill
Design of the Pamphleteer.

And as he does thus treat the Dissenter and his Most Sacred Majesty, so, that
he might leave no Artifice unattempted, he would fain lick over the Sores of
his beloved Persecutors, and says, If you had now to do with those Rigid
Prelates, who made it matter of Conscience to give you the least Indulgence,
but kept you at an uncharitable Distance, and even to your more Reasonable
scruples continue stiff and inexorable, the Argument might be fairer on your
side, but since the Common danger has so laid open that mistake, that all the
former haughtiness toward you is for ever extinguished, and that it has
turned the Spirit of Persecution into a Spirit of Peace, Charity and
Condescension.

In answer hereunto, I am glad to find any Man, who seems Zealous for the
English Clergy, as this Gentleman does, to be so sensible, that the Clergy have
been rigid, that they have made it a matter of Conscience to give the least
Indulgence, and that they have been Proud and Haughty. But I am afraid that few
of the Persecuting Clergy are so sensible of their Error as this Man would have
us believe, for it is manifest that there are many of 'em, who continue their
old Pulpit Railings, and whilst their hands are tied, their Tongues and Pens
are at work. With what scorn and contempt do they express themselves, when they
speak of a Dissenter, and how do they daily threaten, that they hope for a time
to be Revenged on them for accepting of Deliverance from their Violence? And at
this time they do their utmost to prevent their Assembling themselves together
for public Worship, and as the Persecution began in a turning the Dissenter out
of the Halls, so where the Clergy can prevail, there none are permitted the
Conveniences of these places; and where they have Tabernacles to dispose of,
they will let 'em Rot or commit them to the Flames, rather than that the
Dissenters shall have the Advantage of Building Convenient Meeting Houses with
them; yea, one of the most renowned of their Dignified Clergy would rather the
Parish should bear the loss of an Hundred pounds, than part with a Tabernacle
to any Man, that would not give bond, not to employ any part of it toward the
Building a Meeting House for Dissenters. And is it not Natural to conclude,
that as they at this very time do their utmost to discourage the Dissenter,
they would still do much more had it been in their Power? Besides, we have the
greatest reason to conclude, that those of the Clergy who are for the giving
ease to the Dissenter will take the opportunity, and fall in with the King, and
not talk after the rate this Man does, nor act after the manner these others do.

Really Sir, I am almost tired, and therefore must beg your Pardon, that I only
observe further to you how apparent it is from what this Gentleman insisteth
on, that our Persecuting Clergy have been the Papists Tool's; Think a little,
says he, who they were that promoted your Former Persecutions, and then
consider, how it will look, to be Angry with the Instruments, and at the same
time to make a League with the Authors of your sufferings? So that the Papists
are said to be the promoters of the Persecution, and the Church of England
their Instruments, their Tools; and if the Papists be driving on ill designs,
what can they desire more than that all things should run into confusion, and
let the Church of England take heed they be not their Tools in this too. And
why must not the Dissenter enter into a League with the Papists to put a stop
to all Persecutions? The Church of England, it is like, entered into a League
with them in the Persecuting work, but the Dissenter must not join with them in
endeavoring the peace and quiet of the Nation. Verily this sort of Men are
greatly to be pityed; and I being heartily sorrowful for their misfortune, must
beg leave to tell you, that in the midst of all this noise the True State of
the Case lies here; the Church of England Clergy are for joining with the
Papists in a fresh persecution, but the Papists, and the Protestant Dissenters
are agreed to do their utmost to prevent all Persecutions for the future in
this Land, and this is the thing that vexes our humble and good Natured Clergy,
and the Attempt of the Author of this Letter is to wheedle the Dissenters, and
persuade them to give all the Countenance they can to the Persecuting Clergy.
But how Wisely, let the Reader Judge.

I am Yours.

POSTSCRIPT.
If the Gentleman be not satisfied with thus much, but is resolved to continue
his False Charges, etc. He shall have enough in my next to let the World know
what manner of Men our Clergy and their Creatures are.

FINIS.

