THE AMORS OF Bonne Sforza, QUEEN OF Polonia.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for R. Bently in Covent Garden. 1684.

TO THE Most Accomplished Lady, MADAM Mary-Elizabeth Manly.
Madam,
THis Title does so justly speak your Perfections in the great, that it may
ease me of the Modish Labor of retailing them in this Epistle, and you of the
trouble of reading the uneasy repetitions of these Elogyes (so nautious to
generous minds, though never so deservedly expressed) which you daily receive
from all parts. You, Madam, who are so remarkably known by your own Merits,
that it is the same to dedicate to you, as to say, to the most virtuously
accomplished Lady in the World. And though I am full of confidence, that if
this wanton Queen, whose story I humbly present to you, were ever to have been
reclaimed, it must have been through the benign'd influence of so examplary a
Virgin as yours, I have taken the boldness to recommend this little Peace, not
so much to your protection, as to the judicial censure of so absolute a Mistress
of Languages, as you are Madam, in hopes that you will be a Judge as
favorable, as you are decerning, in the endeavors of

Madam, Your most Humble Servant, P. B.

Advice to the READER.
Reader,
I Think that a Word of Advice concerning this Little Book, will not be
altogether useless. There may be diverse Persons, who not very learned in the
Amorous Chronicles of Princes, would be ready to condemn that Liberty which I
take of making the Gallant History of a Queen; but the Public may be informed,
that She of whom I speak, has been according to the most sincere Historians,
one of the Princes in the World, that has most caused her self to be spoken of,
on the Account of Gallantising. And that toward the latter end of her days,
having retired her self in her Duchy of Bar, situated in the Kingdom of
Naples, She died there, in the Arms of Pappacoda her Lover, That the Last sigh
she should send forth, might be a sigh of Love.

It is easy to Judge from those faithful strokes of the Hystorian, if that the
Adventures which I relate of this Princess are unjust, and whether it be
Imposition to give her two or three Lovers, who were much more Worthy than her
Pappacoda. As to what concerns the Bishop, I confess that there might be
something of my own in those Incidents which I bestow on him. But besides that
from all Ages, Persons of that Character have passed for the Children of Adam
as well as others; We see by a great number of examples, that in this Age, they
are not over much reformed, and that men lay down their Humane frailtyes but
with their Lives.

A Catalogue of some Novels, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes.
1. ZElinda a famed Romance. 2. Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3. Count Brion. 4.
Count Gabales. 5. Halige, or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6. Mad. Laviler
and the King of France. 7. Mad. and the Duke of Guise. 8. Mad. Colona's
Memories. 9. Queen of Majork, two Parts. 10. Don Lebastian King of Pourtingal.
11. Heroine Masquiter. 12. Princess of Cleves. 13. Obliging Mistress. 14. Fatal
Prudence. 15. Princess of Fezz. 16. Disorders of Love. 17. Triumph of Love. 18.
Victorious Lovers. 19. Allmanzar. and Allmanzaid. 20. Earl of Essex and Queen
Elizabeth. 21. Neopolitan, or the Defender of his Mistress. 22. Nicoratis. 23.
Amorous Abbess. 24. Homais Queen of Tunis. 25. Pilgrim in two Parts. 26.
Meronious, Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 28. Life of the Duke Guise. 29.
Extravagant Poet. 30. Memoiers Gallant. 31. Instruction for a Young Noble Man.
Books of more serious matters.

The Moral Esaies in four Vollumes.

Humane Misery. Vanity of Honor, Wealth and Pleasure. Plutoes Apology of
Socrates. Natural History of the Passions. Bishop Andrews Devotions. Vanity of
Arts and Sciences. The Officers of the Mouth. Kalandarium Hortencey.
THE AMORS OF Bonne Sforza, QUEEN of POLONIA.
AFter the Death of Queen Barbara, the General Diet of Poland having
Represented unto Sigismondus their King, that the Good of the State required he
should Marry again; He took to second Wife, the Princess Bonna, Daughter unto
John Galeas, Duke of Milan.

That Princess, whose Beauty had made such a noise in the World, was Received
by the Polanders with such Magnificence and Acclamations, as spread themselves
into the most remote parts of that Kingdom. They were such Feastings and
Rejoycings, as lasted so much the more, by reason that the Queen did seem to
take Great Delight in them, and that she was the first also, in inventing very
Gallant Ones.

That Court, besides the Strangers that were there at such a time, was then
Composed of the Gallantest Persons in Europe, who in such an Occasion did all
endeavor to outvye one another, not only in Gallantry and Activity, but in
such a Magnificence also, with so Prodigious Expense, that the King was Obliged
to put a stop to their Profusions, in setting of Limits to these Festivals.

The Queen, who came from so Gallant a Country as is Italy, had heard talk of
Poland, as of a Barbarous Place. At least she had so little expected to see,
what she did see there, that she was wholly surpised, and did no longer regret
so much, that which she had lately left.

She was Naturally of a very Gallant Humor, and she was Charmed with the
Pleasure of seeing the Effects, which her Beauty did produce in all hearts.
Neither was she much insensible for her part; and having found in the Court
such Cavaliers, as well deserved to be considered, she did not scruple to mix
sometimes some Sighs, with those Adorations that others had for Her.

As there was nothing more Beautiful than her Person and that She contributed
also by all her Charming ways, in the gaining of the Hearts, as well as good
Wishes, of all Persons, she presently had as many Adorers as Subjects. Amongst
which she would make Choice of those that were most to her mind, which she
called her Select, and upon these there was bestowed sometimes a Ring,
sometimes a Scarf, a Bracelet, a Picture, other Presents and Favors, which
were rendered more Considerable by the Manner and Time of giving them, than all
that can be reckoned most sensibly moving in Love.

They were not only young Cavaliers that felt the Effects of this Charming
Poison; But the Ministers of State also, of all Ages, and even those of the
Gown, that had the greatest Esteem, and the most Power in the State. She knew
how to entertain them all, with those little Favors, each in such a certain
Confidence of his own good Fortune, that there was not one amongst them, but
flattered himself of having the best share in her Favor. And in that Opinion,
her Ciphers and Colors were seen in all places; every day did afford some
Tournament, or Festival for Love of her; besides Mo^^tos, Verses, and a
thousand other Gallantries, which were Addressed to her alone.

Sigismond was a Prince very clear-sighted; He was past fifty: An Age fit to
entertain Jealousy, especially, with a young Wife of her humor, and so
Beautiful as was the Queen: But she had the Art of Dissipating all those
shadows her self, making the King privy unto the Folly of all her Lovers, of
which she made Sport with him. This kind of pretended Sincerity, would quiet
that good Prince's mind; and judging that it was Reasonable he should have some
Complaisance for a young Princess, who could not so readily lay aside the
Customs of her own Country, he permitted her to live after her own manner.

Thus the Number of the Select did daily increase: There were but three Ladies
only, that were not well pleased with that Princesses Actions, above all the
Fair ones, which she did not Love. They were almost all forsaken by their
Lovers. The Queen could not endure, that any thing should be done for Love of
them; and whoever did attempt it, was presently out of Favor.

The Duchess of Ostrog was the only Person, that did somewhat uphold the
Honor of the Ladies of the Country. She was a perfect Beauty; who did bear one
of the first Ranks at Court; and the Person who at the very first, had given
the most of Jealousy unto the Queen: She had not all that spritely Air, nor
that Pleasantness, that the Beautiful brown Ladies have, as had this Charming
Princess. But she was a Woman of a great Presence, of a Pleasant Aspect, and of
an Excellent Stature; with these might be added, her Fair Complexion, her Eyes
and all the Features of her Face, with her Hairs of a Dazzling Brightness. She
was a Lover of Pleasures and of Gallantryes, and yet for a long time she did
pass for a Discreet Woman; which is the Art that Women of Wit use.

It was at this Dutchess's, that the most Rational Persons of the Kingdom did
daily resort; and that was called, the Little Court; but such a little Court,
as frequently did give the first Motion unto all that was acted of most Gallant
in the Greatest. The Count of Tarnaw, was as the Head of it. He was the best
shaped Lord of the Kingdom, who had the greatest Wit, Brave, Gallant, Generous,
Beloved of the King, and of all the Court.

The first Spite which the Queen had a mind to show the Duchess of Ostrog,
was to deprive her of that Lord, who was worth diverse others of that Court. And
in so doing, she did not only satisfy that Womanish Vanity of Carrying it
above all others, but she followed also the Inclinations of her heart; for
Tarnaw was one of the most amiable men of the World. He was intimate Friend
unto the Duke of Ostrog, and it was thought that he might hold some place near
the fair Duchess also, but not peradventure that went so far as to Gallantise.
At least that was so well managed, that the Public, who is but little
indulgent on such kind of things, did more favor the Duchess, than it was
wont to do in regard of other Ladies, for till then she had not been suspected.
But the Queen, who was yet full of all the Maxims of her own Country, and that
was not of opinion, That a man of Wit, and a Beautiful woman, could long see
one another, without Consequences, did not doubt but that Tarnaw was with the
Duchess in Title of Gallant after the highest manner.

She put in use all her Charms, to make assault in point of Beauty, with that
stately Lady. There was nothing but Kindnesses and Complaisances for Tarnaw.
Presents, and such ways, as were yet more engaging than the Presents
themselves, that would speak much, but all to no purpose; for no hearing nor
seeing could be procured, Tarnaw did always show an unparalled Constancy;
for the Dutchess's Party.

Not but that this Cavalier, as well as the rest, had found that there was
nothing more Charming than the Queen; and that if he had followed the Tendency
of his own Heart, he had submitted unto the necessity, of not casting one's
Eyes on that Princess without adoring of her. But that Crowd of Adorers which
he did continually behold about her, and which she received, did take him off.
In this he thought it a point of Honor, not to do as the rest did, but to
remain inseparably tied unto the Duchess. The Queen, who was not accustomed to
so much Resistance, vexed at a Proceeding which she looked upon as an Injury
offered to her Beauty by the Count; did in a moment, pass from all these Sweets
unto mortal Hatred; and did show nothing but Contempt for him. But that was not
yet sufficient. Women's minds run more naturally unto Revenge; she was studying
of one, which should Content her. For she could give it the satisfaction of
Triumphing over her Rival; and of ruining the Count; which was by causing her
self to be beloved by the Duke of Ostrog.

The Duke was a man of Wit, who through the Character of General which he had,
as well as by his Birth, did hold one of the first Ranks in the Kingdom. He was
very much considered by the King, and he did understand very well his Duty; but
he had Eyes and an Heart, that were made just like oother men's. And what cannot
a Beautiful Princess do, that employes all her Charms to corrupt the Fidelity
of a Gallant man? The Duke of Ostrog surrendered himself, and so soon as he was
permitted to be heard, he offered Vows and Homages, Life and Fortune, and all
that he could offer. But as he had more measures to observe than the rest of
the Selected, he did more Closely manage himself, and would not allow, that his
Passion should have any other Witnesses than the Queen and his own Heart.

That Princess, who had her Designs, and who desired no further of Love, then
the Noise and Rumor of it, did not well like the prudence of her Gallant; It
availed nothing to be beloved by the Duke, except the Duchess knew of it. She
did all that she could to let her know it; which would sometimes put the
discreet Husband into despair. And there were some moments, in which he would
repent of having engaged himself so far. And if it were with Love as with other
things, that one might rid one self of it at pleasure, he had peradventure
renounced unto that which he had for the most-Charming Princess of the world;
but the most Dangerous also, and the most fit to disturb a good Family.

It was not that he loved his Wife more than Courtiers usually do, but he had
no mind to set her so ill an Example. He knew that she had very good Arms,
wherewith to revenge her self of his Perfidiousness; and the less faithful of
all Husbands, takes no delight in being deceived by his Wife.

The Duchess of Ostrog was not blind. She was one of the first that perceived
her Husbands ill ways; and that dived into the Queens designs: But she did but
laugh at it, with the Count Tarnaw. The Machines of that Princess, having not
had a good Effect that way, they had no better a success neither on the Dukes
Part. It was in vain that she attempted to make him Jealous of the Count with
his wife: He had a great opinion of the Dutchess's Virtue. And he believed
Tarnaw to be so much his Friend, and so honest a Man, that he would have
thought he had done them a piece of Injustice, in barely suspecting them of
Perfidiousness.

The Queens Spite and Jealousy did still increase, through all those fruitless
Endeavors. But the Hatred which she had for the Count could not last so long;
because that it was Affected only. She was during some days very much out of
humor; and at last, to please her self, she must come to a new Onset, on that
Heart that was insensible, but only to her. She thought it necessary to bring
her Rival near unto her own Person again, and to show her more Kindness than
she had done.

The Duchess, being Taken with that Charming Bait, of being well at Court
again, perceived not the Poison which lay under it. There was nothing but
continual Feastings, and parties of Divertisements, where Tarnaw was sure to be
one.

This Cavalier did begin to perceive, that men were not always the same; and
that it was very dangerous to be too often a Spectator of those Charms, for
which one may have had some Disposition of being inflamed. He did find the
Queen more Beautiful than ever, and he was full of such Cares and Diligence in
serving and following her, as he had not had before. The Duchess took notice
of it; and she would tell it the Count. She told him by the bye, that she could
perceive some change in her Conduct; but far from making use of any Means
unworthy of her heart, whereby to oppose it, through an height of Ambition, she
did contribute unto some pretty Entertainments, which she might at least have
interrupted by her Presence.

As for the Duke, he was not so easy to be handled; he was the most impatient
and the most Jealous of all Lovers. He was presently strangely Allarum'd at the
Counts fresh Pursuites. He knew his Merit, and of all his Rivals he could not
see any so much to be feared as that was. He imagined that his own Passion was
very secret, and that there were no danger of speaking of the Queen to the
Count.

He one day at the Running of the Ring, took occasion so to do. He was in
course with his Friend, drawing near him, Take heed to your self, said he,
lowly, for there are great Designs on your heart. I fear nothing, answered the
Count, smilingly; and it has been long since of proof against the most
dangerous Assaults. You know not, replied the Duke, what Enemies you have to do
with; they are two delicate Eyes, continued he, which command here; and that
have observed you ever since your coming in. It is very difficult to resist
them. While he was speaking to him in this manner, his Eyes were fixed upon him
to endeavor to discover by the change of his Face, what passed in his Heart.
And perceiving some Alteration of his usual Color, You blush, added he; then
you know what I aim at: You are Caught already; and peradventure, the Happiest
of all men. Say rather, replied the Count, that I am the most Ungrateful of all
men, after the Care that is taken, to show me the good Will that some have
toward me; but I know my Duty, and I will do it. Very weak Reasons Count,
replied Ostrog, those that Duty produces against Love, and you are not
Ungrateful, since you acknowledge your Ingratitude. Confess the truth to me,
continued he without giving of him any time to answer: You would fain make use
of your Discretion with me, but yet I know that you answer very well all those
favorable Intentions, which are had in your behalf. I answer them so ill,
replied Tarnaw (who would put an end to this Conversation,) that never did man
deserve Death so much as I do.

In all that Discourse, which made an end of confounding the Poor Duke, there
was not only some Vanity on the Counts side, but there was Malice also. He was
not ignorant of his friends Love toward the Queen; and he designed to punish
him for his not confiding in him, in concealing it from him.

The Sport ended, Tarnaw had the Prize, which consisted in a Picture of the
Queen, which she was to give her self. As he drew near her to receive it, she
told him softly, That long since he might have had greater Advantages, if he
could have told how to have made the best advantage of his good Fortune. The
Count surpised at those words, whose fence he understood very well, did answer
in some kind of Disorder, That there could be no Advantages that he could
prefer unto the Honor of serving the greatest Princess on earth. You should,
replied the Queen, serve Persons after their own manner, and then you might
succeed But, continued she, (turning her head, to observe if any body did
hearken,) this is not a business to discourse of before so many Persons. Come
this Evening at nine, on the Terrasse which answers to my Closet, and you shall
know what I have to say to you on that account.

After this she suddenly turned her self toward the King, who was speaking to
some Ladies, and gave him her hand, to go a walking.

The Counts mind was so filled with these last words, that he thought it fit to
retire home, to think there on a business as important in its Consequences, as
any that ever had yet happened to him. He did perceive how far that Rendezvous
would go, which was to have him speak his whole Thoughts, and the Danger which
he did run of a total Rout. He was invited unto it after a manner that could
not be resisted; his Honor as well as his Heart, did find a thousand Charms
in it. The Triumph was Illustrious; and there was no Life, which he did not
think well employed, in exposing it on so Glorious, and so Charming a Subject
as that was

With these or such like Thoughts did he entertain himself, till the hour of
Assignation; which was no sooner come, but that he incessantly rendered himself
on the Terrass. There he found the Queen expecting of him already, who
receiving him with an Air full of Sweetness, You see, said she, Count, that
this is but on your account. Here I meet you singly, only one Woman with me,
that I confide in. The King is at play, and we shall have some Time to
discourse here of our business. In the Confusion that the Count at first was,
at the sight of that beauteous Princess, he wanted a Voice to answer with;
which is an ordinary Effect of Love. The Queen took notice of it with Delight,
and leaning against the Railes which overlooked the Garden, she purposely gave
him time to recollect himself. But at last perceiving that he did not yet begin
to say any thing, the Impatiency she was in to continue her Design, made her to
pass over some certain Laws of Manners, unto which Persons of that Rank and
Character rarely confine themselves, when it is Love that guides them. Well
Tarnaw, what, must I be the first to speak? What think you of the Sentiments
that are had for you? I know my self Madam, (he replied, with a respectuous
Gravity) that little Merit that I find in me will not permit me -- All is
permitted you, said the Queen interrupting him, and you but too well know your
own Worth. You have done all that you could, to inspire diverse things to your
advantage into Persons, and perhaps that you have not succeeded ill; but when
you had performed the most difficult part, you should have gone on. You should
speak, and not please your self in suffering such Pains, as peradventure others
share in with you. In a word Count, added she, I know that you love me; I know
it; your Eyes, your Actions, and even your affected Indifferences; all has told
it me. Your Heart is mine, permit it to act without Constraint, and lay aside
all these Thoughts which seem but to render you the more miserable. Tarnaw,
unto whom those very words alone could have inspired Love, had he not been
already in Love with that Charming Princess, replys, What pleasure take you
Madam, said he sighing, in rendering me the most Criminal Person in the World?
Is it a Crime to Love me, answered she? Yes Madam, replied that Lover, and the
greatest that ever I committed in all my Life, so to dare to lift up my
thoughts unto my Sovereign; But though I should expiate it with my Death, I
find that I could not repent it; that it is my Fate would have it so, together
with your Charms, against which there is no Resistance.

The Queen could not contain the Joy which she had upon this Declaration so
full of Transports; Love me; said she to him, with a Charming Smile; if it be a
Crime, I Will bear the half of it, and I shall endeavor to render it so mild to
you, that you shall have no cause of Complaint. In ending these words she gave
him her hand, which that Lover took trembling; But which he Kissed with such a
Passionate Air, as any Lover could do.

Some moments of Silence, which passed afterward between them, were no less
tender and passionate than their Discourses but the Queen more accustomed than
the Count, unto those Ecstasies of Love, beginning to smile in a kind of
Malicious Return, But what will become of the Duchess of Ostrog, said she,
when she will know the Wrong I do her, in robbing of her of such a Heart as
yours? She will never pardon it me in all her life time. The Duchess of Ostrog
Madam, replied the Count, does not take so much the interest of my Heart; but
though she should, it would be a Sacrifice which I should offer you without any
great Repugnancy. It may be, Madam, added he smilingly in his turn, that you
would have more in Sacrificing to me the Duke her Husband. If that the Duke,
replied she, is capable of giving you any Disturbance, you will soon be
delivered of it. I consent said She further, that you regulate your self
toward the Duchess after the manner that I shall treat her Husband. I will
never see her more, replied the Count; and I, said the Queen, will rid my self
of the Duke to morrow.

These Protestations which settled the hearts of these two Lovers, in respect of
those Rivals, which each of them had to fear, did conclude by such
tendernesses, which the Queen let loose, as quite made an end of the formerly
insensible Tarnaw.

Those favors which come from Persons of that Rank have this advantage, that
all charm even to the least Trifles; a Look, a Smile, and Hand given in
season, a Gesture, the least Tenderness, Transports and Dazles. Tarnaw scarce
knew what was become of himself, and did answer but by halves, and confusedly
unto some Amorous Questions which the Queen made him; whether he would love her
all his life time; and whether he was very well pleased with her; till that at
last that Charming Princess, who perceived him so transported with Joy and
Love, as that he seemed Enchanted, and to have but one moment of Life left, Let
us go Tarnaw, said She, let us go hence, for we might be here a little too long
it may be. I think that for the first time, that you have seen me in private,
you have very far advanced your affairs. The Count, who had been half the time
kneeling before her, did rise, and sighing gave her his Hand to lead her; but
perceiving that She designed to return to the King, he entreated. Her to permit
him to retire home, because that he thought himself not strong enough to
conceal the Excess of his Joy, before such Persons as draw Consequences of all
things, as Courtiers use to do. The Queen approved of this Gantleness, and told
him. That to have so Prudent a Lover as he was, I was the way to make Love last
a long time.

The night which followed that Entreview, was for the Count incapable of
yielding any Rest. Not that the Remorse which he ought to have, of the Crime
which he committed against his King, or that the Fear of the dangers that he
exposed himself unto did disturb him; Love had already got too high an hand
over him, to afford the least return imaginable unto Reason. It was the
raptures of Joy, which a thousand Charming Ideas of those render things which
the Queen had had for him, and which did still promise him greater favors. He
slept not, yet the night did not seem the longer for that, on the contrary, he
did make it last into the middle of the following day; so that it was already
Dinner time, when that a Servant came to give him notice of it, and at the same
time to tell him, that the Queens Page waited to speak with him. The Page was
immediately brought into his Chamber, who presented unto the Count a Packet
from the Queen, in which there was a Scarf, and this Note.

I will not forgive it you, Count, if you have slep't one single moment this
night; for Love would have treated you better than me; and you would not love
me half so well as you ought to do, or that I would have you to do. I send you
a Scarf against the Justing, which is to be performed next Thursday. You shall
take for your Motto these words.

Tanto piu alto, e Tanto piu ardore.

We go a Hunting, come you also; for I should but ill divert my self, if I
should not see you there.

While that the Count was thus busied, the Duke of Ostrog, who through the
great Friendship that was between them was dispensed from Ceremonies, being
come in, he perceived the Page, the Scarf, and Note, which the Count was
reading with so great an Attention, that he was in the midsts of the Room
before he had perceived it: The confusion he was in, when he first perceived
him was great. The Duke asked him, whence came so fine a Present. It is without
cause you make me this question, replied the Count, (who would not mince the
matter out of season) you have seen the Queens Page, and you doubt not but that
it is from her Liberality that this favor comes. I was afraid of deceiving my
self, replied the Duke, and did not think that an ungrateful Person, that
deserved death from Her, was worthy of so much favor. If all those unto whom
She has made such Presents, replied Tarnaw, were guilty, you had been so long
since. One must be born, replied the Duke, under as lucky a Planet as yours, to
dare to adventure in a Careere, so full of precipices as that is. It is the
Danger, replied the Count, which affords the Pleasure as well as the Glory of
the undertakeing. Farewell, said the Duke going, I wish that you may come out
of it with the good Fortune which you deserve. I shall take counsel upon that,
replied the Count, when the Enterprise is resolved upon; but it shall be from
the most happy that I shall take it.

The Duke being gone out in this manner, Tarnaw thought of the Answer he was to
send to the Queen, which you may see here.

What hopes of sleep, Madam, when you leave me in the Arms of a God, that does
so little converse with it; yet how restless and troublesome as he is to
others, I can say, that he has treated me so well, that I should wrongfully
complain of him. He has done nothing, but continually spoke of you to me; He
has represented you to my mind, with all those Charms which render you
adorable. There is no Joy equal to mine. Aid him, Madam, if it be possible, to
redouble it; though he should take away my Life, with my sleep, I should not
complain. I have kissed a thousand times that curious Scarf. How great and
glorious is my destiny; and with the esteem of so Great and so Charming a
Princess, how few mortals are so blessed as is Tarnaw!

He gave that Answer to the Page, and called to be dressed. The Conversation
which he had had with the Duke, came again into his mind; he was his Friend,
and he pitied him; but that which troubled him most, was on the account of the
Duchess. He could not think on her without Confusion. She had always been the
Secretary of his thoughts: They had rallyed the Queen a thousand times
together; he had boasted of a Contempt for all that Princesses Bounties. Mean
time he is gone; how many Reproaches was his Weakness going to procure unto
him? He resolved not to see her more; in this he satisfied the Queens desire,
and at the same time did free himself from that thing, which caused him the
most Trouble.

This being once concluded after this manner, he would no longer think on the
Duke or Duchess, to relish the full Joy of such a fortune as his. He prepared
himself to go to that hunting, and was there presently after the Court.

The Queen had taken the Duchess of Ostrog with her, and that night they were
to lie in a house of Pleasure, belonging to the Bishop or Cracovia, who was one
of the blessed number of the Queens Selected.

The Duke had not followed the Court; in the Troubles, or rather Despairs he
was in. He sought after nothing but Solitaryness: Yet after diverse vexations of
mind, on a thousand different Resolutions, on which his heart floted, being got
on Horse back, he came there toward night: But whereas every one was very busy
in those Divertisements, which the Bishop had caused to be prepared, and that
moreover this Prelate, the most troublesome, and most assiduous of all the
Election, under pretense of making the honors of the house, did not abandon
one moment the Queen: The Duke, the unfortunate Duke, could not all that night
find one occasion to speak unto her in private. And the Court withdrew betimes
also, because that the King had a mind to hunt again the next day; when the
Queen being fatigated with that days sport, dispensed her self from going.

Besides the Fatigue, She had her private Reasons also. And the King was no
sooner up, and got out of his Chamber, but sending to seek after the Duchess
of Ostrog, she caused her to come to Bed to her, as she used to do with her
best Friends, to talk or laugh the rest of the Morning. Do you not know, said
she to her, what the Duke of Ostrog would have with me, who desired last Night
that he might have a quarter of an hours Audience, on a business in which he
says his Life is concerned? If it be not a Love concern, Madam, replied the
Duchess smiling, I know not what it can be. A concern of Love; replied the
dissembling Queen? If it concerns me, I assure you that you shall have the
Pleasure of it. I have long known, Madam, replied the Duchess, that he has the
Honor of sighing for you; but I forgive it him, for it is almost the
infallible destiny of all those, that have the honor of approaching you. You
are a Commodious Wife, replied the Queen; but I know not if you should have as
much Indulgency for an other than an Husband. Either Husband or Gallant,
replied the Duchess, when ever they leave me for so beauteous a Princess, I
shall have nothing to say.

The Queen did not think the Duchess very sincere on that point, but she had
wherewith to put her suddenly to a Trial: And returning to speak of the Duke,
She told her, that she had ordered the Duke should be told, that he might see
her that morning, and that if she would lie close behind her, and promise not
to discover her self, She would give her the satisfaction of the whole
Entertainment. The Duchess, who would have bought such an Opportunity on much
more difficult terms, than those which the Queen proposed, did easily agree
unto it, and promised her to observe all her Orders, with all her heart.

So that the hour being come, the Duke was admitted. He appeared with a pale,
and macerated countenance, approaching the Bed, whose Curtains were but half
drawn; and kneeling on one knee before the Queen, You see before you, Madam,
said he in a low and doleful voice, the most passionate of all mortals, but the
most miserable, and the most desperate also; you shall see him for the last
time, if you take no pity of him. Whence comes this despair, Duke, replied the
Queen, of what do you complain? I know, continued that unfortunate Lover
sighing, that it is not for a Subject to complain of his Queen. But if that the
liberty which you have given to my sighs, may in some measure Authorize my
complaints, certainly it is in this occasion, when betraying the hopes that
your Eyes, and your too Charming Discourses for me, had caused my heart to
receive, you give marks of your Tenderness unto a man, who cannot have deserved
them through a real Zeal. And who is that happy man? replied the Queen. It is
not necessary, Madam, replied he, to name him to you; it will suffice that I
tell you, to show you his Indiscretion, that after he had confided to me those
Obliging Sentiments which you have for him, he has showed me the Scarf and
Note, which you sent yesterday, as Proofs and Arguments of that Bounty you had
for him, from which, he says, he has long endeavored to defend himself. The
Queen laughing at this, asked him if that was the thing which so much troubled
him; and if a young giddy head as Tarnaw could be capable of making him
jealous; Tarnaw, who had not been capable to give him any suspicion as to his
own Wife, though doubtless with more cause. Ah! Madam, replied the Duke, how
differently are things felt, in reference to a Wife, and to a Princess that is
adored; I could forgive, continued he, unto my Friend, all the Treacheries
which he could have used against me toward the Duchess, sooner than the least
suspicion that he could kindle in me, in respect of you.

The Duchess was hearkening with a world of patience all her faithful Husbands
Sentiments; but young and beauteous as she was, Heavens knows what she had in
store for him. The Queen would now and then push her with her foot, to make her
observe the chief passages; and the Duchess did press her behind to bid her to
continue.

If Tarnaw has any advantage over you, continued the Queen, It is not his
Merits that acquires it him; I know very well yours; but I love your Wife. Be
reasonable, and be contented with my Friendship; I give it you wholly; and here
is my hand for Surety. In saying this she took the Duchess hand, which she put
half out of the bed, on which the blind Duke did fasten his Amorous mouth; Ah!
Madam, said he with a transported Air, how easy it would be to pass from
friendship to Love toward you, but from love to bare Friendship is such a
return, which depends not even of Heaven. What can be done for you then, Duke?
continued the Queen, who had much to do to contain her self from laughing,
shall you be satisfied, if that for proof of that tender Esteem, that one has
for you, I grant you the whole Person whose hand you hold? That is too much,
Charming Princess, it is too much, repeated the passionate Duke, pressing that
delicate hand with his Lips. Less marks of your Complaisancy are able to make
me die with Love.

When the Queen saw, that the deceived Duke let himself go thus unto the
deceitful Kindnesses which she promised him, that he already began to proceed a
little further, She thought that it was time to open the Curtains: Which this
Lover taking for a good sign, he set himself on pushing very far his Boldness,
when he saw his Wife appear, whose hand he held yet: Never did clap of Thunder
produce so terrible an effect; he did not know whether his eyes were his own,
and whether it was the Duchess really that he saw; but he was soon persuaded
that he was played upon, by the great Laughter which the Queen could no longer
contain herself from; at which he was cruelly nettled. The Duchess triumphed,
and taking advantage of the disturbance he was in tells him: Your Faithfulness,
my Lord, is of a great example; it may be followed hereafter, and perhaps with
better success than your; then it will be seen whether you will be Jealous or
no. The Duke replied not a word to that: his mind and heart were in such a
disorder, through the Change that had so lately been put upon him, that nothing
less then venting his Rage in Reproaches, and it might be with Injuryes also,
could make him open his mouth, to answer such severe Railleryes as were put
upon him. He went out without speaking, and without so much as looking on the
Queen, who at last had some pity of him.

She told the Duchess, that seeing she had been the Cause of that difference,
she would also be the maker of it up again, that it might not spread any
further. The Duchess, who thought her self sufficiently revenged of an
husband, who had not been over successful in his Falsehood, did put all her
interest into the hand of the Queen.

The Duke of Ostrog, was not the only Person, that had a Rendezvous that
morning. The Count of Tarnaw had his hour also; but there were other Sweets
prepared for him. He was ready to go to the Assignation, when he saw the Duke
enter his Chamber, who sat down, and was some moments without speaking: The
Count, unto whom that Silence, no more than the Dukes ill looks, did not
presage any thing pleasant, did not press much to open the discourse; when at
last the Duke, you say nothing to me, said he, with a weak and doleful voice.
You were to begin, replied Tarnaw; for you come not here without design; and if
I mistake not, you have something in your mind, which troubles you. I am not so
happy as you Tarnaw; replied the Duke. But should I tell you my Secret, would
you promise me to conceal nothing of Yours? I am not curious of other Persons
concerns, replied the Count; and that shall not oblige me to tell you mine.
That Indifferency, replied the Duke, makes me think, that you sufficiently know
already what I have to say; so that I cannot exact any thing from you. You are
not ignorant doubtless, that I love the Queen; but you may not know, how far my
Passion has gone. I have betrayed you, I have told her all that you had told me
on her account; and confess that if Love did not render all excusable, I should
not be worthy to Live. But you are better revenged, than if I had lost my life.
I am going to live, but to be the more miserable; I yield to the most
fortunate. You are beloved, and though I do you no great service, in giving you
up a place to which I have no pretense, I think it is fair for a Lover to
abandon it to you. I have nothing more to say to you, continued he. Pity in
lieu of blaming me; Adieu. The Count would have stayed him, to have some
further clearing of the business; but the other would not hearken to him.
Farewell, said he, farewell the third time. I am going to seek Solitude, where
you may one day come and keep me company. Ending these words he went out of the
Chamber; his soul so afflicted, that Tarnaw was moved at it, notwithstanding
all the occasions of Complaints which he had against him.

He did not doubt, but that the ill Offices that this Rival had rendered him
near the Queen, had made a very disadvantageous Effect against him in her mind.
Yet that could not retain him from going to her; on the Contrary, he had the
greater desire of seeing her, to justify himself. He came there just at the
same time that the Duchess was gone forth. The Queen presently looked upon him
with a disdainful Eye; and asked what he came to do near her; if it was to have
some other discourses to make, that might, flatter his Vanity. Tarnaw, who had
prepared himself for a worse Reception, rather animated than abashed, at the
Queens small Anger, did fall upon his Knees before her, and told her, That he
knew already the causes of Complaint, which she might have against him; That
the Duke had lately told him part of what his Jealousy had made him say. But
that she ought not to believe a Rival, nay a desperate Rival. And then
continuing to justify himself with a tender and passionate Air, he put the
Queens mind into a quiet Temper again, who wished more than he, to believe him
Innocent.

There was no more words made of this business, but jesting at it. The Duke and
Duchess were brought upon the List, and the Adventure of the first made their
divertisement. Love had his turn also; I confess that there was no great time
left for that, because it began to be Late, and that the Bishop of Cracovia,
had already demanded two or three times, to be admitted to pay his Devoirs to
the Queen: Nevertheless those Moments that were left, were very well employed;
and because that in Love there are certain Links of favors, by which one
easily and necessarily go from one to another, peradventure that that day the
bold Count had gone very far; But the troubled Prelate of Cracovia, of all the
Selected, of all the Lovers the most Vigilant, and the most Jealous, was at the
door, who was the fourth time asking for admittance, to salute the Queen; and
admittance could no longer be refused him without great Consequences, because
that Tarnaw was with her. That was a Mortal blow for the Cavalier to bear: But
the Queen who was already sensible of her own Weakness, carrying it above the
Reasons that the Throne, and her Duty could afford, was not it may be sorry for
it. The Bishop came in with an Air as perplexed, as were our Lovers. There was
a general Silence, which made them all think on diverse strange things. Our two
Selected stood gazing at one another, and the Queen was making an end of
dressing.

Heavens keep all honest Lovers from a Rival of the Mass Book. Those are
terrible Lords. This here had not been so earnest, without Reason, in coming to
disturb so agreeable a Conversation. He knew what sport was there. His Closet
answered to that, in which was the Queen, and through the means of two
concealed holes, one might see represented in a great Glass all that was acted
there, and all that was said was distinctly heard.

This Prelate was one of the best shaped men of the Kingdom, and that had the
most Wit: And seting aside Gallantizing, for he was not reprehensible on that
point, he was assuredly a man of great Worth. He knew how to appear outwardly,
and he had an Art of agreeing Piety with human frailties; so that passing for a
great Gallant, he was however esteemed a very honest man; so true it is, that
in all things there is but the Way of doing them.

He could speak most perfect Italian, and he was one of the first that ventured
to Gallantise the Queen. The Rarity of the thing pleased the Queen; and without
considering any scruples, as being of the Patrimony of the Church, She
pleasingly gave an Ear unto his Sacrifices and Prayers. She was come out of a
Country, where abundance of those Examples were frequently seen; and it is but
in few other places that Fault is found with it. The Lord Prelate, through the
easiness which he found to have his Sighs well liked and approved of, did
admire himself, and did attribute the Effects of it, unto his good Qualities,
and not to the Queens Gallantizing Humor. He was so proud of it, that he would
have dared Love it self to have been his Rival. So that thereby may be guessed,
what wonder was his, when that he heard the sweet Conversation, which his
inconstant Queen had with the Count; and when he saw the Bounties with which
She honored him; How often was he tempted, Oh Heavens! to go Stab that too
fortunate Count, at the Feet of that Princess? Finally some certain returns
unto his Sacred Person, reducing him to Reason again, the Arms dropped from
his Hands, and he was contented with going to interrupt that too cruel Mystery.
All that he said to the Queen, after the long Silence, into which his almost
lost Senses had at first plunged him, came forth as from a Man that was
brainsick. The Count retired, and the Queen, who was weary of the idle Stories
of this Priest, found out a way of ridding her self of him.

The King, who had a design to go lie at Cracovia that Night, returned in good
time from Hunting; and so soon as Dinner was over, the Court went toward that
City, where it arrived late: So that our Lovers had no opportunities of seeing
one another that Night; as doubtless they had designed: They were forced to
content themselves with some public Devoirs, amongst which some Looks and
Sighs were intermixed, which promised some other kind of Favors the day
following.

The Count retired himself with a very contented Heart of that days Success;
for he imagined, that he was got to such an height of good Fortune, that there
was but one step more to advance, to be entirely Happy. The Dukes thoughts were
quite of another nature. In that Despair he was, he had taken leave of the
Court for some Days; and was retired into the Country, where he entertained
the Rocks and Woods, with his Misfortunes.

The Lord Bishop had Cares that were no less burning than his; yet he had not
gone that way to work. Solitude did appear to him, a means to increase his
Sorrows, rather than to diminish them. Lovers of that temper, have good strong
Stomachs, they digest all things, and are never disgusted. He arose early in
the Morning, and without trouble, because that he had passed that Night without
Sleep, and went directly to Count Tarnaws House, to have some Conference with
him. He was his near Kinsman; and through the Dignity of his Office, he thought
he had right to give him some Brotherly Remonstrances. Distributive Justice
would have required, that he should begin by himself; but that which is a Crime
in another, is a Trifle in those Directors of Consciences. He came into his
Chamber, and with a free and cheerful Countenance which was very usual with
him; My dear Cozen, said he, doubtless that I awaken you a little too early,
you that are an happy Lover, that Sleeps not always when you would; but there
are certain Businesses in hand, in which I should not show my self a good
Relation, should I neglect them; and I do believe that you will be something
obliged to me for interrupting your Repose. The Count having answered the
Prelates kindness, with civil Complements; the Illustrious Cuzen pursued in
this manner, Would you not be very much surpised, said he, if I should bring
you now an Order from the King, for to have you retire to Smolensco; and there
to wait his further Pleasure? I should of truth, replied the Count, for I do no
believe I have deserved such an Exile. Merited that Exile? replied the Bishop,
No, it is nothing, to dare to lift your Thoughts to the Queen, and to permit
yourself to be dazzled with the Favors of a Princess, that leads you directly
to a Precipice. Me? replied the Count, blushing. Your self, replied the Cozen,
who though you should not Blush at it, would notwithstanding be Condemned to
Suffer the greatest of Torments, if there was not Pity taken of you, and if
your Accusers were not of your Friends.

The Count, who thought that his Relation spoke after this manner, but through
his Zeal toward him, and the Distrusts which he might have upon the account,
that in lieu of following the King to Hunt, he had found him that Morning with
the Queen, did boldly maintain, that it would be with great injustice that he
should be accused of such a Crime, and that he thought he had not need so much
as to make his Defense in it. But the Prelate, who was naturally very Eloquent,
redoubling the strength of his Remonstrances, with all the particularities of
that Conversation, which he specified, did put him beyond Answering. And of
Truth he had Reason to be Alarmed at the Recital of all that had passed
betwixt the Queen and he in a Closet, where they had no other witnesses but
Love: It was not likely that that Princess should have confided that Secret to
such a Man as was the Bishop of Cracovia; and in mean time, unless some
familiar Spirit, had designed to reveal their Amors, he could not imagine that
it could be known from any other than the Queen.

All these Thoughts did come and go in his Mind, during the Bishops Discourse;
who taking advantage of the Disorder he was in, did begin to draw him a most
terrible Picture of his Crime, and of his Ingratitude toward a Prince, which
did daily over-whelm him with Kindness; so that awakening in him those just
Reproaches, that an honest virtuous Man ought to use against himself, in such a
Case, it wanted but little that his Love was not quite extinct. He produced
some weak Reasons to excuse himself. But they were overcome by so many others,
that he had nothing left but Confusion, in which the Bishop was pleased to
leave him, telling him, That in this business, there was no less Concern, than
his Fortune, his Honor, and peradventure, his Life also; all which he ventured
for nothing, or at least for a Princess, who was a Woman like others; and that
would leave him one day for some body else, though less deserving.

All that admirable Discourse, with that Tendency which the Count had for his
Duty toward his King, that honored him with his good Will, having made upon
him such Impressions as it ought to do, he was very much shaken, and passed
away some Cruel Moments; he did perceive that that Passion, as happy as it
could be, could not of Truth, but cause him an eternal Repentance. The Bishop
was already informed of it, and others might be so too; and the King would not
fail at last of knowing it, if he knew it not already. In so fair a way of
Reflections, which caused him great perplexity, this Note was brought him from
the Duchess of Ostrog.

So long as your Friendship could preserve that Honor which it merited, I
wished the Duration of it: But since that it only serves as a Divertisement to
some, be willing to let it end: It was too fair not to produce Jealousy; and
those that were so, have at last Triumphed: Expect neither Reproaches nor
Complaints from me; with the fame Liberty that Persons come, with the same
Freedom I let them retire. I neither call, nor retain any one: But when once a
Person separates without Cause, the business is done, there is no return. Adieu
Count, let us no more see one another, I Conjure you of it; I might pity you,
after what you know, and might bring you into a Confusion; Adieu, for the last
time.

The Duchess had but laughed at the Adventure of her Husband; she was obliged
to the Queen, for having so well Revenged her, and in having showed her what
little Concern she had for the Dukes Passion: But as to the Count, whom she had
always considered as a render Friend, whom she could not think of losing,
nothing had touched her so sensibly, as to learn that she had lost him; not but
that certain Ways, which of late she had observed in him toward her, with the
Reservedness he showed in what concerned the Queen, whereas formerly he did
Inform her of all things, ought to have prepared her unto all that; but be it
that we do not easily believe any thing, which is disadvantageous to us, and
that it is easy to flatter our selves, she did not believe him so unworthy as
to turn perfidious. What a Vexation is it for a Beauteous Woman, to learn of
the Unworthiness of a Man, that leaves her, to give himself to another, for
whom he has expressed a thousand Slites? She began to open her Eyes, and to see
that the loss of the Count, was the Price of that Friendship that the Queen had
showed her, and that she had not been the most subtle of the two. These
Reflections which produced diverse others, did represent unto her the Wrong which
was done her, to be a thing so cruel, that there was nothing she would not do
to Revenge her self. But as she was a Woman of Wit, she would not fly out,
judging well that all the Noise would reflect upon her self. All her Cares were
first employed in bringing the Count back again. She knew his Humor well; and
did understand well which way to go about it.

She began by that Letter, which produced that Effect which she had promised
her self; for the Count, who from the day before had taken the Resolution of
not seeing her any more, did find himself touched with a secret Displeasure; so
soon as he saw, that she was the first to advise him to it, and that
indifferency, which she showed in her Letter, did more sensibly touch him, than
all the Reproaches that she could have used, He did Sigh! He afflicted himself,
and from that time he thought, that he should be the most Unfortunate of all
Men, if he should lose the Friendship of a Lady, without whom he could not
Live. It is not unlikely, but that the condition in which the Remonstrances of
the Bishop had settled his Mind, did much Contribute in making him receive all
those Impressions. But here is what he Answered to the Duchess.

You would abandon me, Madam, when I have the most need of you. I am undone if
I see you no more; I confess that my Weakness would deserve that Punishment:
But I am a Man, and you ought not to be surpised at my committing of Faults:
Though mine should be inexcusable, you are obliged to forgive it me; for if you
had pleased I had been less Guilty; help me then, to get out of it, since that
I freely confess it to you. Spare if you please neither Reproaches nor
Chidings. All Remedies will be sweet to me, so they serve to bring me back to
my Duty again: All my Joy, and all my Glory ought to be limited, in being
wholly yours.

This Note seemed to have somewhat settled his Mind; and as if he had already
gained much over himself, thus to have writ to the Duchess, He thought himself
almost free from that dangerous Love which he had for the Queen. But Lovers
know themselves very little, and all those Resolutions are but false Revolts,
which serve but to re-ingage them the more.

This was Evident in the Person of the Count of Tarnaw, who notwithstanding all
that the Bishop had told him, and all that he had writ to the Duchess, with
all his Reflections and great Designs of returning unto his Duty, could not
forbear going to the Justing, which was to be performed that Day, and there to
wear the Queen's fine Scarf.

The Duchess had a great mind not to be there, but the Queen found out a means
to engage her to it, in sending to her the Prize of the Tilting, which was a
Heart of Diamonds, to give to him that should get the Advantage. If she could
have guessed that the Count should again win the Prize; doubtless but that she
had dispensed her self from serving the Queen in that respect; but there being
other Cavaliers as Brave and as Dextrous as he, and that besides, she would be
very glad to see, whether he would wear that Scarf, after that which he had
Writ to her, she yielded unto her Rivals desires.

Never had the Count appeared with such Gallantry, as he did that Day; and his
Dexterity as well as good Mien, was admired by all; The King was Charmed with
it, as well as the Queen, who, without the least regard or management, called
out to every one to have them observe, all that this dear Lover did perform.
The Duchess was the only Person that seemed not concerned at all, and she did
appear with so much dullness, as obliged two or three times the Queen, to ask
her what she Ailed; but her Trouble was very great, seeing that she could not
constrain her self.

The Count at last was the Conqueror, and approaching to the Duchess, not
without Blushing, to receive the Prize: If you wanted nothing more, said she,
with a cold Air, but this Heart to be Contented, you are now very happy; and
not staying for his Answer, she turned to Count Topor, a young handsome Lord,
who of late did Visit her with some Assiduity, and who gave her his Hand to
lead her home. Tarnaw would have stayed her, but the Queen, whose Eyes were
never off of him, called him, and finding him dull, she asked him, what the
Duchess had said, and whether there was an absolute Rupture, or a
Reconciliation betwixt them? No Madam, he replied, it is neither the one nor
the other, but her Coldness surprises me. Does her Coldness surprise you,
Tarnaw? replied that Princess, Is it not that you repent already your
Abandoning of her? The Count would have justified himself from such a Censure,
but she gave him not time to Answer; and making sign to him to be silent; Go,
said she, follow your own Inclinations, I will have no Heart that in the least
wavers, in giving it self wholly to me: Think on it, and give me your Answer
this very Night. This Lover, who did see, that the place was not fit for the
clearing of such a business, did not insist any longer for to be heard, and
retired to put off his Armor.

Never was Man more agitated than he; his mishap proceeded from being too
happy. His Heart was too much burdened with two the most Charming and most
perfect Objects on Earth; one of which was capable of satisfying the Ambition,
and of pleasing the Desires of the most Ambitious and most Passionate of all
Men. But he was to choose, and he knew not which to leave. In following, purely,
Love, he tended toward the Queen; she had such soft and tender Ways, such a
Complaisant winning Air, and even sometime such pretty passionate Expressions
as Enchanted him. But then to absolutely abandon the Duchess, with whom he had
Contracted a kind of Habitude, Tenderness, Society, and Confidence, that was
renouncing a world of Pleasures; that was tearing himself, from what there was
for him of most sweet and agreeable in this Life. The Queen had Changed for
Love of him, she might well change again for Love of another. There were diverse
Examples of her Inconstancy; and he would not flatter himself with being
capable of of setting Limits to it. The defects of Temper are rarely amended.
Unto all those Reasons, those which concerned his Duty were added, which the
Lord Bishop of Cracovia had made him too well to understand, to forget them so
soon. In fine, he resolved to keep the surest side; which was that of the
Duchess, and as he had need of her Assistance, to bear that Victory over his
own Heart, he was no sooner unarmed, but that he went to her.

Long since he had the Privilege to go in there, with the same Liberty that
the Duke himself did use; and after he had inquired, if the Lady was there, he
went directly to her Chamber, where he found a Gentlewoman at the Door, who
told him that there was no going in. That refusal surpised him; he for whom
the Doors were there always open; he inquired the Reason, and he was Answered;
that my Lady was busy, and that there was some Body with her: He would know who
that some Body was: The Gentlewoman, who was Tutored thereto, would not tell,
or at least would be pressed to it, to render the Mystery more important. He
pressed, he entreated, and at last he learned, that it was the Count Topor. The
Count Topor? replied he, to himself, alone in a Chamber with the Duchess,
where I must not enter? On this he busied himself some time, without any desire
that Notice should be given of his being there; he had a desire to see whether
that secret Entertainment would last long. He sat down near the Gentlewoman,
entertaining her with diverse indifferent things, while his mind was an other
way. But as he grew weary every moment of waiting so long, he rose and sat down
again at least a dozen times. At last Impatiency did so seize him, that he
desired the Gentlewoman to go ask her Mistress, whether he might not Entertain
her a moment. She made some kind of difficulty, on the Orders which she had
received from the Duchess, but at last she seemed to be persuaded through his
Importunities, and returned to tell him for answer, That the Duchess did
desire him to excuse her, and that she could not see him, till the Count Topor
was gone. This second Refusal more Cruel yet than the former, quite breaking
the Heart of Count Tarnaw; He arose in good earnest, and yielding unto the
spite which the Jealousy and the Shame of such an Affront did inspire him
with; He told the Gentlewoman she might tell her Lady, That he would not expose
himself a second time to be so ill received; with that he went away, and left
one of his Lacquais at the Door to keep Centry, and to give him an account when
Count Topor should go forth.

The Truth of the Story was, That there was no body with the Duchess; and that
this Duchess having perceived the Count coming by a Window, had shut her self
up in her Chamber, and had ordered her Woman to make all that Sport, who was
very Dextrous at such things, and her great Confident. She had thus gratified
her little Ambition, and had taken extreme Delight in hearing her Woman relate
all the earnest Desires, the Uneasiness, Frettings, and Distrusts which she had
caused the Count to Suffer. But however, she had been very glad to have spoken
to him; and feared lest she might have driven her Resentment too far; which
gave her some Disturbance all that Night.

The Count was returning home, prepossessed with a thousand Vexations that
troubled him; when one of his Servants, who was going to the Duchess for him,
told him, That the Queen had sent three or four times, to know if he were at
home. This Advice having put new thoughts into his Head, did make him take the
Resolution of going, that he might Consolate himself, near the Queen, of the
Dutchesses Scorns. So he directed his Steps toward the Castle: He came to
that Princess's Appartment; where he was told, that the Bishop of Cracovia was
with her; an ill Conjuncture for him; he thinks it fit to wait his going out,
that he might avoid another Lecture; and passing on the other side of the
Appartment, he entered into a Gallery, where but few Persons resorted, because
that it answered unto the Queen's Closet. He thought at his coming there, that
he heard the Voice of the Bishop. It was very dark, there was no light in the
Gallery, and he thought that he might boldly approach to the Door whence the
Noise came. He heard that there was some Discourse of him; his Curiosity
redoubled; he lends an Ear unto the Keyhole, and he distinguishes the Queen's
Voice: Tarnav; said she, is a Villain, if he has said this; but for your own
quiet I advise you not to believe any thing of it. I shall not believe any
thing of it, Madam, replied the Bishop, if that for to Punish him, you see him
no more I see him? replied the Queen: If I do so, it shall be to Treat him as
the meanest of Men. Be more favorable to him Madam, replied the Prelate, and
see him not at all: If you please, added he, I shall let him know your Mind.
The Queen answered not presently, but after some few Moments of (...), she said
that she consented to it. Upon which the Bishop, who thought that he had
obtained all that he (...) wish for, took leave of the (...) and went out
through the door of that Gallery, with such precipitation, that he had like to
have surprised the overcurious (...).

There (...) was any Surprisal (...) to that of this Lover, to hear the good
services which his dear kinsman rendered him. He could not guess what Cause he
had, to use him so (...). There was not the least Noise imaginable at Court,
that he had any Amorous designs toward the Queen and but little likelihood
that (...) Prudent a Person as He, and of his Character, should be guilty of
that Folly, which he condemned in (...) so much. All other thoughts bad that
would have (...) mind. He had but just time enough to retire himself; and 'twas
well for him that the honest Prelate came out without a Light. He let him pass
by with a design to follow him soon but Fortune who was preparing more new
Adventures for him that Night, would have it that the Bishop going out of the
Gallery, drew the other Door after him; so that the Count found himself looked
up on all sides, not knowing which way to stir forth.

This last Trouble was almost the hight of his Despair; He would not, for half
his life, have been found alone in that place, especially at that hour: That
might have drawn diverse ill Consequences, or at least diverse Ralleries, which
had made sport at Court, if it had been known, that he had been obliged to pass
all the Night long there; and his Vexation as well as his Despair, did increase
a^ of as he reflected on the Impos^bility there was of g^^ing off, with (...)
^ome Celestial Assistance. On the Queens side, though he had a pas^^^, it was
the hour that the (...) used to be with her, and ^^^re, would be too much
danger (...) mee^ him there, after what (...) already discoursed abroad. The
other door was of proof against all his strength, and in ^^^ing any noise, he
run the danger of being heard from the ^^ngs side; The Windows were ^oo high;
to get off that way, would endanger his life. In fine there was nothing to be
done, but to wait with patience the coming of the Day. A cruel Choice indeed,
for a man, that had al^^dy so many other Troubles to ^^^e off, without the
need, of passing a whole night in such a kind of Function.

As he was admiring on this the ^^^ur of his Fate, that all that (...) long had
brought him from one Crosseness to another, the door was opened on the Queen
side; and the King came out followed by that Princess. Happily for the Count,
one of the great Pictures of the Gallery, that warred something to be mended,
wa^ let down, behind which he ha^ leisure to hide himself.

It was Sigismond's Custom every night in Summer, to take some ^urnes in that
Gallery, before h^ went to bed, and the Queen would sometimes keep him Company.
She was then entertaining of him, with the Amourous stories of her Selects; of
which she told him diverse as much to divert him, as to gain the more Confidence
from him. What would you say Sir, said She, if that the Bishop of Cr^covia is
in love with me also? I should say, replied the King, that he could not be so
with a more Beautiful Woman; but I believe him too wise; and you would have
much to do to per^^^e me to it. I assure you that he is so, replied the Queen,
(...) to that height as to become (...) us of all that come near me: (...)
first Declaration of Love that (...) ever made me, continued she, (...) in his
Mass Book; where he (...) me, that he would show me (...) greatest Devotion he
had: ^^^ch consisted in five or six ^^ts of my Picture, all which ^^^sented me
in diverse postures of Saints, and he at my Feet. Of ^^th I never did laugh so
much (...) all my life, for never any of my ^^vers had ever devised to make
love to me after such a Pious manner.

^^^smond, who was a good (...) could not forbear laughing also; but he thought
that it was (...) a jesting story, or that at least the Queen fitted it to her
own humor. I swear unto you, ad^^^ she that he is jealous of Tarnaw; and that
he will not have me to see him. But, Madam, said the King, in way of
Admonition. Do not you your self give way unto such Insolences? You have such
sorts of kind ways and manners, continued this Prince, which in Italy would be
nothing, but that in such a Country as this cause diverse things to be thought
and said, more than there is. A little more Moderation, in all those Outward
things, continued he, would not ill become you. What, must I then reform my
self, replied the Queen, for my Lord Bishop's sake? No Madam, replied the King,
but for your Own sake. I must have some time ^^ow'd me Sir, said the Queen,
(...) my self, unto the Customs of the Country, and I cannot warrant you, that
I can ever be^ome, ^o Barbarous, and to take no longer any delight in Life, or
in (...) Society, as I see diverse do here.

The King, ^o whom this dis^^^se did not please, changed the ^^ine; and after
some Turns (...) in the Gallery, they reti^^.

^^is Adventure, which was (...) Tarnaw a Scene, in which he did see a Picture
of the Queens ^^^ural humor drawn to the (...) who would easily sacrifice
(...) that she had favored, did (...) him much cause of ^^^^^izing on her
Person, all the (...) of that Night. The Incom^^^^e Bishop, with his
Declara^^on was not forgot; but above all (...) admit the Kings Patience; who
had so much Indulgency for the Queens little Sallies. It is true, (...) Prince
had already de^^^red on this account, unto some unreasonable givers of Advice,
that if he was to have punished o^ other all those, of whom the (...) had given
him cause of (...) plaint, his Court would be in a short time quite deferted.

This Impunity however, not the Kings Clemency, did not give the Count any
desire, to engage any farther with the Queen; on the contrary, the more this
Prince was Indulgent, the more Horror had he of his Crime. Besides, that this
night, he was very much out of humor with Love, through all those Accidents
which had happened unto him, and of which he was not yet quite rid. Never had
any night seemed so long and tedious to him. At last Day came; and one of the
Kings Bedchamber, having some business that way, came, luckily to open the
door, while he was behind that Picture.

Never Man that was condemned (...) perpetual Prison, could go with more joy,
out of his Bonds, then he did out of that Place: So soon as he was returned
home, he enquired after; the Lacquay which he had left at the Dutchesse's door;
he was answered than hea^ as still in Gentery on which his ^^^plexity did
redouble. He could (...) believe that Count Topor had (...) the night so
fortunately. (...) Duchess was a woman of great Circumspection: And this ^o^ng
Count could at most serve (...), but for Divertisement. His ^^ming to the
Dutchesses was to learn Manners, for it was a (...) School for that; she did
call him her Son; not but that she was too Young to have any of the age, but
through a Kindness, which could not go far. Yet beauteous and well-made as he
was, there had been some Talk about it with any other Person, than the Duchess;
who had had the good ^^^une of being a Gallant, without the least suspicion of
Gallan^^sing.

The Count of Tarnaw, impatient to know the Truth of this, sent to his Man, to
learn some news; Word was brought him (...) all that night no Person of Note
had stirred forth of the Dutchesse's: This put him into greater perplexities
then ever. He changes his Clothes, and followed but with one single Servant,
he designed to surprise the D^^^che^^. When that he saw come i^^^ his Chamber
the Bishop of ^^^avia.

The Reception he made him with very cold. I see, dear Cousin, said the
Prelate, that I came at (...) time, and that you are not (...) early in the
Morning, but upon some great design^; but you know to what Persons of now
profession are obliged; and (...) that we are to obey ou^ M^fl^^^ Orders. I
bring yo^ (...) to (...), continued he, which will not be very agreeable (...).
What? Interrupted the C^^^t first (...) not being desirous to h^^^ any thing
discourse with him (...) the Q^^^ (...) from seeing (...) the Bishop surprised
to hear (...) what he had to say, could (...) now he should the (...) by some
(...) the (...) her self had ^^eady informed him of it. He ^old him that of
truth it was that which had brought him ^hi^^ (...) Queen having doubt (...),
that there was some (...) of that Conversation; which ^he had had with him in
his ^ountry House, she had thought (...) Ho^^ours ^^e rest, and the Counts
good, not to see him for some time, but as she did (...) indifferently all the
rest of the Court; and that this Advice was (...) sufficient Consequence, to
have him profit by it; That she had employed him, to declare it to (...) as a
near ^insman, and one of (...). The Count not (...) moved at all that the
Bishop said, replied, in such a serious manner, as would confound any man, That
he knew well of what nature, the Obligation he owed him in this rencounter was,
and that he might tell the Queen that he would obey her Orders, as she desired.
You speak with such an Air, replied the Bishop, it seems as if I disobliged
you. Once more, I am perfectly instructed, replied the Count, of all your
Bounties; and in time and place, I shall thank you for them. Can you suspect
me? interrupt^d the Prelates Not at all, replied Tarnaw* but I think that I
should not have over much cause of confiding in a man, that should accuse me
falsely to the Queen. Who could accuse you, replied the Bishop blushing? Have
you some ^ivals that can be so much concerned at your good Fortune? The Count,
who began to be (...) of h^uing his false Reasoning; (...) I h^v^ some, said he
to (...) fiercely, and that should med^^ with any thing else than Gallan^^ng.
That does not concern (...) said the good Prelate, in great (...) order. I know
not whether (...) concerns you or not, replied the Count; But I know well that
the King is informed, that ^^^^in man of your Character, (...) ^ound out the
way of making (...) D^^lar^tion of Love unto the (...) in his Mass Book. The
Lord Bishop, not being able to (...) clearing of a thing which (...) him with
Confusion* arose, and (...) king an hasty leave of the (...) Farewell said he,
you may (...) profit of my Advices, if you (...); but whencesoever they (...)
will let you know that (...) in need of them, as much others* The Count, who
thought (...) told him enough did let (...)* ^o go himself about other
^^si^ess* and to execute the design which he had in his Heart, as well as in
his mind.

He went forth with that Servant, and wholly taken up with his Distrusts, he
took the direct way to the Dutchesses Palace; to-wards which he was no sooner
come, but that he saw a man come forth, which was something near the Count of
Topors pitch; and who under a disguise, did endeavor to hide his face with a
kind of Robe or Cloak, which was then worn. He follows him, accost's him, and
speaks to him. He presses him to discover himself, telling him, that it was to
no purpose to hide himself, that he knew him, and that he was sure, he was the
Count Topor. The other said not a word, goes on his way still, with as quick a
Pace as he could, and lets Tarnaw talk on. He who would be fully informed of
the business, seeing that there was no likelihood of being satisfied that way,
looses his patience, speaks with a more loud (...) t^reatning voice, of falling
on this (...) know person, whom he is abs^^^tely resolved to know; but he
having a Servant, and the other none, to have no Advantage over him, he sent
him back: After which, renewing the Assault, You the happy Lover of the
Duchess of Ostrog, said he to him, you shall (...) escape me; I am single as
well as you, and for the Trouble y^^ give me, you must make me S^arer in all
your adventure, or we must cut one another throats. Le^ get into this house,
continued y^^ (being then just before a Merchants door, which he knew very
well) and there we shall take measures more at leisure, to satisfy me one way
or other. This unknown person, having made no difficulty to follow him, Tarnaw
asked for a Chamber, where being locked in with his pretended ^^^al* Come it is
time to leave off this Cloak and speak clearly, said he, for there are but us
two here. The pretended Count of Topor, sitting in a Chair, still muffled in
his Cloak, did neither answer or move: When the impatient and furious Tarnaw,
coming near him took the end of his Cloak, and did pull it with such a force,
that taking it from him, he failed but little of throwing him down Chair and
all. The stress he made, and his Fury did hinder him at first from seeing with
whom he had to do; but having laid his hand on the hilt of his Sword, to be in
readiness, in case the other should require Satisfaction, he cast his eyes on
him, and perceived that it was the Duchess. What an amazement was his! Never
was man more confounded. He no sooner was come to himself again, but casting
himself at the Ladies feet, Is it possible it should be you Madam? said he,
(with a voice which sufficiently showed the Trouble which he had or that Error
he had committed) How will you forgive me so rude a Violence? Yes Count, I
forgive it you, replied the Duchess, smilingly; and I confess to you moreover,
continued she, causing him to rise, that you never did any any thing in your
life, that has pleased me so much as this; for by this I know that you have
still some Kindness for me, and that the Queens Charms have not wholly driven
me out of your heart. Say rather, Madam replied the Count, That that Princesses
Charms have not so much dazzled me, but that I acknowledge my fault. I had
begged your pardon yesterday for it, continued he, if you had not been so cruel
as to refuse hearing me, for a young Rivals sake, with whom you were doubtless
comforting your self of the los^ of me. The Duchess laughing, confessed to him
that little piece of Malice; and told him the Sorrow which she had received by
it afterward, and that in the Trouble that it had put her all the night long,
she had disguised her self, as he then saw her, to go seek him at his own
House, and make up some kind of Accommodation. Tarnaw, abandoning himself unto
transports of Joy, and of Thanksgiving, for the Dutchesses Kindness, he told
her all that his heart could conceive of most tender.

This Conversation, on which it is not necessary that I should extend any
further, had in fine such Pleasures and Delights, that none but very passionate
persons can be capable of conceiving: But in another place, there was at that
time such things preparing, as would pre^ent them from enjoying long their
mutu^^ happiness.

The Lord Bishop of Cracovia, always in readiness, and evermore Curious, had
not failed at his going from the Count of Tarnaw, to leave one of his Servants
behind to watch him. The Equipage in which he had found him so early, the
Trouble which he had seen on his face, and all that he had said to him, more
than all the rest, had raised diverse Chimeras in his head, and he would gladly
have known, what was his Design; if it concerned not the Queen, who had taken
the pains to o^^go him, by advertising so ^^^ely this Lover of all that he had
to say to him from her. This Servant was subtle, and twixt Man and Man there is
an entire Confidence, so that this had no great ^as^ in informing himself, of
what he would know. He learnt that the Count of Tarnaw had some broyl with the
Count of Topor, and that he was to seek the^ him at the Duchess of Ostrog. He
saw them whisper together in the Street, and had followed them to the Merchants
door, where he left them, to go give his Master a just account of it, who
failed not of rendering himself immediately at Court, and of informing the King
that there was a Quarrel betwixt the two Counts, on the account of the Duchess
of Ostrog. The King, who loved Tarnaw exceedingly, and who did very much
consider the Family of the other (which was one of the most Ancient and most
Illustrious of the Kingdom) did presently give order to prevent this mischief;
and the Lord Bishop of Cracovia, being the man, which he thought the most
proper to be employed in such a business, he sent him, with a Captain of his
Guards, and some Musketeers, to arrest them both in the Kings Name. The Lord
Bishop did take upon him with delight this Commission. They all go together to
this Merchants house, and without any noise, that they might not fail of their
Aim, the Prelate gets all alone up to the Chamber, where he had been told those
Gentlemen were; he knocks, without saying a word; the door is opened, and he
finds the Count Tarnaw, in conference with the other Cavalier, who were
doubtless very much startted to see him. You see, says the Bishop to Tarnaw,
who was the first that he met with, how I am appointed all this day to trouble
you; but I do acquit my self more willingly of this Commission, then of that in
the Morning. I come to arrest you both in the Kings Name. To arrest us, replied
the Count, more surprised then ever, and the Reason, I pray you? Of reason,
replied the Bishop, you know there is sufficiency. Deliver both your Swords,
continued he, and give me your Word, that you will not stir from hence, till
all things be adjusted, or I will cause the Captain of the Guards which the
King has sent, with twelve Musketeers, to come up. The Count, who could not
comprehend any thing in all that, fearing least it should be some design of the
Queens on the Duchess; Or that the Bishop would revenge himself, for what he
had said to him in the Morning; he took him aside, and desired him not to
reduce things to the last extremity; that there was no need for him to deliver
his Sword, because that he had no quarrel; that he should send back the Captain
with the Soldiers; and let him retire home with his Companion, who would be
obliged to him for it. The Bishop answered, that it was the Kings Order, and
that he was troubled to see him receive so ill all that came from him, and that
(...) taken that Commission upon him; but however, he doing his Duty, it was
his to obey. I obey, replied Tarnaw, with an angry voice, to an Order which has
been given, but to insult over me; here is, continued he, laying his hand on
his Sword, that which shall give by Force, what you refuse me, and in spite of
you, of your Captain, and Musketeers, I will retire home with this Cavalier.
The Bishop, though of a bold Spirit, knowing the Counts Valor, though that it
was time to call the Men up, and did call them; Upon which the Count taking him
by the hand, told him, showing him the Duchess, who had not discovered her
self yet, That seeing he carried things to that extremity, he should give him
an account of all that should happen to that Person, which he was willing to
leave in his Custody. And presently drawing his Sword, he met the Captain whom
he found upon the Stairs, and bid him to retire or that he would run his Sword
through him. The Captain answered him, that he had no order to offer him any
Violence; but only to Arrest him. You have sufficiently done your Duty, replied
the Count; return to the King; and tell him that within this hour I will be at
the Castle, I give you my Word for it. The Officer, who thought that the Word
of such a Person, as was Count Tarnaw, was sufficient, whom he would not
disoblige, retired with his men below Stairs, there to wait for the Bishops
orders

This Illustrious Prelate, was in a pleasant Surprisal, when the Count came
again into the Chamber. The Duchess, who did foresee that all the Consequences
of this business would fall upon her, thought it would be the best way to
suppress it as well as she could. She had drawn near to the Bishop, while the
Count was speaking to the Captain, and making her self known, she had not had
any occasion for many words, to persuade him to what she desired. He was so
surprised at the sight of her, that she could not forbear laughing at it,
notwithstanding all the Disorder she was in. The Bishop was not yet perfectly
come to himself again, when the Count returned to them. The Prelate asked
pardon of them both, but especially of the Duchess: He informed them of the
Mistake, which had produced such an Order from the King; and how the Noise had
been spread abroad that Count Tarnaw had some quarrel with Count Topor, and
that they had been met in the Street going to fight. The two Persons concerned
not knowing that it was to the Bishop they were obliged for all this Bustle,
all the business was turned into Rallery; and Tarnaw made some Excuses to the
Bishop, for his Rashness toward him. They stood in need of him, that he might
manage the Dutchesses Reputation in this business: She was not wanting in Care
and Ingenuity to recommend it to him. He was concerned in it, as well as they;
for he had had his share of the Rallery, if it should be known, that he was the
mistaken Person, who had first carried the news of it to Court. But he could
not dispense himself from relating the thing as it was to the King, and the
King could not fail of confiding it to the Queen, as of truth it happened.

Mean time the Bishop, being retired, with his Followers, the Count reconducted
the Duchess home, and after that, retired to his own House, where he found one
of the Queens Pages, who had been waiting for him above an hour, with this Note.

I Am still expecting the account of the resolution You have taken. Are things
so equal, that it merits such long Consideration? You caused a great deal of
trouble yesterday to Persons to find you out. Where were you? You doubtless
stood in need of Council, and You were gone for it. How weak you are? You move
pity in me, my poor Tarnaw! Be with me at ten; I have something of greater
moment to impart. Peradventure that the Bishop of Cracovia may have given You
some Orders from me; They would be sufficiently Just; But I must see You once
more, to know what is to be done with you.


He had scarce finished the reading of that Note, when another Page brought him
this.

THere is a Noise abroad, that You have some quarrel with the Count Topor, and
that the Duchess of Ostrog, is the cause of it. To believe this, I must have
other Witnesses then the common Report. Is your blood no dearer to You? You
deserve not that one should take care of it. I forbid You however to fight, for
any body soever, and I charge You to come with the soonest to give me an
account Your self of that difference. You know what You owe me; fear the
effects of my Indignation.


The Count having read this last Note also, told the Page, that he would go
himself, to carry the Answer to the Queen, and that he would be with her in a
quarter of an hours time.

He saw the necessity there was for him to go to the Castle both to lay the
Noise of this pretended Combat, and to prevent by his presence, the raising of
new stories; as of truth there were many of diverse sorts spread abroad already.

The King, having learned the whole story from the Bishop, was pleased with
Laughing at it, and to say, That he had never seen any honest Woman have so
much Gallantry as the Duchess of Ostrog had: And presently going to the Queens
Apartment, he failed not to give her a fine relation of all that Adventure. If
Tarnaw had not been concerned, she had doubtless been pleased with it; but she
had too great a Share in this, to laugh at it as much as the thing deserved.
The Satisfaction she had in it was, to tell it to every body, because in so
doing she knew the Wrong and Spite, which she should do the Duchess. So that
it presently became public; to which every one added Circumstances according
to his own fancy; for no body did know the true Cause of the Dutchesses
Disguise; nor what was the Count of Tarnaws design, when he had risen so early
in the Morning, to conduct her to the Merchants; he that could see her day and
night at her own House. It was easy to perceive, that there was some Mystery in
the business; and that was the Mystery, which gave occasion for all those
discourses, in which the Bishop had his share.

Tarnaw having rendered himself at the Castle, the first that he found there
was Count Topor, who coming up to him, with a smiling Countenance, said, That
more honor had been done him that day, than he merited, in being thought
capable of giving any Jealousy to such a man as he, and bold enough to measure
his Sword with him. Count Tarnaw embracing him, answered with the like Air,
That he had no desire to have a Love-quarrel with a Tongue Cavalier so well made
as he; but if that by ill fortune, there should ever be any such thing, on the
Dutchesses account, He entreated him that she might decide the Difference.
Ending these words he left him, and passed into the Queens Apartment, where she
who was wont to convey him into her Chamber, came to tell him, that he could
not see her for diverse Reasons. The Count, who was going to render this visit,
as a Criminal would appear before his Judges, without inquiring into the
Reasons, nor making any further Instances to be admitted, in that he came upon
the Queens immediate Order, He only bowed to the Lady, and returned home;
whence he stirred not all the rest of the day, having need of some little Rest,
after the night that he had passed.

Mean time the Noise of this business, that had passed from the Court to the
City, was gone from thence to the Country also, and at last unto the Duke of
Ostrogs Ears. The News surprised him; he became upon it very melancholic and
fretful. He did perceive that the Duchess had not carried her Revenge very
long; and if this was the first Folly that she had committed, her temper had
had need of her Virtue, to be wise. Nevertheless, having his mind wholly taken
up with the Queens cruelties toward him, the Joy which he had at her share in
this business did comfort him as to all the rest; and I believe that he would
not have been no Cuckold, considering the Satisfaction he received, from that
blinded Princess being deceiv- by a man, who so little deserved to be preferred
before him. He came to Town again, at least to triumph on the Queens Account,
though he was a Looser on that of his Wifes. He appeared very angry at first
against the Duchess; with biting Ralleries, harsh Usage, and severe Rebukes.
The Duchess took it patiently; and did endeavor to justify the Righteousness
of her Intentions; but finding that the Duke continued treating of her ill; she
flew out as well as he, and began to reproach him: As if it became him, whose
manifest Treachery was not to be regarded, to insult over a Woman, whom mere
Chance, and bare Appearances could render guilty before men. So that things
being almost equal on both sides, there was mention made of an Accommodation,
and the Principal Article was; That for the mutual Union, the Duke should
renounce all the Queens Gallantry, and should no more see her in private; And
that the Duchess should do the same with Count Tarnaw. I believe that at that
present their Intentions might be good; But in matters of Love there is no
forswearing of any thing. Swear, not to see any more that which one Loves? is
an Oath, which even gives a mind to do it; and but too many of those Perjured
Persons are daily seen.

The Queen was startled at the Counts Indifferency. She thouht that the
Refusal, which he had met with at the Chamber door, would have whetted the more
his desires of seeing her; that he would return to the Charge again; that he
would employ some of his Friends toward her; or at least that he would write
to her to justify himself, or to beg her pardon; but she saw none of all this;
and the whole day past away without hearing any thing from him. Her Soul was
more moved at this Indifferency, than at all that had passed besides; and she
did call this the height of Perfidiousness. She could not forbear the next day
from sending to him; but he was gone out very Early on hunting.

It was an Exercise that the Count loved very much, but he had not taken that
pretense, but to be some days out of Town, on a Letter which the Duchess had
writ to to him, as follows.

THE War has not Lasted long; at last Peace is concluded; But on such
conditions, as are difficult to keep on both sides, as we both have been ready
to promise them: Which is, That we absolutely renounce all that which had
caused our Disunion. That is to say, in my sense, all that is most Charming in
the World, which is the pleasure of seeing that which one Loves. I require but
three days absence from you, to bring some to Composition, who will be
obliged, at last, to agree to all that shall be required. I would only have the
satisfaction of not being the first in Breaking of the Treaty. Let me know
where you will be, and let me hear from you at least twice a day.


The Queen could not digest her Anger for the Counts proceedings so contrary to
her desires. She fell into an extreem Trouble of mind upon it; But her
Resenment was still more bent on the Duchess, than on that Lover. She
considered her as the only Cause of all the Crosses that she had met with,
since her coming into that Kingdom, and she was resolved to be revenged, at
what rate soever.

She knew that the Duke was returned from the Country, and that the King had
sent for him; so that she gave order, that when he should come to Court, he
should be told that she would speak with him. Sigismond, who knew as well as
the rest of the Kingdom, that the Duke of Ostrog, was a man of Courage, and of
Capacity to let fly his Resentments far and near, in respect of what had passed
betwixt Count Tarnaw and his Wife: he thought that in Prudence he ought to
prevent the Consequences; not doubting but that all his Court would take
parties with those two Lords, whereby great disorders might follow. He learned
that the Duke was returned to the City; and he easily imagined that it was to
that purpose. He sent him word that he would speak with him. But the whole
Court was very busy, how this matter should be made up; and in truth those of
this nature are very difficult to be reconciled. The Duke went to the Castle,
and finding that persons were very much concerned, especially the King, in
finding out of Terms, and Reasons, wherewith to make him bear the better the
new Title with which his Wife had honored him; He anticipated all that could
be said to him. What need is there of disguising to me the matter, I know that
if I am not a Cuckold before Heaven, I am so before men; but I know also, that
we must fit our selves to the Custom of diverse ages, and to consolate my self
of my affliction, I have but too many examples before my Eyes: I aim not at
Count Tarnaws life; all his Blood would not make the Duchess the honester
Woman; and should my Honor depend on that only, I well see that there would be
no Return of it: All that I can do is, to wait till he be Married, to render
him the Change. The business being thus turned into Rallery, the King was
overjoyed to see him take that Course, which he did second with diverse solid
reasons, giving a great deal of Praise unto the Dukes Conduct. That Action was
after that as an happy Plank for all those that found themselves in the number
of the betrayed Husbands; there being nothing indeed more ridiculous in the
World, than to cast ones self away for being dishonored by a Woman. Give me
those Wise and Prudent Persons, as was the Duke, who on all other accounts, was
an Example of Valor, as well as of Cuckoldship here.

He going from the King, a Gentleman brought him the order from the Queen. He
presently thought of the promise which he had made the Duchess; but he was to
obey, or rather, he was to yield unto that Bias, which carried him that way.
He did appear so constrained, and so perplexed at the fight of that Princess,
that she could not restrain from Laughing; and letting her self go unto her
usual Humor, which was free, and full of Gayety: Well my Lord Duke, said she,
have you not a very honest Wife, and is not Tarnaw an undoubted Friend?
Friendship, Madam, said he, is Subject unto such Treacheries; but the Count is
yet more guilty in point of Love; he will be sooner pardoned for having
betrayed a Friend, continued he, then the fairest Princess in the World. The
Queen answered him Coldly, That she did take no further care of that business,
than so much as would make her Sport. If I was concerned in it, continued she,
I should think the Persons sufficiently punished with the Confusion it has
brought upon them. But how have you resented the business? And how do you carry
your self toward Tarnaw? The Duke gave her to understand, that he was not a
man that would take so much to heart, a business of which he was not the
Master; that which way so ever it had come to pass, he thought that it fell to
his Wifes share, to take upon her all the Blame of the adventure, seeing that
it was she that had committed the Fault: That as to the Count, he expected from
Time and Opportunity some means to revenge himself, like a man of Honor, but
not as a declared Enemy. The Queen having said some pleasant things on his
Maxims which she well approved of, the Duke replied, That he had Copyed them
out of the Practice of the greatest men in Antiquity; and that he did not use,
in things, of Consequence, to regulate himself by the common Opinion. The
Queen, who was desirous to fall upon that which did concern her self the most,
replied, That all that was very well; but that howsoever it was probable, he
would not permit Tarnaw to continue having the same Assiduities with the
Duchess: Why not? Madam, replied the Duke, who presently perceived, that this
was that thing the Queen did wish for. The mischief is already done, continued
he, and it would be a great Folly in me to be so cautious, where there is no
Remedy. That should have been done in time and season. What would you endure,
said the Queen, with some trouble, -- I shall not only endure, said he
interrupting her, that he should do as he has formerly done, but I will go
instantly from hence to seek him, and entreat him so to do. That is to be very
Complaisant, replied she, and this may very well be called, to be a Commodious
Man. But to let you see, continued she, the little Concern I take in it: Know
that I am pleased at your going to see the Count; and I do Order you, at the
same time to bring him here to me. You may think it may be, that I have a mind
he should ask me Pardon, continued she, and that we should be reconciled. Your
example might be followed, and peradventure that I should not find it difficult
to imitate you, if I had no other cause of Complaint against him; but know that
he has offended me by a more sensible way, than that the of Duchess; and that
it is three days since I have given Order unto the Bishop of Cracovia, to tell
him from me, that he should never more appear before my presence. The Duke both
surprised and rejoiced at this news, asked the Queen, if it were possible that
the Count should give her any cause of treating him so ill? Yes, replied she,
and were it not for the Noise that it might make in the World, I had spoken of
it to the King. But I cannot better punish him, continued she, than in
confounding of him before you, and in reproaching his Unworthiness my self in
person. At this proposition the Duke was in his Dumps, and could have wished
that the Queen had persisted in her first Resolution, or at least that she had
charged some other with that Commission. But there was no way to avoid it; she
would absolutely have it, that it should be him that should bring to her the
Count, and that he should be Witness, after what manner she would treat him.
The Duke was too clear-sighted, and did know the Queen too well, to fall into
that Trap. But that Princesses Charms did so dazzle him, that if his life had
been at stake, he could not refuse what she required of him. This is cruel,
Madam, said he, thus to exact from my obedience so hard a Task: I shall do it
however, continued he, seeing that you command it. But the Repentance of it may
cost me my Life. Upon this he took leave of the Queen, who promised him, to set
this Constraint, which he did to himself for her sake, upon account.

Count Topor, very proud of the Honor that this noise had done him, of being
in love with the Duchess, had a mind to become so in good earnest: He
undertook to visit her more frequently then before. But knowing that a Passion
according to Form, ought to begin by a Declaration, he was diverse days in
meditating one which might please his Mistress. They were fine words which he
composed, afterward writ, but which he did blot out as often as he writ them;
and when he was resolved, and had agreed upon those which he would use, he had
forgot all again so soon as he came before the Duchess; so that he was forced
to stand to those which the Public had made for him.

The Duchess could easily perceive a change both in the Humor and Manners of
the Count. She might have guessed at his design; and at some other time she
might have diverted her self with it. But at that time she was not capable of
any Pleasure; and her mind wholly taken up with Tarnaws concerns, could not
find time to examine the bashful sighs of Young Topor. He kept her Company. He
had a graceful sweet Disposition, which in that seat that her soul was in then,
did better please her, than all the Entertainments of the most refined Wits,
that daily visited her. But that which made her the more to consider him, was,
that he had been very useful to her, in recalling back the wavering Constancy
of weak Tarnaw; and that he might yet serve her in other designs.

The Count Topor, had a good Access with the Queen; not so far as to be in the
Number of the Selected, which did take up all the cares and pleasures of that
Princess: For she would have none but such men as were ready perfected, and not
such as were yet to be modelised: And those of Count Topors age, she would send
to the Duchess, as to the School of Tenderness; but all that had the
appearance of a well-made and accomplished man, had access in her Appartment.
And therefore Topor might pretend to a good Reception there. For he was a very
beautiful Youth; and nothing was more regular than his Person.

The Duchess, that went no longer to Court, thought that she could not find a
man more fit than that Young Count, by whom to be informed of all the
proceedings of her Husband toward the Queen, and that in that disposition of
heart, which he had for her, he would embrace with Zeal that occasion of
serving her. As of truth she had no soonner proposed the business to him, but
he promised to have an Eye on all the actions of the Duke, and that there
should pass nothing in any thing that she had a desire to know, but he would
give her a most faithful Account of it. The Young Count was quick-witted, and
very dextrous; and that Commission suting with his Genius, there was no fear,
that any thing should escape his Diligence.

The Duke had no sooner been with the Queen, but that the Duchess was informed
by her young Spy, of that Visit, and of the long Conference which he had had
with that Princess; and that presently after he had taken Horse, to go seek the
Count of Tarnaw. These news did much alarm the Duchess; she feared it should
be some design of a Combat; though she had been told, that the King had taken
care to prevent that mischief. But for the Duke at his going from the Queen,
who could not but be vexed against Tarnaw, to immediately go to seek him! that
could not but foretell Evil. In the trouble which that caused her, she was a
thousand times on the point of running her self after the Duke; when at last
this Note was brought to her.

I Have newly received a visit from the Duke. And you may imagine how great was
my Surprisal; But that which will amaze you more, will be to learn, that he is
come here, to bring me to the Queen. I obey, but fear you nothing; for this is
but an ill way to my heart; and at my coming from thence, I am more yours than
ever.

Tarnaw.


This Note instead of composing her mind, did cast her into a thousand times
more terrible Perplexities. She had almost rather that the Duke and Count had
fought, than to hear of that tender Combat which was going to be betwixt her
Lover, and her Rival. She could not forgive the Count, for exposing himself to
it. It was as to her an absolute Treachery; and whatever should happen of it,
she was resolved to renounce for ever, all that Tenderness which she had for
him. To which did follow such Impatiencies and Vexations, as none but a woman
can well conceive.

It is confessed, that the Count might very well have defended himself, from
obeying an Order, which was not delivered to him, with that Authority, as did
speak, that the Queen would necessarily have it obeyed. The Duke was too much
Interested to acquit himself of his Commission with Candor. But a Queen, who
did send his very Rival to see after him; a Queen so Charming as that was, had
not need to make use of an absolute Authority. There was a kind of Ambition in
obeying her, such as could not easily be passed by, by such a Person as was
Count Tarnaw. Not but that he did hope, in spite of all the dangers he was to
run through, to preserve his heart wholly for the Duchess, as he had writ to
her; but there was too much Presumption in the very writing of it. That heart
had once already yielded it self, and was not grown stronger since that time.

He came then into the Queens Presence, who excellently well acted the part of
an offended Princess. The Duke would have withdrawn, but she stayed him to be
Spectator of the scene, as she had promised him. There was nothing but Slights
and Scorns, and even Injuryes, for the Count; who well knew that he but too
well deserved them, both in respect to the Queen, and in respect to the Duke;
but finding, that he was not charged with Particulars, and that he was taxed
but in General, because the Queen would not specify before the Duke the faults
he had committed; he had so much Insolency, as to tell the Queen, that he knew
not of what she could accuse him; and did in a kind of malicious way press her
to declare his Complisses and Accusers. At which that Princess being more
enraged than ever, she Banished him from her presence.

The Duke, the too happy Duke, charmed with the success of his Journey, did by
an excess of Generosity, implore the Queens Grace, and demand pardon for
Tarnaw; but that incensed Princess told him, that she would never see him more;
and that she would have him to carry that Order from her to him. The Duke
answered her with an humble Voice, yet such as did express the joy of his
heart, That he was ready to obey her; but that it was a very nice part for a
Rival; that it was very probable the Count would not give any great Faith unto
that which he should say to him, if she had not the Bounty to give him that
Order in Writing; which the Queen, who was almost dead with Impatiency of
being rid of him, did grant presently. After which adding some little Kindness
unto the Joys which the Duke already felt, she did so raise his Spirits, that
he scarce felt himself. He at last tore himself from so many Enchantments,
quite lost with Love. But he was no sooner at the Castle gate, but he found he
had left upon the Table the Queens Order; so that he was forced to return, for
it was the most essential piece of all his Commission. He entered the Chamber
somewhat abruptly; and there he finds the Count Tarnaw with that Perfidious
Princess. It is easy to imagine how great was his Amazement; but not the
Vexation, Rage, and Fury of his Soul! Oh! Heavens, cried he aloud, is it
possible I should be thus played upon! The Queen, who was extremely surprised
to see him return, passing on the sudden, as she used to do, from the
Surprisal unto the Address of the adventure, did let her self loose, to such
breaking forth of Laughter, as reduced the Miserable Duke to despair; who
looking on her with Eyes sparkling with fury, went out, without any more words.

All those devouring Poisons accompanying him home, there he found the
additional Grief of a Wife almost in as ill a humor as himself, which gave him
but a very could Reception. They met by accident in the same Chamber; where it
may be said they saw one another without looking: At least they were there long
enough together without speaking. Mean time they were not so wholly taken up
with their own Vexations, but that they sought to guess at one another
Troubles. The Duke did mistrust that his Dear Spouse had already heard of the
Visit which he had rendered to the Queen; which doubtless was the Cause of her
being out of humor: But the Duchess was more troubled than he, in unravelling
the true cause of her Husbands sorrow; and Women being naturally more Curious
than Men, she could withhold no longer the desires she had of informing her
self of a thousand Suspicions. She was the first therefore which broke silence,
in asking the Duke, Whence proceeded some certain Trouble which she saw spread
over his face; he who ought to have Cause of being the most contented of all
mortals, after the tender and obliging Reception which he had met with at
Court. It is true, replied the Duke coldly, that if my happiness consisted only
in a favorable Reception, I should have cause of being satisfied. What then
(interrupted the Duchess) Is it that such an heart as yours, requires
something further than to have a Rival out of favor, and to be kindly received
by the Object it loves? Confess the truth (continued She,) You would appear
troubled before me, while you glory in your Soul of your Conquest. Do not force
your self, (added She) I know all, I know how far your acknowledgments have
gone, in requital of those Kindnesses you have received. They have obliged you
to take upon you the care of bringing back your Rival. I think it is much; and
that you must needs fear but little his success, or that you are very
complaisant in things of such great nicetyes. The Duke surprised, that his Wife
was already so well informed of what had passed, did feel an increase of
Sorrow, and Confusion, by all she said to him, which were as so many severe
Hints upon all the cruel Adventures of that day. He made no answer, which made
her press him more yet; and asked him, whence proceeded his silence? Whether it
was that she was deceived and did falsely accuse him? No Madam, (replied the
Duke) But such pains have been taken to instruct you so well of things, that I
think it not necessary to tell you more. I should be better pleased yet
(replied the Duchess) to learn them from your self; especially (continued she)
in what concerns your Negotiation, whether you have been well rewarded for
your pains; whether your Rival has been received, as you could wish; whether
-- Ay, Madam, that is it, interrupted the Duke, rising, which does concern you
the most; and I am willing to give you that satisfaction: Know then, continued
he, in a passionate tone, that the Count is the happiest of all men. I have
been the Queens property it is true, and that was not according to her promise;
but to my sorrow, and doubtless for yours also, added he going off, Tarnaw is
beloved, as much as he loves, and we are both abused.

Though the Duchess might have expected some such thing, and that she had not
over much cause, neither to believe so concerned a Lover as was her Husband;
She could not, seeing so much probability, but be very much grieved at it, and
yet pleased at his retiring, that he might not perceive the Disorders of her
Soul.

In this interval enters Count Topor, in continuance of his services unto the
Duchess; he was come to tell her, how that the Duke accompanied with Count
Tarnaw, had been that day with the Queen; and moreover that this last, being
gone out first, one of the Women, had retained him to bring him back to the
Queen the back way, while the Duke went out; adding, that he knew no further of
the business. But that the Duke being returned again to the Queen, he had come
forth presently again, with a very dissatisfied countenance. As for the Count
he was there still, when he came to bring her the News.

The Duchess being senseless and raving, during the recital of this cruel
story, remained also some time after without speaking to the young Count. Who
perceiving that the advices, which he took such pains to give her, were not
very pleasing, did retire himself with begging pardon, for serving her better
peradventure then she desired to be: No, My Lord, You deceive your self, said
the Duchess, I confess that there is no great satisfaction to learn how one is
betrayed; but with me it is a thousand times more cruel to be so, and not to
know it; so that your cares and troubles are not useless to me, nor shall they
remain without acknowledgments. You must make an end Count, continued she
sighing, and if you have any tenderness for me, as you express of late, you
must aid me in overcoming the only Obstacle that is to your desires. I have
naturally some inclinations for you, and you are in a way of expecting all from
me. The Count, to whom so much had never been said before, at least by the
Duchess, for whom he had one of those passions of Romances, which are all
fierceness and sighs, casts himself at her feet in the tenderest manner
imaginable, thinking that there was no more but that to do, to make an end of
softening his Mrs. heart. But she caused him to rise, and told him, That she
would have other kind of proofs of his Love than those. That he could not but
know, that she loved Count Tarnaw; but that seeing she was betrayed by him, she
would be revenged. Brave Topor did instantly offer his Arm and his Life. No,
replied she smilingly, It is neither your Blood or your Valor that I will put
to trial; Only find out a way to make me see with my own eyes, how I am
betrayed; and my revenge is ready, without your being in the least concerned
any further in it. As to the Duke, continued she, I am fully satisfied, and I
have no more measures to observe with him; but for the Count, I confess that be
it a weakness of mind, or of heart, I have need to be better informed, not to
doubt any further. I must convince my heart of it with my own eyes, that I may
have the Power to tear it from him; after which it shall be wholly yours. This
Lover, that on this account would have attempted all the most difficult things
in the World, promised boldly all to the Duchess, as if she needed but to
speak, and the business was done. But she whose mind was molded quite another
way, and who knew how many difficulties would be met with, in her designs,
permitted not her self to be overtaken with the vain Ideas of the Young Count.
She would conduct this business after her one way, and said to Topor, That he
should only go to the Castle, to learn News of Count Tarnaw, and so return to
her.

He was scarce gone from her, when the Bishop of Cracovia entered, who was come
to see the Duke. The pretense of his visit was taken, on the business which had
passed betwixt Count Tarnaw and the Duchess. This Prelate had had such a
considerable share in it, as did invite him to come and justify himself
toward the Husband, as to the Noise it had made: But his designs did reach
farther. They tended in fortifying the Duke in the Resentments which he ought
to have of such an Affront; and in offering him a means of Revenge. He subtly
magnifyed, through the descant which he made on each particular, the Cause he
had to hate the Count; he set before him the shameful Consequences which attend
such Adventures, and pointing at the necessity there was, for a man of his
Honor and Quality, not to let such a Treachery go unpunished, he thought to
have reduced him to a fit condition, to make him embrace with Zeal, an
important occasion that there was, of ruining so base a Friend. The way is
easy, said he: The King this night goes to lie out of Town, to be ready for the
Chase to morrow. The Queen has found out some weak pretenses to excuse her self
from it; but of truth, it is to have the freedom of passing the whole night
with Count Tarnaw. What I tell you here, continued he, with a tone and air to
render the thing most certain, I have if from the Original. I leave you to
think, if it be not a certain way of Revenge for you; and if giving notice to
the King of it, like a true Subject, You can fail of having them surprised
together, and of rendering your self at the same time considerable with the
King. The Duke strangely surprised at the Prelates proposition, gave him a full
Attention. There was no doubt but that Jealousy, which was very strong in him,
did find great satisfaction in that design, and Vengeance did also spur him on,
to make use of it. But his soul did find so much Unworthyness in the act, that
he could never consent to it. He therefore told the Bishop, that he could not
resolve to do what he proposed, and that there were other braver ways of
Revenge. That he had learned to use that Sword which he wore; and that there
was but that only way, which could give him satisfaction as to Tarnaw's action.
The Bishop strangely surprised, and as sorry that he had no better success in
his design, dissembled his Spite and Confusion; and to patch things up again,
he seemed to be partly of the Dukes mind, of whom he begged Secrecy, and
retired home, to think on what he had to do.

Churchmen rarely forgive. That Revenge which they forbid in others, is a
delicate Morsel which they reserve for themselves. This had his Soul too much
ulcerated with the Queens Cruelties, and above all against Tarnaw. It was not
to be hoped, that he would let escape so fair an occasion of ruining them both.
His Policy had prompted him at the first to make use of the Duke; but seeing he
was so weak (as he thought) as to refuse those means which were offered him, as
to his Revenge, he knew the way of useing them himself; and no body should know
from whence the Blow came, unless the Duke contrary to his word should divulge
the Secret. He takes a Pen, and having the perfect art of counterfeiting his
own hand writing, he wrote this Note to be given secretly to the King, when
arrived at that Country house, where he was to lie that night.

A Faithful Subject thinks he does his duty in advertising his Prince, when he
is dishonored. If with a little diligence you this night repair to the Castle,
there will be found at any time of coming, the Queen up, and Tarnaw at her feet.


This Note finished, he sealed it, and sent it to a man who he had near the
King, who was wholly devoted to the Prelate; but he took care to instruct him
withal, by what means he should make it fall into his Masters hands. His Heart
being at rest on that side, he was to please it on the other, which did no less
move him. He raised his Rage so far, as to have the satisfaction of being
Witness of the success of the Note. The Queens Chamber answered into the great
Garden; there was a Gallery under the windows, through which that Princess
could descend into that Garden, when she had a desire to walk. The Bishop who
had power enough in the Castle to cause all places to be opened to him, at all
hours, thought to have found what he sought for, and that this Gallery was a
fit place from whence to see, without danger of discovery, all that he desired
to see. This only Imagination did almost bring him beyond himself; he fancied a
thousand things, which were to be acted in that Chamber; which thoughts
transported him. The hour finally was no sooner come of executing his design,
but he took the way to the Castle, and rendered himself at the quarters of him,
who had the care of the Garden; the entry into which he soon obtained under
specious Pretenses. The night was very dark. He is the most satisfied of all
men: But he was not yet where he wished to be; and having found the door of the
stairs of that Gallery shut, he found that he had rejoiced too soon, and that
nothing was done yet to any purpose, except his Wit, or rather some help from
Heaven did assist him in climbing up to that Gallery. Persons of that
Character, are so well accustomed to implore on all accounts the assistance of
the Heavenly grace, that they employ their Vows and Prayers indifferently on
good and bad things. Our Prelate goes and comes, seeks, runs all over the
Garden without lighting of any thing that could so much as second his good
desires: At last as he stood gazing toward the windows, whence there came
forth a very great light, he thought that he saw something hanging on the
Gallery. He presently takes hold of it, finds it to be a Rope, and that rope a
Ladder, to get up thither. What joy was this for him! Thus was the Heavens
opened; he doubted not but that it was the happy Counts Amorous Ladder; and
without loosing of time in reasoning, whether one might with prudence adventure
on it, carried headlong by his Passion, he begins to climb with such
Nimbleness, and Dexterity, as did outgo the natural disposition of his body;
for the good Lord was somewhat laden with matter. He was already got to the
uppermost Round with his hand, when Misfortune would so have it, that an
unlucky Spirit on the sudden loosened the Ladder, to make him break his neck.
He had a Leg out of Joint; and that was not all neither, for his Back, his
Head, his Arms, and all the other parts of his Body, were made sensible of so
cruel a Fall: Never was such a Disaster, none but one so hardened unto
misfortunes as he was, could endure the pain, and live. At the first he let go
a very great Outcry, which he could not retain; after which using great
violence with himself, to refrain from making any further noise, he endeavored
to drag himself as well as he could toward that door he had come in at. He had
rather have dyed a thousand times than given that satisfaction to the Queen and
the Count, to let them know that it was he: Oh! Unfortunate day, cried he to
himself, What a Night have thou provided for me? He was creeping as fast as he
could, suffering in h s Soul, as well as in his Body, such pains as it would
be difficult to imagine, when he saw some People with a Lanthorn which was
coming toward him: He was not in a condition to avoid them; Who goes there?
cried a Man? He was so out of himself, that he knew not the Voice; and without
speaking his Name, he desired him to call some body to assist him in an
Accident that had befallen him; What Is that I hear, said another? Is it not the
Bishop of Cracovia? Ah! My Lord, replied the pityful Prelat, with a strange
surprisal, finding that it was the King; Pardon an unfortunate Wretch, who is
going to give up the Ghost, if no pity be taken of him. Sigismond, the Prince
of the World, the most tender, moved as much as he had been affrighted at this
discourse, inquired of him what he ailed, and whether he was wounded, and what
he was come there to do? But the unfortunate Prelate, whether through the
Anguish he felt, by his fall, or the Trouble he was in at the Kings presence,
did on the sudden loose his speech and fainted away.

Now that I may not confound my Recital with diverse Incidents one upon another,
which would be difficult to unravel all at once, as they happened that night, I
shall begin to clear this, concerning the Bishop.

The Duke, who had a more generous Soul than that of the Prelate, not being
able to resolve on the ruin of his Rival, through such means, would not
however neglect such an Advice; but designed to advantage himself by it, if not
as an open Enemy, yet however as a Jealous Lover. He had had the same thoughts
of that Gallery as the Bishop had. But he was so cautious as to fit himself
with a Ladder of Rope, which had already served him in other occasions, better
peradventure then this was. He came to the Garden, and through the means of
some Iron hooks, which he cast with strength of arm on the Gallery, having
found the means of fastening his Ladder, he had got up very happyly; leaving his
Machine hanging, that in case of necessity, it might always be ready to
descend.

The Queen was in her Chamber with the happy Tarnaw, without the least care or
fear, having no other witness, but Love; rel^hing all the delights which that
God is capable to afford. The Bedside on which they were, was so disposed that
all could be seen that was done there from the Windows, whose Curtains by ill
fortune were left undrawn; so that the overcurious Duke, did see with his own
eyes such things, as sufficiently did punish his Curiosity. The Queen was
seated on a pile of Cushions, of Crimson Damask, and the Count near her, on the
Carpet which covered the Estrade, having his fine head negligently resting on
that Princess knees; who passing her hand over his face, Well Tarnaw, said she,
will you escape from me any more; and shall I again be put to the trouble of
seeking for you? I will infuse so much Love into you, added she with some
passion, before you get out of my hands again, that you shall have no more eyes
but for me: I consent to it my Princess, answered this Lover, with a passionate
air, Redouble, if it be possible, that heat that I feel for you: It can cost me
but my Life. But the pleasure to dye for so charming a Princess, is better than
the happiest Life, that the Heavens can give. You have forgot the Duchess
then, replied the Queen languishingly. Ah! Madam, replied that Lover, I have
forgot all; and I only remember that I love, and that I am beloved of all that
which is most charming in the World. That is not enough yet, replied the Queen;
I have something more to exact from your passion. What can you ask of me Madam,
replied he, but what my heart will rejoice at the performance of? I will have
you, continued the Queen, to tell me your whole story with the Duchess. Tarnaw
began to sigh! You sigh, said that Princess? Yes Madam, replied that Lover, I
sigh, because that I cannot guess at the pleasure you can have, in a Recital
which can no longer have any thing that is pleasing for me, and much less for
you. But the Queen being resolved to be satisfied, the Count was forced to put
himself in a readiness to obey her. The Duke, who till then, had opened his
Eyes and Ears, unto things that did burst his heart, was preparing with this
story for such a Regalia as would make an end of killing him. And I verily
believe that this time he had wished to have been both deaf and blind: But he
was to follow his destiny. Courage, said he, Let us use the utmost of our
Patience. When a certain noise which was coming from that side his Ladder was
on, through the stress which the Bishop made in getting up, made him turn his
head, and obliged him at the same time to go see what it was: He no sooner
perceived that it was a man, whose Curiosity it may be did carry him unto that
Boldness, as to know for what use the Ladder was there, but loosening presently
the Hooks, he sent him down again faster than he had a mind to go. He heard him
cry out, but he little troubled himself with it; his soul was so filled with
Spite and Rage, that there was no room left for Pity and Compassion. If he had
known that it was the Bishop, he had consolated himself by it of part of his
troubles; for he loved him not; and that was the only Pleasure that he was then
capable of. He for some time after still lent an ear to observe, whether this
Adventure would not have some other conclusion. He thought the man very patient
to make no more noise than he did. But he was strangely surprised when he heard
the Kings voice; he knew it too well, and it was too different from others to
be mistaken. He did not well apprehend what He said; but as he thought He was
speaking to the man that was fallen; which he fancyed might be some of his
People, that he had sent to learn what passed on that side. He lost no time;
there was none to lose; and knocking two or three times at the Queens Chamber
door, he caused a great Amazement in those two Lovers. The Queen strangely
affrighted, rose with her Gallant to endeavor to get him off; but too late;
the other doors were already seized on: Fear increases; she doubts not but that
it is the King: She knows not what to do: No place secure to conceal the poor
Tarnaw in; there was nothing but the Chimney, which used to be locked up. She
runs there with him, but no hopes of opening it. All thing conspire their
Ruin. There Is greater knocking than ever. The Queen is past all hopes; at last
Tarnaw makes a last attempt, and the danger giving him a double strength, he
breaks the lock, and maugre all other Obstacles, he opens the Chimney, and
finds it garnished with two persons, which the great Distraction he was in, did
not permit him to discern at first. The Queen, who was in too great a Disorder
of mind to perceive it, thinks of nothing, seeing that door open, then to run
at that they knocked at; and finds that it was the Duke of Ostrog: She remained
confounded at it at first! But having a little re-assur'd her self, through the
joy she had that it was not that which she feared; she set her self in a kew of
quarrelling with the Duke, and asked with what Insolency he durst come at that
hour thus to disturb her in her Chamber, to kill her with Fear? It is not time
now Madam, replied the Duke very seriously, and with a loud voice, to treat me
ill. I have seen all, I have heard all. And what have you seen or heard?
interrupted that Princess, With what Authority do you come to examine my
actions? Authority Madam replied the Duke? I know what I owe you; But I give
you notice that he that has all Right here, the King, is in the Garden. The
King in the Garden! replied the Queen, changing her tone, then you do revenge
your self my Lord Duke. It would not be against you Madam, answered the Duke,
that I would revenge my self. I can ruin you, I can save you; but make use of
me, you will have occasion for it, for the King is not here for nothing. Would
you be generous, replied the Queen, to that hight to forget. -- You need not to
fear any thing from me, Madam, replied the Duke, and Count Tarnaw needs not to
hide himself; It should not be in such an occasion as this that I would appear
his Enemy. But who do I see? added he, crying out, my Wife! At these words the
Queen also having turned her head, did not see with less surprisal than he, the
Duchess of Ostrog, and Count Topor coming out of the Chimney, with Count
Tarnaw: They stood staring on one another without one word speaking, as if
there had been a kind of Enchantment amongst them that had rendr'd them
speechless. But their Souls did not express themselves the less, through their
Eyes and Actions, each conveying their sighs on what concerned them most; above
all the Queen, the Duchess, and the Duke, who being agitated with different
sorts of Passions, had different Motions, which sometimes led them toward
Jealousy, sometimes toward Shame. This dumb show was succeeded by another
scene, which was no less troublesome, which began at the Kings entering: This
Prince very much troubled at the Bishop's mischance, who he thought to be
dead, had caused him to be taken up by his People which he had with him, and
having given order to some body to take care of the unfortunate Prelate, and to
put him without noise into some Chamber, not willing to lose one moment of time
for fear of any surprisal, he caused two armed men to go before him, and
advanced toward the Queens Appartment. He went up the Gallery, of which he had
a key; and causing his two Guards to stay at the door, he went into the Queens
Chamber. At first his Wonder was great, to find her in such company; but his
Joy was not less; for he had no desire to find her guilty. That Princess, who
had a Presence of mind most admirable, did no sooner see him, but running
toward him; Ah! Sir at this hour to return so unexpectedly, doubtless that
some extraordinary business has happened. The King was still so disturbed at
the troublesome Distrusts which had brought him there, and especially at the
sad sight of the Bishop of Cracovia, that he could not answer any thing to the
Queen; which made that Princess to continue in this manner: You doubtless think
it very strange, Sir, to see such Persons here, who according to a great deal
of reason should not be together; But I was willing to end what I had begun; I
thought, continued she, that I should do a thing which would please you, in
reconciling the Duke and Count Tarnaw together, and I have taken the most
interrest'd Parties for witness. I have heard the Justifications of the
accused; and finally they are all agreed. The King did seem to be well
satisfied with that Accommodation, having no great difficulty of adding faith
unto that which the Queen said, seeing that no Person in the Company durst
contradict her: But for all that he had a design, to cause those three Lords to
be arrested, if not on his account, at least on that of the Bishop's death, of
whom he would know who was guilty; when one of his Servants came and told him,
that the Bishop was better, and that his greatest hurt was his Ancle out of
joint. This news having in some measure settled the Kings mind, He appeared
something more cheerful; but he being tired with his late journey, he would go
rest himself, putting off till the morrow the further clearing of all that
nights Adventures: The Queen followed him, and the rest of the Company went
where they pleased; and I draw the Scene.

FINIS.

