THE ANCIENT AND PRESENT STATE OF POLAND.

GIVING A short, but exact, Account of the Situation of that Country. The
Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants. The several Successions of their Kings.
Their Religion, etc. Drawn out of their best Historians.

T^ which (...) added, An (...) ^he (...) of the late K(...) as it now stands.

London, P(...) for E^ ^hitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1697.

TO THE READER,
THE Affairs of Poland being, at this juncture, the common Subject of our
Discourses and Expectations, upon the happy Determining whereof, it is thought,
the future Peace, Quiet and Prosperity, of Europe will, in a great measure,
depend; The following Account may perhaps be acceptable to the Public. It
treats first in general of POLAND, how Bounded and Divided. Afterward of the
Nature of the Country, and Manners of the People, the Election of their Kings,
their Government, and their Religion. These are the principal Heads upon which
we make our Enquiries of any Country and People. They are handled so briefly
and succinctly, as not to be tedious to the Reader, yet, it is hoped, to his
Satisfaction. There is added an Account of the Death of the late King, and of
the present Election, as it now stands.

THE Ancient and Present State OF POLAND, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Poland.
Poland is an Elective Monarchy, comprehending the Ancient Sarmatia Europaea,
and the Eastern part of Germany, toward the Vistula. It is called by the
Natives Polska, and has taken its Name from the Word Pole, or Pola; which, in
the Selavonian Language, signify, an Hunting Country; all this State
consisting of vast Plains, Fields and Woods, proper for Hunting. It is much
greater, and more considerable than it was, since Lithuania, and several other
Provinces, have been added: For before it only contained what we now call the
Great, and the Lesser Poland: But with these Additions, it is one of the
greatest Kingdoms in Europe. Moscovy and Tartary lie to the East; Hungary,
Transylvania and Moldavia to the South; Germany to the West; and the Baltic
Sea, Livonia, and a part of White Russia, or Moscovy, to the North. This State
may be divided into the Kingdom of Poland, and the Great Duchy of Lithuania.
The Kingdom of Poland is subdivided into Great, and Lesser Poland: The Lesser
Poland lies betwixt Hungary, Silesia and Russia: In it is Cracow, the Capital
City of all the Kingdom, and Sandomirz. Great Poland is betwixt Germany,
Pomerania, Silisia and the Lesser Poland; and has the Cities of Posnan,
Kalisch, Gnesna, Lencici, Lublin and Sirad: It contains also the Provinces of
Mazovia, where is Warsaw and Pl^^sko; Cujavia, where is Ulad^sl^^v; Royal
Prussia, which has Dantzick, Elbing, Thorn, etc. and Black Russia, with the
Cities of Leopold, and Prezmisle, in Latin Premistia. Lithuania has in it the
Cities of Vilua, Novigrade, Poloczk, Minx, Wisepezk, Micislaw, Breslaw, etc.
and is divided into Volbinia, with the Cities of Lucho, Klow, etc. Podolia,
with the Cities of Caminiec, Braclaw, etc. Polesia, where is Bressici; and
Samogitia, the Capital of which is Medniki. Poland is otherwise divided into
Thirty four Palatinates, or Governments: Every Palatine has his Chastellans
under him, and they are Captains and Governors of Cities, and are about Eighty
seven in all. There may be an Ecclesiastical Division of Poland, according to
their two Archbishopricks of Gnesna and Leopold. They had formerly Riga too,
but that City is now in possession of the Suedes. The Archbishop of Gnesna is
the First Senator; he ascends the Throne upon the King's Death, and governs
till another is chose. There are Fifteen Bishooricks in Poland, many Abbeys,
and the Universities ot Cracow, Royaumont, Coningsherg, Zamoiski, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Country of Poland.
THE Air of Poland is very pure; and the Land so good, that it is almost
impossible to conceive the Quantity of Corn they send to other Countries. There
are vast Plains, as far as you can see, intermixed with Rivers, and many Woods;
which are to the Advantage, as well as Beauty, of the Country. This chiefly
concerns Great Poland: The Lesser is as fruitful, though not so compact: In it
are Mines of Silver and Iron, and Vines, and excellent Fruits. With these
Advantages, they likewise enjoy, a temperate Air. But it is not so in
Lithuania: The Commodities in which they trade, are, Honey, Wax, Venison, Fish,
Timber, Hemp, Corn, the Skins of Martins, Castors, Bears, Elkes, and other Wild
Beasts; as also Copper, Lead, Iron, and chiefly Steel.

The Nobility only are considerable in Poland: The Third Estate are, in a
manner, Slaves. The Gentlemen of Poland are large, and strong; dexterously
wield the Scimitar; Learned in Foreign Languages; very liberal, brave Men; and
hearty Roman Catholics. But it must farther be owned, that they are fierce,
and proud; that they sacrifice every thing to their own Opinions; and own no
Sovereign, but Liberty. From hence have come those Advantages the Tartars and
Moscovites have had formerly against them; and the Reasons why the King of
Sueden, with about Forty Thousand Men, reduced their Country to the last
Extremity, when their Armies consisted of Two Hundred Thousand Fighting Men:
Which could proceed from no other Cause, than a Mis-understang among
themselves, and the little Power they give their Prince: Insomuch, that before
the Senate can be assembled, and the Nobility have resolved to go to War, the
Enemy has Time to do what he will in the Field; and there are no strong Places
to hinder his going to the Gates of Warsaw. However, the Polanders are good
Soldiers, especially the Horse, who are armed with a Carabine, a Case of
Pistols, an Axe on one side, and Scymitar on the other, a Quiver full of Arrows
and a Bow at their Backs, which they use after the the Discharge of their
Firo-A^^ns, when the Enemy flies. The Polanders love Traveling; they are
faithful, obliging, and civil to Strangers: They are rich in their Habits, and
splendid in their Entertainments, which they make freely for their Friends.

Their Marriages, especially in the Countries of Prussia, Samogittia and
Lithuania, are as follows; The Young Women do not marry before the Age of
Twenty lour Years; or, at least, not before they have wrought with their own
Hands Cloth and Garments to present every one that attends their Bridegroom to
Church. When the Father seeks a Wise for his Son, he considers neither Beauty,
nor Fortune; but only her Manners, whether she be of an agreeable Age, if she
has a Body likely to conceive and bear Children. Having found such an one, she
is taken away by some of the Bridegroom's Kindred; after which, they apply for
the Father's Consent, to complete the Marriage. These People retain still many
Relics of Pagan Superstitions; for, in the Functions or Ceremonies of
Matrimony, they make the Bride go three times round the Fire, then sit down,
wash her Feet, and with that Water sprinkle the Bed and all the Movables that
belong to the New-married Couple. They anoint the Bride's Mouth with Honey,
cover her Eyes with a Veil, and so lead her Blindfold to all the Doors of the
House, which she must strike with her Right Foot. They throw Wheat, Rye, Oats,
Barley, Rice and Beans at the Doors, saying, That the Bride shall never want
any of those Grains if she continues devout in her Religion, and takes Care of
the Affairs of the Family. That done, they take the Veil from before her Eyes,
and have a Banquet; But at Night, when it is time to go to Bed, they dance, and
cut off her Hair; then some of the Women wrap her Head in a white Linen Cloth,
which she may wear till she have a Son born, for till then she is called a
Girl. Lastly, She is taken to her Chamber; where, after being jocularly pinched
and beaten, they deliver her to her Bridegroom, who they give to eat Goat or
Bears Stones together, instead of Sweetmeats and other Delicacies; which, they
are of Opinion, help Procreation; and therefore, in their Marriage-Feasts, they
have no Flesh of any Creature that was gelt.

They use in their Diet, a good quantity of Saffron and Spices; and spare not
for Sugar in many Dishes peculiar to them.

The Polanders are very devout, and fast Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays; but
they scruple not being drunk, and to fight at these times. The Country People
are poor and miserable, and are Masters of nothing they have, but are subject
to their Lords, who treat them as Tyrannically as Gally-Slaves. A Gentleman
there has Power of Life and Death over those of his Family, and Tenants: And if
a Neighbor kills one, and pays the Value set upon him, all is well again: And
when they speak of a Gentleman's Riches, they reckon them by his Number of
Tenants. The Houses of these miserable Slaves, who work hard, and live upon
little, are only of Mud and some Trees to hold up the Roof. The Children sleep
and eat with the Swine; and the Master of the House has no other place to eat
in, and oftentimes for his Lodging, than the Manger and Rack where his Cattle
are kept. It Is true, there is sometimes a little Apartment next the Roof, where
thep have a Stove, and the best of the Family lie upon Skins. They drink Beer,
or Mead, but no Water, because it is almost all stinking in Poland, where it
corrupts in the Plains. Their Women are little, not handsome, very simple, but
civil: The Polanders love them, but treat them like Servants; and when they
return home from the Army, they give them their Right Hands to kiss. They are
something jealous, and therefore have no Conversation, but with their next
Relations, unless when they are at Balls and Feasts. They go very seldom abroad.

There are no Inns in Poland, upon the Road; and therefore, Gentlemen that
travel, either lodge with their Friends, or carry their own Provisions along
with them, or else lie upon the Country People, who are obliged to receive
them, and that as a Tax upon them. If any of the Nobility are taken in War, the
King is obliged to ransom him. Their Language is Sclavonian; besides that, they
all speak Latin, and most of them understand Foreign Languages.

CHAP. III. Of the Kings of Poland.
IT is commonly thought the Huns were the first People that came into Poland;
and the Sclavonians, who drove thence the Suedes and Goths, and some others
that inhabited from the Vistula, to the Elbe. Lechus made himself Master of it
about the Year 550, and began the Monarchy of Poland. This Prince resided at
Gnesna, a City which he built, and so named from an Eagle's Nest that was found
on the top of a Tree where it was building; the Word, in the Polish Language,
signifying a Nest: Whence came the Arms of the Kingdom to be a Spread-Eagle.

The first Governors of this Country did not assume to themselves the Title of
Kings, but only that of Dukes; and the first Form of Government was very
inconstant; for, after the Race of Lechus, (though it be uncertain how many
there were, and how long they governed, and what were their Atchievments,)
Twelve Governors (in their Language called Vayvods) administered the
Government; who having refined this barbarous People by good Laws and
Constitutions, at last were divided among themselves. Whereupon, the Poles
elected one Cracus; who having restored the Commonwealth to its former State,
built the City of Cracovia, (now Cracow,) calling it after his own Name, and
making it his Place of Residence. His youngest Son, Lechus the Second, to
obtain the Principality, Murdered his eldest Brother; but the Fact being
discovered, he was banished. To him, succeeded Venda, a Virgin, only Child of
Cracus. After her Death, the Government returned to Vayvods; which continued
till the Poles elected Premisbus, a Goldsmiths, called also Lescus the First;
who obtained the Crown by a Stratagem that saved the Poles when they were in
distress; the Manner of which was thus; They being in the Field, against the
Moravians, and finding themselves much inferior in Number, this Goldsmith
bethought himself of a Way to make the Polish Army seem more numerous; which
was, by making a great Number of Shields of Barks of Trees, and afterward
smeering them over with Galls and Quicksilver; which making a great Show, and
the Moravians really believing the Poles were equal in Number, stood gazing
upon the Shields, till the Polish Army had Time to retire.

This Duke having no Issue, an Horse-Race was instituted, to determine the
Succession; and three Candidates appearing, one of them thinking by Subtilty to
obtain the Crown, laid several Iron Spikes in the Way where the Race was to be
run; which the the other two knowing nothing of, they galled, and stopped in
their Career, so that the Politician came first to the Goal: But the Falacy
being soon detected, a poor Country Fellow, that ran along with them, on Foot,
only for his Diversion, was chosen, and the other kiil'd upon the Spot.

This Duke's Name was Lescus the Second; and who (as some say) was afterward
slain in the Wars against Charles the Great.

To him succeeded his Son, Lescus the Third; who having appeased Charles the
Great with Presents, made Peace with him, either as an unequal Ally, or by
acknowledging himself his Vassal. This Duke left Poland to his Son Pop^ell; but
gave the neighboring Countries of Pomerania and Cassovia to his Natural
Children.

After him, succeeded his Son, Pop^ell the Second; a very ill Man; who, by the
Persusions of his Lady, murdered his Father's Brothers: Whereupon, it is
reported, that our of their dead Bodies (which he would not suffer to be
interred) came forth a great Number of huge Rats, which devoured him, and his
whole Family, notwithstanding all imaginable means were used to prevent it.

After his Death, came an Inter-regnum, full of Troubles, till the Poles
declared Piastus, a Country-Fellow, born at Cruswitz, for their Prince; from
whom, ever after, if any of the Natives obtained the Royal Dignity, they were
called Piasti. His Posterity reigned for a long time in Poland; from whom also
descended the Dukes of Lignitz, and Brieg, in Silesia. It Is said, this Duke was
One Hundred and Twenty Years old when he died.

His Son Zigmovitus was a brave and Warlike Prince; to whom succeeded his Son

Lescus the Fourth; of a peaceable Temper.

Of much the same was his Son Zickmovistus, who succeeded him. This Prince had
but one Son, who being born blind, was, in the Seventh Year of his Age, (in
which Year, according to the Custom of those Times, his Head was to be shaved,
and he to receive his Name,) restored to his Sight; which was then taken for an
Omen, that he should be enlightened with the Christian Faith. His Name was
Micislaus, or Mischo; who began his Reign in 964. and was the first Christian
Duke of Poland.

Boleslaus Chrobry, his Son, succeeded him in 999, and was created King by the
Emperor Otho the Third, who visited the Tomb of Sr. Adelbert, killed in Prussia.

He left the Crown to Micislaus the Second:

Who likewise left it to Casimir; who being an Infant, his Mother Rixa took
upon her the Administration of the Government; but the Poles being
dis-satisfied with her, she was fore'd to flee, with her Son, into Germany,
who, in his Journey afterward to France, assumed the Order and Habit of a
Monk. During his Absence there were great Disturbances in Poland; whereupon, by
the Mediation of the Pope, the Poles prevailed upon Casimir to leave his
Monastery, and to accept of the Crown; but upon this Condition, That they were
yearly to contribute a Farthing for each Head, except those of the Nobility and
Clergy, toward the maintaining a perpetual Burning Lamp in the Church of St.
Peter's at Rome; and moreover, cause their Heads to be shaved about their Ears,
like Monks.

His Son, Boleslaus the Second, succeeded him. This Prince, surnamed The Cruel,
put to death Stanislaus, Bishop of Cracow; and, as a Punishment for his Crimes.
Poland lost the Title of King for a considerable Time.

The next King was Uladislaus the First, Brother to the foregoing. Boleslaus.

He was succeeded by his Son Boleslaus the Third, a brave Soldier, who obrain'd
a signal Victory over the Emperor Henry the Fifth, in the Dogs Field, near
Breslau. There never was a Prince in Poland more famous than this; he fought 45
Battles with Success, except the last with the Red Russians, which was lost
through the Cowardice of the Vayvod of Cracovia; to whom the King, for
Recompense, sent a Hare's Skin and a Spinning-Wheel; which so troubled him,
that he hanged himself: And the King likewise was so concerned at his Defeat,
that he not long after died with Grief.

His Son Uladislaus the Second succeeded him.

After whom came Boleslaus Crispus, his Brother; who received a great Overthrow
from the Prussians, his Army having been mis-lead into Moors and Bogs, through
the Treachery of a Guide.

Next succeeded his Brother Micislaus Senier; but he was soon deposed for
Maladministration.

Then came his Brother, Casimir the Second, to be elected; who was only famous
for chastising die Prussians.

His Son Lescus the Fifth, Sur-nam'd The White, was fain, to contend with the
banished Micislaus for the Kingdom.

Next him, came his Son Boleslaus the Fifth, Sur-nam'd The Chaste; in whose
Reign the Tartars committed prodigious Barbarities in Poland, and from thence
made an Inroad into Silesia, where, in a Battle fought near Lignitz, they slew
so many of the Inhabitants, that they filled nine great Sacks with their Ears,
though they did cut off but one from each Head.

To him succeeded his Cousin Lescus, Sur-nam'd The Black, who was very
fortunate in his Wars; though the Civil Commotions, and frequent Incursions of
the Tartars, occasioned great Disturbances in his Kingdom.

After his Death, there were great Contests, about the Regency; till at last,
Premis^aus, Lord of Great Poland, got the Upper Hand, assuming the Title of
King, which had not been used for near Two Hundred Years before. This Prince
was murdered by some Brand^nburgh Emissaries after he had reigned but Seven
Months.

Next to him, was elected Uladislaus Lecticus, who was deposed for
Maladministration.

Then came Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, to be chosen; but after his Death,
Lacticus was restored.

After him, his Son Casimir the Great succeeded; who subdued all Russia, and
united it to the Kingdom of Poland. He dying, the Male Race of Piastus lost the
Crown of Poland, which, after this Casimir, devolved to Lewis, King of Hungary,
who left two Daughters.

Hedwigis, the youngest of which, was declared Queen, and married Jagello, Duke
of Lithuania, who was then Baptized, and made a Christian. Upon this Marriage
he was Acknowledged, and his Countries joined to Poland about the year 1386.
Jagello, who took at his Baptism the Name of Uladislaus the 4th. had for his
Successor Uladislaus the 5th. This King was killed in a Battle against the
Turks; in his stead Casimir the 4th. was made King of Poland, to whom Succeeded
his Son John Albert^; after whom came his Brother Alexander, who Reigned only
five Years, when came Sigismund the First, one of the most famous Princes in
his time; his Son Sigismund the 2d. was next Elected, who died without Issue,
and thereby the Male Race of the Jagellonick Family was Extinct.

Then the Polanders chose Henry, Duke of Anjou, Son of Henry the 2d. of France,
King, and he was Crowned the 15th. of Feb. 1574. But this Prince having Notice
of the Death of his Brother, Charles the Ninth, King of France, he went to
receive that Crown in 1576.

Then one Party of the Electors set up Stephen Batori, Prince of Transylvania;
and the other, Maximilian, Archduke of Austria; which brought a War upon the
Country. The First carried it, and died without Childrin, in 1580.

Next Sigismund the Third, Son to John, King of Sweden, was set upon the Throne
in 1587, but the King, his Father, dying soon after, he went to take possession
of the Crown of Sweden. Some time afterward the Swedes revolted, and chose
Charles, Prince of Sudermania, his Uncle, for their King. They went to War with
Sigismund, took Riga from him in 1625, and he died in 1632. Uladislaus, his
Son, succeeded him, who dying in 1648, they chose in his place John Casimir; he
made a voluntary Abdication of the Crown, and had for his Successor Michael
VVitznowizki, that died in 1672, and John Sobieski succeeded him, and died in
1696. This Prince was the Third of that Name; he was the youngest Son of
Sobieski, Palatin of Cracovia, etc. and of a Daughter of Stanislaus Zolkiewski,
Grand Chancellor, and Grand General of the Crown. He was made Grand Marshal of
the Crown, August 24th. 1665, and Grand Master of the King's Household, Palatin
of Cracovia, etc. He recovered 60 Towns from the rebellious Cosacks in the
Ukrain in 1667, he held out Podhois against the Tartars, and two years after he
took from them and the Cossacks all the Palatinate of Bracklaw, in the Lower
Podolia. He defeated the Turks in 1671, during the siege of Leopold, upon the
Peltaw, in the Black Russia, and in 1673 won the famous Battle of Cherzim, upon
the Neister, upon the Frontiers of Moldavia: That Battle begun upon a Saturday,
and was not fully over till within three days after, at what time it was ended
by the Surrender of that that Fortress. The Turks in that Battle lost 8000
Janisaries, and 2000 Spahi's, which being one of die most celebrated Victories
in this Age, was gained upon the 11th. of Nov. the next day after the decease
of King Michael Korilut Wiesnowiski. The Grand Marshal Sobieski was Elected,
May 10. 1674, but was not Crowned till fifteen Months after, during which time
he gained several Advantages over the Turks, and constrained them to make a
Peace at Zurowna. Every one knows how much he contributed toward the Raising
the Siege of Viena, being himself in Person at the Action, wherein he acquired
great Renown. He espoused Mary de la Grange, the Daughter of the Marquess d'
Arquien, not long since made a Cardinal, of the Noble Family of de la Grange in
Nivernois; she was the Widow of Prince Zamoiski. The King had several Children
by her, and among the rest three Princes, of which the Eldest has the Honor to
be Brother-in-Law to the Emperor, by Marrying one of the Princesses of
Neuburgs: Lastly, to complete his Encomium, he spoke several Languages, and was
a great Lover of Books, and Learned Men.

CHAP. IV. Of the Government, and Manner of Election in Poland.
POland is a State where the Government is Monarchical, and Aristocratical. It
is Monarchical, because they have a King; and Aristocratical, by reason their
King is not an Absolute Prince, that can Dispose and Resolve upon Affairs by
his own Power without Consent of the Senators. I have already taken Notice,
that the Archbishop of Gnesna is Primate of the Kingdom, and has the
Administration, during an Inter-regnum. He Assembles the States to Elect a new
King, and Appoints both Time and Place. After every one has given his Suffrage,
the King is Elected by Majority of Voices. This Prelate declares him, brings
him forth into the middle of the Assembly, then he is Conducted to the Church,
where, after Mass, he Swears to preserve the Privileges of the Kingdom, and to
keep the Established Laws, which oblige him to do nothing without Consent of
the States. Upon Matters Of moment the King sends, by his Chancellor, Letters
to the Palatins, called Instructionis Litterae, because they mention the State
of those Affairs his Majesty has to propose to the Assembly, and Appoints them
a Time to come to Court: When they receive these Letters, every one of the
Senators particularly examines the Nature, Quality, Subject and Consequences of
the Propositions, to which he has a Liberty to Answer as he shall think
fittting, whether with respect to the public Good, or his own private
Interest. The King sends Letters also into the Palatinates, where the Nobility
assemble to choose one among them, a Person of Merit, that is sufficient and
capable to speak in behalf of their Province, in whom they are universally to
agree to: For if it happens there be one Negative in the Assembly, it is
impossible to proceed farther, the Deputy cannot go, and that Province has no
Voice in the States. After these Provincial Assemblies are over, the Senators
and Deputies appear at Court at the Time prefixed, where the King, attended by
his Chancellor, signifies to them first the Cause of their Meeting, then hears
and receives their Advices, but they must be unanimous in their Resolutions,
or, as they say, Nemine reclamante, nemine dissentiente, or the Diet breaks up,
every one goes home again, and the Propositions come to nothing. Among the
Cities, there are only Cracow, Danzic and Vilna that have the Privilege of
sending Deputies to the Diet. The ordinary Matters are Transacted before the
Judges established in every Palatinate, and, as in the Provincial Assemblies,
all manner of Persons have Liberty to be present, and hear what is proposed,
the meanest Countryman may know all. So when ever they Treat of War, the Enemy
is advised and informed of their Designs, their Strength, and how to ruin
them. The King's best Revenue consists in the Salt-works near Cracow, in the
Mines of Copper, Lead and Silver, in the Fishery, and Tribute of the Jews, His
Revenues are computed at 600000 Crowns per Ann. The Prosit arising from his
Demesnes are commonly given away in Pensions and Bounties, to the Palatines,
Chastellains, and other Great Men, to engage them to his Interests. Most of
what comes into his own Coffers, is either laid up, or Expended in the Purchase
of Estates for his younger Sons; his Daughters being Married at the Public
Charge; and the Expenses of his Household defrayed by his Subjects.

He has the Nomination of the Bishoprics, and of all the Dignities of the
Kingdom, and of the Commissions of War and Revenue, the Courts of Justice, and
Civil Government. The chiefest Dignities are the Lieutenant, the Great Master
of the King's Household, the Great Treasurer, the Great Provost, etc. These
Places are both for the Kingdom of Poland, and Duchy of Lithuania, where the
King goes every two or three Years to hold a Diet; and as soon as he enters
upon the Country, he is only served by the Officers of the Duchy. The Grand
Marshal of the Crown, or Crown General, has very great Advantages, and his
Office gives him the Title also of Grand Master of the King's House, Great
Master of the Ceremonies, Introductor of Ambassadors, Judge and Master of the
Civil Government; he can make Laws, and has Power of Life and Death in him. The
Generals of this Kingdom, and of Lithuania, may fight as they see Cause, and
have Sovereign Power in the Camp. Besides the Palatines and Chastellans that I
have spoke of, there are in all the Cities, Burghers, Judges and Magistrates.
But there lies an Appeal from them to Cracow for Great Poland, and to Lublin
for the Lesser Poland and Russia.

Though the King of Poland has the name of a King and the first Dukes were in
truth Kings without the Title; yet at present he is nothing less, being not
allowed to make Peace or War, to impose Taxes, make Laws, alienate any of his
Demesnes, or in short, to do any thing of importance which concerns the
Public, without the consent of the Diet. And he does not only swear to do all
this, but allows their Disobedience, in case he violates his Oath, which makes
the Subjects the Princes Judges, and this Kingdom a mere Aristocracy, or knot
of petty Kingdoms under one Head.

The First Dukes indeed were absolute Princes, and ruled after a Despotical
manner, having power not only of the Estates of their Subjects, but of Life and
Death without formalities of Law; yet when they once became Elective they lost
much of that power, which decayed so by degrees, that at last it came to
nothing, magni nominis umbra. A Diminution which began first in the times of
Lewis of Hungary, and Jagello of Lithuania, who to gain the succession to the
Kingdom contrary to Law, the one for his Daughter, the other for his Son,
parted with many of their Royalties and Prerogatives to buy the Voices of the
Nobility. Since which time the Nobility in all their Elections have limited and
restrained tie Kings Authority, and enlarged their own. Yet the King once
chosen and enthroned has sole Power in many things, as in assembling the
Diets, choosing Peculiar Counselors, disposing absolutely of his Vassals and
the Revenues of the Crown, to what use he pleases. He also is sole Judge of
the Nobility in criminal Causes, which is a strong Bridle upon them. By which,
and either joining with the Clergy, or well forming his party among the
Nobility, he may do many things not strictly legal; the power and influence he
has in the public Government being in proportion to his Abilities and
Dexterity in managing them.

The Forces of this Kingdom consist most in Horse, whereof they are able to
raise 160000. Their Infantry are generally German or Huagarians, whom they hire
for money, and are like other mercenary Soldiers. For the raising the Horse, the
Gentlemen of the Country are obliged by their Tenure, not only to serve in
Person for the Defense of the Realm, but to maintain a certain number of Horse
in continual readiness, especially in those parts next the Tartars, where their
numbers are great, and with whom they many times join to afflict and harass
their own Country.

CHAP. V. The Religion of the Polanders.
THe ancient Inhabitants of the Country were Idolaters, and worshipped he same
Gods as the Greeks, the Rowans and Germans. Tertullian assures us in his
Treatise against the Jews, that the Gospel was then preached in Sarmatia: But
we know it was not received in that Sarmatia, which is now Poland till the
10th. Century. Micislaus, or Misk^ I. married Debraw, the Daughter of
Boleslaus, Duke of Bohemia; and was Baptized the 7th. of March in the Year 965,
and 966. since that time the Polanders have always continued Christians.
Lutheranism and Calvinism have been received among them, but have not not
prevailed there as in other Countries. They came acquainted with them from John
Huss, and others in the 15th. Century, who came from Bohemia into this Country.
Gregory Paul Minister of Cracow, preached Arrianism there about the Year 1566.
but was driven thence by Sigismond, with George Blandrata, Lelius Socinus,
Valentinus Gentilis, and some others. Faustus Socinus, who has given the name
to the Socinians, came thither afterward and left his Disciples who are to be
found there to this day. There are likewise some Lutherans, Calvinists and
Anabaptists to be found in other parts of Lithuania. They have among them also
Schisinaticks, Greeks, and many Jews that are in some credit for their Wealth.
They enjoy some particular Privileges, but you see them always intent upon
their Profit and Usury. They live miserable without Estates in Land, and only
enrich themselves by Trade. The Polanders are zealous in their Religion, hear
Mass daily, and practice great Austerities upon themselves during Lent.

GHAP. VI. A Relation of the Death of John Sobieski, late King of Poland: With
an Account of the Present Election, as it now stands.
JOhn Sobieski the late King of Poland, departed this Life the 17th of June,
1696. about nine a Clock at Night, leaving behind him his Queen and 3 Princes,
(viz.) James, Alexander and Constantine, with a Princess who is married to the
present Elector of Bavaria. In his life time he heaped up vast Riches, and
Endeavored to make the Crown Hereditary, but in vain.

The King being Dead, which was notifyed by Express to the Cardinal Radziowski
Archbishop of Gnesna, Primate of the Kingdom of Poland, and Regent during the
Inter-regnum, he repaired immediately to the Capitol, and made his public
Entry into Warsaw on the 24th of June, 1696. with the usual Ceremonies; the
first thing he did was to call together the Senators, Principal Ministers and
Bishops, who met, and had Conference in his Presence the 28 and 29th of June,
1696. and came to the following Resolutions, (viz.) First, To notify the Death
of the King to the Castelleins, and that the grand Convocation for Electing a
new King be fixed upon the 29th of August, 1696. Secondly, That notice be given
to the Foreign Princes. Thirdly, That the Frontier Garrisons be reinforced, and
the Troops maintained out of the public Revenue. Fourthly, That the Treasurer
of the Crown do regulate the deceased Kings Court. Fifthly, The Cardinal
Primate recommended to the Treasurer of the Crown the safety of Trinity Fort,
etc. And Sixthly, He sincerely promised to preserve the Jura Matronatus Regia.

The Cardinal Primate having thus taken the Government upon him (which of right
belongs to his Eminence during the Inter-regnum) he has managed Affairs there
ever since, much in favor of France, and against the Interest of the House of
Austria.

There were at first, several Illustrious Persons proposed as Candidates to
fill the Throne, (viz.) Prince James, Prince Alexander, two of the late King
Sons, the Elector of Bavaria, the Prince of Vaudemont, the Duke of Lorrain, the
Grand Marshall of the Crown, Prince Sapieha, the Prince of Newbourg, the
Prince of Transylvania, with the Prince of Conti, the Prince Don Livio
Odeschalchi, and the Prince of Baden the Elector of Saxony, not then being
talked of.

There being so many Pretenders, the Kingdom fell into Faction, and he that had
the most Money seemed to have the best Interest, in the meantime the Armies of
Poland and Lithuania Confederated, and Committed abundance of Hostilities,
doing a World of Mischief, being supported under hand by the Abbot of Polignac
Ambassador of France, with Money. This put the Kingdom into a Flame, and
occasioned the general Convocation to be put off from time to time; but at
length the Crown generally prevailed with the Confederate Armies to submit,
having procured a round Sum of Money of the Queen Dowager, to be distributed
amongst them.

This being done, matters became Calm; and the particular Diets were held,
which terminated, but not without heats.

The general Diet was appointed, and the overture made on the 15th of May,
1697. with the accustomed Ceremony, first the Popes Nuncio solemnised the Mass
of the holy Ghost. After which the Bishop of Poscow made a Sermon exhorting the
Assembly to mind the interest of the republic, and lay aside all private
Advantages, and to Advance to the Throne whom they should deem most Worthy.

The first thing the Assembly did, was to make choice of a Speaker, but that
took up a considerable time, because all the Deputies were not at first came
up, but in Conclusion the Sieur Bilinski, a Person of Polite Learning and
Ability was Elected, but the lower Nobility being Jealous that he was in the
interest of France, threatened to cut him in Pieces if he should move the
advancing a French Man to the Crown: However we find since that he did not in
the least promote the Interest of the Prince of Conti, which plainly
Demonstrates that he favored the promoting of such as should be proposed by
the Emperor and his Allies. Note that this Election began the first of June,
New Style, and lasted till the 16th of the same Month before the Suffrages
could be collected and told, this Affair which was only looked upon as a
preliminary, took up a whole Month.

The next thing they were to do, was to give Audiences to the Foreign
Ministers, which they Commenced, on the 20th of June; Siegnior Davia the Popes
Nuncio being first admitted, and next to him the Bishop of Passau, the Emperors
Extraordinary Ambassador, and the rest in their turns.

The One and Twentieth of June being come, none could then Conjecture who
should be Elevated to the Crown, many of those first proposed, not being so
much as mentioned.

Prince Don Livio Odeschalchi, who had proposed the most advantageous terms to
the Republic, was also not thought fit to Sway the Crown: They wanting a
Warlike Prince, whose Name was Terrible to the Infidels, to be King.

As for the Duke of Lorrain, there was two main Obstacles that hindered them
from making Choice of him: First, his tender Age; and the second, because the
House of Lorrain having their Territories, could not Expend such large Sums as
was necessary for the purchasing Suffrages.

And upon the whole, it was thought that the Party of the Prince of Conti, and
that of the Prince of Baden was the strongest; yet some were of Opinion, that
the Party of Prince James did overbalance that of the Prince of Conti: so
that the Poles were afraid then of a double Election, unless they could pitch
upon a Third Person to the satisfaction of both sides; which was hardly to be
done.

There was no Discourse all this while of the Heroic Elector of Saxony; but he
being arrived at Dresden, which is his Capitol, the beginning of June, he
mustered his Troops, to the number of 10000 Men, and instead of going for
Hungary to Command the Imperial Army, he marched with them to Breslau in
Silesia, where he explained his design of standing a Candidate for the Crown of
Poland; which was an Amazement to most People, because of his Religion, he
being looked upon to have been a Protestant; but it soon appeared otherwise;
for he had turned Roman Catholic at Vienna 18 Months before, which induced the
Pope's Nuncio to speak in his behalf at the Diet; so that then it was no Secret.

The Day of Election being come, which was the Twenty Sixth of June, they drew
out into the Field, and being come to the Place appointed, the Bishop of
Ploscow, and those of his Palatine, flung up their Caps, and cried out, Vivat
Candeus; but they were immediately surrounded, and threatened to be Cut in
pieces with Cimitars, it not being their turn to speak.

Conti's Party finding thus, that they were not strong enough to Elect him,
sent to the French Ambassador to let him know, that if he would consent to it,
they would give their Suffrages to Elect any other, offering to return him the
immense Sums which they had received of him, but he insisted to have the Prince
of Conti Elected, according to his Instructions from his Master.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, the Primate and the Bishop Ploscow
Elected the Prince of Conti, and caused him to be proclaimed, and immediately
retired out of the Field, and went to the Cathedral at Warsaw, where they Sung
Te Deum.

Upon which the Favorers of the House of Austria, finding that the Prince of
Conti had but Fourteen Voices more than the Elector of Saxony, or Prince James,
they resolved to unite their Suffrages in favor of his Electoral Highness, by
which means he had One and Twenty Voices more than Conti.

This raised up the drooping Spirits of those that were in the Interest of the
H. of Austria against that of Bourbon, to that degree, that they caused
instantly the Bish. of Cujavia, at the Head of that Party, to repair in all
haste to the Cathedral at Warsaw, where he entered with a Numerous Train; but
finding the Doors shut by order of the Cardinal Primate, the Popes Nuncio
caused them to be broke open; and Proclaimed Frederick August Elector of
Saxony, King, with accustomed Ceremony, Te Deum was likewise Sung the same day.

The Elector's Party went into the Field the 27th and the 28th, but that of the
Prince of Conti never appeared after the first day, so that his Party visibly
fell off daily, particularly the Senators; so that Two Hundred Forty Three
Standards declared for his Electoral Highness, and but Thirty Four for Conti.

The Party of the Elector upon this drew up the Concordate which the King is to
Sign, and agreed to send a formal Deputation to Breslau, to invite the Elector
to accept of the Crown.

The four Mareschals have declared in his Favor also.

The Bishop of Cujavia made a solemn Protestation against the unlawful Election
of the Prince of Conti, without the gainsaying of any. The Royalists fired
through the Windows of the Cardinal Primate's Palace as they passed by,
uttering many Contumacious words against his Eminence.

On the 4th of July the great Embassy, consisting of four Senators, accompanied
by a great number of the Nobility and Gentry, went from Warsaw for Breslau in
Silesia, to Congratulate the New King, and to Conduct him to Crakau to be
Crowned.

On the 5th of July the Waywade of Vilna, the great Marshall of Lithuania, the
Crown Treasurer, and the Bishop of Ploscow, as Partisans of the Prince of
Conti, conferred with the Generals who are for the Elector of Saxony, in order
to adjust matters, but to no purpose, the Adherents of Conti refusing to desert
him, threatening the Republic with a War from France, though he should be
necessitated to make Peace with the Allies.

The Minister of Saxony having received a Million of Crowns, distributed some
of it among the Army, which gained them entirely to the side of his Electoral
Highness, and to promise to stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes; and in
a word, they made Rejoycings upon his Elevation, and discharged all their
Cannon Thrice, etc.

The Critics make strange Conjectures at the striking of the Thunderbolt in
the Elector's Closet at Dresden, and at the same time in his House at Vienna;
it being the very hour he was Elected King of Poland.

The Elector's Party have left no Stone unturned to bring over Conti's Party;
and as an Expedient they sent for the Elector's Minister to the place of
Election by above an Hundred Deputies, where he produced an Attestation that
the Elector his Master was turned Roman Catholic, thanked them for their
Election, telling them, that his Master, pursuant to his promise, would pay the
Ten Millions of Polish Florins, that he would maintain Six Thousand Men at his
own Charge, etc. Upon which the Party of his Electoral Highness, bound
themselves with an Association to stand by him, and not change their Minds.

I presume it will not be amiss, to insert here the substance of a Letter,
which the Cardinal Primate sent the day after the Election to the Elector,
wherein among other things he inserts what follows, viz.

We thought not to dispose of the Care of our Kingdom to your Electoral
Highness, who is now taken up with Heroic Actions against the Common Enemy of
Christendom, for which reason we request your Electoral Highness, not to accept
of this nomination as unanimous, but according to your innate Generosity, and
out of Love to the neighborhood, to let us remain in Peace with our free
Election of our King De Conti. If your Electoral Highness make any ground on
the unity of the Generals, and the great Emulation between them and the
Republic; you may be assured the more firmly, we have resolded not to accept
of the King by them proposed, etc. The Express dispatched with this Letter,
returned with it unopened, because the Address was to the Elector, and not King.

The Cardinal Primate has remonstrated to all the Neighboring Princes; that
the Election of the Elector of Saxony to be King of Poland is void, it being
contrary to the known Laws of the Land, but they take no Notice of it. But on
the other hand the Czar of Muscovy and ethers threaten the republic with a
perpetual War; in case they should Advance a French Man to the Throne.

The Elector of Saxony now King of Poland being gone from Breslau to Tarnowitz;
he had advice that the great Embassy of Poland, were approaching on the 21st,
and on the 23d his Majesty rendered himself without the Gate; where an Elevated
place was Erected, covered with green Bows; and hung with Tapistry, and a
Throne Erected under a Velvet Canopy richly Adorned. The King was very finely
Dressed, his Clothes being Decked with Diamonds; so that his Suit was said to
be worth a Million. The Embassy being arrived, they were Conducted to the King
with the Sound of Trumpets and Kettle Drums. His Majesty stood under the Canopy
with the Bishop of Passau on his Right Hand, and the Prince of Furstemburg on
his Left, one of the Prime Ministers Conducted them to the Throne, where after
a profound Reverence delivered their Credentials, which were read; after which
the first Ambassador, being the Wayvode Wylinski for Poland, Commenced his
Speech in Latin; and having Extolled the King's Person, and his great
Qualities, he intimated the reasons of their Arrival. The 2d Ambassador having
the Wayvode of Witegiski for Lithuania, did the like; as did also the 3d
Ambassador, who is the Starost of Zydaizoiw, in the Name of the Nobility. Then
the King commanded the Baron Fleming to Answer them in Latin.

On the 27th the new King with the Court, and the Embassy broke up from
Tarnowitz for the Frontiers of Poland in order to go to Crakaw, where he is to
be Crowned the 15th of September: He is to be called Augustus the Second.

Since the new King is arrived at Crakaw, where he was received with the Loud
Acclamations of the People; and he has Drawn together there upwards of 20000
Men, and is Disposing all things for his Coronation, having sworn to the Pacta
Conventa.

Yet notwithstanding, the Cardinal Primate does not desist from promoting the
interest of the Prince of Conti, having summoned the Nobility to meet the 26th.
of August, pretending to proceed to a new Election, but it will signify
nothing; the Elector of Saxony having already possession, not only of the
Kingdom, but also of the Crown; and on the other hand, the Czar of Muscovy
offers to assist him with 60000 Men to make good his pretentions, and the
Elector of Brandenburgh with 16000. So that we may conclude, that this Election
will terminate without the Effusion of Blood in Favor of his Electoral
Highness now King of Poland.

FINIS.

