THE RESURRECTION Proved: OR, The LIFE to come Demonstrated.
Being a Strange but True Relation of what happened to Mris Anna Atherton: Who
lay in a Trance 7 days, with her Speech when she came to life, As it came from
her Brother Dr. Atherton, Physician in Caermarthen.
Published, now seasonably, in this Adulterous, Atheistical and Papistical
Generation, wherein neither God, Christ, Soul, Heaven nor Hell are minded; but
Whoring, Swaring, Lying, etc. and, it may serve as a Curb to Vice, and a Spur
to Virtue.
THIS Maid being about fourteen years of Age, fell sick in November 1669.
Whereupon several Physicians were called to her Assistance, who consulted about
her Distemper; and judged it to be something of an Ague, though the Symptoms
thereof (as they confessed) were somewhat different from those which are usual
in that Distemper.

2. Her Disease, whatever it was, proved too hard for their Skill and
Medicines, and brought the Patient to a thinness of Body, paleness of
Countenance, and Stupidness to any thing but her Devotion. She was before of a
full Habit of Body, of a brisk and lively Temper, and prone to all kind of
Exercise befitting her Age.

3. Under this strong Alteration she continued till the Beginning of February
ensuing, when by little and little she felt a sensible Decay of her whole Body
which daily increasing, prevailed at length upon all the Organs of Life and
Motion; so that in appearance she lay void of either, whereupon she was
concluded to be really dead.

4. The Women who came to do their last Office to her Body, perceived more Heat
and Warmth in her, than they thought to be usual in dead Bodies, upon which
they desisted a while; And, because the Room was close, and a fire had been
always in it, (thinking the unusual Warmth might proceed from thence) they
opened the Casements to let in what Air they could, and put out the Fire, and
then left her some time to her self.

5. But returning, they found the same Warmth to continue; then they left her
in this manner one whole day, yet could find no alteration: whereupon they
applied a Looking-glass to her Mouth* but not the least Cloud appeared: they
put live Coals to her feet, which discovered not the least sign of Life or
Sense.

6. Notwithstanding her Mother (it being so ordered by Providence) was very
timorous which made her delay her Burial* and kept her uncoffin'd till sev'n
days were expired, at the end of which time, her heat which before was so
languid and obscure, that it could scarcely be discerned, began like some
sparks of fire raked up in Embers) to glow, and more manifestly discover it
self.

7. Upon which, Rubbings and other artificial helps were used, which did not
prove ineffectual; for, in a short time, they sound a trembling Vibration of
the Pulse, afterward she began to breath, and so at last gradually recovered
all her Senses. The first thing that she spoke of, was That she desired to see
her Mother, who coming to her she thus uttered her mind*

The Maids Speech when she came out of her Trance.
8. O Mother! Since, I was absent from you, I have been in Heaven, an Angel
went before me to conduct me thither; I passed through three several Gates* and
at length I came to Heaven Gate, where I saw things very glorious and
unutterable as Saints Angels* and the like, in glorious Apparel; and heard
Unparalleld Music, Divine Anthems and Hallelu-iahs.

9. I would fain have entered that glorious place* but the Angel that went
before me, withstood me yet I thought myself half in; but he told me, I could
not be admitted now, but I must go back, and take leave of my Friends, and
after some short time I should be admitted*

10. So he brought me hither again, and is now standing at the Beds-feet*
Mother* You must needs see him, he is all in white. Her Mother told her* It was
but a Dream or Fancy, and that she knew not what she said: whereupon she
answered with a great deal of Vehemence* That it was as true, as that she was
there at present. She took notice also of several persons in the Room by their
Names, to show she did not dream, but spoke with Understanding:

11. But for the greater Confirmation, she told them of Three or Four Persons
that were dead, since she was deprived of her Senses, and named each Person;
(one of them was dead, and they knew not of it before they sent to enquire:)
she said* she saw them passing by her while she stood at the Gtae.

12. One whom she named was reputed a Vicious Person, came as far as the Gate,
but was sent back again another way. All the Persons she named, dyed in the
time she lay in this Trance.

13. She lived about two Years after this, enjoying a perfect Health, and then
dyed in great Assurance of her Salvation; speaking comfortable Words, and
giving wholesome Instructions to all who came to visit her. It is worthy
Observation, that during the whole time of her first Sickness, which was about
a quarter of a yer, she neither eat nor drank any thing, besides the juice of
an Orange and the yolk of an Egg.

It Is is then necessary all Persons be kept 48 hours before they are buried, if
they be so happy as to escape the designed Popish Massacre.

LONDON, Printed by T* Dawks* 168^


