ENGLANDS CONFVSION: OR A True and Impartial Relation of the late Traverses of
the State in England; With the Counsels leading thereunto.

TOGETHER WITH A Description of the present Power ruling there by the name of a
Parliament, under the Mask of The Good old Cause.

Written by One of the Few English men that are left in ENGLAND.

Judge. 19. 30. And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the Land
of Egypt unto this day: Consider of i^, take advice, and speak your mind.

Romans 2. 1, etc. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man! whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou
that judge do the same things.

2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.
Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God. Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof; from such turn away.

Gal. 2. 18. If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor.

The third Impression with new Additions.

London, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1659.

A True and Impartial Relation of the present Actings at Westminster; under the
mask of The Good old Cause.
IT is not unknown to any that have not been wilfully blind, wi^h what a high
hand of Arbitrary Power the late Protector Oliver Cromwell swayed the Scepter
of these three Nations for the space of five years, and laid the best
foundations his short and troublesome Reign would give leave to have continued
his posterity in the same unlimited dominion; declaring, when death summoned
him to account (if we may credit the greatest of our present Rulers) h^s eldest
Son Richard his Successor in his usurped dominion, and leaving his Son Henry
Lord Lieutenant or Viceroy of Ireland, and his Daughter Fleetwood married to
the Commander in chief under him of the Army, (which they had very far new
modelled for their turn) and the most probable competitor for succession in the
Protectorship. Now that subtle Lambert was upon discovery, his active
undermining spirit removed from all places of trust and opportunities of doing
mischief.

In this posture of affairs was England and the dominions thereof, when the
Lion was forced to quit his prey; of whom I will say no more, because he is
gone to his own place, and where I can speak no good of the dead, I hold it
almost a duty to say no evil.

The Protector being interred among the Kings and Queens at Westminster, (at a
vaster charge than had been used upon like occasions in the richest times)
death giving him that honor which he had aspired to, but durst not embrace in
his life time, his Son Richard, an honest private Gentleman well beloved in
Hampshire, the Country where he lived, ascended the throne by the invitation
and encouragement of Fleetwood, D. shorough, Syd^nham, the two Jones's,
Thurloe, and others the Relations and Confidents of his Father, and by the
contrivance of the Court received congratulations (prepated at VVhite^all) from
most of the Counties, Cities and chief Towns of England, and from the Armies
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with engagements to live and die with him*
Addresses from the Independent Churches by Doctor Goodwill and Nigh their
Metropolitans, and was indeed worshipped by many as the rising sun in our
Horizon.

This introduction being made to the transferring the Government of these
Nations from the Stewarts to the Cromwells, it was conceived by those who had
proceeded thus far, that a General convention or (...) ^isely chosen by
influences from Court; would easily swallow what had been so well prepared to
their hands. And accordingly it (...) by the Junio before mentioned, that a
Par^^^ment should be called to meet the twenty seventh of January last, and (by
pretense of resto^ing the people to their ancient way of Elections, but really)
that the Court might command the more votes, the Buroughs had Writs also sent
to them, and the Elections were all made in the ancient way, only thirty
members were called by W^i^s from Scotland, and as many from Ireland, according
to the late combination of the three Nations into one Commonwealth.

This new kind of Parliament being met at the time and place appointed, God had
so well ordered the Elections, notwithstanding the practices of men, that their
English Spirit quickly appeared both against Impositions from Court and Army.
And though their Counsels were at first interrupted with an Act of Recognition
of the Protector, prepared and brought in by the Court, which took up the first
fortnight of their time upon the very point of Recognition, ye^ they were at
length extricated from that difficulty by the Expedient of an honest Gentleman,
in passing these votes on Monday the fourteenth of February 16^8. without any
division or negative.

Resolved,

That it be part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness Richard
Lord Protector and chief magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and the dominions and territories thereunto belonging.

Resolved,

That before this Bill be committed, the House do declare such additional
clauses to be part of this Bill, as may bound the power of the Chief
Magistrate; and fully secure the rights and privileges of Parliament, and the
liberties and rights of the people: And that neither this, nor any other
previous vote, that is, or shall be passed in order to this Bill, shall be of
force or binding to the people, until the whole Bill be passed.

Their next work was to appoint a Committee for Inspection into the Accounts
and revenue of the Commonwealth, which had been lamentably squandred and wasted
ever since 1648, (when the major part of the Parliament, called in 17 Caroli,
was forceably imprisoned and secluded by the Army and their follow-members) and
twelve Members versed in matters of Account, whereof Mr. Scowen was in the
Chair, were selected for this work, and fully empowered for the work they had
in hand, in order to the retrenching and lessening the charge of the
Commonwealth.

On Saturday the nineteenth of February they proceeded in the Act of
Recognition, and resolved,

That it shall be part of this Bill to declare the Parliament to consist of Two
Houses.

And had afterward several days debate by order concerning the bounding of
the Chief Magistrates Power, and the Bounds and Powers of another House in
relation to the former votes, but could come to no resolution thereupon, the
Court Party stickling hard for the Powers given them by the Petition and
Advice, and the honest Patriots of the House (whose weighty reasons then
convinced the Commonwealth party now ruling to go along with them) denying it
to be a Law, being obtained by force and exclusion of above a hundred Members
in the year 1656, by which force also the purse was taken from the Commons by
settling a revenue of thirteen hundred thousand pounds a year in perpetuity of
the Command of the single person, and the ruling Members of the Other House
being most of them Officers of the Army and Courtiers; which being allowed for
Law, the people would have been absolute slaves to their power, and purse,
stolen from the Commons as aforesaid,

Whilst the temper of the House was thus tried, and they appeared sufficiently
to be English men, diverse of the Members of Scotland and Ireland joining with
them in the same resolutions, by the joint advice of the Court and Army party,
the question of Transacting with the persons sitting in the Other House, as an
House of Parliament, was set before them, upon pretended grounds of Law and
Necessity, and by arguments of Force and Interposition from the Army, and of
Impossibility to proceed in any thing without the said Other House. This
Attempt was as stoutly opposed for fourteen days by the moderate honest
Patriots of the House as the former; the undoubted Right of the ancient Peers
asserted, and all the said grounds and arguments confuted, except that of
Force, which was not to take place with any thing like a free Parliament of
English men: But in the close of the fourteen days debate, wherein much of the
honesty, ingenuity and courage of the English Nation did appear, (seeing all
affairs at a stand till something were resolved in this point) they came in a
very fall House to this well qualified Resolution.

Resolved,

That this House will transact with the persons now sitting in the Other House,
as an House of Parliament, during his present Parliament: And that it is not
hereby intended to exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the Parliament,
from their privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of that House.

The House of Commons (between the Protector, the Other House, and the General
Council of Of^icers now summoned to meet at Wailingford house) may well be
conceived at this time to have had a Wolf by the ears, and (having showed
themselves English men and not Slaves) had reason to entertain wary counsels,
having some of their own Members undermining them without doors; and foreseeing
a Disolution, though not knowing whether they should die a violent or natural
death, or have a mint kind of decease, as it fell out afterward: And therefore
they resolved not to own them in the Other House as Lords, but called them, The
persons now sitting in the other House as a House of Parliament; Neither would
they treat and confer with them, in the usual way as with the House of Peers,
and therefore found out the new word of Transacting; and not intending to have
to do with them, but for a trial, they limited the time to be during this
present Parliament, which they foresaw would not be long; and to muzzle the new
inconsiderable Upstarts sufficiently (if they should take too much upon them)
they asserted the Privilege of the ancient Peers as a good reserve, if the
Parliament should by the Protector and Army be suffered upon second thoughts to
sit longer than was at first intended. And resolved also, That they would
receive no Message from those persons sitting in the Other House, but by some
of their own number.

The House of Commons by this time had also by a Saving in a Vote concerning
the Fleet asserted their interest in the Mil^tia, and had under consideration
an Act for taking away all Laws, Statutes and Ordinances concerning the Excise
and New Impost, and concerning Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, after th^ee
years. And had vindicated the Peoples Liberties, by setting Major General
Overton and Mr. Portman, and diverse others (illegally committed by the late
Protector) at liberty without paying Fees, and declaring their imprisonments
and detention illegal and unjust; and had their new Lord Jailor ^arkstead and
others at their Bar under question for the same. And had also a high resentment
of the illegal sending freeborn English men against their wills to the
Barbados and other foreign Plantations, and to the Isles of Guernsay and
Jersey, out of the reach of the Writ of Habeas corpus, and had appointed a
strict Bill to be prepared for remedy thereof. And had examined and discovered
many other Grievances brought upon the People by the Officers and Farmers of
Excise and others; And by Major Generals, amongst which Butler was for his
insolent actings and high alfronts to the Law and Courts of Justice, put out of
the Commission of the Peace, and a Committee appointed to draw up an
Impeachment against him. The Committee also for Inspection, before mentioned,
had brought in and reported to the House the state of the Accounts and Public,
and of the Martial and Civil Lists in the three Nations, by which it did
appear, That the yearly incomes of England, Scotland and Ireland, came to
Eighteen hundred sixty eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen pounds: And
the yearly Issues to, Two millions two hundred and one thousand five hundred
and forty pounds: So that Three hundred thirty two thousand eight hundred
twenty three pounds of debt incurred yearly by the ill management of double the
Revenue that ever King of England enjoyed: And to maintain the unjust Conquest
of Scotland, cost us yearly One hundred sixty three thousand six hundred and
nineteen pounds more than the Revenue it yields.

Many other particulars were under their consideration, as to the Religion and
Civil Rights of the People, too long now to be mentioned: but in short, to give
them their due, they did some good whilst they sat, both to the Public and
particulars, and intended much more, and did no hurt, gave no Offices nor
Gratuities to themselves out of the Public Treasure, nor granted any money
from the People, which is more than can be said of any Parliament in our memory.

Proceeding thus successfully and hopefully to the general satisfaction of the
People in the three Nations, who chose them; the Protector and chief Officers
of the Army, who were jealous of one another before, and Competitors for
Government, grew now jealous of the House of Commons also, who being the
Representatives of the People, were become also their M^nions and Favorites.
It was therefore now thought seasonable to contend among themselves for the
Power, before the People should recover it from them both: In order to which,
the General Council of Officers kept their constant Meetings at
Wallingford-house, and the Protector with his party countermined them at
Whitehall. The Result of the Officers assembling was a Representation to the
Pr^^^ctor, which was published by the Officers own order, the seventh of April;
and the day after a Copy thereof sent enclosed by the Protector in a Letter to
the Speaker of the House.

This Representation was like Lightning before Thunder, both to the Protector
and the House; for though it has some seeming fair Professions intermixed, it
is written in such a canting aequivocating language, whereof the Sword was like
to be Interpreter, that the sting was easily visible through the honey, and
their former actions and suitable continuing honesty better credited than their
words.

Hereupon the Protector begins too late to think of securing himself from being
surprised with their complements, and stands upon his guard. And the Commons
house, as became Englishmen, wisely and courageously resolved to let the
Officers know that they took them still to be their Servants, though they had
for too many years ill deserved their wages, rebelling and usurping the
Government at their pleasure; and intending to try what they meant by the Good
Old Cause, which, as they seemed to represent it, smelt of Gunpowder and ball,
and whether the repentance held forth in their said Representation were real or
Military, passed these votes on Monday April the 18.

Resolved.

That during the sitting of the Parliament there shall be no General Council or
Meeting of the Officers of the Army, without direction, leave, and Authority of
his Highness the Lord Protector, and both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved,

That no person shall have or continue any Command or Trust in any of the
Armies or Navies of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any the dominions and
territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to subscribe, That he will not
disturb or interrupt the free-meetings in Parliament of any, the Members of
either House of Parliament, or their Freedom in their debates and counsels.

And the same time to show their care of the Army, and to prevent jealousies,
they passed the following votes.

Resolved,

That the House do presently take into consideration the ways and means for
satisfaction of the Arrears of the Armies, and providing present pay for them.

Resolved,

That Sergeant Maynard the Attorney General, and Solicitor General, do
forthwith prepare an Act of Indemprity for all such as have acted under the
Parliament and Commonwealth.

Whilst the House spent the rest of their time in considering how to Provide
money, without laying new burdens on the people, great contests grew between
the Protector and the opposite Officers of the Army, both sides keeping guards
night and day against one another, the Protector having in pursuance of the
votes of the house forbidden the meetings of the Officers.

In this divided posture, affairs continued till Friday the 22. of April, on
which morning early, Fleetwood the Protectors Brother, Desborough his Uncle,
and the rest of the mutinous Officers, carrying the greater part of the Army
after them, and the Protectors party flinching, the Conquest was made without
one drop of blood, (which was strange in so ancient, hereditary, just, and
undoubted a Title) and the Protector forced to consent to a Commission and
Proclamation ready prepared, giving Desborough and others power to disolve the
Parliament, contrary to the best advice, and his own Interess and Promise. And
accordingly the same day, The Black Rod was sent twice to the House of Commons
(from Fi^nnes Speaker of the Other House) for them to come thither, but they
admitted him not in, and much scorned the motion, having ever looked upon that
Mushrum House as the Lower House and their own creature, the language being to
send down to the Other House, when they sent the Declaration for a Fast, for a
trial of transacting with them: And therefore understanding there were guards
of Horse and Foot in the Pallaceyard, after some motions made by Mr. Knightly,
Sir Arthur Haslerigge and others, wherein Sir Arthur exceeding, That the House
should first declare it Treason for any persons whatsoever to put force upon
any Members of the House; and next, that all Votes, Acts, and Resolutions,
passed by any Members of Parliament, when the rest were detained from, or taken
out of the House by force, should be null and void, and other motions becoming
Englishmen to that end, judging themselves under a force; and finding they were
very unanimous, though near four hundred in the House, in the things proposed,
they resolved no question, but adjourned till Monday morning the twenty fifth
of April, and attended the Speaker in order through Westminster Hall to his
Coach in face of the Soldiery.

Now the Court (according to the guise of the world in like accidents) shrunk
out of Whit^hall into Wallingford House: And Fleetwood, D shorow, and the rest
of the Officers, great and small, took the Government into their own hands, the
House of Commons being shut up, and entrance denied to the Members when they
came on Monday (even to Sir Henry Vane and Sir Artbur Haslerig themselves)
according to adjournment, the Court of Requests and all avenues being full of
Soldiers, who told the Members they must sit no more.

After the Officers had new modeled themselves, cashiering Whaley, Ingolsby,
Goffe, and diverse others of the Protectors party, and restoring Lambert,
Haslerig, Okey, and others displaced by Protector Oliver, and played with the
Government for a few days, and grew weary of it (the inferior officers and the
Pamphlets (that now flew about daily without control) carrying things beyond
the intention of the Chief Officers, who would have left the Protector a Duke
of Venice, for his Fathers sake who raised them, and their relation to him
which they had forgotten till now they sent to some of their old hackney
drudges of the Long Parliament then in London, who they knew would do any thing
so they might be suffered to sit, and on the fifth and sixth days of May had
conference with them, the last of which was at their never failing Speaker, the
Master of the Rolls House in Chancery Lane, where both Officers, viz. Lambert,
who had already gotten his old place, and others with him, and Members, viz.
Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Ludlow, John Jones, Mr. Chaloner, Mr.
Scot, and others, to the number of twenty, solicited William Lenthal Esquire to
sit Speaker again, but be objected scruples in judgment and conscience, (which
are not yet answered, nor never will:) nevertheless Fifteen Articles between
the Officers and some of the Members (who it seems over-confidently undertook
for the rest) being first agreed on at some of their meetings they resolved to
meet in the House on Saturday the 7 of May; yet that they might do it by
surprise, they gave out that they would not sit till Tuesday the tenth of May:
But the itch of ambition and Lording it over the people, giving them no quiet,
on Saturday the seventh of May early they met, in the Painted Chamber at
Westminster, and to make up their number, sent for the two chaste Cock-Sparrows,
the Lord Manson, and Mr. Henry Martin out of Prison, where they were in
Execution for Debt, and honest Whitlock, and Lisle of the Chancery Bench, and
with this addition being two and forty in number, the Chancery Mace for have
being carried before them.

William L^nthall Esquire, their tender conscienced Speaker, together with the
said Lord Munson. Henry Martin. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Temperate Mr.
Chaloner. Wise Alderman Atkin. Rich Alderman Pennington. Pedantick Thomas Scot.
Hastily rich Cornelius Holland. Single hearted, preaching Sir Henry Vane, now
become old Sir Harry. Prideaux Attorney General to all Governments. Smiling Sir
James Harrington. Levelling Ludlow. Pembrochian Oldsworth that made the Earl
his Masters wise speeches Vainglorious, hair-brained Haslerigge, with
repentance like the Armies in his conscience, and the Bishopric of Durham at
his back. Sir Thomas Middletons man Jones. Doting Purefoy, without purity or
faith. Coll. White the Lord Fairfax's Secretary got before his Master.
Relig^ous Harry Nevil. Mr. Say, the famous Lawyer. Mr. Blagrave, better known
at Reading then here. Coll. Bennet, Sir. Henry Vane's little second at
preaching. Mr. Brewster, a Cipher to make up the number. Sergeant Wild, best
known by the name of the Wild Sergeant. John Goodwin, alias Herb John. Mr.
Lechmore, the Attorney Generals second at all Governments. Augustine Skinner, a
Kentish Christian. Mr. Downs another cipher. Mr. Dove, a Brewer of Salisbury,
come to help in this new Brewing. Mr. John Lenthal, William Lenthal's own Son.
Saloway, a smart prating Apprentice newly set up for himself. M. John Corbet,
such another Lawyer as Miles, and of his own color M. Valton, that will never
forget his Son furnished Blacks for the Protectors Funeral. Gilbert Millington,
the Church snuffers, who desires no better trade then Scandalous Ministers. Mr.
Gold newly married to get more, the Commonwealth being poor. Coll. Sydenham a
Dorset shire couple in at all Governments, who rather talk then fight, and yet
will venture to doc any thing, being backed with an Army, against the naked
people.
Coll. Air, whose name fills his head. Mr, Smith a Six Clerk, that wishes he
could write and read. Coll. Ing^lshy; that fought so well lately for the
Protector against Fleetwood: And, Fleetwood, that holy man, who so smoothly
supplanted the Protector, that he persuaded him three Crowns were not worthy a
drawn sword. Stole on the sudden into the House, the Invitation of the Army for
the sitting of the Long Parliament (as they call it) being first published in
Westminster. Hall.
Upon notice of their sitting, there being double their number Members of the
same Parliament in Town, and many of them in the Hall, to prevent the mischiefs
of a sureptitious packt Parliament, they agreed among themselves in the Hall
(though they were doubtful that Parliament was disloved) that about a dozen or
fourteen of them should immediately go to the House: And the persons that did
so were these, viz.

Mr. Ansley Sir George Booth Mr. James Harbert Mr. Prynne Mr. Geo. Monntague
Sir John Eveling Mr. John Harbert Mr. Gewen Mr. Eveling Mr. Knightley Mr. Clive
Mr. Hungerford Mr. Harley Mr. Peck
Who though with much ado, they got into the Lobby, they were not suffered by
the Officers of the Army to go into the House, though they disputed their
privilege of sitting (if the Parliament were yet in being;) but Reason, as
well as the Laws, must be silent amongst men of War; and therefore after they
had fairly made their Claim, and found the House under force, they retired, and
resolved by Letter to acquaint the Speaker, and those Gentlemen assembled with
him, what usage they had received.

And according'y on Monday the 9. of May, they went to Westminst. where
understanding that there were no Guards upon the House, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Prynne
and Mr. Hungerford went up to the House, and had free admittance, receiving the
Declaration of the 7. of May at the door, which were published this day; but M.
Ansley walking afterward into the Hall (the House not being ready to sit) to
let the Members know, that though they were repulsed by force on Saturday, the
House was open for honest men this day; at his return, Capt. Lewson of Goffe's
Regiment (as he confessed himself) and other Officers denied him entrance; he
asking them whether they were a Committee to judge of Members without doors:
they said no; but they were commanded by their superior officers to let none
in, that had not sat till Apr. 1653. After some reasoning the case with them,
the Capt. told Mr. Ansley, that if he would give his Paroll to return without
sitting, he might go in and speak with whom he pleased; so upon his paroll
passed to the Captain, he was permitted to go in the second time, and soon
after returned, telling the Captain as he came out, that he had kept his
Paroll, and wished he and his soldiers would do the like. Mr. Prynne continued
still there, and resolved so to do, since he saw there was force again upon the
House. The discourse Mr. Prynne had within doors, and how he made them lose
that morning, and adjourn by reason of his presence without the Speakers taking
the chair, you may expect from another pen. And how he attempted to sit again
in the afternoon, but found there a troop of horse, and two companies of red
coats, Keepers of the liberties of England, and so bid them farrewel;
immediately after which, to prevent further inturruption in their works of
darkness from honest men, they barred the door against three parts of four of
the Members of the House by the following Votes.

Ordered,

That such persons heretofore members of this Parliament, as have not sat in
this Parliament since the year 1648. and have not subscribed the Engagement in
the Roll of engagement of this House, shall not sit in this House till further
order of the Parliament.

Whereupon, Sir George Booth, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Knightly, Mr. Prynne, and the
rest, who had agreed on a Letter to be sent to them, finding them in their old
temper of trampling the privileges of Parliament under foot, and Judging
without Hearing, resolved to make no application to them.

But a copy of a Letter coming to my hands, I judge it so worthy of the
persons that subscribed it, and of the public view, that I have here inserted
it.

It was directed

To William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the Members of the House of Commons
now sitting at Westminster.
SIR,
WE the persons subscribing and others, Members of the House, coming to
Westminster Hall on Saturday the 7th of this month, understood that the
Officers of the Army had by their Declaration dated the day before, invited the
Members of Parliament to return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust,
by virtue of an Act of Parliament passed 17 Caroli, wherein are these words:
And be it declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same that this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose nor
shall be at any time or times during the continuance thereof, prorogued or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that
purpose; and the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this
present Parliament be adjourned, unless it be by themselves or their own order.
And in like manner, that the House of Commons shall not at any time or times
during this present Parliament be adjourned, unless it be by themselves or
their own order: And that all and every thing or things whatsoever done or to
be done for the adjournment prorog^ing or dissolving of this present
Parliament, contrary to this Act shall be utterly void and of none effect. And
having casual notice immediately after, that yourself together with the Lord
Munson, Mr. Henry Martin, Mr. Chaloner, Mr. Henningham, Sir Peter Wentworth,
Alderman Arkin, Sir Arthur Haselrig, Mr. Blagrave, Sir Henry Vane, Mr. Purefoy,
and others to the number of forty or thereabouts, were privily met together in
the painted Chamber, and seen to pass thence with a Mace before you into the
House, We did not only out of sense of duty to our Countries, if that
Parliament be not dissolved, but by the persuasion of multitudes of honest
faithful, and well-affected people, minding us of our trust, and that you
wanted number in the house for the public service, resolve that (in regard of
the great crowd) only about fourteen of us (there being many more in the Hall)
should presently go to the House, where if they found free admittance, the rest
might follow; but getting with much difficulty up the stairs, we found the
outward door shut, and strictly kept, yet by degrees we got into the Lobby,
where we found the Inner door of the House guarded by Lieutenant Coll. Allen,
and other unknown persons, Officers as it was said of the Army, who though we
pressed hard to get into the House, and urged their incompetibility to judge of
the Members without doors which by the privilege of Parliament was proper
only for the House, and how they were all obliged to preserve the Freedom,
Rights, and Liberties of Parliament, the former interruption and forcing
whereof they had seemingly repented and by your present sitting by virtue of
the said Act of 17 Car. have published to the world the injustice of their late
dispersing us; yet by no earnestness nor arguments could we prevail, but were
forcibly hindered by them from going into the House; and when some of us
acquainted Major General Lambert, whom we met in the Lobby as we returned, of
our usage by the officers, though he give us civil words yet the force was not
removed, whereupon we withdrew our selves, resolving to give you this account
thereof, that you may know that though to your selves you may seem to sit free,
there is the same force as we conceive continued at your doors, which excluded,
interrupted, and forced the major part of the House in 1648.

And now having laid before you the matter of fact, and not being conscious to
our selves of having done any thing in breach of our Trust, or which may merit
an exclusion from public Counsels, and duly weighing the sad condition of
these three Nations, and that in the multitude of Counselors there is safety
and that of the said House there are yet living at least three hundred Members,
besides those that sat that day, not being admitted to discharge our trust,
and to give our faithful counsel for the good of these distracted and divided
Nations in the House, and to assert and vindicate our innocence and faithful
adhering to the Good old Cause, as it was held forth by the Parliaments Votes,
Declarations and Oaths, till we were forcibly excluded: We have thought it a
duty incumbent on us for our selves; and the respective Counties, places, and
all the people for which we serve in this way, to claim our own and the peoples
right of having their Representatives freed from force, and admitted to the
House, unless it be legally dissolved, and unless in a Parliamentary way (by a
full and free House and not by any without doors) any thing can be charged
against them to disable them, which we are ready as Members in our places to
answer and quit our selves of. And having no more at present to say, but to
desire that this our Claim may be communicated to the House, we remain

Westminster May 9. 1659. Your loving Friends.


Thus you see (to the grief of all that fear God) the same pretended Parliament
was sitting in 1653. (till ^he Protector Oliver, by the be^^ act of his life;
pulled them out of the House) sitting again upon a Declaration of the Army
(whose Slaves they are) to do what they please, as time will discover: And
that you may see they can trust few but themselves, and are not changed (for
all their feigned repentance) they are already returned into the Good old Cause
of preferring one another, and their Friends to good Offices and Commands, and
Counselors places, as appears by their Vote of the 9. of May, viz.

The Parliament does declare, That all such as shall be employed in any place
of Trust or power in the Common wealth, be able for the discharge of such
trust, and that they be persons fearing God and that have given testimony to
all the people of God, of their faithfulness to this Commonwealth, according
to the Declaration of Parliament of the 7. of May 1659.

And their proceedings thereupon, whereby they have chosen of their own members
for a Council of State, 21. viz.

Sir Arthur Haselrig Sir Henry Vane Ludlow Jo. Jones Sydenham Scot Saloway
Fleetwood Sir James Harrington Coll. Wal^on Nevil Chaloner Downs Whitlock.
Whose several Characters you have before.

Hab. Morley Squib-maker of the County of Sussex. Sidney who has nothing of
Sir Phillip but the name. Coll. Thompson as wood a head as leg. Coll. Dixwel
better know in Kent then trusted. Mr. Reynolds half Bishop of Winchester, and
whole solicitor to the Infant Commonwealth. Oliver St. John's, late Solicitor
to the King, now Solicitor to the Commonwealth, to be chief Justice again;
but they hold him to be sanctus nomine non re, and too great a Patron of the
Law. Haselrig remembers his and Collingwoods Case. Mr. Wallop a silent
Hampshire Gentleman, much in debt, fit indeed to be Councellor, if he could
advise the Commonwealth how to get out of debt.
Of persons without the House ten, viz.
Bradshaw, President at the formal murder of the King. Lambert a Yorkshire
Gentleman, not born to Wimbleton house, but too crafty for them all, now old
Oliver is gone. D^sborough, a country Clown, without fear or wit. Lord Fairfax,
an allay for Lamberts brittle mettle. Berry the worst of the Major Generals,
except Butler. Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, a Gentleman too wise and honest to
sit in such company. Sir Horatio Townsend, a Gentleman of too good an estate to
be hazzarded with such a crew. Sir Robert Honnywood, Sir Henry Vane's brother
in law. Sir Archibald Johnson, never advanced before the Marquess of Argile
till he came for England. Josiah Barners fool of the play.
Their next work must be to vote money answerable to the dignities bewowed on
themselves; they discontinued the Term (to the great damage and discontent of
the people) because many Suits were depending against Vane and Hazilrig; and if
they rule on as well as they did when Oliver turned them out of doors with the
braod of Knaves, Whoremasters and Drunkards, to the general rejoicing of the
people, no doubt we shall be a happy Nation; And what esteem the people had of
them appears by the elections to the last Parliament, wherein though none but
persons well affected to Parliaments had Votes, and the persons now sitting
labored hard to be chosen, very few of them were elected, the people generally
looking upon them as apostares from the Good Old Cause; and therefore no wonder
they would have that Parliament to which only they were chosen never dissolved.
I have now little more to do at present (honest and learned Mr. Pryane having
saved much of my labor) but to let the world see how they go about by the
example of the Army, whose Apes they are, to cozen the people of their
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments and Money, with a Ra^^le, called the
Good old Cause, which is a very cheat as you may see by the ensuing penitential
Letter of one better skilled in their Cheats than I am.

Mr. Hugh Peter's Letter written to a chief Officer of the Army.
SIR,
Whereas the late transactions of the Army, have very sore afflicted me; and
with Heman, Psalm. 88. ver. 15. have exceed ugly troubled me, because of my love
to my Native Country, and the concernments thereof, I thought it my duty,
being under much bodily weakness, to desire you to take and give notice unto
others, of these my apprehensions ensuing.

1. Though called to speak to the Officers, I knew not their further intentions.

2. When I heard of his Highness distasting their meetings, I went to Three of
the Chief, and begged as for a penny, that they would not proceed in any
meeting, and did the same to other Officers I met withal.

The dangers I conceive are these, because the Protector and the two Houses as
they were Set, was the hopefullest way in the whole world to settle these
Nations, and the crossing thereof most dangerous, as now it appears both in the
sin and sorrow of it, As

1. All the Armies addresses to his Highness to live and die with him, are
broken, and their proclaiming of him everywhere slighted.

2. His Family, Himself and Lady, being truly godly; yea, such a Family of
godliness and sobriety, not known in the Christian world, now broken, and the
son of Jerubaal not regarded.

3. The Authority of the best Parliament, and most freely chosen; trampled
upon; yea, such a sort of men gathered together as would have been a Defense
and establishment against all evils.

4. Nothing set up in their place, an Enemy at the door, a pe^u^ious soldiery,
thousands of poor perishing, that by this time might have been paid, Widows and
Orphants already dying in the streets.

Trade gone, Private soldiers grown Masters, Law and Gospel dying, the whole
Protestant cause in the whole world over^ottering, how much animosity,
discontent, and self ends have prevailed herein I know not; but if the least
encouragement was taken, by any word of mine, who was a stranger to any design,
I do here profess my sorrow and grief for the least occasion of it, and look
upon the whole business as very sinful, and ruining, of which the Child unborn
and after Ages will be sensible; and this I write from the saddest spirit of a
sick man, and

Your Loving friend, Hugh Peter's.
I know but one expedient, which is, That his Highness may be in the same
condition with his House and Family; and that he be desired to call in as many
of the late Parliament as are at hand to make up a House, and Council, and
Indemp^ity to pass, and so forthwith to settle things. And for that which they
call the Good Old Cause, (I look upon it as a Cheat by the Jesuits put upon the
Army,) the which we enjoyed, it being Liberty and Peace.

White Hall May 10. 1659. Thus far Mr. Peter's.




But for a further discovery of the Cheat ob^^uled upon the people by putting
of the Good old Cause, I shall to avoid large recicals of Remonstrances, Votes
and Declarations of Parliament, state the true Good old Cause in the House of
Commons own words briefly out of their Declaration of the 17th. of April 1646.
At the end of the War when they were full and free which they caused to be
affixed in all the Churches of England, to call God and Man to witness their
sincerity therein. And because the title of it is very significant and
comprehensive take that at large. viz. Die veneris April 17. 1646.

A Declaration of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament of their true
intentions concerning the Ancient and Fundamental Government of the Realm; the
Government of the Church, The present peace, securing the people against all
arbitrary Government, and maintaining a right understanding between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, according to the Covenant and Treaties.

The Preamble recites how their good intentions had been misrepresented by
diverse Declarations and Suggestions of the King, and thereby and by other
practices the minds of many possessed with a belief that there was no just
Cause of the War, And that now they had succeeded in the War they desired to
exceed or swarve from their first Aims and Principles in the undertaking the
War, and to recede from the solemn League and Covenant and treaties between the
two Kingdoms, and that they would prolong these uncomfortable troubles and
bleeding distractions in order to alter the fundamental constitution and frame
of this Kingdom, To leave all Government in the Church loose and unsettled, and
themselves to exercise the same arbitrary power over the persons and estates of
the subjects which that Parliament had thought fit to abolish by taking away
The Star Chamber, High Commission, and other arbitrary Courts, and the
exorbitant power of the Council Table.

Then they declare in General that they will settle Religion in purity,
according to the Covenant maintain the ancient and fundamental Government of
this Kingdom, preserve the rights and liberties of the subject, lay hold on the
first opportunity of procuring a safe and well grounded peace in the three
Kingdoms, and to keep a good understanding between the two Kingdoms of England
and Scotland according to the Covenant and Treaties.

Then to give fuller satisfaction they declare particularly concerning Church
Government, that they are for the Presbiterial Government with a due regard
that tender consciences which differ not in any fundamentals of Religion may be
so provided for, as may stand with the word of God and the peace of the Kingdom.

Then they declare, that there was nothing they had more earnestly desired, nor
more constantly labored after, than a safe and good peace (with the King)
which is the just end of a just War, and ^here they assert the fundamental
constitution and Government of this Kingdom to be by King, Lords and Commons,
which they will not alter.

Then they conclude that the first and chiefest grounds of the Parliaments
taking up Arms in this cause was to suppress attempts of introducing an
arbitrary Government over this Nation, and Protecting Delinquents, enemies of
our Religion and liberties, by force from the Justice of Parliament, and
declare that they will not interrupt the ordinary course of Justice in the
several Courts and Judicatories of this Kingdom.

This is the good old Cause the Parliament owned.

And therefore let all that fear God in the three Nations consider whence they
are fallen, even from the Good old Cause held forth in the Votes*
Remonstrances* Declarations, Protestations, Vows and oaths of the Parliament
published in maintenance of our Ancient and well tempered settled Government by
King, Lords and Commons, to a sneaking Oligarchical Tyranny under the bare name
of The Good Old Cause, which is as changeable as the addle heads that contrive
it, as oppressive as the corrupt w^^ls of licentious men can make it, must be
as arbitrary as the Army will have it, and shall be more fully deciphered if
they persist in it, which they never dare do, if the people who yet seem to be
in a Lethargy remember their first works, and be as resolute to assert their
Religion, Laws and Liberties, as these despera^e men of lost fortunes and
reputations are bold to trample them under foot, and make this great people
(once famous is through the world for valor, wisdom and Religion) a scorn and
derision to all that are round about us, and themselves Monsters of men by
their A^heism, Apostasy and Inconstancy.

I shall conclude with some advice (now it is seasonable) To the Army, To the
people of all sorts and degrees, and to the members sitting at Westminster.

1. Faithful advice to the Army.

First, remember the ends for which you were raised, for defense of king,
Parliament, Religion and Liberties, that you were servants to them and received
their wages, and were (...) by oaths to them.

2. Remember how in 1647 you were first by some of your ambitious Officers,
most whereof are since dead, seduced to Rebel against and betray your masters
(whom you accused falsely) and to refuse to disband when the War was ended,
whereby you are become Oppressers and Robbers ever since, And mere (...).

3. Remember how in December 1648. you rebelled the second time against your
masters, and forceably and trait^rously as well as perjuriously b^oak the
Parliament, imprisoning and driving away most of the faithful members, keeping
only a few that prostituted themselves and the rights and liberties of the
Kingdom with the lives of the King, Nobles and Commons to their own ambition,
and to your lusts and wills, as your pentioners in the house till April 1643.
when you rebelled against them and for their self seeking and notorious crimes
and miscarriages (printed then at large in your Declaration) you absolutely
dissolved them to the general satisfaction of the people.

4. Remember how giddily and impiously your ambitious wicked Officers have lead
you through horrid Murders, Treasons, and breach of Oaths from a happy settled
Government under a King and Parliament. First to a Ridiculous Commonwealth,
thence to a new kind of Protector, thence To Praise God Bare-bones little
Parliament, thence to a Protector with an instrument of Lamberts making, but
never in tune, thence to Tyrannical Major Generals, thence to a new Crochet
called The Petition and Advice, thence to a New Protector and two Houses of
Parliament, whereof one was still-born, thence To build up the things which you
destroyed, whereby you have made your selves transgressors. Gal. 2. 18.

Thus have you marched so fast from one Government to another' that the poor
people wearied out, are sain to return home and sit still in a maze, abhorring
your unstable ungodly ways, and crying to God in secret that he will at length
restore unto England Our Kings and Nobles as at the first, and our Judges as at
the beginning, making it a quiet habitation, which by your ungodly courses has
been so long a howling wilderness full of birds of prey and beasts that do
devour.

I have no mo^e to say to you, but that if your mist^ading Officers can
reconcile your actings since 1646, to the Scripture rule, which you find Luke
3. 14. By which all Christian soldiers much more then Heathen are to walk,
viz. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely and be content with your
wages; then le^ them go for honest men and count me mistaken. But if this
discourse of mine by God's blessing becomes instrumental for the awakening your
Drowzie consciences to see your Long course of Sins and Provocations, and to
repent, Then let me tell you your Work is short to make your Selves and the
Kingdom happy; for as you have lately gone Six years backward at one Step,
viz. from this time to April 1653. So if your Officers and You will but make
one Step more, viz. from April 1653, to December 1648, to our Ancient
Long-experienced and fundamental Constitution of Government by KING, LORDS and
COMMONS, you will justify your Repentance to be sincere, and render it famous
to all the World, and deserve and have Rewards from your Country instead of
Indemnity which you now beg from every Power that Sits.

2. Advise to the People of all sorts and degrees.

Delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi, your rulers do^e and go astray but you
suffer by it as well as they. Therefore strive to set them right; and though
they forget their Oaths and Promises, do you remember yours: Have you ever seen
quiet or settlement since the King was inhumanely murd^ed this own Gate, and
our ancient Government by King, Lords and Commons changed? since our Covenant
was counted an Almenack out of date? this was one in 1648. shall I persuade you
to return whence you are fallen? I need not, I know you are ready for it, and
watch your opportunity.

Let me only tell you the time is now come; for having tried all other ways,
insomuch that we are going round again where we first turned aside; you see no
Foundation to build upon but our Ancient one, strive therefore for the
restoring of King, Lords and Commons, that you may enjoy them and be happy:
Remember how the Ministers and others of London, Essex, Suffolk,
Northamptonshire, Lancashire, and other Counties gave their Testimony against
the King's death in 1648: and repent for that Blood with which the land is
defiled: Let those who so boldly in their late mutinous Representation to the
Protector moved for a Justification of the Kings death and all acts done in
pursuance thereof know, that they may as soon pull the Stars out of God's right
hand, as make those that fear his name in England justify such a horrid
impiety for which God has made us an unsettled people ever since, and has
given them and the Kingdom no rest ever since; nor will till they repent and
do their first works, and call all the Members of the Long-Parliament together
to sit free, that they or a new Parliament called by their advice may upon the
secure Terms offered at the isle of wight by the KING, and such further
reasonable Additions as the Times may require, restore us to our Ancient
Government, and put an End to our Giddiness and Confusion, which destroys
Trade, increases Poor, and threatens ruin to our Religion and Laws.

And let none be any longer deluded with the Bastard Good Old Cause now cried
up by some, which is but the setting a self-seeking Generation of Unstable
Bloody men in supreme Authority; who as zealous as some of them seemed lately
in the new dissolved Parliament for the Liberties of the People, think, now
that by their Hypocrisy and Falsehood as well as Force they have advanced
themselves upon the Ruin of their Country, that the work is done: And though
they have cried down a single Person, and another House, think you such Fools
or Slaves that you will not take Notice that an armed General is a worse single
Person, and such a Coordinate Senate as they intend by the Proposals of the
Army (which now are come to the House by way of Petition as if they had not
been agreed on before) a worse other House than the last, which was the worst
that England ever saw: And this Rump of a cashiered House of Commons, taken
into service again at Mercy, and new dressed by Sir Henry Vane (another single
person amongst them) worse than the late House of Commons which was full and
free; or than the Long Parliament restored to its Freedom, or than any other
that may be chosen by the free Votes of your selves and Legally summoned to Sit
and Decree our Settlement.

I shall say no more to you, but desire you to consider what I have said to the
Army, with hearts ready to forgive them and pay them their Arrears with
additional Rewards, if now at length they Repent and Restore our violated
Government, and obediently submit to what They and the KING shall Ordain for
the Settlement of these Distracted, and no otherways to be cured Nations: for
we see by Experience than one FACTION devoures another, and will at length
devour the People and their Liberties in the ways of Sin and Guilt that we are
in. Let all of you therefore insist on this, That the Members of the Long
Parliament who have been unjustly imprisoned and secluded, may be Restored to
Discharge the Trust you have put in them, and then we may hope for Settlement,
which we have tried almost Eleven years that we cannot have without them. And
if the Army shall again interpose and interrupt you in your Sober and honest
Endeavors for Settlement, Let them find by your vigorous Appearing against
them, that you know them to be the Meanest of the People; and so Few in Number
that they are not One in every Parish in England, and many single Parishes have
Ten times their Number of PEOPLE.

3. Advice to the Members sitting at westminster.

First remember the volumes of Remonstrances, Declarations, Votes, Ordinances,
Protestations, Oa hs and Covenants wherein you as members of that house with
others, have held forth to God and the world The good old Cause you engaged in
to be for the defense of the King, Parliament, Protestant Religion, privileges
and liberties of the people, and that you renounced all other Causes wherewith
you were aspersed and never owned any other till that in March 1649. after you
had injuriously joined with the Army in forcing away the majority of the House
of Commons and the whole house of Lords, you perjuriously apostatized from the
Good old Cause and set up another of A Common wealth or free State opposite to
it, and which you had ever formerly disowned as a scandal cast on you when you
were charged but with an intention that way.

2. Remember and be ashamed that you have stuck at no oaths but have taken the
oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, The Protestation, The vow and Covenant, The
solemn league and Covenant, The engagement, The Recognition of Protector
Oliver, The oath to be true and faithful to Protector Richard, and have kept
these contrary oaths and engagements all alike, and now do set men of the same
stamp in offices and places of trust instead of men of courage fearing God and
hating covetousness. But do not think all is well when you have advanced your
selves and friends, rather believe that though returning to what you have so
often sworn to maintain, you cannot so many of you be Councellers of state
Judges and Officers military or civil, yet you may become honest men and
Christians which will better become you, and bring you more comfort and peace
at the last.

3. Remember that though by lies and subterfuges men may be deceived and abused
for a while, God is not mocked, Gal. 6, 7. but will though he bear long, at
length wound the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their wickedness, Psalm.
28. 21. and pierce you through with many forrows.

4. Consider how God has emptied us from vessel to vessel and led us through a
wilderness of changes these eleven years of Apostasy, and gives no
settlement, return therefore to December 1648. where you forsook settlement
when it was offered by the King and accepted by the Parliament, and in doing
your first works for King and Parliament in a full and free house, God will
bless you and this Kingdom as at the first, and the present Protector cannot
but rejoice also to part with his power upon those terms which both he and his
brother the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland must needs grudge to have wrested from
him by you and his treacherous relations.

I intended a word also of justification of Mr. Prynne, but that his Learned
and seasonable writings praise him in the gates, and carry such evidence of
undeniable truth with them, and so clear a testimony (from A Martyr for the
People) against the abominable iniquity and horrid impieties of this iron Age,
that the Railing Rabsh kahs of the time in what they belch out against him do
but as dogs that bark against the Moon, and therefore I shall leave him to the
cure prescribed by God himself for such tongues in the 120 Psalm. v. 3. 4. What
shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee thou false tongue?
sharp arrows of the mighty with coals of Juniper. And do depend as I believe
Mr. Prynne does also upon that Scripture word, that in due time the mouth of
al^ iniquity shall be stopped.

FINIS.

