THE Behavior, last Words, and Execution OF THE Five grand JESUITS AND POPISH
PRIESTS: VIZ. Thomas White, alias Whitebread, Provincial of the Jesuits
throughout England, and pretended ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury. William Harcourt,
-- Nominal Rector of London. John Fenwick, -- Procurator of the Jesuits. John
Gavern, alias Gawen, and Anthony Turner, Two Jesuits deeply concerned in the
PLOT.

WHO All justly Suffered at TYBVRN on the 20th of June, 1679. (Not for being
either Jesuits, Priests, or Papists, but) For their apparent Crimes of
HIGH TREASON against the Life of the King, and resolved Designs of destroying
and subverting the established Government and Religion of ENGLAND.
Sera, sed certa venit vindicta Dei.
THe Five beforementioned notorious Criminals, after a long Confinement, being
on the 13th of this instant June brought to their Trials; and upon full and
demonstrative Evidence, found guilty of the horrid Treasons they stood charged
with, were for the same, on Saturday last, sentenced to be Drawn, Hanged, and
Quartered; which this day was accordingly Executed.

We shall not here repeat the hellish Treasons proved against them, as having
not only resolved upon, but suborned persons to attempt the Sacred Life of his
most gracious Majesty, our lawful and undoubted Sovereign; There having already
been published a small Book in Quarto, giving the World some brief (but as to
the matter of Fact, most true) Account thereof: Though since there has
privately crept abroad a Sheet in Folio, pretending the same; but in truth not
only plagiarizing the very words of that former Narrative, but impudently
prejudicing Truth, and that more full and exact Copy of the Proceedings against
them in due time to be emitted, by suggesting as if that Triobolary Pamphlet
were a full and exact Account of their Trials: whereas That is only to be
expected from the Pains and Care of Authority.

It will be enough for us to say, That Four of these most dangerous Malefactors
were plainly proved to have agreed upon, and under their respective hands, at
the grand Consultation of Jesuits, (held at the White-horse-Tavern in the
Strand, April, the 24th, 1678, and thence adjourned to Wildhouse, and several
other lesser Colonies, as they called them) to murder the King, as the only
Expedient to carry on their damnable Designs of subverting the Covernment, and
introducing Popish Superstitions: and that in pursuance thereof, they had hired
several persons to effect the said horrid Murder, as Grove and Pickering to
stabb or shoot him; Wakeman to poison him; Four Irish Ruffians to assassinate
him at Windsor, etc.

Nay farther, it was made appear, that they had prepared received, and disposed
of Commissions to raise Forces, and would have had fifty thousand Men in Arms,
to have carried on this bloody design; and the better to color the same, would
at first have cast the odium of the Murder on the Presbyterians, that by
dividing and weakening Protestants in particular Parties, they might have been
better enabled to destroy them all in general. This was proved to have been
declared at a Consultation of Popish Priests in Staffordshire. And moreover,
that by a Letter directed thither, bearing date the very same night Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered, they had there news of his being killed
before ever his Body was found, or the Fact discovered at London. And in this
intrigue in the Country, the fifth Jesuit was proved to be concerned, who was
likewise violently presumed to have been present at the aforesaid Consult at
London. because his name was thereunto subscribed, though the Witnesses not
particularly remembering to have seen him write the same, did conscienciously
forbear, directly and positively to charge him therewith.

After they were Condemned, they were kept seperately in distinct Chambers in
the Press-yard, Newgate, but their friends had (by leave of the Court) liberty
to come to them in the presence of a Keeper. With a confidence usual to those
of their persuasion, and especially of their Society, they appeared outwardly
not much concerned with the thoughts of death, but rather seemed to indulge
themselves; and indeed what preparation for death can we expect from those, who
think Treason Merit, and that whoever dies for promoting the Interest of their
Church, though by the blackest and most barbarous, and bloody means, shall yet
be Kalendar'd for a Saint, or at least a Martyr?

These persons being of the most pestilent Fraternity, who blasphemously call
themselves, The Society of Jesus, it may not be improper to give the Reader
some short account of their Original, and the Pranks they have formerly played
abroad in other Kingdoms, to let the World see, That Treason, and the
contrivance of Disturbances to Civil States, is no new or strange thing, but a
natural, and as it were, essential property of a Jesuit.

Their first Founder was Ignatius Loyola, a raskally Spanish Soldier, born in
Biscay, about the year 1491; who being maimed in the Wars, and unable through
poverty, to prosecute his wonted Debaucheries, in a melancholy mood, turned
Superstitious Zealot, and getting together certain seduced followers, offered
his service to the Pope, who finding his power shockt and endangered by the
attacks of Luther, and other wrestlers for Reformation, was glad to accept of
their service at a dead lift: for so says Maffaeus a Jesuit, in his second
Book of the Life of Loyola, Cap. 12. -- When Ignatius, by the means of Cardinal
Contarenus, offered the Pope the form of their Order, wherein (amongst other
things) it was contained, That to the other three solemn Vows of Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, common to other Orders, they would add a fourth
special Vow, That whithersoever it should please the Pope to send them, without
grudging, delay, or reward, they would readily go. As soon (I say) as the Pope
had viewed this Proposal, he said, Sure these men are stirred up by special
Providence, at such a time to be an help to the afflicted State of the Church!

On this account, in the year 1540, this Order was confirmed by the name of the
Society of Jesus, (for certain blasphemous reasons by them alleged, which I
am ashamed to mention) by Pope Paul the third; whom all Historians record to
have been a Conjurer, and one that prostituted his own Sister formerly, to
obtain a Cardinals Cap; poisoned his own Mother, and Nephew, that he might
enjoy all the Estate of the Family of the Farnese's; and a thousand other
Villainies.

From such an Author, and such an Establisher, sprang up the Society of
Jesuits; whose first Promoter, limping Ignatius, is recorded to have given for
his Motto, these words: Cavete vobis Principes; Kings and Princes, look to your
selves! and indeed they have had reason: For two of the French Kings have been
since murdered by their Instigation; not to mention the Prince of Orange,
killed by one of their Pupils. Most Kingdoms and States in Christendom have
been by them Embroiled, insomuch that they have been for their Villainies
banished the Kingdom of France, and the Republique of Venice; though in both
places they have insinuated themselves. And the best way of preventing their
Incursions, is that of Sweden; where, by Law, if any of them are found, they
are forthwith to be Guelt: which has hitherto cleared the Realm of them. Nor
ever will Europe be at quiet, till these pestilent restless Vermin are (like
the proud pragmatical Knights-Templers of old) by the general Consent of
Princes suppressed, as it is their Interest whether Papists or Protestants, to
do.

(...) On Saturday the 14th instant, there was another of these Plotters, a
Councellor of the Temple tried, found guilty, and Condemned, but he, in reguard
of the multiplicity of his business, and the many persons he was interested
with, whose Writings and Concerns being in his hands, it might have been no
small prejudice to them in their Estates, if he should so suddenly have been
cut off, and therefore on that account he obtained a Reprieve for some few days.

The other five, on this present Friday, June the 20th. were drawn on three
Sleds, each with four Horses, about half an hour after nine a clock in the
morning from Newgate; Mr. Harcoat and Mr. Whitebread went in the first Sled,
Mr. Gawen, (who as we are credibly informed, was a Tailors Son in Covent
Garden) and Mr. Turner in the next; and Father Fenwick in the last by himself.
The first two were in Mourning, the others in colored Coats. They all behaved
themselves very resolutely in their passage, and only one of them had a Book
in his hand. The Guard was extraordinary, and so was the concourse of people;
and if they made such a grand disturbance dying, what dismal effects must we
think they would have made had they lived, and their Hellish Plot taken effect.

As for Mr. Fenwick, he was a Northumberland man, and it was particularly
observed, that several Quakers, during the time of his confinement, came to
inquire after him; and there is good reason to believe, that he had not
infrequently been an eminent Holderforth amongst them.

When they came to Tyburn, Harcoat and Whitebread were first tied up, then the
next two Gawen and Turner; they were all four turned off together: and after
that, Mr. Fenwick suffered alone. None of them said any thing considerable at
the place of Execution, but with the usual assurance of that Faction, died
without any public Confession of their Crimes, seeming only to mutter certain
private Prayers to themselves, and so were wafted to a dubious Eternity.

FINIS.

