THE ACTORS REMONSTRANCE, OR COMPLAINT: FOR The silencing of their profession,
and banishment from their several Play houses.

In which is fully set down their grievances, for their restraint; especially
since Stage Plays, only of all public recreations are prohibited; the
exercise at the Bears College, and the motions of Puppets being still in
force and vigor.

As it was presented in the names and behalfes of all our London Comedians to
the great God PHOEBUS-APOLLO, and the nine Heliconian Sisters, on the top of
PERNASSUS, by one of the Masters of Requests to the MUSES, for this present
month.

And published by their command in print by the Typograph Royal of the
Castalian Province. 1643.

LONDON, Printed for EDW. NICKSON. Ianuar. 24. 1643.

The Actors Remonstrance or Complaint, for the silencing of their Profession,
and banishment from their several PLAY HOUSES.
OPpressed with many calamities, and languishing to death under the burden of
a long and (for ought we know) an everlasting restraint, we the Comedians,
Tragedians and Actors of all sorts and sizes belonging to the famous private
and public Houses within the City of London and the Suburbs thereof, to you
great Phoebus, and you sacred Sisters, the sole Patronesses of our distressed
Calling, do we in all humility present this our humble and lamentable
complaint, by whose intercession to those powers who confined us to silence,
we hope to be restored to our pristine honor and employment.

First, it is not unknown to all the audience that have frequented the private
Houses of Blackfriars, the Cockpit and Salisbury-Court, without austerity,
we have purged our Stages from all obscene and scurrilous jests; such as might
either be guilty of corrupting the manners, or defaming the persons of any men
of note in the City or Kingdom; that we have endeavored, as much as in us
lies, to instruct one another in the true and genuine Art of acting, to
repress bawling and railing, formerly in great request, and for to suite our
language and action to the more gentile and natural garb of the times; that
we have left off for our own parts, and so have commanded our servants, to
forget that ancient custom, which formerly rendered men of our quality
infamous, namely, the inveigling in young Gentlemen, Merchants Factors, and
Prentizes to spend their patrimonies and Masters estates upon us and our
Harlots in Tavernes; we have clean and quite given over the borrowing money at
first sight of punie gallants, or praising their swords, belts and beavers, so
to invite them to bestow them upon us; and to our praise be it spoken, we were
for the most part very well reformed, few of us keeping, or being rather kept
by our Mistresses, betook our selves wholly to our wives; observing the
matrimonial vow of chastity, yet for all these conformities and reformations,
we were by authority (to which we in all humility submit) restrained from the
practice of our Profession; that Profession which had before maintained us in
comely and convenient Equipage; some of us by it merely being enabled to keep
Horses (though not Whores) is now condemned to a perpetual, at least a very
long temporary silence, and we left to live upon our shifts, or the expense of
our former gettings, to the great impoverishment and utter undoing of our
selves, wives, children, and dependants; besides which, is of all other our
extremest grievance, that Plays being put down under the name of public
recreations; other public recreations of far more harmfull consequence
permitted, still to stand in statu quo prius, namely, that Nurse of barbarism
and beastliness, the Bear^-Garden, whereupon their usual days those
Demy-Monsters, are baited by bandogs, the Gentlemen of Stave and Tail, namely,
boystrous Butchers, cutting Cobblers, hard-handed Masons and the like, rioting
companions, resorting thither with as much freedom as formerly, making with
their sweat and crowding, a far worse stinck than the ill formed Beasts they
persecute with their dogs and whips, Pick-pockets, which in an age are not
heard of in any of our Houses, repairing thither, and other disturbers of the
public peace, which dare not be seen in our civil and well-governed Theaters,
where none use to come but the best of the Nobility and Gentry; and though some
have taxed our Houses unjustly for being the receptacles of Harlots, the
exchanges where they meet and make their bargains with their franck chapmen of
the Country and City, yet we may justly excuse our selves of either knowledge
or consent in these lewd practices, we having no propheticke souls to know
women's honesty by instinct, nor commission to examine them; and if we had,
worthy were these wretches of Bridewell, that out of their own mouths would
convince themselves of lasciviousness: Puppit-plays, which are not so much
valuable as the very music between each Act at ours, are still up with
uncontrolled allowance, witness the famous motion of Bell and the Dragon, so
frequently visited at H^lbourne-bridge; these passed Christmas Holidayes,
whither Citizens of all sorts repair with far more detriment to themselves
then ever did to Plays, Comedies and Tragedies being the lively
representations of men's actions, in which, vice is always sharply glanced at,
and punished, and virtue rewarded and encouraged; the most exact and natural
eloquence of our English language expressed and daily amplified; and yet for
all this, we suffer, and are enforced, our selves and our dependants, to tender
our complaint in doleful manner to your great Phoebus, and you inspired
Heliconian Virgins: First our Housekeepers, that grew wealthy by our
endeavors, complain that they are enforced to pay the grand Landlords rents
during this long Vacation, out of their former gettings; in stead of ten,
twenty, nay, thirty shillings shares which used nightly to adorn and comfort
with their harmonious music, their large and Well-stuffed pockets, they have
shares in nothing with us now but our misfortunes; living merely out of the
stock, out of the interest and principal of their former gotten moneys, which
daily is exhausted by the maintenance of themselves and families.

For our selves, such as were sharers, are so impoverished, that were it not
for some slender helps afforded us in this time of calamity, by our former
providence, we might be enforced to act our Tragedies: our Hired-men are
dispersed, some turned Soldiers and Trumpetters, others destined to meaner
courses, or depending upon us, whom in courtesy we cannot see want, for old
acquaintance sakes. Their friends, young Gentlemen, that used to feast and
frolic with them at Tavernes, having either quitted the kin in these times of
distraction, or their money having quitted them, they are ashamed to look upon
their old expensive friends. Nay, their very Mistresses, those Buxsome and
Bountiful Lasses, that usually were enamoured on the persons of the younger
sort of Actors, for the good clothes they wore upon the stage, believing them
really to be the persons they did only represent, and quite out of sorts
themselves, and so disabled for supplying their poor friends necessities. Our
Fools, who had wont to allure and excite laughter with their very
countenances, at their first appearance on the stage (hard shifts are better
than none) are enforced, some of them at least to maintain themselves, by
virtue of their bables. Our boys, ere we shall have liberty to act again,
will be grown out of use like cracked organ-pipes, and have faces as old as our
flags.

Nay, our very Doore-keepers, men and women, most grievously complain, that by
this cessation they are robbed of the privilege of stealing from us with
license: they cannot now, as in King Agamemnons days, seem to scratch their
heads where they itch not, and drop shillings and half Crowne-pieces in at
their collars. Our Music that was held so delectable and precious, that they
scorned to come to a Tavern under twenty shillings salary for two hours, now
wander with their Instruments under their cloaks, I meant such as have any,
into all houses of good fellowship, saluting every room where there is
company, with Will you have any music Gentlemen? For our Tire-men, and other
that belonged formerly to our wardrobe, with the rest, they are out of
service: our stock of clothes, such as are not in tribulation for the general
use, being a sacrifice to moths. The Tobacco-men, that used to walk up and
down, selling for a penny pipe, that which was not worth twelve-pence an
horse-load; Being now bound under Tapsters in Inns and Tippling houses. Nay
such a terrible distress and dissolution has befallen us, and all those that
had dependence on the stage, that it has quite unmade our hopes of future
recoverie. For some of our ablest ordinary Poets, in stead of their annual
stipends and beneficial second-dayes, being for mere necessity compelled to
get a living by writing contemptible penny-pamphlets in which they have not so
much as poetical license to use any attribute of their profession; but that of
Quid libet audendi? and faining miraculous stories, and relations of unheard of
battles. Nay, it is to be feared, that shortly some of them; (if they have not
been enforced to do it already) will be encited to enter themselves into Martin
Parkers society, and write ballads. And what a shame this is, great Phoebus,
and you sacred Sisters; for your own Priests thus to be degarded of their
ancient dignities. Be your selves righteous Judges, when those who formerly
have sung with such elegance the acts of Kings and Potentates, charming like
Orphens the dull and brutish multitude, scarce a degree above stones and
forests into admiration, though not into understanding with their divine
raptures, shall be by that tyrant Necessity reduced to such abject exigents;
wandering like grand children of old Erra Paters, those learned Almanack-makers,
without any Maecenas to cherish their lofty conceptions, prostituted by the
misfortune of our silence, to inexplicable miseries, having no heavenly
Castalian Sack to actuate and inform their spirits almost confounded with
stupiditie and coldness, by their frequent drinking (and glad too they began get
it) of fulsome Ale, and heretical Beer, as their usual beverage.

To conclude, this our humble complaint great Phoebus, and you nine sacred
Sisters, the Patronesses of Wit, and Protectresses of us poor disrepected
Comedians, if for the present, by your powerful intercessions we may be
re-invested in our former Houses, and settled in our former Calling, we shall
for the future promise, never to admit into our sixpenny-roomes those
unwholesome enticing Harlots, that sit there nieerely to be taken up by
Prentizes or Lawyers Clerks; nor any female of what degree soever, except they
come lawfully with their husbands, or near allies: the abuses in Tobacco shall
be reformed, none vended, not so much as in three-penny galleries, unless of
the pure Spanish leaf. For ribaldry, or any such paltry stuff, as may
scandal the pious, and provoke the wicked to looseness, we will utterly
expel it with the bawdy and ungracious Poets, the authors to the Antiodes.
Finally, we shall hereafter so demean our selves as none shall esteem us of
the ungodly, or have cause to repine at our action or interludes: we will not
entertain any Comedian that shall speak his part in a tone, as if he did it
in derision of some of the pious, but reform all our disorders, and amend all
our amisses, so prosper us Phoebus and the nine Muses, and be propitious to
this our complaint.

FINIS.

