THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS About the DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GRACE AND
MORALITY.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS, etc.
WHAT advantage the Enemy of God and Man has got against Truth, Holiness, and
Love, by the Divisions of Christians, and especially by the Contentions of
their Teachers, Experience has been long telling the Christian World, by smart
and sorrow: Where Envy and Strife has begun, Confusion and every Evil Work
has followed: Little Breaches tend to greater: The Cause which first made
them, will make them wider, by calling in more Causes to its help and service.
Distinct Parties have their distinct Interests, as to Commodity and Reputation:
And, alas! what work will selfishness and fleshly interest make? What
Moralities, what Untruths, Injustice, and Unmercifulness is it pregnant with?
What Evil so great, that it will not first venture on, and then palliate, and
next justify, and lastly propagate, if God do not mortify, or restrain it?
The foresight of this Danger to the Land of our Nativity, moved some of Us to
strive for the prevention of it, while we thought there was place for our
Endeavors: But as our labor did but exasperate the Disease, (...) our doleful
and dear-bought Experience, of the prog ^^ss and calamitous Fruits of Discord,
in the space of more than two Apprentiships, has wrought no (perceived) Cure
on Men's Minds, nor deliverance to the Church. The Discord, which began about
Worship and Discipline, is by some now pretended to be also in Doctrinals, and
about the Principles of Civil Government, and Humane Society and Peace. And
whither increasing Discord, by the power of Interest and Envy, may yet carry
the Charge, or how much wider yet Dividers may persuade the Ignorant that the
Difference is, we cannot foretell: But because we are sure that all tends to
the ruin of Brotherly Love, and that he that hates his Brother is a Murderer,
and has not eternal life abiding in him, to save as many on both sides as we
can from such a damning sin, we take it to be our duty to detect the Errors of
Contentious Dividers, and to hinder their farther widening of the Breach. Which
we shall here attempt about this Question, much agitated of late.

Quest. Whether the Parties called Conformists and Non-Conformists do really
differ, about the nature and sufficiency of Morality compared with the Grace of
Christ? Neg.

As to the Explication of our Terms, 1. What we mean by Conformists and
Non-Conformists, we have lately showed on another Question: we mean not that if
a Papist, or Socinian, or Quaker should join either with the Conformists or
Non-Conformists, they would not herein differ from others: but that they that
are now called Conformists and Non-Conformists herein differ not: 1. Formally,
qua tales; 2. No nor Materially, qui tales, being merely such.

2. We speak only of the Parties: For as to some individual persons, it cannot
be expected that any Parties in the World should be wholly made up of men so
wise, as that none among them have Ignorance enough to wrangle in the dark.

3. The Terms [Grace] and [Morality] must be anon explained in our Proof.

Which Proof (as in our last Case) we fetch, I. From our common consent to the
sacred Scriptures, the ancient Creeds, and the doctrinal Articles and Homilies
of the Church of England; which surely contain all that is needful to be held
about the difference of Grace and Morality. Nor has either Party declared
their dissent by any contradiction of any of the aforesaid Articles or
Doctrines.

II. Our second Proof is, by a sufficient explication, and enumeration of the
Points in which we are agreed.

I. The word GRACE is taken, 1. EFFICIENTLY, 2. OBJECTIVELY, 3. SUBJECTIVELY.

I. EFFICIENTLY, Grace is taken, 1. For the Efficient Principle: 2. For the
Efficient Action of the first Cause: 3. For the Efficient Means and its
operation.

1. Grace taken for the Efficient Principle, signifies God's efficient Favor,
Love, Mercy, or Will to do good freely to the Unworthy.

2. Grace taken for God's Efficient Action, signifies the same Good Will of
God ex part sui, but as connoting the Effect in fieri vel facto esse. The
former is considered as Decreeing or merely Willing; but this as Effecting.

3. Grace taken for the Efficient Means, is an effect of God's free Love, and a
second Cause of Man's sanctification, and has many parts; of which CHRIST as
Mediator is the Head or Chief, and his Gospel, Ministers, Sacraments, and
Providence are inferior subservient parts: All which are the Efficient Grace
of God.

II. OBJECTIVELY, Grace is all God's free-given Mercy as it is offered and
proposed to Man's actual Belief, Acceptance, and Improvement, (or use.)

Even as the word Fides signifies, 1. The fidelity or trustiness of God the
Promiser or Revealer: 2. The fidelity or trustiness of the Word promising or
asserting: 3. The Belief or Trust of the Believer; (Fidem promittentis, fidem
promissi, and fidem credentis.) So the word GRACE has the like three
significations: 1. The Grace of the Giver. 2. The Grace of the extrinsick Gift.
3. The intrinsic Grace of the Receiver.

This Objective Grace, or Free-Gift, is, 1. God himself, as offered us
Relatively through Christ to be our reconciled God and Father, with his Love,
and our Relation to him as his Children. 2. Christ himself, to be our Head and
Savior, and our Relation to him, as his justified, saved Members. 3. The Holy
Ghost to be our Sanctifier, our Relation to him and his Grace as offered: This
is the Grace offered and given us in Baptism by Covenant, on Gods part. Under
these are the Objective Means (the Gospel as it is to be believed, the
sanctified Mercies of this present life, the Ordinances as to be used, etc.)
and ultimately, Heaven as the end of all: Glory freely given being the
perfection of subjective Grace, and as proposed and offered being the
perfection of objective Grace.

III. SUBJECTIVELY, GRACE, is, 1. Gracious Dispositions and Habits; 2. Gracious
Acts; viz. 1. Of the Intellect, 2. The Will, 3. The Executive power in
practice. The word GRACE has in the use of Divines all these significations,
besides several sub-divisions which the Schoolmen ordinarily make.

And in Scripture, I. For Efficient Grace, see Exodus 34. 6. and 33. 29. Number. 6.
25. Neh. 9. 17. 31. Joh* 33. 24. Psalm. 86. 15. and 103. 8. and 112. 4. Isa. 30.
18, 19. Joel 2. 13. Jon. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 3. Heb. 4. 16. and 10. 29. Ephesians. 1. 6,
7. and 2. 5. 7, 8. and 6. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 11. 5, 6. and 5. 2. and 1. 7.
and 4. 16. Acts 15. 40. Heb. 29.

II. For objective Grace, see Gal. 1. 6. and 5. 4. and 2. 21. Jud. 4. 1 Pet. 3.
7. and 1. 10. 13. Joh. 1. 17. Acts 20. 24. 32. and 14. 3. Romans 6. 14, 15. Tit.
2. 11. Heb. 12. 15. 1 Pet. 4. 10. and 5. 12.

III. For Subjective Grace, see 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Jam. 4. 6. Heb. 12.
28. and 13. 9. Col. 3. 16. and 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 7. 29. and 3. 8. Gal. 2. 9. 2 Cor.
8. 6, 7. and 9. 8. Joh. 1. 16. etc.

II. The words [MORALITY] and [MORAL] have also diverse significations.

I. In the first most comprehensive and most famous sense, MORALITY, as
distinguished from mere Naturality or Physics, does signify the Relation of
the Manners or Acts of an Intelligent free Agent to the Governing Will and Law
of God: And so Actus morales and Actus humani are used in the same sense; and
all Morality is distinguished into Moral Good and Moral Evil, Virtue and Vice.

II. Some have used MORALITY in a narrower sense, unfitly, for so much of Man's
duty as is revealed by the mere Law of Nature, and as is of common obligation
to lapsed Mankind: And so it comprehends the relicts of the Law of Innocent
Nature (to love God and obey him, etc.) and the additional Law of Lapsed
Nature, (to Repent, and use all possible means for our recovery, and thankfully
improve the Mercies which we receive.) And thus it is distinguished from Duty
known by supernatural Revelation, and especially the Mysteries of Redemption by
Jesus Christ.

III. Some use the word (improperly also) for all that Duty which is of
perpetual Obligation, whether by natural or supernatural Revelation: And so it
is distinguished from Temporary Duties: And thus the Lord's Day, Baptism, the
Lord's Supper, a Gospel Ministry, Scripture (to be used) discipline, are said to
be Moral-Positives, distinct from mere Natural Duties, and from Temporaries.

IV. Lastly, Some, yet more unaptly, confine the sense to the Duties of our
common Conversation toward man, as distinct from Holiness or our Duty to God:
And so they distinguish a mere moral honest man, from a godly or religious man.

Though we wish that the needless use of words improperly were not the common
Fuel of vain Contendings, yet we being not the Masters of Language, must take
words as we find them used, and leave all men arbitrarily to use them as they
please, so be it they will but tell us what they mean by them, before they lay
any stress on them in disputing.

In reference to these various senses of these words, we suppose that we are
all agreed as follows.

I As to MORALITY in the first and most famous signification, we are agreed, 1.
That all proper Humane Acts are moral, that is, morally Good or Evil: And all
Duty and Sin, Virtue and Vice, in Habit and Act, Positive and Privative Vice,
are parts of Morality; moral Good directly, and moral Evil reductively and
consequently.

2. Holiness to the Lord, or the Love of God as God, is the chief part of
Morality; and what Duty soever is Evangelical and spiritual is also moral.

3. Nothing is morally laudable or rewardable, but Moral Good; and nothing is
punishable, but Moral Evil.

4. All Morality is seated primarily in the Will, but is secondarily (as
flowing thence) in the imperate Acts of the Intellect, and inferior Faculties.

5. All truly moral Good in lapsed man, is, 1. From God's Efficient Grace. 2.
And exercised on some Objective Grace. And, 3. Is it self Subjective Grace,
either special or common.

6. The Good called Moral in Infidels, and all other ungodly unsanctified men,
is such but secundum quid, and not simpliciter, nor in the full or properest
sense: Because bonum est ex omnibus Causis essentialibus: And a good Principle,
Rule, End, and right Object, especially the formal Object, are all essential to
a truly good moral Act: But every ungodly man in every Action does want at
least some one of these. And an Act is denominated in Morality from that which
is prevalent in it, and not from every conquered deprest ingredient: We say not
that he that kills his Father or Prince, with the reluctance of better
thoughts and inclinations, does therein do a good work, though that reluctance
was good: So he that has some Love to God and Goodness, but more Hatred; and
more love to sinful pleasure; does not a work properly Good, which proceeds
from such a mixed Cause. But the evil Principle and End is predominant in all
ungodly men.

7. But materially, and secundum quid, bad men may do Works that are morally
good, and physically very good to others; as Governing and Protecting
Commonwealths and Churches, building Cities and Temples, and Hospitals,
relieving the Poor, preaching the Gospel, expounding Scripture, defending
Truth, promoting Learning* and in good Nature, Patience, Meekness, Temperance,
Chastity, Wit, and Industry, they may be commendable and exemplary, and their
Precepts and Practice may conduce much to the good of others.

8. Whatever good is found in Heathens or Infidels, or ungodly Men, is to be
acknowledged and praised proportionably according to its real worth; it being
all from God, who must not be robbed of his praise.

9. A Man that has but Common Grace is better than he would be if he had none,
and it is the usual preparatory for special saving Grace. Though many civil
temperate persons, by overvaluing Common Good, are hindered from seeking Special
Grace, that is not caused by the Good, but by their abuse of it objectively.
And though God take occasion from some men's great sins, to affright their
Consciences to Repentance and Reformation, that is not caused by the sin, but
by Gods Mercy: Sin as remembered is not sin in the act of remembering, nor sin as
repented of in repenting; but before in the committing. God may Convert Paul in
the act of Persecuting: But Persecuting is not the way or means of Conversion.
Special Grace must be sought in the use of Common Grace, and not in a way of
negligence, contempt, or wilful sin.

II. Of MORALITY in the second sense (as taken for Natural Duties, which all
Mankind is obliged to by Natural Revelation of God's Will) we are agreed, as
follows.

1. The sum of this Natural Morality or Duty, is to love God as God for
himself, and all things else for him, even as being of Him, and through Him,
and to Him; to obey God, and make it our chief care to please him, and therein
to place and seek our Happiness, even in everlasting mutual love: To love
others as our selves, and do all the good we can to all for Soul and Body,
especially to the most public Societies; to do justly, and as we would be done
by; to use our Bodies as the Servants of our Souls, and Soul and Body as the
Servants of God: And to hate and avoid all that is contrary to these. This
Natural Evidence will prove to be the Common Duty of Mankind.

2. This Love to God and Man before described is true Holiness; that is, The
Soul's separation and devotedness to God.

3. All the Evidence which Nature affords us herein, is not seen by all men
that are of natural Wit or Industry, no more than all that is revealed by the
Scripture is known to all that read the Scripture, or that believe it.

4. Holiness is the End of Medicinal Grace, as used by Christ on us, and as
used by us toward Christ as the Mediator: Faith in Christ is to kindle in us
the holy love of God, and obedience to him: Love therefore as the final and
everlasting Grace, is preferred by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. last v. and 13.
throughout.

5. Even our Faith in Christ, and our Obedience to the Gospel (in Preaching,
Sacraments, and such like) are neither only of natural, nor only of
supernatural Obligation, but mixed: Christ and his Ordinances are supernaturally
revealed; but being once revealed, with the Evidence of Divine Authority,
natural Revelation then tells us that it is our Duty to believe and obey.

6. That which is of Natural Revelation and Obligation, must be performed by
supernatural Grace. Though Nature prove that all Men should love God as God, it
is Grace that must dispose and enable them to do it.

7. We call Grace supernatural, not only because it is not essential to Nature
(no not to Adam in innocence) but because in our lapsed state it is not
conveyed to us by Natural Generation, but Nature in the state of pravity is
deprived of it; and because God works it by the free gift of his Spirit, in a
manner beyond the search of man, and by it, as an effect of his love, does make
us lovely, (in our union and relation to Christ who sanctifies and justifies
us) it being his Image on the Soul, which no mere Natural Causes, without this
operation of God's Love and Spirit, can effect.

But yet, 1. We all agree that Holiness is Nature's health or rectitude, and
therefore suitable to it as its perfection, as health is to the Body. 2. And
that the Spirit of God does ordinarily make use of his appointed means, and
especially his Word, for our sanctification. And these being second Causes,
which have their proper Natures, may so far be called natural Causes: And that
thus far Grace may be said to be Natural.

8. This Holy Love being the final Act, on God the final Object, and so being
man's felicity it self, it follows, that all men have so much happiness
constitutively, as they have holy love to God and Goodness; and that no man can
be damned that has the said predominant holy Love, while such: And that such
have no cause to fear damnation, any farther than they should fear lest by
forfeiting Gods Grace they should lose that love.

9. The Mediation of Christ, and our Faith in him, who is the Glass, the
Messenger, and the great Gift of the Fathers Love, are the Means appointed by
God to sanctify us, by the effecting of this Love, with all its Concomitants
and Fruits.

10. Therefore as God is called [All in All] so Christ is called [All in all,]
Col. 3. 11. to Believers, as being the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

11. Therefore they that would bring men to the holy and felicitating Love of
God, must preach Jesus Christ and his Grace to them, as the means, and bring
them to believe in him, and to take it for their Wisdom to know Christ
crucified, and glorified, and to learn of him, and obey him, and trust in him,
and daily to use him as their Mediator for access to God, acceptance with him,
and communication from him.

12. To preach up the blessedness of Saints and excellency of holiness, without
teaching men how to attain it by Christ, is but to commend health to the sick,
without directing them to the Physician and the Remedies: And to hear of a
Sanctity and Felicity not attainable, is to be tormented by despair: And to
think to obtain it by our works or endeavors, without a Mediator and his Grace
(or by any other Mediator than Christ,) is the way to lose it by false
presumption, and neglect of the necessary means: It being Christ that is made
of God to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

13. As Christ on Earth did purchase us this Salvation by his meritorious
Righteousness and Sacrifice; and is now in Heaven our Head and Intercessor, and
the Treasury of Grace and Life to Believers, so he sanctifies us by his WORD
and SPIRIT; and herein differs from all other Teachers that ever were in the
World, 1. That his Gospel (Doctrine, Precepts, and Covenant-promises) are
singularly suited to this sanctifying work. 2. That he sends forth his Spirit
with it, to work the Souls of men to that which he teaches and commands,
that so they may be effectually taught of God: Without the Spirit of Jesus no
word or means will sanctify and renew a Soul.

14. Therefore all Preachers must jointly preach GOD and holy LOVE, (trust,
obedience, and delight in him) as the END, and CHRIST and faith in him, and
learning of him, and obeying him in the use of his healing Remedies, as the
MEANS: This being life eternal, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, Joh. 17. 3.

15. And though the End must be preached as more excellent than the Means, yet
the Means must be preached as more mysterious, and above mere natural
Revelation. Experience tells us, that all men quickly learn to confess that
they should repent of sin, and love God as God; but they are hardly taught to
understand the Mystery of Redemption, the Person, Incarnation, Works, Office,
and Grace of the Redeemer; and therefore have here need of longer teaching: The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father, and the Communion
of the Holy Spirit, must be the Preachers subject, as it is the Christians
benediction and felicity.

16. There are things in Aristotle's Ethics, and in the Ethics of the Stoics
and and some other Philosophers, of great worth and use to Christians, to show
us what by natural evidence may be discerned: But they are all poor, defective,
spirit-less Doctrines and Precepts, in Comparison of the Gospel of Christ,
though to carnal wit they seem to excel it in Method, Language, and several
Curiosities: And the Writings of Christians, who do but expound and apply
Christ's Doctrine, do far excel all the Heathens Ethics.

17. We have no reason to think that any of the Heathens understood all that
Nature it self by way of proving-Evidence reveals: Yea, or that any
Christians perfectly understand it; because natural evidences are exceeding
numerous, and none can say that he sees them all; and they are of various
degrees, some plain, and some obscure; and even natural verities, as they arise
from the great Branches, into innumerable Partitions as smaller Sprigs, are not
perfectly discernable by a mortals Eye.

18. Therefore no knowledge of Man, much less any Heathens Writings, are the
certain measure of natural verities, in Morality, by which the number and
certainty of the obscurer Particles may be known.

19. Though Heathens know and teach, that we must Love God and Goodness above
all: And all that sincerely love God and Goodness shall certainly be saved: Yet
this Confession will but more condemn them, that have not, and practice not
what they teach; but, when they profess to know God, by their works deny him,
and are void of true sanctifying Grace.

20. Therefore it is intolerable in those that are styled the Ministers of
Christ, and Preachers of the Gospel, to preach little more than what Heathens
teach; and when they speak of Christianity and Faith, and should open the
Mysteries of the Gospel, to do it as drily, scantly, and heartlesly, as if it
were done but on the bye, and for Custom or Fashion sake, rather than as a
matter of the necessity and importance before described.

In all this we are agreed.

III. As to MORALITY in the third sense (as it signifies Naturals and
Positives of perpetual Obligation) we are agreed, 1. That all to whom they are
promulgate are obliged to the practice of them. 2. And that for that Practice
we need the fore-described helps of Grace; even efficient, objective, and
subjective Grace: For saving Practice special Grace, and for common Practice
common Grace.

IV. And as to the fourth Sense of MORALITY (as signifying only our Duty to
Man, as distinct from holiness to God) we are agreed,

1. That as the Love of our Neighbor as our selves is the second great
Commandment like to the first, so the practice of this in our Duty toward Man,
proceeding from Love and Obedience to God, is the second part of our Duty, and
to be preached and practiced accordingly.

2. And it is that part, about a near discernable Object, by which our Love to
God must be expressed and made known; and by which it shall, by Christ himself,
be judged of at the last day.

3. And it is that Matter in which God will have our obedience to him to be
carefully and constantly exercised: Because God needs us not himself, but as
his Government of Man is his ordering us to our own good and felicity, so he
obliges us to do good to our selves, and one another.

4. But as Man without God is nothing, and no Man; so Duty and Love to Man, not
depending on Duty and Love to God, is no Duty, no Morality at all: And as to
love, honor, or obey Man above God, as the best or greatest, is damnable
Idolatry, or Rebellion against God; so to preach up Love, Honor, and Obedience
to Man, as separated from, or not dependent on our Love, Honor, and Obedience
to God (much more as above him, or against him) were but to preach up Idolatry,
or Rebellion. No Man can love Man for Gods sake, that loves not God more; And
no Man can honor or obey Man for Gods sake, who does not more honor and obey
God. He that will serve Man more than God, does as it were make Man his God,
and from Man must expect his Protection, Provision, and Reward.

5. Profession of Piety to God without true Justice and Charity to man, is but
Hypocrisy. While we have time we must do good (as we are able) to all Men, for
with such Sacrifice God is well pleased, Gal. 6. Heb. 13. Christ was our great
Pattern in doing good, even to the unworthy, and he purifieth to himself a
peculiar People zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. For we are his workmanship,
created unto good works in Christ Jesus, which God has ordained that we should
walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. To be rich in good works is to be rich to God, Luke
12. 21. and to lay up a good Foundation for the time to come, to lay hold on
eternal Life, to lay up our Treasure in Heaven, and to make us Friends of (that
which to worldlings is) the unrighteous Mammon; and blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy; and receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
or a righteous Man in the name of a righteous Man, is the way to have a
Prophets, or a righteous man's reward, when Christ will say, In as much as ye
did it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye did it unto me. Pure
Religion and undefiled, is to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the World.

As we verily believe that not only the Parties called Conformists, and
Non-Conformists (alas! that we must call them Parties) but most true
Protestants are agreed in all this, so we take it to be our Duty to profess our
dissent from the Practice of such as would hinder Love and Concord by
persuading men that we are really disagreed when it is not so. And as we are
the Believing Disciples of the Prince of Peace, that blessed Reconciler, who
took down the Partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles, and made them one, so
we would serve him with all our power and interest, in building up the Wall of
Defense, and taking down every Partition Wall, which unjustly divides the
Church of Christ; and daily pray that God would humble, convert, and reform
those men who have built them up, and will not yet be entreated to give peace
to the Churches, and in special to this self-distracting Land.

FINIS.
THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS OF THINGS INDIFFERENT Commanded by AUTHORITY,
As far as the Subscribers are acquainted with it.

Written to save the Ignorant from the temptations of Diabolism, (described 2 Timothy 3. 3. and 1 John 3. 10. 12. 15. Joh. 8. 44.)

Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
Matthew. 5. 9.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS OF Things Indifferent Commanded by Authority.
Quest. WHether things antecedently lawful do therefore become unlawful,
because commanded by Lawful Authority? Neg.

We take the Question as we hear it stated by some Accusers of the
Non-conformists, who feign them to affirm it: And some seem serious in the
Fiction, as if they did indeed believe themselves; by which they dispatch these
several works of no small moment; viz.

1. They hereby render the Non-Conformists contemptible and odious, as
Brainsick Persons, who keep up a dividing Faction in spite of the Light and
Obligation of the Common Principles of Humanity and Society.

2. They hereby imprint the Stamp of Satan, viz. the hatred of their Brethren,
upon the minds of such hearers as will believe them, and receive the Impress.

3. They hereby fill Families, Cities, and Countries, with all that Spawn of
ugly sins, which are the genuine Fruits of such hatred and contempt, and keep
men also from Repentance for any thing that they have said or done (how cruelly
soever) against such Ministers, and others, as are represented as so odious to
them.

4. They hereby fortify the Peoples Souls against receiving converting, or
edifying instruction, by such accused Ministers.

5. They furnish Papists, Insidels, and other Adversaries, with Matter of
Accusation against one part of the Ministers and Servants of Christ: They are
able now to say, that such and such Protestant Clergymen themselves reported
it.

6. They tempt the worser and weaker sort of the accused, to return the like
measure to them again, and to judge as they are judged: Satan hereby gets
Matter for a Temptation, to call the Accusers Fools in revenge, to bring them
to the danger mentioned, Mat. 5. 22. and to hate their Brethren for hating
them, that they may be as Murderers, that have not eternal Life abiding in
them, 1 John 3. 15.

7. And lastly, they hereby perhaps quiet their own Consciences, and deceive
themselves; or at least for a while, with some, preserve their Reputations, by
making it believed, that their Conformity, or difference from the
Non-Conformists, consists but in the rejection of such wild Opinions, as the
Affirmers hold; and in being the wise Spectators of such as are beside
themselves.

But the Sun will arise after the longest, and the darkest Night: In the mean
time this Candle may serve the formerly deceived Reader, to save his Soul from
the mortal sin, of hating his Brethren wrongfully, which false Accusers would
tempt him to be guilty of.

The Terms need little Explication: 1. We call things here [Lawful and
Unlawful] in respect to the Laws of God: For as to the Laws of Men the
Affirmation of the Question, were but a mad Contradiction.

2. We speak of that which is Antecedently Lawful as Clothed with all its
Accidents, save this subsequent one (being commanded by Authority) And that the
Question is, whether the Command of Authority be an Accident that rendereth it
Unlawful.

3. We take [Lawful Authority] to be a Tautologie; (for all Authority is
Lawful, being in the Sense in the Question nothing else, but a Jus R(...)gendi;
and [Jus Justum, or a Lawful Right] is a Tautologie: If it be not Lawful, or a
Jus, it is but equivocally called Authority:) Yet because the equivocal use of
the Word, may to some need such an Expository Epithete, it may here be born.

And we suppose that the Word signisieth [Authority over the Persons, and in
General, over the Affairs in Question; so that you may see first here what is
not the Question, and thereby the more easily perceive what it is.

1. The Question is not of a thing before Lawful merely as an Act in genere,
vel specie, but Unlawful by some other Accident, e. g. It is Lawfal to kill,
and to kill a Man, (else none could be put to death for Capital Crimes;) but it
is Unlawful to kill a just Man: And if Rulers Command it, it is still Unlawful;
but not because it is Commanded by them, but because it is forbidden of God. It
is Lawful to forbear preaching, (else Women might not forbear;) but not for a
true Minister of Christ to forbear it, when men's Souls notoriously need his
preaching, and he is able consideratis consideran(...)is to perform it: If then
Rulers forbid it him, it is still Unlawful to forbear; but not because they
forbid him, but because God Commands him in season, and out of season,
instantly to preach, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.

2. The Question is not of the Command of Usurpers, Civil, or Ecclesiastical:
For their Command sometimes may make a thing Antecedently Lawful to become
Unlawful, by Accident, at that time, and to that Person. As it is Lawful in it
self to meet an Usurper, and to put off the Hat to him, and to give him Money;
but if he by pretended Authority Command the Kings Subjects to appear before
him as their King, or to put off the Hat in token of subjection to him, or to
pay him Tribute as his Subjects, it is an Unlawful owning of him, so far to
obey him.

It is in it self Lawful to go to Rome, but not in obedience to the Pope, who
is an Usurper, if he Command it us. It is in it self Lawful to take an Oath,
yea an Oath of Obedience (viz. To the King:) But if the Pope, or one of his
Prelates would Command the Kings Subjects to take an Oath of Obedience to him;
yea, or to perform Obedience as such, it may become Unlawful so to own his
Usurpation.

It is Lawful, and a Duty, to be justly obedient to a true Pastor, or Bishop of
the Church: But if Arrians be obtruded on Antioch, A(...)exandria, Cesarea, and
other Eastern Churches, even by the Emperor Valens, the Churches will
resolutely refuse to obey, or hear them: Or if sede vacant one intrude without
a true Call, and will tyranically make himself a Pastor, or is obtruded by the
Pope, or other Foreign Power, without the consent of the Church (either the
Clergy, or the Flocks) or any one that has true power to choose him to that
place or Office, it may be a sin to own such an Usurper, though by (...) in it
self.

3. The Question is not of men that have Lawful (...), and not over the Person
in Question: The King of France may have Lawful Authority there, and yet no
Authority to Command us in England.

4. Nor is the Question of a Ruler that has Authority in other matters, but
not in the matters now in Question. For as Rich. Hooker says, Though a man be
a Lawful Governor, yet if he extend his Commands beyond his Authority, and
Command that which he has no true power to Command, it is not disobeying
Authority, therein to disobey him: e. g. If the Judge of the Common Pleas
Command that which is proper to the Judges of the King's Bench, extra proprium
forum, they have no Authority. If a Bishop would command Husbandmen when to
Plow and Sow, and with what Seed; and what Clothes to wear, and what Meat to
eat in particular; or all Physicians what Physic to give each Patient; these
Commands are Usurpations, and make no Duty: Nay unless greater Accidents
preponderate to make the thing needful on some other accounts, it may do
somewhat toward the making of an Act otherwise Lawful to become Unlawful, when
the doing it will encourage and strengthen such Usurpers, and be a scandalous
seeming to own their Usurpation. So if a Justice would presume to arrogate the
power of a Judge, or a Constable of a Justice, or a Churchwarden of a
Constable, or a Magistrate of the Pastors of the Church, etc.

But because it seems doubtful, whether the Question be of one that has
Authority to Command the Lawful thing in Question; or only of one that has
Authority in General, whether his Authority extend to the Point in Question:
and if not, whether his Command make the Act Unlawful to be done: We shall
include what we assert in these Propositions, which will show what it is that
we deny.

Pr. 1. To question whether it be Lawful, yea or a Duty, to obey them Whom we
suppose to have Authority to Command the very thing questioned, is but to
question the same thing which we first affirm; and to deny it, is to deny what
we first affirm.

For to have Authority to Command an Action, is nothing else but to have
Authority to oblige me to do that Action by Command. And is it a wise Man's
Question, whether he that has Authority to oblige me by his Command to do an
Action, does not, by making it my Duty, make it become Unlawful? That is,
whether Duty be Sin, whether Life be Death, and Light be Darkness? Why should
Men be feigned so mad, as to argue at this rate?

Pr. 2. If the Question be, whether any Ruler have power to Command a thing
which would be no Duty, but indifferent, if he did not Command it? It is to
question that which all sober Persons must assert, in the disjunctive use of
Things, or Actions, as to each other. That is,

1. Nothing is to be done or commanded, that is not good before, or made good
and useful by the Command: Idle Laws are not good, if idle words be bad.

2. The End and Benefit of an Action may be necessary, and the commanding of an
Action or Circumstance before indifferent, (comparatively as to others,) may be
disjunctively necessary, (either this or that;) and the indifferency taken
away, and the thing made both Naturally and Morally good, by the Determination
of the Command.

For Instance: It is necessary that the Army keep together, and march in Unity
and Order: It is therefore necessary that they all meet, or Rendezvous at one
determinate certain place; and it is necessary that they meet at one
determinate certain time, or day: It is therefore necessary that one certain
place and time be determined: By Consent it will not be: It is therefore
necessary that it be done by Command. None of this is indifferent: But the
place, and day, may be antecedently so indifferent, that no Man can see a
Reason, why one, rather than the other should be chosen; no more than why of
two equal Eggs I should choose this, rather than the other. In this case it is
not properly choosing, but taking: I do not choose this rather than the other,
there being no preserence of Esteem; but only I take this, and not the other;
because I must take one, and I must take but one. And when the indifferent
Place and Time is determined of, it then, and thereby, is made profitable to
the End, which is Unity and Order. Thus far things necessary in genere (this or
that disjunctively) and unnecessary antecedently in particular (this no more
necessary than that,) may be commanded by Authority, and are thereby made
Naturally useful, and Morally the Subjects Duty.

Pr. 3. If the Question be only in matters of God's worship or Religion,
whether the same hold there; we affirm that it there holds also. Which we
thus explain.

1. No Ruler has Authority to forbid what God commands, or to command what
God forbids, as to Action, or any Circumstance of an Action.

2. No Man can command by pretense of an Authority coordinate with God's, but
only derived, and subordinate.

3. No Man can do any thing which God has appropriated to himself as his own
proper work; as to make Universal Laws for the whole World, or Church; to make
another Gospel, Divine Covenant, or Sacraments of Gods Covenant; to add to, or
diminish, or alter the Word of God; to alter the Ministry, Churchstate, or Laws
which he has made, or to make the like; or to change his Institutions.

4. No Man can command any thing, but what God gives him Authority to command;
for there is no Power but of God.

5. But God gives Men Authority to command things before indifferent in his
Worship, such as we before described about Civil or Military things: That is,
It is necessary that the Worship of God be orderly performed in Sacred
Assemblies; and that Unity and Concord be there kept: It is therefore necessary
that many meet in the same Place, and the same Time, and use the same
Translation of Scripture at that time, and the same Meter and Tune of Psalms,
and hear the same Preacher on the same Text, and the same Sermon; and that the
Preacher at that time use the same words and Method of Prayer and Sermon to
them all, whether by Notes, or without, etc. But whether it be this place or
that, this day and hour or that; this Translation, Meter, Tune, or that; this
Chapter, Text, Method, words, or that, may be indifferent before, and needful
and a Duty to the People after the Determination of the Ruler, to whom it does
belong.

Pr. 4. If a Ruler do not Act quite out of the Matter or Circuit of his own
Jurisdiction, about a thing which belongs not to him, nor by his
Determination of Circumstances subvert the thing Circumstantiated, and the very
End or Work it self; though he miss it in a Work which belongs to his Office,
and do it not the best way, but be culpable in his Command, the Subject yet may
be bound to do what is so commanded, and is not excused by the faultiness of
the Rulers determining Commands. Which we thus explain.

1. It belongs not to a King to govern a Man's thoughts. Therefore if he make
Laws for our thoughts, it is doubted by many, whether they oblige; unless as he
is the Official Promulgator of God's Laws, or exhort Men to obey them: Yet
knowing that he is God's Minister for our good, if he should Ministerially
command us not to think ill of God, or well of wickedness, etc. we will not
concur with those that affirm, that no secondary Obligation arises from his
Command; as long as we all hold, that if a Church-Pastor Ministerially as
Christ's Officer, forbid blasphemous, malicious, filthy thoughts, and Command
holy meditation, and mental Prayer and Thanksgiving, his Ministerial Command
has an answerable Obligation. It suffices us therefore to say, that Kings
cannot punish Men, or reward them for their thoughts; which is from their
Natural Incapacity of knowing them: For could they know a Thoughtful Plot of
Treason, or a wise and honest contrivance or design for Public good, we cannot
say that they might not answerably punish and reward them.

But to go to clearer Instances: It belongs to the King to give general
regulating Laws to Physicians, to Mariners, to Parents, to Nurses, to Farriers,
to Brewers, Bakers, Cooks, etc. He may forbid Physicians the use of some
dangerous Drugs; and Mariners some times, and places, that are unsafe; and
Parents, and Nurses, to give their Children some pernicious Food, or wicked
Counsel or Education; and Brewers, Bakers, and Cooks, to poison Men, or deceive
them in the matter of their Trades. But if he make such Laws as take these Men's
Callings out of their hands; If he will choose a Physician for every Patient,
and the Medicines that every Physician shall use, with Dose, Time, and other
Circumstances; and what Food every Parent shall give his Children, with the
Measure, Time, etc. and so of the rest; This is to go beyond his Calling, and
so beyond his true Authority, and such Laws oblige not.

So if a King will give such Laws to Christ's true Ministers, as turn them out
of their Callings, and take them all upon himself; it is an acting beyond, and
without Authority, and does not oblige. It is the Office of a Pastor of the
Church, to have and use the Keys of the Church, to be the immediate Ministerial
Judge of Individuals, who is to be taken in by Baptism, and entertained in
holy Communion, and in Sin called to Repentance; and for Impenitency shut out
by Excommunication; and upon Repentance restored by Absolution. For the right
performance of all these the King may give general regulating Laws, subservient
to Christ's Laws, to secure and promote their execution; and he may forbid and
punish gross abuses of the Ministry, as well as of Physicians, and other
Callings. But if he will usurp the Ministry in the Parts aforesaid, or take
those Parts out of the Ministers hand, and as Uzziah burn Incense: If he will
choose for the Minister what Text still to Preach on, and what Words in
Preaching and Prayer still to say; and bid him instruct, reprove, comfort,
direct, baptize, absolve no man but such as are named to him by the King, nor
in any words but such as he prescribes; this being, 1. A destroying of an
Office of Christ's Institution. 2. And an usurping of it without Christ's
consent; such Laws oblige not, but are null as to Conscience, for want of true
Authority in the Makers: As the Sentence of a Judge in foro alieno, or in a
Circuit, City, or Corporation, where the Power is appropriated to others.

2. And if a Prince, or Inferior Ruler, who has power to determine
Circumstantials about the Callings of his Subjects, shall so determine them as
shall overthrow the very End and Work it self, in a Calling which God by
Nature, or Scripture, has made necessary; this Determination binds not, it
being an Act without Authority: For it is as true of Magistracy, as of Paul' s
Apostleship, We have this power for edification, and not for destruction, 2
Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10. Ephesians. 4. 12. 2. Cor. 12. 19. 1 Cor. 14. 5. 12. 26.

It is the pernicious error of some Papists, to Dream that their Pope and
Church has a Power of obligatory judging in matters of Faith and Practice, in
partem utramlibet; and in this wicked supposition they Cant over and over to
the ignorant, Who shall be Judge. To which we say, That Public Judgment
belongs to Public Persons; that is, To the Magistrate [who shall have Civil
Communion] (even on Religious accounts,) and to the Pastors [who shall have
Church Communion;] and private Judgment (discerning each Man's Duty) belongs to
every rational man. But all men are Subjects of God, and their judging Power is
limited by his Laws.

If the Question be, Whether there be a God, a Christ, a Scripture, a Heaven,
an Immortality of Souls, etc. Kings, and Pastors, and Councils may, and must
judge that there is; but none of them may judge that there is not; if they do,
it is worse than null: And in Practicals, if the Question be, Whether we may, or
must pray for the hallowing of God's Name, the coming of his Kingdom, the doing
of his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven; or whether we must love and
worship God, and hear him, and meditate on his Word; and whether true Ministers
of Christ may, or must Preach in season and out of season; and seek to instruct
and save Men's Souls; whether we must honor our Parents, relieve the Poor, and
save Men's lives, in danger, from Murderers, etc. They have Authority to judge
affirmatively, but none at all to judge negatively; which if they do, it is
worse than null.

So Kings and Pastors have power to judge that we may not take God's Name in
vain, nor be perjured, nor profane his separated day, nor forsake the
assembling of our selves for his Public Worship, nor Murder, nor commit
Adultery, nor steal, nor lie, or bear false witness, nor persecute, nor hurt
any man injuriously; but they have no power to judge that we may do any one of
these: and if they so judge, or command, it is a nulli(...)y to the Subject,
and worse to themselves. God has made no men absolute Judges, but given them a
Regulating and Limiting Law to Judge by.

Even so those Rulers who have Power to Judge and Command some Circumstances of
Divine Worship, they have it but as a means of promoting that Worship, and its
Ends, by the means of Edifying-Order; and they have no Power to destroy the
Worship, or its Ends. For Instance, whoever has Power to determine of the
Place of Public Worship, has that Power for the Worship, and Worshippers
sake; and is to be obeyed when he does it accordingly. But if he Command a
thousand Persons to meet no where but in a Room that will not hold two hundred,
or three hundred; or fifty thousand Persons to meet no where but in one Temple,
where above three thousand cannot hear; this is, on pretense of ordering and
placing God's Worship, to forbid it to all the rest; for which God never gave
him Power: So also it is, if he command them to meet no where but forty, or
thirty, or twenty miles off from their Habitation, or where they cannot go
without destroying the Work and End.

So whoever has Power to choose the Day, or the Hours of God's Public Worship,
has this Power for the Work sake, and the Peoples edification; and is to be
obeyed when his Commands are answerable. But if he should Command Men to
worship God only once a Year, or once a Month; or to do it only at Midnight,
and so destroy the Work by ill-timing it; this is a nullity, as being an Act
without Authority, and worse, as against the Laws of God.

So whoever it be that has Power to appoint Pastors and Teachers to the
Churches or Public Assemblies, if they should, as Constantius and Valens, send
Arrians to be Bishops, or any other intolerable Persons, who through utter
insufficiency, Heresy, or Malignity are incapable, and will do more hurt than
good; or if they would limit the Churches, or Countries, to an utterly
incompetent Number, and say, No other shall Preach, but such incapable Persons;
or no more than one to fifty thousand Souls, or where ten or twenty are
necessary; this is to forbid Preaching, or corrupt it, and destroy Men's Souls
on pretense of Order: And it is a nullity, and worse.

So if the same Rulers should say, that, You shall Preach only in Country
Villages, but not within many miles of Cities, or Corporations, which truly and
notoriously want your Preaching; this were but to forbid such Cities, and
Corporations, to hear the necessary Preaching of the Gospel, and the Ministers
to Preach it; and is a nullity and worse, as being both without any Authority
from God, and against his Laws.

3. But if true Rightful Governors, who have Power to determine
Circumstantials, Civil, or Religious, shall mis-determine them; yet so as not
to destroy the Work, or End, nor put Subjects on the breaking of any Law of
God; here their fault will not disoblige us from the Duty of obeying. Though it
be a sinful mistake of theirs, we may be yet obliged to do what they Command
us. For Instance,

The Ruler chooses a Place less convenient, that has no Seats, or an ill
access, yet capable of the Assembly; He chooses a less convenient Hour of the
Day; he places the Pulpit in a les(...) convenient Place; he appoints a
tolerable, but not the best Translation of the Scripture, and Meter of the
Psalms, or Tunes, to be used; he appoints a Bible of a worser Print; and
(supposing him Authorized to choose the Preacher) he appoints not the best, or
fittest Preacher which might be had: And whether it be the present Pastor, or
any other (we now dispute not that) who has Authority to choose Chapters, and
Texts, and word the Sermons and Prayers, if he choose a less convenient Chapter,
Text, or Subject, and less convenient Method and Words in Preaching and Prayer;
all this is his Infirmity and Fault, but yet the People must not refuse the
thing so commanded: Not that we must obey it sub ratione ma^^, as ill chosen
and inconvenient, but [Though it be such;] not qua but quod inconveniens.

And the Reasons are, 1. An inconvenient ill-chosen Place, Time, Text,
Translation, Meter, Tune, etc. may be good as a means of Union and Concord in
the Worship, which without that would not be had; and that Union and Concord is
a Duty: Therefore so is the necessary means, though it be not the best that
could be chosen. If the People will not join with that Translation, Meter,
Tune, Subject, Place, Time, which the Minister uses, or chooses, they cannot
join with him in the Worship. Were there no Interposition of Authority, but
men's consent, if a thousand of the People are for a less convenient means,
(Time, Place, etc.) and a small part for a more convenient, they cannot concur
but in some agreement: And if the mistaken part will not yield to the other,
when Unity is necessary, for that Unity sake the rest must yield to them.

2. The less convenient way may accidentally become a means to avoid
Persecution, and the loss of all their Liberty and Public Advantages; and they
that refuse that may be deprived of all the rest. And it is better worship God,
e. g. at an inconvenient Time, Place, etc. than not at all.

3. The General Obligation to obey our Governors, is not nullified by every
mistake in the Law or Determination: For all Mankind being imperfect, it is
supposed that all Government by Man is imperfect: If we should forbear praying
till we can pray without all sin, we should never pray; and if we should
forbear obeying till Rulers Commands be perfect, or blameless, we should never
obey: There is some fault in every Translation of the Bible, every Version of
the Psalms, every Sermon and Prayer, that we hear, or make; and in every Book
that we Write, and Read. If no Parent, Teacher, Master, Prince, oblige us, but
only by such Laws and Mandates as have no (...)ault, all Government and
Obedience is null, or at an End.

Obj. No Man is bound to that which is evil.

Answ. 1. It may be evil in the Commander, and good in the Obeyer: Not that the
same thing is good to one, and ill to the other (though in other Instances that
often fall out;) for it is not the same thing: To Command an Inconnveient Time,
Place, Translation, Tune, etc. is one Action, and to obey that Command is
another.

2. We obey it not as evil, but as good: The inconvenient Time, Place, etc. is
not good as inconvenient, but as a means of Order and Concord, and so we use
it. And the General Nature of Obedience is good; and if we must do no good,
which we cannot do without some adherent evil, we must never Pray, Preach, Eat,
Drink, or Trade more.

Pr. 5. if a Ruler go beyond (and so without) his Authority, yet in several
Cases we may be bound to do what he Commands, as such.

For Instance, In case the thing be in it self good, or at least indifferent
and Lawful; and the Honor of the Ruler, or the Peace of the Society depends
on our material obeying him: It is our Duty to honor the King, and our Parents
and Pastors, and to avoid all things that will dishonor them; or that will
encourage others in disobedience, or disorder the Society. If therefore it were
granted to be the Pastors Duty, and not the Kings, toword our Prayers and
Sermons, and choose Translations, Chapters, Metres, Tunes, etc. yet if the King
do it, though beyond his Calling; that is, If he appoint us what Chapter to
read every day in Public, and Command some Prayers to be read, and some
Homilies, or Printed Sermons to be sometime read, which are all good and lawful
in themselves, not destroying the Office of the Ministry; and if by him, or the
People, it be taken for Contempt, and a dishonouring him, to disobey him, the
General Command of honoring the King, will here oblige us to the Commanded
Action.

And if the Question be, Whether this be formal Obedience, or only material? We
Answer, 1. It is but material and not formal Obedience, de specie, properly as
it is to a Command that is without Authority to that thing. But, 2. It
partaketh of formal Obedience as to the Genu, in as much as we do it for the
honor of a Ruler, and because it is his Command who has Authority to Govern
us, though not to do it by this mistaken Action.

Pr. 6. If a Rightful Ruler should go quite beyond the bounds of his Authority,
so far as that his Command did not at all bind us, yet would it not make an
indifferent thing become unlawful, merely because he does Command it; what ever
any other Accident may do.

Proved, 1. Because there is no force in the Inference, [It is Commanded, ergo,
it is unlawful.]

2. Though his Act be culpable and without true power, yet he is no Usurper
whom we are obliged to disown; and all true Governors have their faults.

3. The thing may be good, and so a Duty on other accidental reasons, viz. 1.
As a means of Concord: 2. Of pleasing others to their edification: 3. Of
honoring Superiors: 4. Of obtaining liberty, and avoiding mischief; and as
such, though not as an Act of Obedience, may be a Duty.

4. Else it would be in the power of ill-minded Rulers, to make all indifferent
lawful things to be sin or unlawful to us, by Commanding them; and so to
deprive us craftily of all our liberty, and make us Slaves. If Rulers
forbidding them, make not all things indifferent sinful (which many say) much
less their commanding them; else they might command instead of forbidding, and
do the same thing.

We do believe that there may be found some Persons in the world of such weak
Understandings, and unruly Spirits, as to think that it is a sinful betraying
of their Liberty, to do a thing antecedently indifferent, when it is commanded
them. Were we acquainted with such a one, we might ask him, 1. At what Age he
would have Mankind begin the practice of this Principle? Infants cannot learn
it. If before they can feed themselves, they should refuse Meat at the Hour
when it is offered them by the Mother, because that Hour was antecedently
indifferent; yea, if Children or Servants refuse their set Meals on that
account, it were just if hunger teach them more wit and obedience. If Children
will think they betray their Liberties, if they learn that Catechism, or words
of Prayer which the Parents teach them, (even set Forms,) or if they will not
read, hear, or learn, or pray at the Hour appointed by their Parents, because
it was antecedently indifferent; or if they will not go to the Church at the
Hour set them by the Minister, because it was before a time indifferent, how
should they be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord?

2. We would ask such a one, Whether this be an obeying of that Command, Col.
3. 20. 22. [Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing
to the Lord: Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh?
Are things lawful none of the [All things?]

3. If Obedience must be only to things antecedently necessary, may not the
Child in such expect Obedience from the Father, in some sort, as well as the
Father from the Child? We mean material Obedience, that the thing be done.

4. We hope they will not say the same to God, that they will obey him in
nothing antecedently indifferent: And that is, because the very nature of
obedience is contrary. And if so, is it no subordinate obedience that is due to
Parents and other Superiors? Government, as such, can make that a Duty which
antecedently was none, (or else all Children and Servants live in constant
sin:) Therefore Obedience, as such, consists in obeying such Government. For
though the chief work of all Rulers, is to urge the observation of Gods own
Laws, yet their secondary work is (as Corporations have Bylaws about
Particulars, under the Universal Laws of the Kingdom, so) to determine of
subservient Particulars. And if their Principle practiced in Families and
Schools, would overthrow all Family and School Order and Obedience, and utterly
subvert the Education of Mankind; let them consider why it should be brought
into Kingdoms, Cities, or Churches.

5. And we would ask them, Whether they live not themselves in the practice of
the contrary? Do not all Sects, even Quakers, meet at the Place and Time which
their Leaders do appoint them? Do they not hear the words which the Leader
chooses for their Ears? Do they not command their own Servants and Children
things or circumstances antecedently indifferent?

Did we hold such Principles, we should have less reason to lament the sin of
those who have of late written Accusations against us, as Subverters of
Government, Order, and Obedience: And if any one can find any word of such
importance, in any one called a mere Nonconformist (which we know not of,) we
have no more to do with it, than the Church of England has with words of
Untruth, Call(...)mny, Error, or Nonsense, which we read in the Books, or hear
in the words of any Conformists: (of which we are not willing to imitate such
as gather Catalogues or Dunghills of them:) And the rather because, 1. We
Licensed not such Books: 2. Nor Ordained such to the sacred Ministry: 3. Nor
have the Government of them; and therefore are not responsible for them.

As for those men that have persuaded the ignorant in Print, that we hold the
things, to which we deny Conformity, to be Indifferent or Lawful, and avoid
them only as Inconvenient or Offensive to the Weak; and that some of us were
forced at the Savoy to assert, that, Nothing may be commanded by Authority
which may by accident become Unlawful to the Subject, (or become his sin by
abuse*) it is a subject of which we shall here say no more, but that, we will
not here do so great a dishonor to the Authors, as some of them have done to
themselves, that is, to tell the world their Names; the rest that concealed
them, had more tenderness it seems of their Reputation than of their
Consciences: What sort of Men believe them, it is easy to conjecture: It is no
fault of the Earth to bear them, nor of the Sun to shine upon the Writers or
the Believers; and we hope it is none in us to hear and bear the Calumny, nor
(in our circumstances) that we have not farther provoked them, by answering for
our selves. We must lament the temptations and dangers of the Age, and the
sinful alienation of Minds, Divisions and Distractions, which Incendiaries have
caused, and still cause. But for our selves, we do with peace read and
remember, Luke 8. 17. Nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest,
neither any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad. Jam. 5. 7, 8.
Be patient, Brethren, to the coming of the Lord -- stablish your hearts, for
the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely, or my sa(...)e: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, etc. Psalm. 37. 13.
The Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees that his day is coming. Psalm. 146. 4.
His breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish. Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.

FINIS.
THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS OF THINGS SINFUL by ACCIDENT, AND OF SCANDAL.

PUBLISHED To save Men's Souls from the Guilt of Believing those Men who tell
them, that the Non-Conformists Asserted, that, [Whatever may be the occasion of
Sin to any must be taken away; or that, Nothing may be imposed which Men may
take Scandal at, or by Accident turn to Sin.]

And to help those to Repentance, who have polluted their Souls with Falsehood
and Uncharitableness by Believing them, and seconding their Reports.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE JUDGMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS OF Things Sinful by Accident, and of Scandal.
COuld we but have prevailed with Men of confused Conceptions, and consounding
Pra^^^s, to have been reconciled to Distinctness and (...)engruity of speech;
or at least, with Men of has(...)e, temer(...)ty, and (...)assion, to have
endured it, and patiently heard us distinctly tell them what we hold, we might
have spared this trouble to the Reader and our selves.

Those that cannot bear d(...)stinct explication, but in the Dungeon of
Confusion still deride or r(...)ge at the Light, which rendering things
intelligible, does open the unloveliness of Ignorance, and the error and sin
which are its Progeny, are not the Reader(...) for whom this is published; but
such as have retained so much of Humane Nature, as to love the Light, and be
willing to know the truth, and to be patient of a little sober consideration
that they may know it.

That we may make the matter in question Intelligible, we must open the Nature
of Morality, and so of Moral Evil (or Sin,) and what it is to be Evil by
Accident; and what Accidents make a thing unlawful to be commanded, and what
not; and what Scandal is, and how far to be avoided; which we shall do in these
Propositions following.

Prop. 1. MORALITY is either Regulans, or Regulata, (mensurans, or mensurata:)
The first is Radically in God's own Mind and Will, and is called by many Lex
aeterna; and it is signally, and expressively in Gods Laws; and
subord(...)nately in Man's Laws, as they are a Rule to Subjects: Of these we
are not now to speak; that is, not of the holiness of God or his Laws, nor of
Man's, as they are truly a Rule to Subjects.

Morality as Regulated is subjected in the Minds and Actions of the Creature;
specially in the WILL, and in our Actions, as VOLUNTARY; and so even the Laws
of Men, as those Men are God's Subjects, and their Laws are Actions good or
evil, as Regulated by God's Superior Laws, are the Subjects of the Morality
now in question.

Prop. 2. This Morality in Man's Will and Actions is nothing else, formally,
but their Relation of Conformity or Disconformity to God's Law, as their Rule;
(and subordinately to subordinate Rules;) and materially to the End and
O(...)jects.

Prop. 3. How far this Moral Relation is immediately founded in a Physical
Relation, which is before it in order of Nature, viz. in the said Relation of
the Will and Action to the End and Object as such, antecedently to the Relation
to the commanding or forbidding Law, we would willingly open, were it not lest
we seem, with Men that love not much distinction, to justify or excuse them
that censure us as guilty of excess herein; and we may do what is now necessary
to be done without it.

Prop. 4. No Being as such, no Substance as such, no Habit as a Habit, no Act
as an Act, is Morally Good or Evil: For so they are but Quid Natural; and God
does not command and forbid Natural Beings as such.

Prop. 5. All Moral Good and Evil is subjected in Natural Beings, or
Privations, but not immediately as such; but as modified, circumstantiated, and
related.

Prop. 6. Good and Evil make up all Morality; there is no third Species: There
are many things that are Indifferent as to Morality; that is, neither Morally
Good, nor Morally Evil; but there is nothing Moral-Indifferent: Mere Natural
Beings and Acts are Indifferent as to Morality; that is, they are not Moral:
But whatever is Moral, is Morally Good or Evil, and not Indifferent.

Prop. 7. The Subject and quid absolutum Fundamentale, of all moral good, is,
quid positivum, or a real Being; but the Form of moral evil is ever found
indeed in a real Subject, but not always in a real fundamentum. For it is (often
at least) in total Omissions and Privations of the Act, and in Privations of
some modal or accidental qualification, or rectitude.

Prop. 8. Yet the formal relations of moral good and evil, are both true(...)
Relations; even Dis-conformity as well as Conformity, (as curv(...)tude and
dis-similitude are, as well as rectitude and similitude:) And a Mere Negative
is neither good nor evil, e. g. Negative Nonconformity, which is not Privative
Dis-conformity, is no sin; because there being not the Debitum inessendi, the
non-inesse is inculpable. It seems indeed to some Learned Men, that non agere
may be moral good; e. g. Non odisse Deum, au(...) proximum, non meant(...)ri,
not to murder, steal, etc. And it is true, that the (...) is the thing remotely
commanded, or, loco materie (...); but the thing imm^^^ately commanded, is the
(...) agere: The Will by all these Commands is bound posit^^ely to nill the
forbidden Act, e. g. Murder, Adultery, Lying, etc. To nill them is the prime
Duty or moral Good (that we say not with Ockam, the only) and
not-to-d(...)-them is the secondary, but that is as they are Acts restrained,
or forborne, by a Commanding Will: For a Man in Infancy, or the Womb, or in an
Apoplexy, or when he is wholly taken up with some other sin, not then to
Steal, Lie, Murder, or commit Adultery, is not at all a moral Good. But a mere
incogit^^^y, non agere, non velle, may be a true moral Evil: The reason is,
because when a right Volition is commanded, (as to love God or Man,) or ^^ight
Action, (to do good(...)) not to do it is a breach of the Command: And not to
will and not to do when we ought is the commonest kind of sinning.

Prop. 9. Right ordered Actions, Dispositions, and Habits then as in, or of the
Will, directly, and remotely some non agency, are the only things commanded,
called morally Good; (save that eorum gratia the Soul and whole man (or person)
is well and truly called moral(...) Good:) And the P(...)ivation and
I(...)ordination of Voluntary Actions, Dispositions, and Habits, are the only
moral Evil; (save that the person is also called such eorum gratia.)

Prop. 10. An Action may be Indifferent, or of no Morality, as to Election, or
Performance; and yet to Deliberate about that Act may be morally good. e. g. I
may doubt of two ways which are equal to my End (as far as can be known by me,)
whether they be so or not; or which is the better: I may be obliged to
deliberate whether they are equal or not, to guide my Progress, and end my
Doubt: And when I have found them equal, I have found that Comparatively
neither of them is matter of Election, as by reason to be preferred to the
other: But yet because I must choose to g(...) on, therefore I must take one way
and not the other, because I cannot go both: But this is only a choosing to go,
and a taking that way, but not a choosing it, which signifies a rational
preferring it. Here my Deliberation is a moral Act, and so is my choosing to go;
but my choosing this way, rather than the other, is none: For upon deliberating
I found that neither was Eligible, and Choice no Duty.

Prop. 11. As the smallness of the least Physical Being, though undiscernable,
proves it not to be Nothing; so the smallness of any moral Good or Evil, (Duty
or Sin) proves not that it is no Duty, or Sin at all.

Prop. 12. Moral Good and Evil is it self only an Accident; for Habits,
Dispositions, Actions, and Relations, are Accidents; and Privations are either
reductively Accidents (as some call them) or less than Accidents, even mere
nothings, (though from a Nullity or Privation a moral Relation truly result on
the Person.)

Prop. 13. Therefore when we say that a thing is Good or Evil by Accident, we
mean somewhat more than that the Good or Evil is an Accident it self, (for
there is no other:) We mean that it is something acciding (or added) to the
former Accident or State that makes it now Good or Evil.

Prop. 14. In an Action there is considerable, 1. The Action as such, or as
specified only by the Faculty, (Intellection, Volition, Imagination etc.) 2.
The Action as farther specified by the terminating Object; 1. In the first
respect, the Gradus Actus is Accidens accident(...): And an Act may become Good
or Evil, by such Intenseness or Remissness as is ordinate or inordinate. And
the Timing it may do the like: (As to be thinking when I should sleep.) 2. In
the second respect, an Accident supervening or added to the Object, is said to
make that Action Good or Evil by Accident; that is, by an alteration of the
specifying Object by some Accident. And this is the commonest Case, and the
Sense in which this Controversy in hand is most concerned; which therefore we
desire to be most observed.

Prop. 15. Any Man therefore that knows what true Knowledge is, may easily
perceive that he that will Dispute about Bonum vel Malum per se and per
accidens, if he would not lose his labor, or deceive must use more diligence
in explaining these Terms, than they do that toss them about unexplained, as if
they were sufficiently intelligible of themselves, to such as some use to make
the Receivers of their choleric and splenetick evacuations. Even Bonum and
Malum per se, is not such Ver se qua substantiam, nor per se qua Actum, nor per
se qua Intellectionem, Volitionem aut Praxin execu ivam; but per se ut Accidens
substantiae (scilicet Actum) circa Objectum (quod est accidens plerumque) sine
altero accidente superaddito. So that the same which now is Bonum vel Malum per
accidens, is called Bonum vel malum per se, in respect to a supervenient
Accident: And excluding all Accidents, or all Good or Evil by Accident; so
nothing in the World is Bonum or Malum morale per se (except what is anon
excepted. E. G. To Love is an Act; that Act (as is the Habit also) is an
Accident: To love a Man as godly or wise, or as my King or Teacher, is to love
him for Accidents; that is, Godliness, Wisdom, Authority, etc. This is Bonum
per accidens, and yet Bonum per se, stating the Object thus, without farther
Accidents. To love him as an Enemy, and Persecutor, and Silencer of Godly
Ministers of Christ, is Malum per Accidens, and yet Malum per se, in respect to
farther Accidents. To love the Man is not Evil, but to love him for his Evil.
The Exception here is, when we are bound to love the simple Essence, as such,
abstracting from all Accidents: The principal Instance is of our love to God,
(of which more anon;) because God has no Accidents, and therefore is loved
merely as in his Essence: And no doubt but God is to be loved as in his
Essential perfection. But yet we are nono of those that against Pet. Hurtado
Mendez, and other Nominals, will undertake to prove, that Relations to the
Creatures (which are Accidents) do not truly belong to God; such as that of
Creator, Owner, Ruler, Benefactor, etc. we leave that Task to the Thomists; and
to other Men's judgments how well they perform it.

The next Instance is (our love to Man as Man,) and so to other Created
Essences; which we deny not, but add, 1. That Man's Relation to God, as he
shows his Maker's perfections is a Relation, and that is it that is to be
loved morally in Man, at least principally, and never left out: The same we say
of other Essences. 2. And the Wisdom, Goodness, and so the moral amiableness of
Man (at least the principal) is it self an Accident. The Word of God, and the
Worship of God, are Accidents. But yet we say, that the properest Notion of
Bonum per se, is, when we love a thing (but specially God himself) as in the
simple Essence, (...) a supervening obliging Accident: And of malum per (...),
when God's very Essence is hated, or not loved: But that any morally hate the
very substantial Essence of a Creature, we leave others to prove.

Prop. 16. This holds about the very Negative Laws of the Decalogue, e. g. To
kill a Man is in it self no moral Evil; else it were sin to Execute
Malefactors; and Kings, Judges, and Soldiers were the most criminal sinners:
To kill a Man Authoritatively, that is, a Traitor, or Murderer, is good; that
is, an Act with its due Mode and Object, which are Accidents that make it good.
And to kill the Innocent, or without Authority, is sin by this Accident, of an
undue Mode and Object.

To take another Man's Goods or Money is not Malum per se; for it may be done as
a Mulct, or by Law on just Cause, or for the Public defense by Authority, or
by his Consent: But to take it without Consent, Right, or Authority, is sin by
this Accident. So also of the seventh Commandment. The Law forbids the Act as
Clothed with its undue Accidents. The Names of Injustice, Coveting, Murder,
Adultery, Theft, False-witness, etc. all signify the Acts with the undue
prohibited Accidents. One of our Casuists excepteth only Lying, as simply per
se Evil: But he that Lies, sins not because he speaks those same words,
but because he speaks words that, in relation to his own mind, and to the
matter, and to the hearers understanding, are false and deceitful: And that
Relative Incongruity of the words is the accident that makes them sinful.

Prop. 17. Man passes his life among such a multitude of accidents and
circumstances, that it is not one, but very many, that every one of our actions
is Clothed with, or concerned in, which tend to make it Good or Evil.

Prop. 18. A chief distinction here to be observed, is between Immutable
Duties, (supposing our own continued Faculties) and mutable ones; and those
things are principally or eminently called Good or Evil per se, which are so
immutably, and no supervenient accident can ever make them otherwise: And in
the most notable Sense those things are called Good or Evil per accidens, which
by supervening accidents may be changed from what they were before.

Pr. 19. That which is thus immutably Good per se, is Man's Duty to God himself
immediately, as he is our Owner, Ruler, Benefactor, and End: Considering this
Duty not in this or that time, but in kind, in its season; and supposing our
Faculties and Con-causes. For if a Man should be exercising even Love to God
when he is bound to sleep for the support of Nature, or if a Man should love
God with so passionate an affection as would distract him, this, as so used, is
not good; but we never knew any in much danger of so over-doing: Nor is it a
Duty for a Man in Infancy, or an Apoplexy, or deep sleep, etc. actually to
love, fear, or trust God; and in other such Cases of Impossibility. But when
possible, or in its season, it is immutably a Duty: Not so rarely as the
Jansenist charge the Jesuit Casuists to hold, once in many Weeks, or Months,
or Years; but Love constraining us to its holy Fruits, must be the very New
Nature as it were of our Souls, and the Business of our Lives.

Prop. 20. That which makes this to be Bonum per se immutabile, which no
accident can alter, is, 1. Because the Foundations of our Obligations are
Immutable, while our Faculties and Powers endure (else they would cease,) for
the de(...)itum is a Relation resulting from the mere Being or Position of the
Humane Nature, as related to God: And God will never change: Therefore unless
Man cease to be man, or to be able to act as man, the obligation can by no
accident be changed. 2. Because it is a duty to the supreme Ruler and absolute
infinite Good; and therefore the very performance of it is exclusive of all
changing accidents: For he that loves God as a means to his fleshly pleasure
and prosperity only, and as less good to him than the world, loves him not as
God: And he that loves him as God, loves him as the absolute Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness, and therefore exclusively as to all Competitors, unless as this
love is sinfully defective; but that accident of defectiveness makes not our
love to God to be a sin, but the defe(...)t of it as to degree or frequency of
exercise is the sin. 3. And also because that God is the Final Object, and Love
the Final Act; which together make up the ultimate end of man (including the
Vision that kindles love, and the praise joy, and obedience which express it:)
But though mean(...) may be often changed, and may be too much loved, yet the
ultimate end is unchangeable, and cannot be too much loved (by true mental
love, distinct from distracting passions;) therefore our Obligations to it are
according. So that Love to God is the most immutable Moral Good.

And the same in their place and time must be said of holy Fear, Trust, and
Obedience to God, from which no Accident can disoblige us; no Command or
Prohibition of man; no suffering of body, or danger of life it self; much less
the allurements of sensual delights.

Pr. 21. Accordingly to hate God, to distrust his known Promise, to disobey his
known Law, to oppose or persecute his known Interest in the world, in his Word
and Worship, Church and Servants, are immutably evil per se; which no Accident
can make good or lawful: For the Reasons before given.

Pr. 22. But where the object is mutable, and the circumstances of things which
the Obligation presupposes, there the duty or sinfulness is by supervening
Accidents mutable: Even Incest, which is a heinous sin, was a duty to Adams
Children, because of accidental difference of the case. The killing of an
innocent Son, was well consented to by Abraham, when the Lord of Life and of
all the world had commanded it; and that consent was an act of eminent
goodness, and accordingly rewarded. The borrowing of the Egyptians Goods
without intent to restore them, and the robbing of them by taking them away,
was well done, when the absolute Owner of the World had by his Precept altered
the Propriety. Thus the altering of the Case may alter Obligations.

Pr. 23. But besides the immutable Obligations to God himself, there are many
instances of our actions toward men, and worldy Things, which are ordinarily
unchanged; and only some rare or supernatural declaration of the will of God
does change them: For as God the Author and Orderer of Nature, shows us by
experience, that he delights much in the ordinary Constancy of his
operations, and rarely changes the course of Nature; so there is an answerable
constancy in the ordinary state and order of Things; and consequently of
obligations or duty. And these are the matter of Gods common universal Laws,
which ordinarily oblige all mankind; These are the matter of the second Table
of the Decalogue; and are seconds in point of immutable Obligation to the first
(mentioned) sort (our natural duty to God:) For though man be mutable, and God
immutable, yet God preserves so much constancy in Humane Affairs, as is just
matter of constant universal Laws, (though they are liable rarely to
dispensations or exceptions.) And as not murdering, not committing Adultery,
not stealing, not lying, or false witness bearing are such, so also are the
mere Positives of the first Table, such as are the acts of Instituted Worship,
and the holy observation of the Lords day.

Prop. 24. The Cases of Man's Life, which are more mutable, are the matter of
mutable Duty and Sin, which are most usually called Good or Evil per accidens,
because that mutable accidents, added to the more constant accidents, make them
such by change. And so it is greatly to be noted, that the Act which is a Duty
to one Man, in one Place, at one Time, etc. may be a sin to another Man, or at
another Time, Place, etc. And that new accidents may again come in, and make
that Action, that was a sin, to become again a Duty: And more new accidents may
make it a sin again; and so over and over: Even as when you are weighing in the
Balance, one Grain may turn the Scales the other way, and two more in the
other end may turn them back again; and three more in the other end may yet
return them, and so on many times over and over. For Instance, Suppose an
honest Man cannot pray without some unseemly faults in utterance; in secret it
is his Duty to pray vocally if that most profit and affect his heart; if an
exceptious Person be known to over-hear him, it may be a sin to do it audibly:
If his Family be capable of bearing it, it is his Duty to do it as he can: If
strangers come in that would by scorn make it do more hurt than good, he may be
bound to forbear till they are gone: When they are gone it is his Duty again: A
Fire breaks out, or one falls into a swound, and it is his Duty to forbear:
When that is over, it may be his Duty again, etc.

Pr. 25. Two sorts therefore sin against God, that would tie Men to do the very
same things, of such a mutable Nature, without excepting the mutation of
accidents: 1. Those that will tie them to it by peremptory Laws: 2. Those that
will censoriously reproach or condemn them as sinners, that do not do just as
they do, when the Circumstances alter the Case: Many are so guilty who complain
of other Men's Impositions.

Pr. 26. Hence it is evident, that Prudence, discerning how the alteration of
accidents alter our Obligations, is a very needful thing to Christians, for the
same guidance of their hearts and lives: And as Men picture Justice as holding
the Balance, so should Christian Prudence be thought on, even as judging of
Good and Evil with the Balance in our hand, and putting every Grain of
considerable accidents into each end: And much error, censoriousness,
disorder, and other sin is in the World, by ignorant Men's judging of things by
some mistaken word of Scripture, without prudent weighing of Circumstances, and
discerning which preponderateth: There were Circumstances in which Paul would
shave his Head, and Circumcise Timothy, and become a Jew to the Jews; and there
were Circumstances in which he says, If ye be Circumcised Christ shall profit
you nothing: Stand fast in the liberty with which Christ has made you free.

Pr. 27. Hence the common People, who cannot be expected to have a sufficient
measure of such ponderating Prudence, do need spiritual Guides; who should be
good Casuists, and endowed with so much accurateness of Sapience, and Prudence,
as to be able to examine all the Circumstances of Actions, (as Physicians must
do about their Patients Case) and to see when one Grain or Accident does indeed
determine them to be good or evil.

Pr. 28. And the Laws of just Governors being made by Men that must be
presumed to be wiser than the ordinary Subjects, in the matters which belong to
their own Office; as also the decision of a spiritual Casuist and Pastor; if
either of them be put into a Balance that before stood equal, are an
additional Accident which must turn the S(...)ales: Supposing that the former
equality, or suspense, was not from the Persons sinful ignorance, or negligence.

Prop. 29. But in such variety of Cases and intricate difficulties, God does
not lay our safety, peace, and comfort, upon such degrees of accurateness and
Prudence as we cannot attain, though truly willing and faithfully endeavoring
it by sincere diligence: Nor is God pleased that Men be over scrupulous, or
over solicitous, about lesser doubtful Circumstances; that is, that we neglect
the Duty it self, or too much delay it, or live in self-distracting
uncomfortable despondencies; making God's service burdensome and grievous to
us, either by an over troublesome and tedious care of some less accident, or
because we can do the work no more exactly: Like a Servant that instead of his
days work and journey, would sit down and spend half the day in crying because
he can do no better, or in curious enquiries about lesser Circumstances: But
God would have us upon our sincere willingness, and a proportionable fidelity
in enquiry, to do his service cheerfully as well as we can; and to go on as
believing that we have a merciful God, a sufficient and a pardoning Covenant,
and expect with joy his acceptance of our sincerity.

Pr. 30. He that would tell Rulers that they may lawfully command every thing
which is not evil in the Physical Action, considered without its Accidents; or
that is not evil in the first Accidents or Circumstances that cloth it, will
teach them to cast off Religion and common honesty and justice, and to own more
iniquity than ever Mahomet, or any false Prophet to our knowledge, has
defended, and such as Satan himself has confessed to be evil.

Pr. 31. No man may command others any action, which is by accident unlawful to
be commanded: For it is sin, if sin by accident.) But Rulers may command many
things, which the Subject may by accident make sinful for himself to do, (as
shall be showed.)

Pr. 32. For there are some accidents rendering the act sinful, which a Ruler
may and ought to make provision against, or prevent: And there are some which
he neither can prevent, nor is bound therefore to forbear or change his Law.
For instance,

Pr. 33. No man is bound to forbear a Law or Practice, which is commanded of
God, or is necessary to a greater good, (as Gods Glory, the Public safety, the
salvation of many, or himself, etc.) lest some man should turn it to his own
sin and ruin: Gods Laws must not be broken, nor the Public Welfare hazarded,
to save a particular person from himself, and from his sinful inclinations to
ill doing.

Pr. 34. As to a circumstance that is indifferent antecedently to further
accidents, and if it be determined one way will do accidentally a great deal of
good and a little hurt; and if the other way, it will do a little good and a
great deal of hurt; the Ruler, if he foresee it, must determine it the first
way, notwithstanding the accidental hurt (whether sin or suffering) which will
follow. Because a greater hurt is more carefully to be avoided than a less, and
a greater good more carefully to be endeavored than a less: E. g. If the Army
be appointed to meet at such a day and place, some few Soldiers (one of a
thousand) will mutiny and not appear: If at another time and place, most of
them will mutiny. Or if a congregation be appointed to meet at such an Hour and
Place for (...)ods Worship, and join with such a worthy Teacher, one of an
hundred will schismatically separate: If in another Place, at another Hour,
with another worthy Teacher, an hundred to one will separate. Here the Ruler
must first avoid the greater Evil that by accident will follow. If one
pe(...)vish hearer will sinfully separate if the Preacher use Sermon Notes, or
if he use such a Translation, such a Meter, such Tunes of Psalms, if he pray
freely without a Form, or if he use the same words often as a Form; and it an
hundred to one are for the contrary, and would separate if he did otherwise,
the greater Evil by Accident must be avoided before the less.

Pr. 35. So much are wicked Men inclined to turn all things into sin, that it
is not possible to command any thing so good, which bad Men may not make a
sinful use of: Sin takes occasion of God's own Commandments, To. 7. 8.

Pr. 36. No Ruler is bound to suspect and prevent such unusual dangers of men's
sin, or ruin, as fall out beyond all rational foresight or expectation, of
whose probable event, or possible at least, there was no just evidence.

Pr. 37. Caeteris paribus, an equal certain hurt must rather be avoided, than
an equal uncertain hurt, much more an improbable one.

Pr. 38. The equal danger of a more Public worthy Person is to be avoided more
than the danger of a Private, or less worthy Person. And so in other Instances:
Rulers must weigh all discernable Accidents, and prudently pr(...)fer the
greatest Good, and most avoid the greatest Evil.

Pr. 39. Seeing it is Accidents that make most Actions Good or Evil, it is the
Office, Skill, and Honor of Rulers to avoid as many ill accidents, and prevent
as many sins by accident, as is possible: And as the Multitude of his Patients
Funerals is the Physicians dishonor, and the Multitude of Cures is his honor;
so is it to the Ruler (allowing necessary disparities) as to Men's sins by
accidents.

Pr. 40. If Good as Good be amiable, then the greatest Good as such is most
amiable, and to be preferrd before the less: And when the difference is known,
or such as Rulers are obliged to know, the less cannot be preferred without
sin; and such as is against the very Nature of Goodness, and of Man's Will. It
is not therefore a thing indifferent, nor the matter of God's Counsel, which is
no Law.

Pr. 41. But to know of several Goods which is most eligible, or the greatest,
is a matter of great difficulty in many Instances, in which consists no small
part of the Christian Wisdom, Work, and Life. The Rules of such discerning are
elsewhere laid down, by such as have written on that Subject; see Christian
Direct. p. 137. etc.

Pr. 42. A Good that in it self is Lesser may be the matter of a Greater Duty,
pro hic and nunc, because the Greater may have another season when the Lesser
cannot: E. G. to save a Soul, or to build a Church may be a better work than to
quench the Fire in an House: And yet for that time the quenching of the Fire
may be the greater Duty, because it can be done no other time, when the other
may; and so both done in their several seasons are better than one alone.

Pr. 43. A greater Good may be no Duty to him that is not called to do it; as
preaching to a Woman, or unable Layman: To Rule well as a King is a greater
Good than private Business; and yet private Men must not usurp it, but let it
alone as no work of theirs. The Subject must not take up the Rulers work, nor
the Child the Fathers, nor the Wife the Husbands, nor the Scholar the Teachers,
because it is better.

Pr. 44. A Rulers Command will not justify all scandal given by the Act
commanded, nor make that Act lawful: Nor will all scandal, that we foreknow
will thence be taken, excuse us from obeying the Rulers Command in the
offending Act. It is therefore a matter of great difficulty and prudence
sometimes to discern, whether the Rulers Command, or the scandalousness, or
accidental hurtfulness of the Act, put into the Counterballance, do weigh down
the other.

Pr. 45. If Governors determine Circumstances antecedently indifferent, (as
the place and hour of Assemblies, etc.) that way which some will be scandalized
at, and turn to their sin and hurt, when they might have avoided this occasion
of their sin, by another way, without any, or so great a hurt; this is the
Governors sin so to mis-do: But it may, notwithstanding, be a Duty in the
Subject to obey that Determination; because, 1. It is a Command of a Ruler in
his place: 2. The thing is supposed not only lawful, but such as does more good
for Concord, as it is a Determination of Authority, than it does hurt by Men's
mistake: (of which we have spoken in another Paper.) As, e. g. some are so
offended at the old Meter of our singing Psalms, that they will separate from
the worship on that account: Suppose that the Magistrate, and Pastors, will use
them and no other: If they sin in choosing no better, and if my using them be
offensive to them that separate, yet is it my Duty and the rest of the Peoples
to obey the Magistrate and Pastor, and join with the Church in using them,
rather than separate as others do (for many reasons.)

Pr. 46. Of the Nature, Kinds, Causes, and Cure of Scandal given and taken, one
of us has written so much (Christian Directory, Tom. 4. p. 80. etc.) as may
excuse the omission of the same in this writing.

But we must still desire the Reader to note, that the word [Scandal] is among
us variously used: 1. Sometime by the vulgar for mere displeasing or grieving
another, especially in matters of Religion: 2. Sometime for [a seeming
sinfulness:] So a Scandal is said to be raised of a Man when he is (truly or
falsely) accused of sin, especially a disgraceful sin: And a Man is called
scandalous, and scandalized, when others (justly or unjustly) report him to be
a disgraceful Sinner; and he is called a Scandal in the place where he lives
for that Infamy: 3. The use of the word in the Gospel is, for any thing that is
a Snare or Trap or Stumbling Block to others, to keep or hinder them by
Temptation, from Faith, Repentance, Holiness, or Salvation.

Pr. 47. Love kindled by Faith, and Faith kindling Love, and Love working in
the order of Obedience, is the Sum of all our Duty, or Religion. To love our
Neighbors as our selves, and exercise Love in doing good to all as we are
able, is indispensible Duty: (We speak of Natural and Moral-legal Power
Conjunct: Illu(...) possumus quod and animae corporisque viribus, and jure
possumus:) Seeing then that Love is the fulfilling of God's Law, no Rulers Law
can disoblige us from it; no, not to our very Enemies: Nor are they disobliged
themselves.

Pr. 48. He breaks the sixth Command [Thou shall not Murder] who does not do
his best to save his Neighbors Life in danger: Much more if he voluntarily and
unnecessarily do that, which he knew, or ought to know, would be the occasion
and means abused to effect it. He that owes maintenance to another, and
denies it him, is guilty of his suffering though he take nothing from him: E.
G. He that provideth not Food for the Life of his Child, and famisheth him by
such omission: He that suffers his Neighbor to famish when he might relieve
him: Yea, or his Enemy, except when in Wars, or a Course of Justice, he may
take away his Life. He that sees his Neighbor in Fire, or Water, or among
Thieves, and could save him by lawful means, and does not, is guilty of his
Blood. So is he that sees his Neighbor in Drunkenness, Folly, or Passion,
making away himself, and does not save him from himself, if he can.

Much more is be guilty of Murder, who wilfully sells Poison to him, who he
knows does intend to kill his Neighbor, or himself; much more his Prince
with it: And if we have any Casuists more loose than the Jesuits accused by
Montaltus, who will justify this, because that selling Arsenick, etc. is
lawful per se, and unlawful only per accidens, ye we suppose that the Judges
would be stricter Casuists, in judging him to punishment that sinned thus per
accidens: And as Gods Laws reaching the Conscience are stricter in such things
than Man's, so should the Expositors of them be than the Judges. And we hope
that our Casuists will never see a Law so made, that shall Command (or
tolerate) all Apothecaries to sell Poison to those that they know mean to use
it to Treason, or Murder; and shall say, you are not bound to neglect your
Trade, your Right, or Liberty, to prevent another Man's sin, and abusing it to
his own, or others hurt: Our Lawmakers will never say, we may Command this,
because it is sin but per accidens: When Interest is against their Error, who
by Interest were led into it, it will then be easy to see the evil of such
commanding (yea, or conniving at) sin per accidens. Till then it is hard curing
them, whom mistaken Interest blinds, of the most Inhumane Error.

Pr. 49. We therefore who are called Non-Con(...)ormists, (and Puritans, by Men
whose Interest dictateth reproaches) do now confess, that, whereas we once
hoped that we had differed but in lesser things from our Accusers, we do find
our selves so far mistaken, as that some of them, who have thought it worth
their labor to write vehemently for our reproach and increased sufferings, do
differ from us in the Vitals of our Religion, even of our Belief, our Love, and
Practice. We mean such as hold [ That all the Obligations of Scandal proceed
purely from that extraordinary height of Charity, and tenderness of good
Nature, that is so signally recommended in the Gospel: -- But if it proceed
from humor, or pride, or wilfulness, or any other vicious Principle, then is
the Man to be treated as a peevish and stubborn Person; and no Man is bound to
part with his own freedom, because his Neighbor is froward and humorous: and
if he be resolved to fall, there is no reason I should forego the use of my
liberty, because he is resolved to make that his Stumbling Block. Ecclesiast.
Polit. page 231.]

Because this is contrary to that very Religion in which only we hope for
Salvation, we take the boldness to put these few Questions to them who thus
judge.

Q. 1. Is not Love the fulfilling of the Law, and the End of the Gospel, and
Faith working by Love, the Sum of Christian Religion? Does not the Law of
Nature oblige us to love our Neighbor as our selves?

Q. 2. Does not God beneficently love his Enemies; even the sinful, the
humorous, the proud, and the peevish? Did not Christ come to seek and save
them? Is there not joy in Heaven for their Repentance? Does not God welcome
such Prodigals when they return, Luke 16. and call, invite, and entreat them to
return?

Q. 3. Are we not Commanded to be merciful as our Heavenly Father is merciful;
and to love even our Enemies, and pray for Persecutors, that we may be like
him? And is not this a Natural Common Duty?

Q. 4. Has not God sent out his Ministers to preach home such sinners; and
commanded them to do it instantly, in season and out of season, reproving and
exhorting, and with meekness, to instruct opposers, if God peradventure will
give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth? And must we not labor
hard, and suffer much, for to win such Souls?

Q. 5. Should not every thing be valued according to its worth? And are not the
Souls of such as you call humorous, peevish, or wilful, worth more than some of
that which you call your Liberty? Are they not worth more than a Pipe of
Tobacco, or a Cup of Sack, or a Stage Play, or a needless Ceremony; which you
account part of your Liberty? Would you deny none of these to save many Souls?

Q. 6. Would you not deny your Liberty in a Cup of Drink, or a Pipe of Tobacco,
to save the Life of one that in humor would destroy himself? or his House, who
would set it on fire?

Q. 7. If not, does this Religion of yours much commend it self to the Nature
of Mankind? Or is he that writes this fit to report us of the other mind,
unfit for subjection, or Humane Society? Can Christians be of your Religion?

Q. 8. Are not Souls more worth than Bodies? And should not the Soul of a
Sinner be as compassionately saved by us as his Body, as far as we are able,
and at as dear a rate?

Q* 9. Is that Man like to profit his Hearers, or be taken for a faithful
Pastor, or an honor to the Church of England, who would tell them, [I would
not forsake a Pipe of Tobacco, or a lawful sport or jest, to save any of your
Souls, who are vicious, humourous, or peevish?]

Q. 10. Does not this doleful Doctrine tell Men consequently, that they should
seek to save the Soul of no Sinner in the World? For if you, 1. Except all that
have humor, pride, wilfulness, or any other vicious Principle; 2. And that but
so far prevalent as to be resolved to make a Stumbling Block of some liberty of
another: What Sinner almost is not here excluded from your Charity? Who is it
that has not as great sin as some humorous, or peevish stumbling at some
lawful thing? or who is it that has no pride, no peevishness, no humorousness,
or at least that has no vicious Principle at all? Is not that Man perfectly
holy? 3. And if to save such an one you would not so much as deny any of your
liberty for him, what would you do for him at all? Who can expect that you
should bestow any great labor or c(...)st to do good, or save a Sinner, that
would not lose a Cup of Sack to save him?

Q. 11. Do you not thus reproach Christ, that set a higher price on Souls, when
you value them not at the price of a Cup of Drink? Would you have it believed
that they are purchased by his Blood?

Q* 12. Would you have God care no more for your soul, and value it at no
higher a rate? Does he believe the immortality of Souls who will say so?

Q. 13. Should God give such a Law to all his Creatures, for their acting
toward your self and one another; q. (...). [D(...)ny not so much as a lawful
Jest, or Sport, or Ceremony, to win and save any one in the world, that out of
any vitous principle will stumble at your liberty;] what Family, or
Commonwealth, could subsist under such an inhumane privation of love?

Q. 14. If you loved your Neighbor as your self, and did as you would have
others do to you, would you deny no lawful thing to save his Soul, though he
had some vicious principle?

Q. 15. What will people say of such men as you, if you shall ever preach for
Love and Good Works, and would make people believe that its you that are for
them, and we against them; when they compare this Doctrine with your words?

Q. 16. Why do such men call us Puritans, as if we succeeded the old Catharists
(or Perfectionists) and the Novatians, when we are so far from so vilifying
sinners that have a vicious principle, and sin against some lawful thing, by
taking it for unlawful, that we know none in the world that has no vicious
principle, and is not to be helped at a dearer rate?

And seeing we find such real difference in our very Religion it self, from
such as this, we cannot wonder if men of such Principles use us and the Nation
no better than they do: But we crave their solid resolving of these Doubts, if
they will lose so much of their Ease and Liberty, for the convincing of persons
judged so unworthy.

Pr. 50. For our parts we must profess, that we take it to be our duty not only
to deny a lawful thing, or our liberty therein, for the saving of Souls that
have vicious principles and humors, but to bestow our labors, and endure
poverty, reproach, persecution, imprisonment, and, when God calls us to it,
death it self, to serve Christ in the saving of such Souls.

Pr. 51. We suppose that Christ and his Apostles were of the same mind, when
Christ would have a right hand or a right eye rather lost, than the Soul should
be hazarded by the scandal or temptation of it. And when he would pay Caesar
Tribute when he was free, rather than o^^end men. And when he so dreadfully
speaks of them that offend or scandalize one of the little ones, even weak
Believers, as that it were better for them that a Millstone were hanged on their
necks, and they were cast into the Sea: Mat. 5. and 18. 8. Mar. 9. 42, 43. Mat.
17. 27. and 18. 6. Romans 14. 13, 14, etc. This was S. Paul' s judgment, [Let us
not judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers way. I know, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self; but to
him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. But if thy Brother
be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably: Destroy not him with
thy meat for whom Christ dyed: Let not your good be evil spoken of: For the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost: For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved of men: Let us therefore follow after the things that make
for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. For meat destroy not
the work of God: All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who
eats with offense. It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, nor that
whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Have thou faith?
have it to thy self before God: Happy is he that condemns not himself in that
thing which he allows: And he that doubts is damned if he eat, because its
not of faith: For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. This was Paul' s Doctrine
then, even to all the Church of Rome.

So on, Romans 15. 1, etc. We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his
Neighbor for his good, to edification: For even Christ pleased not himself. --
Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus.

So 1 Cor. 8. 9. But take (...)eed lest by any means this liberty of yours
become a Stumbling Block to them that are weak. -- 13. Wherefore if Meat make
my Brother to offend, I will eat no Flesh while the world stands, lest I make
my Brother to o^^end.]

Remember that he that spoke this had as great Church Authority as any Bishop,
and spoke this as an Apostlers and not as a mere private Man.

Pr. 52. The same Author says, (Eccl. Polit. p. 230.) that this
School-distinction (of scandalum datum and acceptum) is apparently false and
impertinent, and the main thing that has perplexed all discourses of this
Article.]

But we see no Reason to think, that the generality of both Protestants and
Papists are herein mistaken, and this Writer is in the right, or that the
School Doctors need go to School to him to reform such Errors: It is a Moral
Subject, and Given and Taken are morally meant; that is, There is scandal
culpably given, and there is scandal culpably taken only, and not so given. The
distinction is of the Parties culpable. All which is culpably taken is not
culpably given: A man that either purposely or negligently speaks injurious
provoking words, does give the temptation of wrath to the hearer: But he that
speaks words which in themselves have no tendency to provoke, nor was obliged
to foresee that they would provoke, does give no scandal; (no nor he that
justly and aptly reproves:) But a peevish or impatient sinner may yet take
scandal from them. He that leaves Arsenick where he should know that another
is like to take it to his death, whether he do it purposely or negligently
(that is by the Wills commission or omission) is the reputed Giver, or Moral
Cause, of that Man's death. But he that leaves it where he could not know, and
was not obliged to fear, that another would so take and use it, may say, It was
taken by him, and not given by me.

An alluring Habit, Actions, and Gestures, which have a Natural tendency to
provoke others to sinful lusts, have ever been condemned by all sober Divines
as Scandal Given; which yet chaste Persons may re(...)use to Take: But if the
soberest and modestest Habit prove a Snare, it is a Scandal Taken, and not
culpably given: (As a Thief, if he steal my Knife and cut his own Throat with
it, cannot say that I gave it him.) He that speaks words which are apt to
tempt the hearer to Treason or Rebellion, does give the Scandal: But if by the
reading of any Chapter in the Bible, any will be incited to Rebellion or
Disloyalty; or if by the innocent, necessary, and sober defense of a just
Cause, any will be tempted to think unworthily of his Governors or Judges, he
Takes Scandal that is not culpably Given him.

Pr. 53. If a Man were bound to forbear all that others will turn into an
occasion of sin, he should not only lose all his liberty, but omit all his
Duty: And to think that we are bound to deny no liberty, or nothing indifferent
to prevent or cure the sin of others, is to deny the common Principles of
Humanity; and on pretense of Justice to renounce common Charity, and to become
an Adversary to the great Precepts of Christ and his Apostles. Therefore the
difficulty is to resolve how far, and in what cases, our liberty must be
denied, to save other Men from sin; and consequently from damnation; which must
be determined by the great General Canons: [Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self: Whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, so do to them: Let
all be done to Edification: Prefer a greater Good before a less; and most avoid
the greatest Evil: Caeteris paribus, the most Public good (of many) is the
greatest: Sin is a greater Evil, than bodily wants and sufferings.]

No Ruler may Command any thing which is contrary (though but by accident) to
the Law of God, in Nature and Scripture expressed: Charity and Justice are
Commanded by the Law of Nature and Scripture: When accidentally the Man that
fell among Thieves was wounded, and naked, Charity obliged the Priest and
Levite to have relieved him. If by accident Fire consume Men's Habitations,
Charity requires others to relieve them.

Especially where the Obligation is great and special, As for Parents to feed
their Children: If Rulers forbid them, and so would have them murder them by
Famine, the Command is sinful, and the Obligation null; because they cannot
dissolve the Obligation of God's Natural Laws.

And the exercise of Charity to Believers, that are the Members of Christ, is a
Duty that none may Countermand; and the Commands of none can disoblige us from:
For Mat. 25. Christ tells us that he will judge Men, according to their
exercised Charity to his Servants, to everlasting Life, or everlasting
Punishment. Yet Christ foreknew, and foretold Men, that much of this Charity
must be exercised against the Wills of many of the Rulers of the World.

Much less may Rulers prohibit the due exercise of Charity to Men's Souls, or
can oblige Men by such prohibitions: As to instruct an Unbeliever, exhort a
Blasphemer, Idolater, Adulterer, a Thief, a Murderer, etc. to repent.

And much less yet may Rulers forbid the means of Men's Salvation, to be used by
the faithful Ministers of Christ, who by Covenant in their Ordination are
specially thereto obliged.

And least of all may any Rulers Command, or can oblige Men, to kill Men
unjustly, or to draw Men to sin, or to deceive them by false teaching, or any
thing else, that directly, or by accident, is like to procure their damnation,
except in the Cases hereafter excepted.

Pr. 54. Though Rulers cannot destroy Charity, they may Regulate it in due
Subordination to God's Laws: E. G. They may make Laws that the Poor shall be
kept in their own Parishes, and not beg abroad; and forbid relieving them that
so beg. They may forbid Parents to cram their Children to excess. They may
forbid Ministers the unnecessary, and irregular, intruding into other Men's
Pulpits, or Assemblies, or Families; and such like.

Pr. 55. And they may forbid Men doing hurt on pretenses of Charity: E. G.
Physicians to give Men pernicious Drugs; or Preachers or others, to seduce Men
to Idolatry, or blaspheme Christ, or draw Men to Mahume(...)anisme,
Socinianisme, etc. or to preach Rebellion, or seek to bring the Subjects into
subjection to a Foreign Prince, or Ecclesiastical Usurper; or uncalled and
unfit Men, to make themselves unnecessarily Public Teachers, to the disgrace
of the sacred Doctrine which they abuse, and hindrance of Men's salvation, and
of the Public peace and safety.

Pr. 56. In a word, Rulers may forbid all things not Commanded by God, though
seemingly Charitable, or good by accident, when contrary accidents notoriously
preponderate, and it is certain, or most probable, to Men of true judgment, to
whose Cognizance it belongs, that the thing will do more hurt than good, and
tends more to destruction, than to edification*

Pr. 57. The Time, Place, and other Circumstances of a Duty may be at the
Governors Determination, when the Duty it self is not: And they may forbid the
Duty it self, as to that Time, and Place, etc. when a greater good, at that
Time, requires it. E. G. They may forbid resting on the Lord's Day, in time of
a Fire, Inundation, or a Siege, when defense is necessary: They may forbid some
Public Assemblies in time of a great Pestilence, to prevent infection: They
may Command Men out of the Church to quench a Fire, etc.

Pr. 58. It is certain that Rulers have not Power from God to destroy the
Duties Commanded by God, on any pretenses of Regulating, or duly
Circumstantiating, or ordering them; or of being the Judges: (As is elsewhere
showed.) For they have their Power to edification, and not destruction; and are
the Ministers of God for Good. E. G. If on pretense of forbidding hurtful
Preachers and Seducers, they forbid sound Doctrine, or necessary preaching of
it. Constantius and Valens might not set up Arrians, and cast out and forbid
the Orthodox, on pretense that they were the Judges. So if on pretense of
restraining unnecessary supernumeraries, they forbid, or silence, one half the
necessary Number: Or if on pretense of keeping Order, they commit the charge of
Fifty Thousand or One Hundred Thousand Souls to one, or two Men, who cannot
possibly supply the real necessities of Five Thousand of them; and forbid all
others to help the rest, as intruders into another Man's Charge: (On which
pretense they might keep almost all the People from the Gospel, by committing a
Kingdom or County only to one Man:) So also if on pretense of any cross
interest of their own, they would prohibit Christ's Gospel: Or if they will
forbid Men to preach, because they will not make a Covenant against some Law of
God, or will not lie, or be perjured, or profane God's Ordinances, or own
false Doctrine, or disown the very Law of Nature, calling this Nonconformity,
Disobedience, or Schism. Yea, if they forbid necessary helps to Men's
Salvation, because the Teachers be not all of one Opininion about some
unnecessary Controversy, or Ceremony: As if all the Lutherans would silence
all called Calvenists, or they the Lutherans, or Arminians: Much more unlawful
is it for Rulers themselves to be the Makers of such snares and occasions of
dissent, and then to impose them by such penalties, that none shall preach the
Gospel of Christ, that will not consent to them, how great soever the necessity
be. As, e. g. God has not forbidden wearing a pair of Horns: If Rulers should
make Laws that none shall preach the Gospel that will not wear Horns in
preaching, in token that the Word of God shall push down the Powers of Sin and
Satan, this is an unlawful Command. So if on pretense of ordering the Place of
Worship, Men be commanded to such a distance, or confined to so small a room,
as destroys the End of the Work it self, and depriveth most of all
possibility of the Benefit.

Pr. 59. Rulers ought not to command any thing which will notably do more harm
than good, nor make an unnecessary thing a means or occasion of excluding the
necessary Worship of God, or Preaching of his Gospel. Nor will their saying
that necessary Teaching is not necessary, or that they are the Judges of
Necessity, or that Heretics are Orthodox, or the Orthodox are Heretics, or
that Usurpers only are duly called, and others are Schismatics, or that
ignorant insufficient Preachers are sufficient, or that more in number are not
necessary, when indeed they are; none of this will excuse their sin, nor
disoblige Christ's Servants from the obedience of his Laws.

Pr. 60. If still ignorant or fraudulent men should ask us, ad rancedinem
usque, who shall be Judge of Order and Necessity, we again and again repeat our
undeniable Answer; 1. That the esse rei is before the scire: Either the thing
is really true and good which they judge true and good, or it is false and bad;
and no man's false judging will change the thing: (e. g. Our Preaching is sound
and necessary, or it is not.) 2. The Magistrate is the Public Judge who shall
be protected or punished by the Sword. The Pastors are the Public Judges who
is fit for Church Communion, and who not. And all the Subjects are the rational
Private discerning Judges of their Duty: This no man can with a face of Reason
deny. But all these are Subjects to God, and limited by him in their Judging
Power, and not enabled to judge falsely, that Evil is Good and Good is Evil:
what Good is such by Nature or Accident, they cannot make Evil, and forbid what
God commands on pretense of judging. They have Power to judge that all the
Articles of our Faith are true, but not that any of them are false: They are
Judges that the Commands of God must be all kept, but have no power to judge
the contrary. In what Cases we may be bound to obey them when they err, we
have opened in another Paper, and may partly be discerned from what is here
said.

Pr. 61. The Bishops or Pastors of the Church are above others obliged, to
exercise paternal tender love to all the Peoples Souls. If they are peevish,
and humorous, and quarrelsome, and proud, and have other vicious Principles, it
is their Office and Work under Christ to cure them, and to use all that
gentleness and forbearance which is needful to their cure; and to become all
things (lawful) to all men, to win and edify them: (not doing greater hurt by
injuring others, or the Public Good, for the sake of those that are few or
less considerable.) If therefore they should either scandalize them and hinder
their salvation by things unnecessary, or whose good will not countervail the
hurt; or if they should say, we are not bound to forsake our own Liberty (no
not in a trifle) for the sake of such as are inclined to offense by their
vicious Principles, they seem to us much to forget or renounce their proper
Callings, as well as Humane Charity to Souls; as if a Physician should say, I
am not bound to medicate any that are sick, but only those that are in health.
And if all that have vicious Principles be so far from under the Ministers
(...)are, we see no Reason why the Kingdom should maintain so needless a
Ministry, at so dear a rate; nor why they should be had in so much honor, and
why we should not all be silenced at once.

Pr. 62. The sin of tyrannical abuse of Power is so contrary to the Nature of
all Good Rulers, and so contrary to their own true interest, peace, and
comfort, and final justification before God, and so contrary to the welfare of
all Mankind, and does at this day so much mischief in the world, by serving
Satan, maintaining Idolatry, Mahometanism, Popery, and Profaneness, and
keeping out the Gospel from the most of the whole world, that the Flatterers
that would for their own ends and carnal interests promote it, and make all
odious to Rulers that dislike it, will one day be known to be the great Enemies
of Princes and People, of Church and State, of Jesus Christ and God the
Sovereign Lord of all.

Pr. 63. And Confusion, Anarchy, Popular Rage, Faction and Sedition,
dishonouring our Rulers, and all Rebellions and Schisms, must be odious to all
men of Interest, Wisdom, and true Religion, as being ultimately against the God
of Order, and the Glory of his Wisdom and Sovereignty in Government, who is to
be honored and obeyed in Kings, in Pastors, and Parents, and all that are
under him authorized to Govern us.

Pr. 64. Perjury, justifying thousands in perjury, deliberate lying,
covenanting against great and known Duty, corrupting Gods Worship and Church
Government, cruel denying christendom and salvation to the Infants of thousands
of godly Christians, and casting out godly Christians from the Churches
Communion causelessly for a gesture, pronouncing all Atheists, Infidels,
Adulterers, and other wicked Persons saved, so be it they be not unbaptized,
excommunicate, or make away themselves; none of these, nor any such other, in
our judgment will ever be made lawful by any Command or Accident, nor will ever
be lawfully commanded; nor shall we ever number them with Things Indifferent,
nor revile or persecute any as humorous, obstinate, disobedient, Schismatics,
or seditious, for refusing them.

FINIS.
What Mere Nonconformity is not: THE PROFESSION OF SEVERAL WHOM THESE TIMES
Have made and called NON-CONFORMISTS.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

What Mere Nonconformity is not.
THat we may not, after near fourteen Years suffering and silence, yet tell the
World what our Nonconformity is, without offending our Superiors, and
incurring all the censures and farther sufferings which we have reason to
expect, is more grievous to some of us, than all the corporal pressures by
Ejections, Deprivation of Maintenance, Prosecutions, Fines and Imprisonment
which we have undergone; when we consider not only that the little remnant of
our opportunities for Ministerial Work, (the preservation whereof has done
much to restrain us) is by the Odium cast upon us made less profitable to Men's
Souls; but especially, how many Thousands do defile their hearts with false
uncharitable Conceptions of their Brethren, and their tongues with false
Reproaches, if not their hands with cruel Prosecutions, because they are falsely
informed of our Cause: When we think how Satan is served by this; how odious
sins are multiplied through the Land; how Christian Love is killed; and
divisions made among all Ranks of Men, and in all places: When we think how God
is hereby provoked, the Land dishonored and endangered; and how fast the
guilty post one after another into another World, where such work will cost
them dear; with many a heart-tearing groan some of us have long said, Must we
be silent and see all this? In a Christian state, must we be condemned,
imprisoned, driven about as Rogues and seditious Persons, and our Ministry
vilified, and that by Clergymen, who think that it is their right to be
believed, and not have leave once to speak for our selves, so far as to tell
men, what it is that we take for sin? and why must we see so many Thousands
going in such guilt into another World, and distracting a Kingdom that has
been too long distracted, and weakening both the Protestant and the Christian
Interest, and by building and keeping up a Wall of separation, serving the
great Enemy of both? and must we not in compassion speak for peace, but only
say as Christ, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do? If God
forgive Men he turns their hearts, and gives them Repentance. And we are
commanded to pray, Forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and turn
their hearts: And must we pray, and not endeavor?

At least, now at last, we shall endeavor to stop them by this short
Profession, from believing those Tongues or Pens which tell them, that we make
a Schism for things which our selves confess Indifferent, and that our
Nonconformity consists in what it does not: If we must not tell them what it
is that we think men command and God forbids, we may tell them what it is not:
For this may be some service to themselves.

But we must premise, that if any that are called by other names, denoting
other Opinions besides Mere Nonconformity, or any Persons else whosoever, do
hold any thing unlawful which we here allow, it is none of our meaning to
declare their judgments, which they are fittest to declare themselves: We
profess but our own, and such as by familiarity we have had opportunity to
understand.

Three sorts we must here justify our selves against, who we know are likely
to accuse us upon unjustifiable accounts: I. Those that will be angry that we
so far undeceive the People, as to acquaint them with our judgment, and the
untruth of what they have believed of us: How many soever may be guilty of
this, it is so diabolical that we suppose few will own it, and therefore we
need not any farther dispute it, than to tell them that worldly interest, and
wicked means will serve Men's turns but a little while.

II. Those that will say that we are not all of a mind; one thinks more
unlawful, and another less; and therefore we are not to be united or agreed
with, nor can it be known what will satisfy us all. If the Churches Peace and
Concord depend upon such Heads, and Hearts, and Principles, as this Objection
does imply, no wonder if it have no Peace or Concord: We are united and agreed
with those that differ from us in more than Circumstances: We will hold Concord
with all in Faith and Love and Communion (if they will admit us without our
sinning) upon the Terms set down by the Holy Ghost and the Apostles, Act. 15.
28. who would have nothing but necessary things imposed, (or such things whosoever
Determination one way or other is necessary, though compared each with other
they are indifferent;) at least not made necessary to Life, Liberty, Ministry,
or Communion; we have long learnt from Romans 14. 15. and from that Spirit which
indicted it, not to judge nor to despise each other for things of tolerable
difference, but to receive each other as Christ receives us. One Man is not a
Church, nor a Kingdom: And if no Men must be of the same Church or Kingdom that
have any difference, yea as great as the Objection can reasonably suppose in
the Mere Non-conformists, we are sure that no two Men in the World can be of
the same Church or Kingdom, except you will Compose it of such as hold nothing
at all unlawful, and consequently nothing morally good, which is no Church. We
profess that we love them as our selves, and shall not be guilty of
imprisoning, undoing, silencing, or excommunicating them, who wear not the same
Clothes, and use not the same Gesture in singing, hearing, or reading, as we
do; who differ from us in the sense of many a Text of Scripture, who take many
things for duty or sin which we do not; who will not be tied to use no Public
Prayers to God, but what we or others write them down; so they hold one Body,
one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, and will endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the Bond of Peace,
Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. We are not for cutting off every Member that is of
different size or shape, 1 Cor. 12. God keep us from their mind and guilt and
judgment, who will hold Love and Communion with none but those, in things
unnecessary, of their own opinion or way, or that would ruin and persecute all
the rest.

III. And some Non-conformists that are more than so, or differ from us, will
say that we should not have declared thus our judgment, lest by differing from
them we seem divided, and expose them to the greater Odium and Persecution,
because they cannot go so far as we.

But, 1. We protest against the persecution of sober godly Christians, on the
account of such differences; and are we then guilty of what we deprecate? 2.
Did not Mr. Eaton, when he wrote that the Oath of Allegiance and the Covenant
bind not, know that most of us were against his judgment? To say nothing of
many more that wrote against Episcopacy, Presbytery, Infant Baptism, Parish
Churches, etc* who yet forbore not on any such accounts: Did not Mr. Nigh and
Mr. Tombs, when they wrote very well for the Oath of Supremacy, know that in
Scotland many refuse it as unlawful? And did they forbear for fear of bringing
Persecution on Dissenters? Did not Mr. Nigh write to prove it lawful to hear the
Parish Ministers? and Mr. Tombs write to prove it lawful both to hear and to
communicate with them? And did the fear of bringing Persecution on others
hinder them? 3. Has not this Reason (to keep others from Persecution)
prevailed with us far enough and long enough? 4. Would they have us either by
speech or silence draw men to believe, that we are of all men's minds whom we
would save from Persecution? Must we tempt men to think that we are Seekers,
Quakers, Separatists, Anabaptists, lest we expose them to Persecution? Is not
this such Carnal Policy, as if not repented of, will perish with the Masters of
it? Even to do evil, and to tempt others to evil, and to draw all our Hearers
into sin by our Example, by making them think that we hold that to be good or
evil which we do not? and all this on pretense of good? yea to cherish the sin
of many, lest some should suffer? 5. The thing is unreasonable, and the
pretense is apparently vain: For it is known by our Superiors that we differ
already; and yet they who make this Objection have suffered never the more, but
live a quieter life than we have done. 6. If the Objection implies, as it
seems to do, that we are of their mind that will bear, or live in Communion,
with none but those that differ not from them, as far as the Objectors now
suppose, we disclaim their dividing Principles, and are not of their mind: If
they are not for loving Christians as Christians, and using them accordingly,
let them not expect that we should not seem to differ from them.

And that we do not this that we do without reason, we must thus show:

I. It is sinful when we can help it, to let Clergymen uncontradicted deceive
Men's Souls, and draw and keep both high and low, even many Thousands in sin, by
persuading them that we are so schismatical and hateful a People, that our
sufferings are no persecutions, because we divide the Church for things
indifferent, and stick at nothing but Liturgy, or Forms of Prayer, and
Ceremonies, and that we hold Rebellious and Seditious Principles; or at best,
have such humors, foolish scruples and singularities, as render us fitter for
the Common Goal, than the Church. Shall our silence contribute still to their
deceit, and to the quieting of Men's Consciences in all that is done against us,
as if it were good service to God and the King? Shall we have no pity on Men's
guilty Souls?

II. On the other side, we have long by sad experience seen, that the
misunderstanding of the Case, and perhaps partly of some of our judgments, has
led many of the People who are against Conformity, to overrun moderation, and
the truth, and to run into unsound opinions and singularities, and to lay
heavier charges on the Liturgy, and the Parish Churches, than there is cause
for: And having once overrun us, they expect that we should follow them, and
be ruled by them; and if we do not, are ready to censure us as guilty of sinful
Compliance and Conformity: It greatly concerns us therefore, to keep some
from such mistakes, to rectify others, to vindicate our selves, and clear our
Consciences, that we tell Men what our Nonconformity is not, if we may not
tell them what it is?

I. Our Nonconformity is not in holding that the Scriptures are a particular
Rule or Determination of all the Circumstances of Church Government and
Worship, (as Time, Place, Utensils, Words, Methods, Metres, Tunes, Division of
the Text into Chapters and Verses, Translations, helps by Notes, Written or
Printed, Gestures, Habits, etc.) But Nature and Scripture give us sufficient
General Rules or Laws for all such; as that they be done in Unity, Charity, to
edification, decently and orderly, etc. which must be observed.

II. We hold, that when (...) un(...)etermined Circumstances are lawfully
determined (...) Authority, yea were it but by the Consent and (...) of the
Churches of Christ, or the present Conduct of their Pastors, the Assembly
should yield Conformable Obedience, and avoid unnecessary Singularities.

III. We hold, that if those, to whom such Determinations belong, should
mistake, and not do it in the best and profitablest manner; yet ordinarily it
is the Peoples duty to obey and hold Communion with that Church, so be it that
nothing sinful (...)e commanded them to do, and the error of the Determination
be not such as overthrows the Worship or End it self: Of which we have
elsewhere fullier opened our sense (In our judgment of things Indifferent.)

IV. We are against no Bishops or Church Government of Gods appointment: We all
are for an Episcopus Gregis; and where there are many Chapels and Curates in a
Parish, we are far from persuading them to deny such submission to the chief
Pastor, as the Law requires, and as God himself allows: Were Ignatius his
Episcopacy among us, who tells us this, as the Note of the Churches Unity, that
[to every Church there is one Altar, and one Bishop with his fellow Presbyters
and Deacons] we should be far from persuading any to separate from it: Yea were
it Cyprian's Measure of Episcopacy. Yea, there are some among us who have long
professed themselves uncertain, whether such a large Episcopacy, as is but the
same with the ordinary part of the Church Power of the Apostles and
Evangelists, be not jure divino, such as should be still continued; because, 1.
When Christ has once settled a Form or Order of Government, a change must not
be charged on him rashly, and without proof; especially as made so suddenly: If
the Affirmer prove the settlement, the Denyer must prove the Change and
Revocation. 2. Because Christ promised to be with them to the end of the World,
Mat. 28. 20. when he appointed them this universal, or indefinite Work. 3.
Because many others, as well as Apostles, had larger Circuits than particular
Churches for their Work, (as Silas, Silvanus, Apollo, Titus, and many more:)
And at their Reformation the Scots Visitors seemed such. That Men of
extraordinary worth and gravity may Plant many Churches, and take the care of
many, directing, exhorting, and admonishing the Pastors, or particular Bishops,
not depriving those Pastors and Churches of the Power and Privileges granted
them in Scripture, some of us do not deny. Government by the Word is an
ordinary continuing Ordinance of God: But the Apostles extraordinary Work and
Office (to be Eyewitnesses and Embassad^^rs immediately sent, and endued with
the extraordinary Measures of the Spirit) these we believe they have no
Successors in, because they were but for a time.

And those of us that cannot grant so much, as is aforesaid, and all of us as
to an Episcopacy which we think contrary to God's Word, can yet submit to much
which we dare not approve of; and as we take our selves bound to obey all by
what Names or Titles soever distinguished or dignified, who, circa sacra, as
Officers of the King, do exercise any part of that Power of the Sword, by his
Commission, which we acknowledge in the Oath of Supremacy; so if any usurp more
Power of the Keys than Christ allows them, we are not thereby disobliged from
living peaceably in our places, nor allowed to raise Sedition, or use any
unlawful means to re(...)orm it; though we cannot make a Vow and Covenant never
to do any lawful thing, to alter and amend it.

Much less is it true which M(...)n of hard Faces have sometimes said, that we
are against Bishops, because we cannot be Bishops our selves. And they that
tell Men that every Presbyter would be a Parish Pope, do sure think they speak
to Men so silly as to be mocked by an undiscerned Contradiction: A Pope is the
Universal Monarch of the Christian World, (or all:) Is a Parish all the World?
A Diocesan is the Sole Bishop with us of a Multitude of Churches. Is a Parish a
Multitude of such Churches? If a Man be against one Schoolmaster only over a
thousand Schools, shall he be reproached because he is willing to teach one? Is
a King in each Kingdom as unreasonable a thing as a Papal Monarch, or a King of
Kings, and of all the Earth? If it be to the gain of Souls that we are deprived
of this Parochial Episcopacy, we can easily bear it; professing that we hold it
far easier to be Governed, than to Govern.

V. We judge not all Officers, circa sacra, unlawful which are made by Man: As
some Circumstances are not particularly determined in Scripture, but left to
Men, so are many of the Officers that must execute them. If the King appoint
Church-Magistrates to keep Peace and Order, to call Synods, and take such
cognizance of Causes as belongs to him, or do any part of his work, as is before
said, we will obey them: And so of Churchwardens, Door-keepers, Sextons, and
such others, as some Churches of old made use of, so be it they usurp not any
part of the Office which Christ has appropriated to the Pastors of the
Churches.

VI. We are not for Laymens claim or exercise of the Power of the Keys,
whether they be Lay-Chancellors, or Magistrates or Lay-Officers, or People: But
we hold that the Keys of Christ's Church, that is, the Power of receiving in by
Baptism, and of Guiding the People by holy Doctrine, and in holy Worship, and
of Excommunicating and Absolving, are by Christ committed to the Pastors of the
Churches. Though there is also an admonishing Power in Magistrates, and diverse
sorts of Penalties, for sins against God, which they may inflict. And the
voluntary execution of the Pastors judgment, by holding or not holding
Communion with others, is the Peoples part; in which, as reasonable, they have
a discerning judgment.

VII. As to the case of Elders, we all hold that none should be proper Church
Governors, by the said Keys, which are merely Laymen, and not Church
Officers: And many of us hold that neither Christ nor his Apostles over
appointed any Elders to Rule the Church, by the power of the Keys (distinct
from the Magistrates Government by the Sword,) but only ordained Ministers of
Christ, who have also authority to preach and administer both the Sacraments.
However, we know that when many of these belonged to one Congregation, one that
was the Chief Speaker (usually the Bishop) was w(...)nt to preach, and the rest
to be his Assistants, especially in private Care of Souls; and those of us that
think otherwise, that Christ or his Apostles made such a Church Office as
Ruling Elders not-ordained, or that have no power of preaching or administering
Sacraments, do not hold such essential to the Church, nor refuse to live in
love and peace and Communion with the Churches that have no such Elders. And we
all think that so small a difference should make no greater a breach among us.

VIII. We are against the Excommunicating of Kings, and of other Magistrates,
on whose Honor the well-governing and peace of the Kingdom does depend, (and
are sorry to find some of our sharp Accusers of another mind:) Our Reasons are,
because the dishonouring of them is forbidden in the Fifth Commandment: And
Positive Institutions, caeteris paribus, must give place to Moral Natural Laws:
Rituals and matters of Order are no Duties, when they make against those Grand
Duties which are their Ends, or those that are of fundamental or greater use.
And this Christ has often taught us, by sending the contrary minded to learn
what this means [I will have mercy and not sacrifice,] and bidding the
unreconciled leave their Gift at the Altar, etc. The End is to be preferred
before the Means, which indeed are no Means when against the End. And
Church Order is not to be pretended for disordering and confounding Kingdoms,
or against the public good and safety. We judge that Bishop Bilson, Bishop
Andrews, and such others, have truly heretofore determined, that some wicked
impenitent Princes may be denied the Sacrament, but not defamed or dishonored
by a Sentence of Excommunication: Much less by any Foreign Usurper, or any
Minister at home, that the Prince himself does not by consent make the Guide of
his Soul; for no other but he that is called to give him the Sacrament if
qualified, is the denyer of it if he be unqualified; unless as he is to do what
he does, by the advice and consent of Fellow Pastors.

But the very use of Excommunication is to punish and reform men by
dishonouring and shaming them; therefore it is not to be used, where we owe
such honor by the Fifth Commandment, to our Prince.

Obj. 1. We are bid also to honor Father and Mother; 2. Yea to honor all men.

Answ. 1. We dare not justify any Pastors public disgraceful excommunicating
his own Father or Mother, unless where a public obligation for public good
requires it. 2. But to both instances, we say that a greater end and more
public good is to be preferred to a le(...)s: And when a private man's honor
is forfeited, we cannot give him that which he has cast away, and God will
penally take away till he repent. But when the public order and welfare (which
is above all personal good) obliges us to honor Magistrates, a
subordinat(...) Law will not suspend it. Public Excommunication is an Act of
Government, to be exercised on the Governed for the Ends of Government. But for
a Prelate or Priest, or any other, to do this on his Governors (though of
another rank) crosses the Ends of Government: Nor are Subjects so to be
tempted to contemn their Rulers, lest they come to think, as Bellarmine and
such Papists, that Infidels are not to Govern Christians, nor to be tolerated
in their Government; or as their very Religion teaches them, Council. Later. c.
3. sub Innoc. 3. that when Princes are excommunicated, they may be deposed by
the Pope; or as their learnedest Doctors say, that they are no Kings, and to
kill them is not to kill the King: See the Testimonies of this cited at large,
and expressly, by H. Fowlis in his Book of Popish Treasons.

If ever any Protestants Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independents, were or be
of another mind, (for the Excommunicating of Kings or Chief Rulers) that is
nothing to us, who shall neither live nor dye by the Faith or Opinion of
others: But we should so much the rather here disown it.

IX. It is none of our judgment, that when men are excommunicated (by Pope,
Prelates, Presbyters, or People, who are the four Pretenders to that Power) the
Magistrate must be their Lictor or Executioner, or must further punish men by
the Sword, merely, eo nomine, because they are excommunicate, or because they
reconcile not themselves to the Church, by penitence and obedience; or because
the Pope, or Prelate, or Priests, deliver up the excommunicate to him to be
punished, or threaten him if he will not do it. The Civil Ruler may punish the
same men for the same Crimes, but upon their own exploration and judgment of
the Cause, and not as mere Hangmen that must needs execute the judgment of
other Judges. Their own Conscience must be satisfied, and they must know what
they do, and why; else to how many base and bloody offices the factious worldly
Clergy may oblige them, the Papal Kingdom has long given men too sad a proof.

And we must profess, that we are fully persuaded, that we have good Reason to
conclude, that so near a Prosecution by the Civil Power, as is the imprisoning
and undoing of Persons Excommunicate, merely because they stand Excommunicate,
and are not absolved as Penitents, has not a few nor small incommodities
Ecclesiastical. 1. So great a Dominion in the Clergy has done much to corrupt
the Sacred Office, and make men (naturally proud) unmeet for the humble
Services of the Gospel. 2. And it breeds in the People a distaste and hatred
of the Clergy, as if they were the grievous Wolves that devour the Flock in
Sheeps Clothing, and bear not Grapes and Figs, but wear Thorns and Thistles to
p(...)ick and hurt them; and causes their Exhortations to be the more
unsuccessful. 3. It seems to dishonor the Discipline instituted by Christ,
as if the Keys of his Church ^^re of no more signification, than the Crown of
Thorn^ (...) Reed with which he was derided, and could do nothing without the
Princes Sword. 4. It contradicts the experience of above 300 years, when
Church Discipline was exercised more effectually than it is now, and that not
only without the Sword of the Magistrate, but also against his will and
opposition: Yea, it was many a hundred years more, after Emperors were
Christian, before the Keys were ever thus seconded by the Sword; and had not
the Donatists, by inhumane assaulting the Orthodox, provoked the Churches and
Magistrates, it had been like to have been long before the Sword had been drawn
against Heretics at all. 5. And that which much moves us is, that it greatly
frustrateth the use of the Keys* or Church Discipline, by obscuring the use and
efficacy of them: For who can tell whether they do any thing or nothing to that
man's seeming Repentance, who must lie in Goal and be undone, unless he will say
that he repeneth? Though the Church must take up with outward Professions, as
not knowing the heart, yet must they be voluntary and credible Professions. 6.
And thus how unavoidably must the Church be corrupted, when its Communicants
are such as choose rather to be in the Church than in the Goal, and all those
are thought worthy of its Privileges, who had rather say [we repent] than be
made Beggars: Whenas in the ancient Churches none had its Communion that did
not desire it, and beg for it, though it cost them dear in the world. 7. And
thus Christ's great and precious Gifts seem exposed to contempt, while they are
forced upon the Refusers by ways of violence. If the Church be made a Prison,
and men be driven into it and locked up, the Place will hardly prove them
Christians. 8. And we fear it will misrepresent Christ's Laws and Covenant-terms
to the world, while Christ says, that none can be his Disciples that do not
(by consent and resolution) take up the Cross, and forsake all, and follow him,
in hope of a reward in Heaven, (Luke 14. 26. 29, 30. 33, 34.) And this course
seems to tell men, that if they had but rather be in the Church, than among
Rogues and Beggars in the Goal, they shall have Christ, pardon, and life
eternal, given and sealed up to them particularly in the holy Sacrament. As if
Christ were the Cross-maker, and the Cross to be born by his Enemies only, and
not Christ but sin were served by forsaking temporal felicity. 9. And we fear
lest it tend to deceive men's Souls, by giving them all the sealed Grant of
forgiveness and salvation, who can but rather endure to take the Sacrament, and
say I repent, than be undone.

We doubt not but there is a time for just punishment of sinners: But we read
not, that Christ sent men to preach Repentance by any such motives, nor to
offer his Blood and Mercy on terms so low, nor to any but desirous Volunteers:
And with what confidence or comfort can a Minister deliver the Sacrament to
such?

All which considered, we are so far from desiring to subdue Kings and Rulers
to be the Executioners of the Clergy, and the Servants of their worldly
Interest, Pride, or Passions, that we heartily wish that Church Discipline
might be left to operate alone, and valeat quantum val(...)re potest, and that
Church Privileges might be given to none but desirers, and voluntary
accepters, and none might be crammed or drencht with the Body and Blood of
Christ, but all earnestly invited, and by loving importunity compelled to come
in: And that Magistrates may judge and punish Vice, in their proper court, and
proper way.

X. We hold it not unlawful to take Oaths, and make Covenants, Subscriptions,
or Declarations of things lawful, when Authority commands us; yea, we hold
Oaths of Fidelity to the Sovereign to be needful; and are the loather to swear
Allegiance to any inferior Officers, or to swear never to endeavor any
alteration of them, lest we seem to make them equally necessary and fixed as
the King; and to give them any of his Prerogatives, when they are his Officers,
whom he has power to alter.

XI. We readily subscribe the Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments contained in the
39 Articles, and differ not therein from the Church of England, that we know
of. Though our Religion is only (objectively) Gods Word, (as to the Essentials,
the Sacramental Covenant, expounded in the Creed, the Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, and integrally the sacred Scriptures,) and therefore if there be any
fault in the 39 Articles, it is no fault in our Religion, (which is confessed
to be all true by Papists themselves;) yet as our Writings, and Sermons, and
Speeches, are the expressions of our subjective Religion, so the Confessions of
Churches are eminently such; being useful to satisfy other Churches of our
sincerity, and to regulate or limit the Teachers, that by weakness or error
are apt to deliver their mistakes, or to oppose the Truth. And though there be
some expressions in the Articles, the Liturgy, yea in the Creed called
Athanasius's, which we think not accurate, but liable to an ill interpretation,
yet when our Consciences tell us that it was truth which was intended, and
words are not natural, immutable, but arbitrary signs of the Speakers mind, we
are far from affecting to be peevishly or unreasonably quarrelsome or
scrupulous, but are willing to overlook infirmity and unfitness of expression,
when we see that we are not to own Untruths.

XII. We much approve of the Method of the Church Catechism, as it first
opens the Essentials of Christianity in the Baptismal Covenant, and then the
Exposition of it in the Creed, Decalogue, and Lords Prayer, and then the use of
the confirming Sacrament the Lords Supper: Though we are persuaded, that it
needs more explication and some correction.

XIII. We are taught by Christ and his Apostles using of the Septuagint, that
it is lawful, when the Peoples usage and acquaintance with it does render it
most edifying to them, to use a defective faulty Translation of Gods own Word,
and to call this Gods Word, as long as it sufficently expresses the Doctrine,
which is the matter and main sense. And that we may hold Communion with
Churches that publicly and privately use such Translations, and that have many
other faults in their Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; though we cannot
justify the least of them, by our professed Assent and Consent, nor make a
Covenant that we will never endeavor to alter or amend them. We are apt enough
to let sin alone, and not to amend any thing amiss in our selves and others, so
far as sin remains in us (it being a self-de(...)ending evil,) and therefore
are unwilling to add to our badness, nor do we need a Law to bind us never to
repent or amend, or never to help others in such a case to do it.

XIV. We have in a peculiar Explication of our judgment, not only disclaimed,
but sufficiently depressed, that unruly Opinion falsely charged on us by some,
viz. [That Things Lawful or Indifferent become Unlawful when commanded by
Lawful Authority.] Though we hold it unlawful to encourage and strengthen
Traitors and Usurpers against Christ or the King, by voluntary Swearing or
performing such Obedience to them, even in licitis and honestis, as seems to
own their Usurpation.

XV. How far we think the Magistrates Laws bind us to things Scandalous, or
Evil and Hurtful by Accident, yea by the Weakness of others, we are prepared to
open in a distinct Profession by it self.

XVI. We are far from condemning all Forms of Prayer, and Public Liturgies, as
unlawful, (of which we have His Majesty's Testimony, in his Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs;) much more are we far from condemning all the ancient
and present Churches of Christ that have used such, or yet use them, throughout
the Christian world: And yet farther are we from separating from them on that
account, (for using Liturgies,) and from encouraging such a Separation. Yea we
commonly use a stinted Liturgy our selves, at least the Psalms read and sung;
and we hold it lawful to use such as are invented by men, that are no Prophets;
seeing we are commanded to use Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, (which
confineth us not only to Scripture words;) and all men have not the skill to
make Hymns ex tempore; much less would all the Assembly, ex tempore, break
forth into the same words: Therefore those that are used by all, must be
invented by some: And Ministers with us do ordinarily impose their own invented
words on all the Congregation, who must follow them; as our Metres and Tunes of
Psalms are imposed.

XVII. We think it not unlawful to use as much of the English Liturgy, as we
consented to use, when by his Majesty's Commission some of us treated about the
reformation, or alteration of it; viz. in such Assemblies where the Peoples
incapacity makes not such use of it more hurtful than helpful to their
edification, and the comely concordant worshipping of God: Much less do we think
it unlawful for our selves, or the People, in this case to join in the reverent
and serious use of it with others. We find that even the old Non-conformists
(such as Cartwright, Hildersham, Knewstube, Dr. Jo. Reignolds, Bradshaw, Paget,
Ball, etc.) petitioned for a Reformation, but not an Abolition of it, and wrote
and preached against separating from it, or for it, from the Churches that used
it; and many of them not only used much or most of it themselves, but also
persuaded to the use of it, and answered largely the Separatists Arguments
against such use. And we join with Mr. Ball, and other of them, in thanking God
that England has a more reformed Liturgy, than most of the Churches in the
World; and we would not seem to use it when we do not, but do it (as aforesaid)
in the serious devotion and fervor of our Souls: Nor would we peevishly make
any thing in it worse than it is, but would put the best construction on each
part of it, that true Reason will justify or allow.

XVIII. We are far from judging the Parish Ministers to be no true Ministers of
Christ, or the Parish Churches no true Churches, or judging it unlawful to hold
Communion with them: But if there be any called Ministers or Priests, of these
following sorts, we take them for no true Ministers of Christ, ziz. 1. If by
insufficiency they are incapable of Teaching the necessary parts of
Christianity, and Guiding the Church accordingly in the Public Worship of God.
2. If they are Heretics, denying any of these essential parts. 3. If they are
malignant Opposers of the practice of them: And in a word, If they are such,
through incapacity, as are like to do more harm than good.

XIX. In several Customs (freely, not by constraint,) used in many ancient
Churches, and in several practices of several Churches of these Times, we find
that which we would not by Oaths, or Subscriptions, or Covenants, approve, but
with they were reformed, and that they had never been used; when yet we do not
for such things dishonor and reproach such Churches, nor inveigh against them
in our preaching to diminish their due esteem; much less disclaim them as no
Churches of Christ; but love, and honor them; and live peaceably under many
faults which we cannot reform in the places where we live: So be it no sin be
put upon our selves, we can hold Communion with those that have diverse sins, or
faults, in their Ministrations; not as with their sin, but with their Church in
worship, notwithstanding the sin, so it corrupt not God's worship so far as
that he himself rejects it: For no Man is sinless in his best performance.

XX. Though the Pastors hold any tolerable errors personally, and though such
are usually uttered in their Ministration, and though they be inserted in their
Liturgies, so that we may expect to hear them; yea, uttered as in that Churches
name; we hold not all this sufficient cause to warrant our separation from that
Church: For all Churches consist of Men, and all Men are faulty and imperfect;
and such as the Men are, such we may expect their works should be,
notwithstanding the Divine assistance: And to separare from all faulty Churches
and Worship, is to separate from all the World; and allow all the World to
separate from us.

XXI. If (...) true Church deny us Communion, unless we will commit some sin,
or omit some necessary duty; though we cannot be locally present in such cases,
nor approve what they so do, yet we shall not therefore renounce them as no
Churches; but lamenting their sin, and their denying us their Communion on just
Terms, we shall continue the Union and Communion of Faith and Love, and be
present in spirit, though corporally absent, desiring a part in their Prayers,
and owning all that God disowneth not.

XXII. We hold that no Christians must be disjoined, or separated in any of the
seven Points of Union required by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. One
Body, (the Catholic Church headed by Christ:) 2. One Spirit, (the Holy Ghost:)
3. One Hope of our Calling, (Remission, Adoption, and the Heavenly Glory:) 4.
One Lord (Jesus Christ:) 5. One Faith, (the Essentials of Christianity
believed:) 6. One Baptism, (or Baptismal Covenant with God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost:) 7. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in us all; of whom, and to whom, and through whom are all things.

XXIII. Though we are not satisfied of the lawfulness of using the transient
Image of the Cross, as a Dedicating Sign and Symbol of Christianity, so much
Sacramental (much less to refuse from Baptism and Christendom all Christians
Infants, unless they will have them so crossed, no more than if a Crucifix were
so imposed and used:) yet do we not condemn all use of either Cross, or
Crucifix: Nor do we presume censoriously to reproach and dishonor the ancient
Christians, who, living among Pagans that derided Christ Crucified, did show
them, by often using this sign, that they were not ashamed of the Cross: And
though we find that they used more Rites and significant devised Signs and
Ceremonies, than we think they should have done, yet we judge it our Duty to
love and honor their Memorial: Nor do we take all Rites to be sinful that are
significant.

XXIV. We hold not all the use of Images, even the Images of holy Persons, to
be unlawful: Historical and memorative use we commonly allow, as the English
Geneva Bible shows by many Pictures: We condemn not them that have Scripture
Persons and History Painted on their Walls, or on the very Bricks that adorn
their Chimnies; nor that use a Skelleton or Deaths-head; or that by these are
minded of Mortality or the Life to come, and so make a holy use of them, (as
good Men should do of all lawful things; which therefore are pure and
sanctified to them.)

XXV. We hold not a Gown, or other mere distinctive Garment for Ministers, to
be unlawful, in which, says the Canon, no holiness is placed; any more than to
Judges, Lawyers, or Philosophers. And some of us hold a Surplice rather to be
used, than the Ministry forsaken: And those that think otherwise, think not the
matter of so much weight, as to alienate them from Love or Communion with those
that use it: For we pretend not to so much perfection, as to be all just of a
mind and measure of Knowledge in all things, of no greater importance than
this: Nor would we silence faithful Ministers for a Surplice.

XXVI. Though we greatly dislike the common use of Godfathers, as they
undertake that, as Sole-promisers for the Child, which they never signify
credibly the least purpose to perform, and the Parents are excluded from
entering their own Children into Covenant with God, and must not speak one
covenanting or promising word; no, nor be urged to be present, etc. Yet we
refuse not the use of such Sureties or Sponsors in Baptism, as are but Seconds
to the Parents and only attest the Parents credibility, and undertake to take
care of the Childrens Education, in case the Parents either apostatize or dye;
nor yet such as are Adopters of the Children, and take them to them as their
own, and so have the right of disposing of them, and covenanting in their names
and stead. Though yet we conform not to the denying of Christendom to the
Children of all godly Parents, that either cannot get such Godfathers, or will
not, but offer to enter their own Children into that Covenant.

XXVII. Many of us hold it lawful to communicate Kneeling, in the reception of
the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ: And those of us that think so, and
those of us that think otherwise, take it not for such a matter as should
hinder Christian Love, Concord, Unity, and Peace; or allow Men to despise,
condemn, or excommunicate one another: But all detest that cruelty that dare
cast out the worthy Members of Christ and his Church from Communion, for their
difference in that gesture.

XXVIII. We all hold that God must be orderly and decently worshipped with the
Body, as well as spiritually with the Mind: And that reverent gestures and
behavior are fit, not only to express mental reverence to God, but also to
excite it in our selves and others. And that such slovenly, rude, and undecent
behavior, as seems to signify profaneness and contempt, or to tempt others
thereto, is no small sin, whatever men intend by it.

XXIX. We all hold that Preaching, Prayer, or Sacraments, should not be made
ridiculous or contemptible, by the Ministers incongruous, light, or otherwise
unmeet and uncomly words; nor by tautologies, and such an unmeet style as
tends to disaffect the Hearers: (Though that Curiosity, which consists in
pedantick, light, and frothy Speech, unsuitable to the Hearers edification, we
dislike.) And O that God would raise up enough such for his Service, in the
Church and World, as are able to express true wisdom, holiness, and zeal, in
words beseeming the most Holy Majesty, and the holy Things of which they speak.
But yet we judge that various Auditories should have various Styles, though
none but clear, and spiritual, and serious: As a laboring poor man will choose
a great piece of Brown Bread, before a little piece of Manchet, when idle
tender Persons will choose otherwise.

XXX. We are so far from holding it unlawful to use the Creed, and
Commandments, and Lords Prayer, as some accuse us, that we take them to be the
Summaries of the Christian Religion, as to matter of Belief, Desire, and
Worship; which the Church should use and profess accordingly, and should never
be forgtoten.

XXXI. We are so far from being against Catechizing, as some have accused us,
as that we take it to be a most needful thing, and no small part of that work
which both Ministers and Parents should perform.

XXXII. We are far from opposing that sort of Confirmation, which consists in
the solemn transition of Persons out of the state of Infant Communion into that
of the Adult, by their solemn intelligent owning that Covenant with God, which
they entered into by others in their Infancy. The Reasons of which more than one
of us have long ago publicly given to the World, (Mr. Hanmer, Mr. Baxter.) And
the want of which we conceive is a great cause of the pollution of the Church,
and of the increase of Anabaptists, who are scandalized at the omission of it,
and the turning it into a Ceremony or Formality.

XXXIII. We hold it a Duty for all Ministers in their Administrations of
Baptism, the Lords Supper, Absolution, and in their Speeches of the dead at
Burials, to go as far in charitable hopeful expressions, as Reason will allow;
and to speak and judge of men according to their own intelligent Professions,
not rendered incredible by proved contrary Expressions, or notorious contrariety
of Practice; as being no searchers of men's hearts our selves: And where
Discipline is truly exercised, such words are meet, as otherwise are not
tolerable. So that if we conform not to the Liturgy in our Administration of
any of these Ordinances of Christ, and if we dare not pronounce of all the open
Atheists, Infidels, Heretics, Schismatics, Rebels, Perjured, Murderers,
Thieves, Adulterers, Drunkards, etc. who made not away themselves, and were not
unbaptized or excommunicate, that [God of his great mercy has taken to himself
the Souls of these dear Brethren,] nor give thanks for [delivering them out of
the miseries of this sinful World,] nor pray to rest in Christ [^is our hope is
this our Brother does,] etc. it is not because we deny any of this before
granted, but because we dare not renounce the Gospel, that says, [He that
believes not shall be damned,] and [without holiness none shall see God,] and
[Except ye repent ye shall all perish;] and because we are loath to preach to
men all our lives, that which we shall contradict at men's burial, and tempt the
ungodly to presumption and damnation.

XXXIV. Many of us hold it lawful to keep Anniversary Days of Thanksgiving, in
commemoration of the great Mercies of God to his Church, by the Holy Doctrine,
Labor, Miracles, Lives, and Sufferings of the Apostles, and most famous
promoters of the Faith; so that Superstition and prohibited Creature-worship be
sufficiently avoided. And those of us that scruple such Days of man's
Institution, yet take not this for any other than a tolerable difference among
us.

XXXV. We are not against such sort of reading the sound parts of the
Apocrypha, as we may do by other good Books, sufficiently distinguished from
other Scriptures, and used in due time and place; though we conform not so far
as to declare our Assent and Consent to the use of the Calendar, Prescript, or
Directory, which requires them to be read in the Mornings, from September. 27.
and 28. till November. 24. even Bell and the Dragon, Susanna, Tobit, when as the
Vulgar understand not the word Apocrypha sufficiently, to distinguish them from
the sacred Scriptures, when they are equally called the Lessons, and read in
the same order. And we are confirmed in this part of our Nonconformity by the
Articles of Religion, which discard the Apocrypha, and by the Learned Treatise
of the late Bishop Cousins, who has fully proved that the ancient Churches
received not those Books into the Canon, and by many Doctors of the Church of
England that charge them with Untruths: Some of us have seen the Writing (as on
good reason is supposed) of a present Learned worthy Bishop, who shows that
the words of the Angel in Tobit are a Lie, who said that [he was the Son of
Ananie of the Tribe of Naphtali:] And that so is his saying, [that the smoke of
a Fishes heart will drive away all Devils, that they shall never return; when
Christ tells us of some that go not out but by Prayer and Fasting.]

XXXVI. We are far from designing any abasement of the Clergy, nor do we deny,
or draw others to deny, any due Reverence and Obedience to them. And though we
know that the bare Title and Office will never preserve sufficient respect, for
the honor of the Clergy, and the success of their work, without competent
qualifications and labors of the persons; yet would we rather hide than open
or reproach the faults of such as are tolerable in that sacred Office, and
would do our best for their work sake, to promote the esteem even of those that
differ from us, and of some that persecute us. We know that the People are
exhorted, to know those that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord,
and to esteem them highly in love, for their work sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. And
to obey them that have the Rule (or Guidance) of them, and to submit
themselves, Heb. 13. 17. 24. And that the Elders that Rule well are worthy of
double honor, especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.
17. We that take it for our Duty to honor all men, and submit our selves to
one another, would not deny any due honor to any of the Clergy that have any
preeminence, either in age, grace, gifts, or by the Magistrates appointment, as
his Officers (as aforesaid,) or any way given them by Christ: We take it not
for a Privilege to be from under Government.

XXXVII. Our Nonconformity consists not in denying a National, Provincial,
or other Church Form of man's invention and institution: On these Suppositions:

1. So it be presupposed that there is somewhat of Divine Institution
predetermined by Christ and his Spirit in the Apostles, (that is, 1. That there
be such Doctrine, worship, and Discipline as he has commanded: 2. That there
be such Pastors to exercise them, whose Office he has described: 3. That there
be such stated Congregations or Societies in which they shall be used, even
Neighbor Christians associated for Personal Communion therein. 4. That all
these Churches enjoy the Privileges granted them by Christ, and live in love,
peace, and concord, and hold such just correspondence as is necessary thereto,
and to the Common End and Good: All this is of Divine appointment.)

2. So that these Divine Institutions be not violated by Humane, or by the
power of man.

3. So that Humane Churches be not made equal and coordinate to the Divine,
much less superior, and superordinate; as if they were to Christ's instituted
Churches, what a Kingdom is to a City, or a Regiment to a Troop, and Christ's
Churches were but similar parts of the Humane Churches, that must rule them.
But as the King is Episcopus exterior, or the Governor of the Churches so far
as the Sword is to be used; so, circa sacra, we have before said, that he may
make his own Officers, and consequently Provinces for them, and Orders of their
exercise: And the Churches in his Dominions may be so called one National
Church, as he is the exterior Civil Governor of them all by the Sword, which
indeed is but to be a Religious or Christian Kingdom; as also, ab accidente, as
these many Churches are under one Christian (yea were he an Infidel) King; and
as hereby they have the advantage of fraternal association and correspondency
for concord. But proper Denominations are from the Essential Form.

XXXVIII. It is no part of our Nonconformity to be against the due Use or
Authority of Councils, or Synods of the Clergy. We hold, that when one is cast
out of one Church for a cause belonging to the Cognizance of many, many may
have occasion to take Cognizance of it: And the edification of each other, the
satisfactory Debate of Difficulties, the preservation of mutual Love, Peace,
and Concord, may make Synods to be useful. But yet we hold that the major Vote
of Bishops in a Council are not thereby the proper Governors of the minor
dissenting part, nor of the absent Bishops; but that Councils are for Counsel
and Concord, and not for direct Regiment of each other, (though together and
asunder the Pastors are all Governors of the Flock.) And some of us have long
ago publicly proved, that Councils were called General at first, but with
respect to the Dominions or Empire of one Prince, and not as if they were
Universal as to all the Christian World; and that absolutely Universal Councils
never were, or ought, or can, or ever will be called; and that to pretend that
a Papal or Imperial General Council is the Universal Lawgiver of the World,
and that they have a promise of Infallibility in what ever they determine, and
that we receive our Faith in Christ upon their Infallibility given by him, (and
so we must know that Christ makes them Infallible before we can believe that
he is Christ.) These and such other nonsense cheats which some are now
agitating, are fit to delude none but the grossly ignorant, that are prepared
for deceit.

XXXIX. Yet we deny not, but that God having first bound us to Unity and
Concord as far as we can ^ttain, (with loving forbearance in the rest,) when a
lawful Synod or Council has determined of a way of Concord, on lawful Terms,
in matters under their Power, there is an Obligation on all the particular
Members, to forbear breaking that Union, and violating those lawful Terms of
Concord: For where there is not a Governing Law, there may be an Obliging
Contract, or Consent.

And whereas even the Papists now usually teach that even a Councils Decrees
bind not the Churches, at least those that had no Delegates, till by actual
reception they consent, be it known to the World, that on these Terms the
Non-conformists in London seem to have some excuse, if it had been only
Indifferent things that the late Convocation had imposed on them: For when the
Clergy met to choose Clarks for the Convocation for London, (at Sion-Colledge,)
the major Vote chose Mr. Calamy and Mr. Baxter, (whom the Bishop of London,
according to his Power, did reject;) so that the City of London neither has,
nor ever had one Clark of their own choosing in this Convocation which altered
the Liturgy; but the Dignitaries, and the two Clarks chosen by the exterior
parts of the Country, were the only Persons hence accepted (that ever we heard
of, or could learn:) And surely our after-consent will hardly be alleged. And
London is no inconsiderable part of England.

XL. We refuse not the Renunciation of the solemn Vow and Covenant, as if we
thought it bound us unto any disloyalty, Sedition, or other sin: For we are
ready to profess, that it so obliges no Man: It cannot make a Sin to be a Duty
or no Sin, nor a Duty to our Superiors to be no Duty; nor disoblige us from
any part of our due Obedience to the King. Nay, we judge that we must not make
our selves a Religion or Law by our own Vows, or bind our selves to any thing
but what we are bound to antecedently by God; and so our Vows must be but
secondary Obligations: And these being our own thoughts, we must needs hold
accordingly, that this solemn Vow does bind as to nothing, but what God does
bind us to antecedently himself; and what would be our Duty had we never taken
it: And therefore should we renounce this Vow, we should still take our selves
bound by God himself to do all the good that in it was Vowed. Whether the Vow
of a thing indifferent bind or not, we are not determining; but as we hold that
no such thing should be Vowed, so we declare that it is none of our present
case, as is aforesaid.

XLI. We are so far from refusing the Oxford Oath, or the Subscription, upon
any disloyal or rebellious Principles, that we shall hereafter adjoin such a
Profession of this Subject, as shall suffice with all Men of common humanity,
and impartiality, to justify our Principles of Loyalty, against Malice it self.

And if yet Malice will go on to keep open our Divisions, and keep us under
Odium and unjust Suspensions, and provoke men to forbid us to preach Christ's
Gospel, by talking of the late Wars, and charging all on the Non-conformists,
we shall now only crave their just Answer to these few Questions following.

Q. 1. Are they willing that so many of the English Non-conformists shall have
leave to preach Christ's Gospel freely, as never had any hand in the Wars? If
they will procure us this, we are confident that the rest that meddled with the
Wars are so few, and so self-denying, that they will thankfully accept of this
liberty for their Brethren, though they be silenced, or banished themselves.

Q. 2. Was it for matter of War that near two Thousand Ministers were ejected,
or silenced, 1662? or for something else? Was this the cause that Mr. Martin of
Weeden, that lost an Arm in the King's Army and War, could not have a day
abated him in the Common Goal at Warwick, when he preached as a Nonconformist?
And many other Instances we may give.

Q. 3. Did ever any of us that now address our selves to you, go farther in our
Principles than Bishop Bilson did, even in his excellent Book of Christian
subjection? we detested all that went beyond him in his Doctrine of Resistance:
Or did any of us ever go near so far as your famous R. Hooker in his first and
his eighth Book of Eccles. Polity, (published long ago, and again by Bishop
Gauden, and Dedicated to the King,) whose over Popular Principles one of us,
long ago, at large confuted: And were they silenced for this?

Q. 4. We humbly crave them that remember, and knew the Persons, to bethink
them, whether, 1. Most of of the Parliament, when the War began: 2. Most of the
Westminster Assembly, when they met: 3. Most of the Earl of Essex's Colonels,
and chief Officers: 4. Most of the Lord Lieutenants of the Militia: 5. Most of
the Parliaments Major Generals, in the Earl of Essex's time: 6. Most of the Sea
Captains, in the Earl of Warwick's time: We say, Whether most of these (we
think ten to one, and in some Instances twenty to one) were not Conformists? As
sure as Archbishop Abbots was, and all the Bishops, save six, in his days; on
whom Doctor Heyling lays the cause of our Divisions.

Q. 5. And is it just, that all the Conformists be therefore made odious, and
all the Conformable Ministers silenced for these Conformists sakes, even such
as never had a hand in the business?

Q. 6. If the War had been raised only by Non-conformists, yet why should a
thousand or 1400 Ministers now, that were never proved guilty of any Wars, be
silenced and ruined for other men's Actions; any more than the Conformists for
the Archbishop of York's, who was a Commander for the Parliament?

Q. 7. Why should no other penalty serve in this case, but silencing us? to the
loss or hazard of the innocent people. Is silencing us our suffering most, or
the Peoples? If half the Bakers, Brewers, and Country Farmers had been in those
Wars, is there no way to punish them, but to put down their Trade, and
forbidding them to bring Provision to the Markets? Would not punishing the
innocent, as Drunkards or Whoremongers are punished, satisfy you? Nor any
thing but keeping them from preaching the Doctrine of Salvation? And that when
the Fire consumed the Churches, and when in many Parishes the tenth part of the
People have no Church to go to?

Q. 8. Do you think that the Devil and the Papists had rather we were silenced,
or not? Are they pleased with well-doing, and with that which promoteth the
Protestant interest, and man's salvation? And has the Protestant Religion been
secured and advantaged by our usage?

Q. 9. If it be that we Preach worse than others, or Preach Sedition, or
unsound Doctrine, why are not we accused of it, and judged upon proof? And why
are we not suffered rather to Preach publicly, where witness may be had, than
driven into corners, where Sedition or Heresy may be hid by those that Preach
it?

Q. 10. If you say that our preaching is needless, Is not your own then as
needless, if you preach the same Gospel? And must you have Lordships, great
maintenance, reverence, honor, and obedience, for needless preaching? And when
some Parishes have ten thousand, some twenty thousand, some thirty thousand,
some it is thought fourscore thousand Souls, when three thousand cannot come to
hear in the Church, why is Preaching any more needful to those three thousand
than to all the rest? or to four persons in a Village, than to thousands in
Cities? When our Preaching and other Ministration cease to be notoriously
needful, we profess our selves joyfully willing to cease: Our Flesh had rather
have ease, and a gainfuller Trade of life, than spending-labour, with poverty,
reviling, scorn, and imprisonments.

XLII. To conclude, As far as we are able to understand the most learned,
sober, judicious Conformists, by their own words to us, and their Writings,
they differ not at all from us about the matter it self, which we deny
Conformity to, but confess it to be unlawful, (as to the hardest points of the
imposed Subscriptions, Oaths, and Declarations, and Covenants;) but they only
take the words in such a sense, in which we our selves could take them, were we
persuaded that it were indeed the true meaning of them. And do they that are as
much as we against that sense which we disown, and agree with us in the matter,
deserve liberty, honor, and preferment, for otherwise interpreting the words
of the Law, which the Lawgivers themselves will not interpret? And does our
supposition that the Lawmakers mean properly as they speak, deserve scorn,
silencing, and Goals, from them that will not expound them to us? The righteous
God will be Judge between us.

For instance, 1. By [Assent] in the Declaration required, we understand
[Believing it to be true.] But the Conformists that we speak of, understand
only [a Belief that I may use it.]

2. By [all and every thing contained in the Book] we suppose is meant [all and
every thing indeed:] But they say, only the Forms to be used are meant, and
many other things in the Book not meant.

We find after named [Unfeigned Assent and Consent unto, and Approbation of the
said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites, and Ceremonies, Forms and
Orders therein contained and prescribed,] we think here Approbation and Assent
are more than Consent to use; and we think that the use of all the Orders is
more than the use of the Forms: We think that no Word in the Book was intended
to be useless, and that the Doctrines, Calendars, (even that untrue one to find
out Easter Day) Rubricks, and Directories, have each their proper use. We
suppose that the foregoing words of the Use, are the End, and the Form of the
Declaration is the Means to secure that Use as the End, and that the Means has
more in than the End.

3. Some of them suppose, that denying Christendom to Christians Children, for
want of Crossing, or Godfathers, and denying Communion to true Christians that
receive not kneeling, are none of the Orders to be used: But we think otherwise.

4. Some of them think, that [Admitting none to the holy Communion, till they
be Confirmed, or desirous to be Confirmed,] though it be the very words, is
none of the Orders which they Consent to use; (and we never knew any use it by
any trial of men's desires:) But we think that nothing in the Book is
intelligible, if such plain passages are not.

5. Some of them by the words at Burial [that thank God for taking to himself
the Soul of this our dear Brother, out of the miseries, etc.) understand not
his Salvation, but his going out of this World: But we think otherwise.

6. When only [the unbaptized, self murderers, and excommunicate] are there
excepted, some say, all others are meant that ought to be excommunicate; and so
every Priest is made the Judge who should be Excommunicate: But we think, that
Exceptio particularis firmat regulam in non exceptis.

7. They think that the Words in the Canon [that Nothing in the three Books is
contrary to the Word of God,] are meant with exceptions as to [Nothing] or to
[Contrariety:] But we take [Nothing] for [Nothing,] and [Contrary] for
[Contrary.]

8. Some of them say, that the Church being the Maker of these Impositions, we
are to take them in the Churches sense, which the Bishops may signify. But we
think, that we must take them in the sense of the King and Parliament, as the
Lawmakers; and that no Church or Bishops can alter our Religion, or Articles,
or Subscriptions, by an Expository Power.

9. Some of them think, that the words [on any pretense whatsoever] in the
Subscription, have exceptions: But we know not how any words can be more
exclusive of exceptions.

10. Some of them think, that [by any Commissioned] is meant only [Lawfully
Commissioned,] and so Subjects are left to judge of the Lawfulness: We find
there no such Limitation or Exposition.

11. Some of them say, that by [the Government of the Church, not to be
altered] is not meant the Lay-Chancellors use of the Keys: But we think, that
their actual Government is the Government actually.

12. Some of them say, that by [no change or alteration] is meant only of the
Essence of Episcopacy: We take [no alteration] for [no alteration.]

13. Some of them say, that by [not endeavouring] is meant only [not
seditiously, or by ill means:] We think, That ubi DEX non distinguit, non est
distinguendum.

14. Some of them think that no Law or words imposed must be expounded contrary
to Gods Law, or any former Law, or to the King's or Peoples rights. But, 1.
That is to suppose that men cannot contradict themselves or God, or do
unjustly. 2. And then whatever Oaths men put on us we may take them, were the
words never so false or impious, because the meaning must still be judged good.

15. Some say that we must put the best sense on imposed Oaths, and Covenants,
and Subscriptions, that the words can be subdued to: We think that they must be
taken in the sense of the Lawmakers, which is to be judged of by the usual
meaning of their words, unless themselves do otherwise expound them.

And so in many other Instances, the Conformists say that they would not
Conform themselves, if they understood the words as we do.

Seeing then that all these worthy Conformists before mentioned do confess,
that if the words of the Laws be properly to be understood, and not with their
limitations, then the Conformists are in the wrong, and the Non-conformists in
the right; we conclude with these few Questions.

Q. 1. Whether we owe not that honor to our Lawmakers, as to suppose that
they are able, and willing, to speak intelligibly?

Q. 2. Whether they would have men left as to the Oath of Allegiance, and all
other Oaths and Laws, to subdue the Lawmakers words to any sense that the
Subject thinks lawful; and to make themselves Judges of the sense, by departing
from the common use of the words, without proof that the Lawmakers meant
otherwise?

Q. 3. Whether there be need of much Learning, Conscience, or Honesty, to
stretch the words from their ordinary sense, more than to do otherwise? And
whether so to do would deserve honor and preferment, and to do otherwise be a
Crime that deserves silencing, and ruin?

Q. 4. Whether their way of Exposition, or ours, tend more to promote Perjury
and Equivocation; and which more secureth Truth and Honesty?

Q. 5. If once the Conscience of Oaths and Covenants be relaxed, by stretching
words to the takers interest, are not the Lives of Princes left in danger, and
the Bonds of common Converse loosened?

Q. 6. If this must be the cause of our sufferings, and silence; is it not
justice so to tell the World, and write it on our Cross, that we are silenced
and laid in Goals, because we dare not take Oaths and Covenants, imposed in
Terms excluding limitations and exceptions, in a limited excepting sense,
without the Explication of the Lawmakers?

Q. 7. And if we must be so used, whether any in the whole World be more unfit
to silence, imprison, fine, reproach, and ruin us, for misunderstanding the
words which we are to Subscribe or Promise or Covenant in, (viz. for taking
[none] to mean [none,] [nothing] to mean [nothing,] [not any] to mean [not
any,] contrary] to mean [contrary,] [all] to mean [all,] than those that while
they are set to ruin us, will by no entreaties, after our almost fourteen
Years sufferings and expectations, be prevailed with to procure us an
Exposition of the sense of any of these so much controverted words? We are more
confident that the Lawmakers can more certainly, and infallibly expound their
own words, than the Pope or Council can expound Theological difficulties: And
if our Accusers will not once endeavor to procure them so to do, nor be
entreated to consent it, when Conformists and Non-conformists are chiefly
disagreed about the Interpretation of them; and when our preaching or silence,
honor or reproach, maintenance or poverty, liberty or imprisonment, yea, and
much duty or sin in the Body of the Nation, lies upon the resolution of this
Controversy, (what is the Lawmakers meaning,) we will still refer all to him
that judges righteously, who will shortly finally end the Controversy;
praying to God, though Men will not hear us, to open our Lips, that our Mouths
may show forth his praise; that he will make speed to save us, and make has^e
to help us; that he, whose service is perfect freedom, will defend us his
humbled servants in all assaults of our Enemies, that we surely trusting in his
defense, may not fear the power of any Adversaries; and that these evils which
the craft and subtilty of the Devil or Man works against us be brought to
naught, and by the providence of his goodness they may be dispersed, that we
his Servants being hurt by no persecution, may evermore give him thanks in his
holy Church; that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence
in his mercy, and evermore serve him in holiness and pureness of living; that
he will forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and turn their
hearts; especially that he will save our Posterity from their Curse, who say,
The Blood be on us, and on our Children. For we are not against such a Liturgy
as this.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
IT was intended that a short Account of the Nonconformists Judgment, about
the Power of Kings, and the Obedience of Subjects, should have been added; but
by reason of some Men's aptness to be offended at all such Publications, and
because of the present dispersion of the Collectors, it is pretermitted, with
this Profession, That they shall at all times be ready to give such Account of
their Judgments, when Authority shall call them, or allow it, as shall
satisfy all impartial Men, that they are haters of Disloyalty, Sedition,
Rebellion, and Schism.

FINIS.

