A VINDICATION OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion, Against the Objections of
all Modern Opposers.

PART II.

Written in French by James Abbadie, D. D.

Rendered into English By HENRY LUSSAN, M. A. of New College in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for J. Wyat at the Rose, and R. Wilkin at the King's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCVIII.

The CONTENTS.
SECTION I.
Containing some Arguments for the Christian Religion, drawn from the Testimony
of those who were the first Publishers of it.
THE Design of this Work. Page 1 Chap. I. Where we shall enquire whence the
Christians had their Original, and what their Profession is, by looking back
into the first Ages wherein they appeared. p. 3 Chap. II. Where we shall examine
the Martyrdom of the Primitive Christians. p. 7 Chap. III. In which we further
prove the Truth of Religion by several undeniable matters of Fact. p. 10 Chap.
IV. Where we yet further prove the Truth of the Christian Religion by several
undeniable matters of Fact. p. 14 Chap. V. Which demonstrates that all the
matters of Fact contained in the Books of the New Testament can never be
forged. p. 17
SECTION II.
Wherein we shall prove the Divinity of the Christian Religion by examining the
Books of the New Testament.
CHAP. I. Where we shall prove that those Books can never be Supposititious. p.
33 Chap. II. Proving that the Books of the New Testament were never Corrupted.
p. 39 Chap. III. That the Apostles did not write what was False. p. 44 Chap.
IV. That the Disciples of Jesus Christ could not impose upon Men in the matter
of their Writing or Preaching. p. 49 Chap. V. Where we shall more particularly
examine whether the Apostles had the Power or the Will to deceive Mankind. p. 53
Chap. VI. Where we shall examine the matters contained in the Gospels, and see
whether they are capable of Illusion or Imposture, p. 58 Chap. VII. Of the
Holiness of Life of Jesus Christ. p. 63 Chap. VIII. Of the Prophecies of Jesus
Christ. p. 71 Chap. IX. Wherein we shall examine the matters contained in the
Book of Acts. p. 82 Chap. X. Wherein we shall take into Consideration what
success the Preaching of the Apostles had. p. 86 Chap. XI. Wherein we shall
examine the matters contained in the Epistles of the Apostles. p. 88 Chap. XII.
Wherein we further examine the Epistles of St. Paul. p. 102 Chap. XIII. That we
ought to look upon the New Testament as a Divine Book. p. 107 Chap. XIV.
Wherein we shall examine those Difficulties which may probably be raised against
the foregoing Truths. p. 113 Chap. XV. Where we further examine the objections
of the Incredulous. p. 119 Chap. XVI. Where we further examine those
Difficulties which may be raised against our Principles. p. 126 Chap. XVII.
Where we further answer the objections of the Incredulous. p. 133
SECTION III.
Wherein we shall endeavor to carry even to a Demonstration the Proofs drawn
from the External Evidence of matters of Fact contained in the New Testament,
and the inward sense we have of them.
CHAP. I. Of the natural Temper, Dispositions, and Inclinations of the
Disciples, and what sort of prejudices they were possessed with, when Jesus
Christ Manifested himself to them. p. 143 Chap. II. The first Center of Truth:
a particular Consideration of the Miracles of Jesus Christ. p. 162 Chap. III.
The second Center of Truth: a particular Consideration of the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. p. 184 Chap. IV. The third Center of Truth: a particular
Consideration of the Ascension of Jesus Christ. p. 200 Chap. V. The fourth
Center of Truth: A particular Consideration of the Effusion of the gifts of the
holy Ghost upon the Disciples. p. 213 Chap. VI. Wherein we shall join all the
Miraculous matters of Fact together, and form thereby a full and perfect
Demonstration of them. p. 220 Some reflections on the Gospel according to St.
Matthew. p. 242 Chap. VII. Wherein we shall further Produce out of the other
Gospels, several places very proper to make us truly sensible of the Truth of
the Christian Religion. p. 258 Chap. VIII. Wherein we shall further produce
from the Acts of the Apostles, several places very proper to make us truly
sensible of the Divinity of the Christian Religion. p. 274 Chap. IX. Wherein we
shall yet farther produce from the Epistles of St. Paul, St. Peter, and St.
John; several Texts very proper to make us truly sensible of the Divinity of
the Christian Religion. p. 282
SECTION IV.
Wherein we shall prove the Truth of the Christian Religion by the
consideration of its Nature and Properties.
SEveral Portraitures in which it may be considered. Page 300 I Portraiture of
the Christian Religion, as it is considered in the multitude of Testimonies
given in favor of it. p. 301 II Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it
is opposed to all other Religions. p. 307 III Portraiture of the Christian
Religion, as it is considered in its effects. p. 320 IV Portraiture of the
Christian Religion as considered in the Purity of its end. p. 325 V Portraiture
of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in its suitableness to the
necessities of mankind. p. 329 VI Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it
is considered in the relation it bears to the Glory of God. p. 341 VII.
Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in its Morality. p.
344 VIII Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in its
Mysteries. p. 360 IX Portraiture of the Christian Religion, or the conformity
of its Mysteries to the Lights of Reason. p. 399 X Portraiture of the Christian
Religion, or the proportion it bears to the Jewish Religion. p. 420 XI
Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in the proportion it
bears to Natural Religion. p. 432
A TREATISE OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion. PART II.
Wherein the Christian Religion is proved by its own proper Characters.
SECTION I.
Containing some Arguments for the Christian Religion, drawn from the Testimony
of those, who were the first Publishers of it.
The Design of this Work.
IN the first Part of this Work we took our rise from this Proposition, There
is a God, and from thence we proved that, Jesus Christ the Son of Mary is the
Messiah who was to come. We shall now take a contrary course, and begin with
this Proposition, There are at present Christians in the World, and from thence
prove that, There is a God who has been pleased to manifest himself by the
means of Religion. There we have had but a faint prospect of Jesus Christ by
the Light of Nature and Revelation of Moses; Here we shall as it were draw the
Curtain, and discover Jesus Christ with that brightness of Truth and fullness of
Light, as will wonderfully illustrate both the Religion of Moses and the
Revelation of Nature, and in an excellent manner confirm the truth of the
Existence of God.

In order to which, we shall do these three things. I. We shall consider the
shell and bark, If I may so say, of the Christian Religion, by examining all
those Arguments that are drawn from the external Testimony which the Primitive
Christians gave of it, and by considering their natural Capacities, the
discoveries that were made to them, their prejudices, the peculiar frame of
their minds, their Martyrdom, and the reasons that induced them to suffer it,
etc. And all this before we proceed to the consideration of the Writings of the
New Testament. II. We shall consider these Writings themselves, and enquire
whether they are forged or not. We shall examine the subject matter of them, and
endeavor both to defend them against the suspicions of the Incredulous (by
showing that they contain nothing but what is certainly true) and to evince the
Divinity of them by the Character of those things they contain. III. and
lastly, We shall endeavor to show the very substance and spirit of
Christianity, by discovering the Excellence, uses, advantages, the end, genius,
and in general all the beauties which are proper and natural to it. And this is
what we design to treat of in the following Sections whereof this second part
is composed.

But since our Adversaries by their prejudices may be inclined to fear, lest we
should impose upon them, by making them believe such Doctrines as cannot be
proved by Reason, and since it is much for our advantage to remove all such
suspicions, we will for a while doubt of every thing with them, and raising our
selves by degrees to the Knowledge of those matters of fact which establish
Christianity it self, admit of nothing for truth but so far as appears evident.

CHAP. I.
Where we shall enquire whence the Christians had their Original, and what
their Profession is, by looking back into the first Ages wherein they appeared.
IN order to which, we suppose that there are now Christians in the World, and
there have not always been such. From this I gather that I must look back into
past Ages to find out the Original of my Religion. In this search I pass
therefore from Age to Age, till I come to Constantine, without being able to
clear this doubt.

But here we must make a little stop. The prosperity of this Prince gives at
first some occasion of suspicion, and we easily mistrust a man who being Master
of the most considerable part of the World, seems probably to have established
the Christian Religion therein, either by Force, or Policy, looking perhaps
upon it as more proper than that of the Heathens to carry on his designs.

Yet that suspicion soon vanishes, since we are assured there were Christians
in the World before Constantine's time. All the Heathen Writers who lived
before him speak of them; and the Ecclesiastical Historians are wholly employed
in describing their sufferings. But supposing that these Historians lived in
the days of Constantine, or after him, they must needs have either lost the use
of their reason themselves, or have imagined that the men of their age had lost
theirs, when they give them the History of the Christan Church, down from the
Apostles to Constantine, if 'twere certain there had not been Christians in the
World before that Prince. And therefore this must be too extravagant a
suspicion to be entertained long.

But here is something still more observable, viz. that on the one hand the
Christians who lived before Constantine were then possessed of the Books of the
New Testament, and on the other, that those very Christians were so strongly
persuaded of the truth of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, of his miracles, of
the pouring out the holy spirit on the Apostles, and of all other matters of
fact that establish the Christian Religion, that they hardly speak of any thing
else; their books are full of them; and their Doctrine is altogether built upon
this foundation. And therefore if Constantine invented the matters of fact
which establish Christianity, he must not only have forged the Books of the
New Testament, but also the Writings of Clemens, Justin, Iraeneus, Athenagoras,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, and in general of all the Fathers who
lived before him, because every one of their Writings have an essential
relation to those matters of fact that prove the truth of Religion.

And should we go up a little higher than the reign of Constantine, we should
hear of Christians that were afflicted during the three first Centuries of the
Church, and persecuted throughout the whole World, and punished with most
barbarous and new invented torments. They were put to Death upon wheels and
scaffolds, tortured by fire: their flesh torn with pincers; their bodies were
mangled by cutting off limbs one after another: they were thrown into Rivers,
and cast into the Sea, and exposed to Wild Beasts; wrapped up in garments
dipped in sulphur, to serve for torches, and set up to light Passengers in
their Way. In fine, it was never known that men so universally agreed in any
one thing as in their design of tormenting the Christians; in so much that the
ordinary people who have generally some compassion for the greatest malefactors
upon the Scaffold, conducted the Christians to the place of Execution with
acclamations of Joy.

Certainly, it is a very difficult matter to restrain one's Curiosity so much,
as not to desire a more particular Knowledge of a people persecuted by the
World with so much rage and malice. For to see the whole World so strangely
incensed against one sect of men, one would easily think them the common
Enemies of all mankind, and the offspring of Hell it self born for a common
plague to the Rest of the World.

Tertullian in his Apolog.
What then were the great Crimes these Christians were guilty of? They were
accused of impiety, murder and incest. 'Twas pretended that they violated the
respect due to the Gods; that they murdered their own Children, which they
scrupled not to eat up after having Killed them; and lastly, that they lay
promiscuously together, the Brother with the Sister, and the Son with the
Mother.

But first of all there is little likelihood that the Christians should suffer
Death, and torments worse than Death it self, in defense of a Religon which
engaged them to the Commission of such infamous actions. That steadfast
constancy they showed in the midst of their Torments, and which their Enemies
themselves acknowledged, suits very ill with the voluptuousness and enormities
they were accused of.

Besides, were they questioned concerning these Crimes which they are obliged
to clear themselves of, they would produce in their Behalf the Apologies of
Justin, Athenagoras, and Tertullian, wherein they earnestly desired the Senate,
and Roman Emperors that they would make a strict enquiry into their lives, and
inflict upon them such torments as were a thousand times if possible more cruel
than those they had already endured, if they were really gu^lty of what they
were accused.

They would show us likewise a letter from Pliny to Trajan, which ought to be
looked upon as an authentic monument of their Innocence: Since Pliny there
informs the Emperor, that having strictly inquired into the lives of the
Christians, he found nothing else but that they assembled together in remote
places early in the morning, and there said their prayers to heaven, and bound
themselves under a Solemn Oath, not to commit Murder, Adultery, Injustice, or
any other crime. They would also produce an answer from Trajan to Pliny,
wherein that Emperor gave positive orders, that for the future there should be
no particular enquiries made after the Christians, but those only should be
punished, who should discover themselves. And that we may not think that, these
letters are forged, we may consider that it is Tertulian that mentions them in
his Discourse to the Senate, and the Roman Emperor, whom he could not impose
upon, without endangering his own life, and prejudicing his Religion.

CHAP. II.
Wherein we shall examine the Martyrdom of the Primitive Christians.
BUt Perhaps we may sooner suspect the credulity of the Primitive Christians
than their innocence. We are sure their Constancy proceeded from their hope,
and their hope from their persuasion. But who knows the ground of that
Persuasion? Are there not Mahumetans so strongly persuaded of the Divinity of
the Alcoran, as to die in defense of that Error? The multitude then of Martyrs
shows an infinite number of persons to be strongly persuaded of the truth of
Christian Religion, but proves not that persuasion to be well grounded. We m^st
therefore go a little further.

And here we may easily suppose without fear of being mistaken, that the
Primitive Christians had some sort of Common sense. Those who made it their
profession to ridicule the plurality of Gods, and the many superstitions of the
Heathens, which were really contrary to Reason; those who put in practice such
wise Rules of Morality, who were so regular in their behavior, so averse to
all the excesses that disorder Reason; who formed to themselves such rational
Ideas of the Deity in comparison to others, those men, I say, could not be
wholly destitute of the light of Nature. Now supposing them to have but the
least glimmering of that light, 'twill be hard to conceiv^ that they should
wholly renounce their Estates and Fortune, and courageously suffer Death in
defense of any cause whatsoever, unless they had very powerful Reasons to
believe it were good.

This consideration will be further strengthn'd by two very important
Reflections. And first, we speak not here of such only who being born
Christians, blindly followed the prejudices of Birth and Education: but also of
a great number of persons, who renounced Paganism to embrace Christianity, and
laying aside the favorable prejudices of Education and Birth (which in them
were quite contrary to the Christian Religion,) were yet willing to die for it
as soon as 'twas known and embraced.

Secondly, The truth of Christian Religion is altogether founded upon mattters
of fact. For if Jesus Christ wrought Miracles, and rose again from the Dead,
than is the Christian Faith True. But if Jesus Christ wrought no miracles, nor
rose from the Dead, then is the Christian Faith false. And surely 'twould have
been folly or madness in those men to forsake so flourishing a Communion as
Paganism, to take upon them the name of Christians, a name so vile and
contemptible in those days, to suffer voluntarily the loss of their Estates,
and undergo a most terrible Death, only to defend a Religion grounded upon such
matters of fact as they had no reason to believe to be true. Those indeed that
are born and live peacably in a Communion, may blindly believe the Doctrines of
it: but he that is never so little acquainted with the constitution of man's
heart, can scarce imagine men to be so senseless, as to renounce the prejudices
of Birth and Education, to offer violence to their dearest and most tender
Inclinations, and embrace a Faith pursued with fire and sword, and persecuted
by all the powers of the World, unless they had first duly examined the nature
of it, and knew well upon what grounds they thus embraced it.

If it be objected that some of these men were of the meanest sort of people,
whose example cannot be alleged as a precedent for Wise and learned men, We'll
grant it. But then it must also be confessed that the Vulgar usually embrace
that Religion which is attended with Power, and Prosperity, Pomp and Authority,
and hate even Truth it self, when once destitute of all these outward helps.
How is it possible then that against all outward appearance, they should have
acted so contrarily to themselves in this Occasion?

But supposing the commmon sort of Christians to have lost their Reason, can we
say the same of the Doctors of the Primitive Church, as Clement, Polycarp,
Justin, Iraeneus, etc? It Is certain on one ha^nd these men were men of very
good sense (as their Writings, those Monuments they have left us evidently
demonstrate) And on the other, it is very well known they lived in a time so
very near to that of the Apostles, that it is absolutely impossible they should
have been deceived in this respect. For Polycarp conversed a long while with
St. John, Iraeneus saw Polycarp, and Justin was a more ancient Father than
Iraeneus.

Had those Doctors only told us that Jesus Christ and his Apostles wrought
several Miracles, we might perhaps have suspended our belief upon their bare
word. But since they suffered Death in defense of the truth of certain matters
of fact, which they must necessarily have fully been informed of, since I see
that Clemens, and Polycarp, Disciples and Contemporaries with the Apostles,
cheerfully came to the stake to maintain a Religion essentially founded upon
those matters of fact, (such as were the gift of diverse Languages conferred
upon the Apostles, the power of working Miracles, and imparting those very
gifts themselves to others;) Since, I say, these Christian Doctors suffered
Martyrdom for the confirmation of matters of fact which the Christian Religion
is essentially united to; I confess I begin to be convinced. Nevertheless let
us search more narrowly into this matter, and see whether we shall yet have any
Reason to entertain any further scruples.

CHAP. III.
In which we further prove the Truth of Religion by several undeniable matters
of fact.
WHo told us Clemens and Polycarp suffered Martyrdom? And supposing they did,
who will assure us they were not deluded by the Apostles* Nay who can tell
whether there ever were any such men?

I suppose I shall not be obliged to prove with a great many arguments there
were such men as Clemens and Polycarp, who suffered Martyrdom. Eusebius who
wrote their history could not wholly have invented it, unless he had corrupted
all the Writings of the Fathers that lived before him; for they all speak of
it. Iraeneus, Justin, Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. mention it, as a known matter
of fact. The first of them glories in several places of his works that he had
seen Polycarp in his youth; and it appears they all suffered Martyrdom in
imitation of those Primitive Christians.

That the Apostles deceived Polycarp and Clemens and the rest of their
Disciples, is a thing much less to be suspected; because they themselves stuck
not to boast of their being able to work miracles, heal all kind of diseases,
speak all sorts of languages, and impart to others those gifts they called the
gifts of the Holy Ghost. And it is impossible that Clemens, Polycarp, etc.
should have suffered themselves to be deceived in this respect, especially to
^uch a degree as to suffer Death for the testimony of a Religion founded on so
many impostures.

But whence appears it that the Apostles boasted of a power to work miracles,
and impart the gifts of the Holy Ghost? It appears not only from their own
Epistles which cannot be forged (as we shall prove by and by) but also from the
writings of the Doctors of the Primitive Church; and in fine, it is manifest of
it self. For as we cannot deny that there was such a man as Alexander the Great,
without overthrowing the common Opinion that he subverted the Empire of Darius,
and the Macedonians subdued all Asia under his conduct; because one matter of
fact depends upon the other: so we cannot acknowledge the Divinity of the
Christian Religion without believing the Miracles of Jesus Christ, his
Resurrection; his pouring out the Holy Ghost on the Apostles, and the
miraculous Gifts imparted to those that believed. For take away these matters
of fact, and what would become of the Christian Religion? Wherein would the
Divinity of it consist? Wherein would lie the Strength, Promises, and
Essentials of it? Since therefore Clemens and Polycarp suffered Martyrdom for
the truth of Christian Religion, it follows also that they died in defense of
the truth of those matters of fact we just now mentioned. So that those matters
of fact being very palpable, and it being very easy for Clemens and Polycarp
who lived and conversed with the Apostles, to know certainly whether they
really had the pretended gifts of diverse tongues, of healing all sorts of
diseases, and of communicating these extraordinary gifts to others, so as to
render them frequent in the Church, I do not see how its possible to call the
truth of them in question.

The soul of man however fruitful in imaginations, can hardly raise here a
doubt of a moment's continuance. For should I fancy they may have given me a
false Relation of the Martyrdom of Clemens, of Polycarp, and the successors of
the Apostles: this thought soon vanishes, when I consider the number, quality,
and unanimous consent of the Witnesses of this matter of fact. For can we think
that the Sucessours of Clemens, and Polycarp would have suffered a real
Martyrdom in imitation of one that was but imaginary? Would they so
courageously have imitated a fictitious Martyrdom of their own invention? And
should I imagine Clemens and Polycarp were imposed on by the Apostles, I am soon
convinced of the contrary; since those matters of fact which we have now before
us, are matters of Experience so evident in themselves, that we cannot be
mistaken in them. Lastly, should I doubt whether the Apostles endeavored to
persuade men of the truth of them, I am made to understand that there can be no
Christianity without these matters of fact, and that the Apostles could never
have established the Christian Religion unless they had first persuaded men of
the truth of them. This will be farther seen by what we shall offer in the
following chapters.

In the mean while may we not know what the professed Enemies of Christianity
said of them? For it seems unjust to hearken to that only which the Christians
allege in defense of their own cause. This is no hard matter; We find
Porphirius, Celsus, and Julian surnamed the Apostate maintaining that Jesus
Christ did no miracles at all but by a magic power, and that it was a fantom
which appeared to the Disciples instead of Jesus Christ risen again from the
dead. Whereupon I think it necessary to make some few Reflections. It is very
remarkable that those who were far more exasperated against the Christians,
than the Incredulous of these imes are, and who living in a time nearest to
that ^f the Apostles might have easily known the truth ^r falsehood of those
matters of fact; I say, it is remarkable that those men durst not in the least
call any of them in question, but were forced to have ^ecourse to Ghosts, and a
Magic power to avoid ^eing perplexed with them. It Is also worth our while to
observe that Celsus himself who ever before questioned Magicians, was at length
forced to a^cribe the miracles of Jesus Christ to a Magic power, ^s Origin
himself upbraids him in some part of his works.

Thus it immediately appears that the Primitive Christians were men of very
good sense, and very honest and sincere principles too: that part of them lived
in a time so very near that of the Apostles (in whose days all those things
came to pass) that they must necessarily have known the truth of them; that in
the mean time they suffered Death to seal the truth of a Religion, founded upon
all those matters of fact; and lastly, that their Enemies themselves durst not
presume entirely to call any of them in question.

But I will not yield my self conquered for all that, but rather raise my self
a little higher, and stop for a while at the latter end of the first Century,
which is the time wherein St. John (the last of the Apostles) was yet living,
and wherein Clemens and Polycarp whom we just now mentioned flourished: and
this shall be our fixed point in the following Chapters.

CHAP. IV.
Where we yet further prove the Truth of the Christian Religion by several
undeniable matters of fact.
It Is an hundred years since there were no Christians at all in the World, and
now there are some in all parts of it, at Rome, and at Antioch, at Alexandria,
at Corinth, at Ephesus, in Spain, and among the Gauls, etc. I confess I am some
what surprised to see this progress, yet not so much as to be convinced of the
truth of Christian Religion, because Mahomet's Religion was established in a
lesser time. We must then go yet farther, and consider that the Christian Faith
was not only destitute of the assistance of Policy and Authority, but received
notwithstanding the continual oppositions of both.

It Is observable that other Religions, as that of the Heathens and Turks, were
established in the World by some singular and extraordinary prosperity, and by
the policy of persons raised to dignities and grandeur; but Christianity in a
small time became Master of men's hearts and understanding, tho it was attended
with nothing but shame and Misery, tho* all the powers of the World strove to
stifle it in its very birth, and for that purpose invented such tortures and
punishments as no other interest could have made men devise.

We might indeed question the sufferings of the Christians, were we not assured
of them from the Writings of the Heathens, and had we not a clearer proof in
the complaints of the Fathers, who certainly were not so extravagant as
publicly to complain of an imaginary persecution, when it was so dangerous to
complain of one that was real.

And therefore I would fain know what this Christian Faith and Doctrine is
which made men so patiently suffer, and abandon all things. But to my great
amazement I find that they believed that a certain crucified man was the Son of
God; that a man hanged and nailed on a Cross was the sovereign judge of the
World, and the object of our Adoration. I confess I cannot but acknowledge some
supernatural power in all this. For though men of as mean appearance as those who
first preached the Gospel, might without any Miracles have weighed down the
Authority of Emperors and Prelates, and all the Magnificence and glory of
Paganism, objects very suitable to the worldly and ambitious heart of a man,
yet how can we conceive that they could without the help of Miracles, persuade
men to believe a Paradox so offensive to Reason, and which appears at first
view so horrible as this, that the Son of God was nailed on a Cross?

We can never persuade our selves without offering violence to our Reason, that
those who from their youth represented their Deities to themselves, as the
greatest and most glorious Beings they could imagine, and gave the name of
Divine to whatever they thought in the highest degree beautiful and
magnificent, should yet substitute to all these great Ideas, the notion of a
God who died an infamous Death upon the Cross; That not one alone, but an
infinite number of persons embraced an Opinion that immediately overthrew all
their first Ideas of a God; that this great change was not gradually and
insensibly brought to pass, or in the compass of several ages, but in a very
few years, and with an incredible swiftness, by the Mystery of vile and
contemptible persons, of no power or authority in the World; and that the
passion they had for a Doctrine which seemed at first so monstrous to Men,
induced them to suffer Death in defense of the same, after having renounced
their Fortune, Reputation and Pleasures.

But does not prejudice overruled in all this, and make me Fancy I see that
distinctly which I perceive but confusedly? in truth I ought yet further to
distrust my self, and though I honor Error too much, in suspecting it may be so
coherent, so united to the Principles of Common sense, and involved in so many
appearances of Truth; yet I will not pass by any scruple for all that has been
hitherto said.

I find then that the Christian Religion was established in the World an
hundred years ago; I know that the Christians believe in a certain Jesus Christ
crucified. I know also that this Opinion of theirs was not innate. I am fully
persuaded that neither the Heathenish Priests, nor their ordinary Guides taught
them this Doctrine, because they were the professed Enemies of it. I am
compelled therefore in despite of my self to credit, at least in some respect,
the Relation the ancient Doctors of the Church unanimously gave of it, viz:
that some persons called Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, went about the
World, preaching that this same Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and the
Messiah whom God had promised to the Jews.

But these fundamental Truths require a more particular Examination; and
therefore we must show more distinctly whether there were ever such men as the
Apostles in the World; what their Original was; what Doctrine they preached;
and how they were qualified. This we shall presently see, by laying down for a
certain Principle, that the Christians had the books of the New Testament in
their possession at that very time we have chose for our fixed point. I shall
not at present enquire whether those Books are forged or not, my design being
to argue some time without entering upon that Enquiry. For whether they are
forged or not, at least we learn from them certain undeniable matters of fact,
which will wonderfully illustrate all our following Enquiries,

CHAP. V.
Which demonstrates that all the matters of fact contained in the Books of the
New Testament can never be forged.
IF the New Testament be forged, It may well be presumed that the Contrivers of
that forgery (who certainly could have no other design but to make it pass for
truth) endeavored to ground it upon some foundation either good or bad: So
that we have reason to believe, that though they should have invented all that
they relate, at least they invented not the Names, Country and Persons of Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, under whose Names they speak, and to whom they ascribe
the Establishment of the Christian Religion.

For is it probable they should endeavor to persuade men to worship a certain
Jew called Jesus, the Son of Mary, a Galilean too, who was crucified at
Jerusalem, and had several Disciples whose names ^re exactly related, if the
Jews could have immedi^tely convinced them of the falsehood of all those
matters, by producing the Testimony of their own Nation, who would have
thronged in to tell them, that Jesus and his Disciples were only fictitious
^ames; and that there was no more to do but con^ult all the Registers and
Decrees wherein Augustus commanded all the Jews should be taxed in the days of
Cyrenius, and where it must have appeared that Jesus Christ himself (if there
was any such Person) was also taxed.

It Is all one as if a man should publish in this age a book full of excellent
precepts of Morality, intermixed with several fictitious actions, which book he
would have the World receive as the Doctrine of some divine and extraordinary
man, who in the beginning of this age raised up several men from the Dead,
healed all sorts of Diseases, calmed the Winds and Tempests of the Sea, gave
Authority to several of his Disciples to work many strange Miracles, was at
length seized and put to Death in Germany; and whose Disciples who bore such
and such names, and were born in such and such a Country, came afterward into
France, dispersed themselves throughout the other parts of Europe, preached his
Doctrine, and at length died all unanimously in defense of it. What think you
of this Tale? And how would it be received in the World but as a System only of
many evident and palpable falsities? What think you those persons would say of
it, who should be thus accused of so dreadful a parricide? They would certainly
reply that that fictitious book was purposely designed to blast their
Reputation. But it appears the Jews never attempted to clear themselves after
that manner. They confess there was such a person as Jesus Christ, and that
their Fathers put him to Death: neither do they deny the least Circumstance of
his Life, Ministry, or Death, excepting those which might probably make him
pass for the Son of God. But we have here something still more clear and
convincing than all this to offer.

Either those Books which you may think forged or not forged, spread of
themselves the Christian Doctrine throughout the World, after they had been
carried into several Parts of it, before there were any Apostles to preach it
there, or else those Books were composed after the Apostles had published their
Doctrine in the different parts of the Universe. I see no medium.

If the Books of the New Testament instructed men in the Christian Doctrine
before any of the Apostles had preached it, how could the Romans be persuaded
that St. Paul, which is a mere Name, had wrote an Epistle to them; or those of
Antioch, that St. Peter had been in their City; or the Galatians, that St. Paul
had preached the Gospel to them; or in general all Judea and Galilee that Jesus
Christ with his Disciples had preached there; or in particular the people of
Jerusalem, that he was there condemned to Death by the Sanhedrin, etc.

But if the New Testament was not collected into several Books, nor composed
till after the Disciples of Jesus Christ had preached the Gospel in the several
parts of the World, it must follow from thence that there were some Apostles
before that time, and a certain Jesus Christ crucified, who was reputed the Son
of God, and the true Messiah according to the Christian Doctrine.

So that whether those Books be forged or not, still I am certain they relate
certain fundamental matters of fact which are necessarily true. For it is
certain there was such a person as Jesus Christ who dwelt in Nazareth, and was
at last crucified at Jerusalem. It Is also as certain that Peter, James, and
John were Fishermen who followed him out of Galilee, and preached the Gospel
after his Death in several Parts of the World. Wherefore then should I be the
only person that should question a thing never so much as doubted of among the
Christians or the Jews, nay which the Incredulous themselves of these times do
not pretend to call in question?

But to stop a little here, It seems that Jesus the Son of Mary living in a
certain Corner of Judea, pretended himself to be the Son of God, or if you will
the Messiah. It Is very strange indeed that a Man of so mean an extraction, who
all his life time followed the profession of a Carpenter, (as his Enemies so
often reproached him to have done) should notwithstanding pretend himself to be
the Messiah, who was to have been (according to the professed opinion of that
age) surrounded or attended with pomp, splendor, and temporal Prosperity. Let
us therefore enquire a little into it.

This Jesus (whoever he might be, and whatever Idea we may frame to our selves
of him) gathered together a company of Disciples, some of which he took from
among Fishermen on the bank of the Lake of Gennesareth, some out of the Towns
of Galilee, nay and some he called from among the Publicans themselves, whom
the people ever had in Origin. contra Cells. lib. 16.
abomination (as the First Enemies of Christian Religion laid to his charge.)
Those men which thus followed him were of mean Education and Birth. They
neither had Learning nor Politeness; they neither were acquainted with the
heart nor the inclinations of men, neither with the Policy of Princes, nor the
elevated Morals of the Stoics; nor lastly, with the misterious and secret
Wisdom of the Sages. But they were mean and simple Persons, as the Enemies
themselves of Christianity readily acknowledge.

I shall not at present examine what Reasons induced them so firmly to adhere to
Jesus Christ, nor what convincing arguments he used to engage them to follow
him. It is enough we know they were ignorant persons, who looked for the
Messiah, according to the common Opinion of those times, and so might probably
be thought to have been imposed upon in that respect.

But here I cannot but admire that those mean and ignorant people, who had
undoubtedly framed to themselves a very sublime Idea of their Messiah, and
imagined no less than that he would have distributed Crowns to them (to use
that expression, since this was always a strong opinion amongst the Jews) I
say, I cannot but admire that those ignorant sort of people should content
themselves with the outward and apparent meanness of a man, who took quite
another form upon him than that of a Conqueror.

It cannot be denied that Jesus Christ was in a very poor and mean condition
when he called his Disciples, since Porphirius, Celsus, and Julian the Apostate
reproach him with it. Besides this is such a matter of fact as no man would
invent though he could easily have done it, and which he could not easily invent,
tho he would have done it. It Is certain the Jews at that time and always before
expected a Triumphant Messiah. It Is also as certain the Disciples adhered to
Jesus Christ notwithstanding the professed opinion they were prepossessed with
at that time; this is what we are surprised at.

Since the Disciples found not in Jesus Christ all the Glory and temporal power
they were strongly persuaded their Messiah should have been invested with, they
undoubtedly imagined that what their Master did not then actually possess, he
would certainly enjoy some time after. They did not at all question but that he
was to re-establish the Monarchy of Israel, and overcome the Enemies of the
Jews. This made them to dispute the Priority among themselves. They would know
who was to be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, in the
flourishing Kingdom of the Messiah, which they termed the Kingdom of heaven in
imitation of the Prophet Daniel. Nay two of them importuned our Savior to
grant them to sit the one on his Right Hand, and the other on his Left, as soon
as he was exalted to that state of Glory.

I admit not of these matters of fact merely because they are in the New
Testament, but because they are very conformable to the Jewish Tradition, and
Reason it self. Common Sense assures us that the Disciples adhered not to Jesus
Christ without some hope or other. Now what could they hope for from him whom
they looked upon as the Messiah, but that which they expected from the true
Messiah himself, viz. a temporal deliverance attended with the like Prosperity.

But not to advance any thing doubtful or in the least uncertain in it self, I
affirm that the Disciples considered Jesus Christ as the true Messiah, and that
they could not regard him as such but either in the sense of the Jews, or in
that of the Christians, that is, either as a temporal Deliverer, or a spiritual
one, and consequently that whatever sense we take it in, still were they to
hope for some advantage or other from him; but let us see how far this twofold
Consideration will lead us.

Whilst the Disciples were strongly preposessed with the thoughts that Jesus
was their Messiah, that is, the person that should have raised up their Nation
to the utmost pitch of Prosperity and Glory, this Jesus himself was seized, and
nailed on a Cross, where he suffered a most infamous Death, infamous in the
esteem of all Nations, but more particularly accursed in the Jewish Law. What a
mighty thunder bolt must this have been to such men who had fed their fancies
with such charming hopes! They were long since persuaded that the Messiah would
make his appearance in a very Glorious State; that he would overthrow at his
coming the Empire of Caesar, together with all the Roman Grandeur, and thereby
make the Jews absolute Masters of the World. All these things they impatiently
expected from Jesus; and yet this Jesus was dishonored by an infamous
punishment he was compelled to endure. The Jews themselves not only sacrificed
him, but they sacrificed him even to Caesar himself, and delivered him up to the
Romans to put him to Death. There was no power able to deliver him out of the
hands of his Tormentors; so that he died, and his Disciples heard of his Death,
or rather were eyewitnesses of it. In truth I cannot conceive how they should
after all this have still preserved the least of their pretentions. They might
reasonably grieve at the loss of such pleasing hopes, but nothing could redeem
the loss of them. They might abhor the furious passion of the chief Priests and
Sanhedrin, who had utterly deprived them of their dearly beloved Master: but
they must at length lay aside the opinion they had entertained of him. And
therefore nothing can be so likely as that which St. Luke makes them utter in
the midst of their sorrow and astonishment. But we trusted that it had been he,
which should have redeemed Israel; and besides all this, to day is the third
day since these things were done. Luke 24. 21.

But supposing they had no such Hopes or Expectation, it is enough that the
Disciples looked upon Jesus as the promised Messiah. Nay it is all one, whether
it was in the sense of the Jews or in that of the Christians. For if it was in
the sense of the Jews, they could not but imagine that Jesus would have raised
up the glory of the Jews to its utmost height, so far were they from conceiving
he was liable to be put to Death by them. But if it was in the sense of the
Christians, they ought surely to have believed that in case he should die, he
would certainly raise up himself and those that believed on him from the grave,
because the whole System of Christian Religion essentially depends upon this
foundation.

Thus, were the Disciples preposessed with the general opinion of the Jews,
they could not choose but lose it at the sight of the Death of Jesus, and were
they prepossessed with the professed Doctrine of the Christians, they could not
likewise but be undeceived of their Error, when they saw that Jesus Christ
rose not again from the Dead.

What then shall we think of certain Fishermen, who were a most mean wretched
sort of people (as the Enemies of Christianity called them) who had not the
courage to accompany their Master even when they looked upon him as the true
Messiah, but gave him over to his Executioners? Sure they are by this time
sensible of their mistake. What care then does it appear they took to hide
themselves, to conceal their shame and confusion from men? let us see what was
the Event, and we shall know the Truth.

We find that few weeks after the Death of Christ, his Disciples publicly
showed themselves in Jerusalem, and confidently affirmed that they had seen
their Master who was risen again from the Dead; had spoken with him, handled
him, eat with him, conversed with him for forty days; and lastly, that they had
seen him ascend into Heaven. It Is certain this was the Testimony of the
Disciples, since the Faith of the Primitive Christians was founded on this
Testimony.

Who could have thought of this unexpected turn? The Disciples affirmed that
Jesus was the Messiah: but could they still believe it, when they saw him give
up the Ghost? Or if they did not believe it, were they now grown bolder to
maintain an imposture, than before to follow their Master, when they thought
him the true Messiah? Could certain Fishermen, dejected fearful Fishermen, who
ought with shame to have owned their Error, could they invent such a fable,
preach it with so much confidence, maintain it with so much boldness, expose
their persons to all sorts of Torments, and even to Death it self, in defense
of such an incredible fiction? Could any of them imagine that they could seduce
Mankind, or had any one of them imagined it, could the rest have been so
extravagant as to approve of his ridiculous fancy? Did they think the World
would believe them upon their bare Word? And were they then no longer in any
dreadful apprehension of the Sanhedrin that had inhumanely put their Master to
death? Did they believe they might safely reproach the Jews for having put the
Messiah to death, without being themselves severely punished? Were they not
sensible into how many troubles and afflictions this fable would inevitably
cast them? And if they were, could they still be so courageous as to maintain
such an imposture? Is it possible that no one of them should recant his
opinion, not one contradict himself, but that all should unanimously depose,
notwithstanding the most rigorous punishments inflicted on them, a matter of
Fact which they knew to be altogether Chimerical and false? Certainly this is a
thing so very strange, or rather which appears to me so very absurd and
extravagant, that I question whether our incredulous Adversaries could persuade
themselves of it, provided they would but reflect never so little upon it.

But let us continue still to distrust our selves; may we not probably have
made some false Supposition in what we just now affirmed? we will therefore go
over again the same principles we just now established.

And indeed the more I reflect upon them, the less I conceive how we can
possibly call any of them in question? For can I deny that Jesus ever was in
the World, that he ever had any Disciples, or that those Disciples thought him
at first the promised Messiah? But why should I alone question a matter of fact
which the Thalmudists, nay Julian, Porphirius, and all other Enemies of
Christianity have always acknowledged? This is what I have shown to be absurd.

Can I question but that if Jesus died and rose not again from the dead, his
Disciples were then undeceived of the opinion they probably entertained, that
Jesus was the Messiah, the Son of God? If so, either they understood nothing at
all by these two words, the Messiah, the Son of God, or else they understood
quite another thing than that he was a Mere Man, who was to remain for ever
under the power of Death after his Crucifixion.

Can I deny that the Disciples declared the Resurrection of Jesus Christ after
his Crucifixion? It Is self evident. All the Earth has heard of the preaching of
the Apostles, who all unanimously declared that Jesus Christ was risen again
from the Dead: and it is purely upon their testimony that the World believed it.

Can we imagine that the Disciples of Jesus let slip a long period of time, as
twenty or thirty years after the Crucifixion of their Master, and so having had
time to embolden themselves, and to contrive an imposture, they suddenly
appeared in the World, and preached that Jesus was risen again from the Dead?
If so, how could the compilers or forgers of the New Testament, make the world
believe that the Disciples of Jesus preached his Resurrection a few Weeks after
his Crucifixion? How comes it to pass that the Jews never had the least
thoughts of contradicting our Scripture in that respect? And what is the reason
that the Christians yearly commemorate two festivals successively one after
another, one for the commemoration of the Death and Resurrection of the Lord,
and the other for that of the coming down of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles,
which was purposely given them to preach the Gospel in all places? If the
Disciples had not preached the Resurrection of their Master till a long time
after his Death, would it not have been asked them, what have you done since
your Jesus was Crucified? Rose he not sooner from the Dead? Or wherefore do you
now preach his Resurrection so long after it? What could have obliged the Jews
to assert that his Disciples had stolen away his Body by night, if his
Resurrection had been preached so very late in the World? And how comes it to
pass that there were Christian Churches established almost every where, by the
sole testimony of the Apostles, few years after the Death of Jesus Christ?

Can we suppose that it was out of ambition or revenge that the Disciples of
Jesus published his Resurrection, as designing to make the Chief Priests and
Scribes pass for Paricides, or immortalise their own names to Posterity? But
could the Disciples think of revenging themselves on those Men that had so
clearly shown them their mistake in the Messiah? Or could they fancy there was
any revenge purely in inventing such a ridiculous fable? Would they buy their
Revenge so dear as at the price of their own lives, and expose their persons to
inevitable Torments, and certain death? then as for ambitious thoughts, did
they entertain them immediately after the death of him who could only support
and confirm them? Had they any reason to aspire after Glory and Grandeur, just
when all their hopes were destroyed with their Messiah? Is it likely a few poor
Fishermen should have had such thoughts? Certainly had that been their design,
they would soon have relinquished it, and the immediate scandal affixed to
their profession, the Misery and barbarous persecution it continually drew upon
them, would have soon banished out of their Minds so ridiculous and extravagant
a design.

But to what purpose is it for any one to delude himself? It Is well known that
when a Malefactor is put to the rack, he is forced to confess his Crime, the
torments he endures extorting a confession of his most secret Actions. This is
a way almost infallible to discover truth; and human Justice often puts it in
execution for that purpose; How were it possible therefore that so many
impostors together, that had been so often examined, and urged by Fire and
Sword to recant what they had asserted, should yet so constantly persist in a
false deposition? For 'twas not only one single witness, but a great Number of
Witnesses, who were not compelled to suffer one single punishment only, but all
sorts of punishments. 'Twas not only in one single place, but almost in every
place where they preached, they were urged to recant their opinion by the
severest torments. Neither was it for one single Moment, but for every Moment
of their lives that they were thus exposed to persecution. Not one single party
was on their side? But Jews and Heathens, Kings and Magistrates, Prelates and
People, openly declared themselves their Adversaries. They were not only
assaulted with Persecutions, but reviled, contemned, and reproached, yet for
all that not one of them recanted his Opinion. Being Separated or Confronted,
they all unanimously deposed, not only that Jesus Christ was risen from the
Dead, but that they had seen him after the Resurrection. If this be the Method
commonly used to maintain an imposture, I wonld gladly know how Truth it self
is to be defended.

But perhaps the Disciples were themselves deluded, and Peter or some other
Apostle, being so cunning as to remove the body of our Lord out of his
Sepulcher, persuaded the other Disciples their Master was really risen from the
Dead, and so they firmly believing his report, went about the World, preaching
his Resurrection. But this Opinion necessiarily falls of it self to the ground.
For the Apostles not only testified that they had all seen Jesus Christ after
his Resurrection from the Dead, but that the holy Ghost fell on them in the
likeness of fiery Tongues. They testified likewise the Truth of Christ's other
Miracles, and it is impossible they should all have been deceived in respect of
all those matters of fact at once.

Above all, it is necessary to observe this last kind of miracle, viz. the
coming down of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles in the likeness of fiery tongues.
For those Apostles boldly affirmed that with the help of that very miracle,
they were endowed with the gift of diverse Languages, so that Greeks, Romans,
Parthians, Persians, etc. heard them speak every one in their own Language.
This is a matter of fact which neither the Apostles could have deceived the
World in, nor they themselves have been deceived in. It cannot be imagined they
could have deceived the World, or that some Fishermen could have been so bold
as to pretend they were endowed with the gift of diverse Languages, unless it
had been really so; for they would in every place have been immediately
convicted of the most notorious Cheat in the world. There were at Rome men who
spoke Greek, as well as in Greece some that spoke Latin. And by reason of
Trade, it generally happens that there are men of all Languages in every
Country. Now if St. Paul really understood no other Language but that Greek
spoken in Cilicia, can we suppose he would have been so bold as to boast in
Asia of his speaking Latin, or any other foreign Language? Would he not have
certainly met with people, who would have immediately convicted him of
falsehood? Neither is it more likely that the Apostles could have been
themselves deceived in this respect, because it is a business of inward sense. I
may easily be deluded outwardly, and think that I see a man indeed, when I see
but the shadow, or fantom of a man. But I can never persuade my self that I
speak several different Languages, when I speak but one. But when I see that
men of different Countries, who speak different Languages, do all understand my
speech, there can certainly be no illusion in that.

The Validity of a Testimony is no longer uncertain, when we are sure of two
things; First, that the witness is not himself deceived; and Secondly, that he
does not intend to deceive Others. Now this might easily be verified concerning
the Disciples of Jesus. For first the matters of fact upon which their
depositions were founded, are so evident and notorious, that none can ever be
deceived in relation to them. Thus how is it possible that the eyes should
think they saw, what they did not really see, that the ears should agree to
witness nothing but what was agreeable to the Testimony of the eyes; that the
hand should touch that which both the eyes and the ears perceived, not once
only but several times, not the eyes, the ears and the hands of one single man,
but of several men together, that they should unanimously profess themselves to
be endowed with an extraordinary power, and that too of working miracles,
unless they themselves knew the certainty of it? but tho we should suppose a
man so Whimsical as to impose upon himself after that prodigious rate, yet sure
we could not without extravagance imagine, that the Apostles had utterly lost
their senses by the same kind of madness; that this madness begun exactly after
the Death of Jesus Christ; that the spreading of the Gospel over the face of
the Universe was a wonderful contrivance of the same; that it was joined to
that Morality which is so excellent, so sublime, and yet so just and pious in
it self, that the very Enemies of our Religion always reverenced it, And
Lastly, that all manner of virtues derived their original from such pretended
madness, which works a change upon the World, sanctifies mankind, and exactly
fulfills all those Oracles which foretold the calling of the Gentiles.

But if it appears that those men did not impose upon themselves, much less
ought they to be suspected of having had the will to deceive others; because
their Simplicity and mean Education allowed them not to frame any such design;
and besides the confusion they were in to see themselves frustrated of their
hopes by the unexpected Death of their Master, would wholly have diverted them
from it. Their temporal concerns too could not admit of it, and their shame to
show themselves to the World after what had happened, was of it self sufficient
to hinder them from it. Moreover their Conscience would have checked them for
their superstitious fondness of the vain shadow of a Messiah. And it is
impossible they could ever have agreed together so as to contrive that strange
and notorious imposture. But supposing they undertook it, the Torments
inflicted on them would have made them repent such a rash design; and the
confession of one single person amongst them would have sufficiently discovered
them all. Lastly, their Shame and Poverty, the Gaols and the Chains, the
Stripes, the Fire and the Sword that were used against them to make them
recant, sufficiently warrant us that they never intended to deceive the World.
And if one single person so disposed is to be looked upon as an unheard of
prodigy, how much more unlikely is it that a whole Society could have conceived
such an extravagant design?

If the Testimony of the Disciples be false, we cannot choose but look upon them
as Mad men, or rather as Rascals, nay perhaps as both. And yet their preaching
sufficiently shows the glory of their Innocence and Wisdom, to confound both
these Calumnies. Let any man but read over the Books of those admirable
Writers, and there he will to his satisfaction find, that Honesty, Sincerity,
and Self denial is inseparably interwoven with the most pure and most judicious
Morality that ever was.

But this Reflection puts me in mind that I must now hasten to the consideration
of the Books of the New Testament, not to see whether they be human or divine
(for that will be considered in its own proper place) but whether they be
forged or not. For if once we show that they are not forged, we need only read
them over, to know the Testimony the Disciples bore of Jesus Christ himself.
And because that Truth will serve for a confirmation of what we have already
said, we shall begin the following Section with the Consideration of it.

SECTION II.
Wherein we shall prove the Divinity of the Christian Religion by examining the
Books of the New Testament.
CHAP. I.
Wherein we shall prove that those Books can never be supposititious.
WHen I examine the Books of the New Testament, all the doubts I strive to raise
concerning them, amount only to these three, I. Whether those Books were not
composed by some Impostor, who probably might have ascribed them to the
Apostles? II. Whether those Books, supposing they were composed by the
Apostles, were not afterward corrupted by the Christians? III. Whether the
Apostles the pretended Authors of those Books, did not themselves fill them up
with many fictions for their Masters honor, and the advantage of their
Religion? It is but just we should examine whether these three suspicions are
well grounded or no.

And First, it is certain that in taking away the evidence of the Books of the
New Testament, we overthrow that of all other Books, and call in question the
account of all things past. For who will warrant me that Cicero's Orations are
his own, if I cannot reasonably assure my self that the Epistles of St. Paul
were written by St. Paul himself? But hold! Perhaps it was easier or more
advantageous to counterfeit the Books of the New Testament than those of Humane
Learning. This is what we must a little enquire into.

And I. the facility there is in Counterfeiting the the works of an Author,
wholly depends upon the several Circumstances of time, place, and persons, upon
the subject matter of that Book, the temper of men's minds, their different
notions, and their various interests which must be carried on in it. Now to
counterfeit Books of Humane Learning seems infinitely more easy in all these
respects, than to counterfeit those of the New Testament.

I. Because they who counterfeit a Book of Humane Learning, may take as much
time as they please for it; but here we know not what time can be imagined the
Books of the New Testament were forged in. If we look back from age to age, we
find the Christians had those Books continually before their eyes, and that
they were quoted by the most ancient Fathers, who looked upon them as Sacred
and Divine.

II. It is easy to counterfeit Books of Humane Learning, because there are
generally but few people that interess themselves at all in them, at least but
very indifferently: but it would have been a very difficult matter to
counterfeit those Books which compelled men to suffer Martyrdom, as the Books
of the New Testament did. If a man that lends out his money seeks the best
security he can for it; what then must that person do, or rather what must an
infinite number of persons do, who utterly renounce all things for the sake of
the Gospel?

III. There has been found some who have counterfeited Books of Humane
Learning: but none ever known that were willing to die in defense of their
forgery. Now none here can be suspected to have forged the Books of the New
Testament, but only those who suffered Death in defense of the Christian
Religion, and consequently to confirm the Truth of these matters of fact on
which Chistianity it self is founded.

IV. A man may very well counterfeit a Book of Humane Learning, but not always,
nor in all circumstances, and 'twould be very ridiculous in a man to forge
Letters that must have been written not long ago to whole Societies, or
Epistles that must have been deposited in the hands of an infinite number of
persons, and in very many different places. Now this must needs be affirmed of
all the Epistles of the Apostles, which make up a very considerable part of the
New Testament. And how could the Church of Rome have possibly been made to
believe, that St. Paul wrote an Epistle to her; or the Church of Corinth, that
she had received two Epistles from him, and so of the rest unless it had been
so.

V. This argument is so much the more considerable, since he that grants one
point in this matter, unavoidably grants the whole: and if you should agree
with me, that perhaps one single Epistle among all those of the New Testament
was not forged, you must grant the same thing of them all; or at least it will
be to no purpose for the Incredulous to to cavil thereupon. For what if I
should grant the four Gospels to be forged, does not the Book of the Acts of
the Apostles contain, nay does it not necessarily suppose the same essential
matters of fact, related to us in the Gospels? should I grant the same of the
Book of Acts, are not the Epistles of St. Paul sufficient to inform us, that
Jesus Christ wrought several miracles, rose again from the Dead, and ascended
into heaven, and that the Holy Ghost descended upon the Disciples on the day of
Pentecost? and that is as much as I desire. In a word, should I grant all the
Epistles of St. Paul to be the works of another man, I need but receive those
of St. Peter, or those of St. John, to prove the same thing. There being never
an Epistle in all the New Testament, but what mentions or implies those
essential matters of fact, without which there can be no such thing as
Christianity in the World.

Let us now see whether we can persuade our selves that all the Books of the
New Testament, without excepting one fragment, or single Epistle amongst them,
are forged; and whether we can entertain such a suspicion which no Heretic, no
Impious, or Incredulous Person ever entertained.

But how is it possible all the Epistles of the Apostles should be forged,
since they must have been committed to an infinite number of Persons, as they
were really in the beginning of Christianity, and since Tertullian tells us,
that in his time they carefully preserved in several Churches the Originals of
those Epistles which the Apostles had wrote to them?

Again, in what time, and on what occasion could this Forgery have been made?
Was it during the lives of the Apostles? No: For could the World consider those
Books as Sacred and Divine, which the Apostles themselves forged. Was it then
immediately after the Death of the Apostles? Do we owe it to Clemens, Polycarp,
and the other Doctors of that Age? By no means: for those Disciples of the
Apostles separated themselves as soon as those great Lights of the World were
extinguished. Polycarp went to Rome, to decide a controversy with a Bishop of
Rome, occasioned in the Church about the time wherein they were to celebrate
the Feast of the Christian Resurrection, or Passover. Those two great men
differed much in that point, but yet they both greed unanimously to receive the
Writings of the Apostles, and to look upon them as the true standard of their
Faith and Manners. Moreover, what Probability is there that so great a number
of Churches could have been induced to receive so many false Epistles, so soon
after the Death of the Apostles, and when there was so many Persons yet living
who had conversed with them? In truth, this is so extravagant a Notion that we
hold our selves not at all obliged to refute it.

But it may be objected that the Primitive Christians questioned the Authority
of some Epistles, such as the Epistle to the Hebrews, whose Author was never
certainly known, the second Epistle of St. Peter, that of St. Jude, etc. I
grant it: but then I presume that this consideration makes for us, since it
cannot be conceived that the Ancient Primitive Christians should dispute so
long about some Epistles in particular, had the rest altogether been as liable
to suspicion.

But may we not reasonably imagine that during those strange disorders which
followed the destruction of Jerusalem, some Christians either perfect cheats,
or but partly persuaded of that Faith, might have composed the Books of the New
Testament, and so after having inserted in them whatever stories they pleased,
ascribed them to the Apostles, to gain the greater veneration and respect for
their fictions? No certainly, because the devastation of Jerusalem hindered not
but that there might be very numerous Churches at Rome, at Antioch, at
Thessalonica, Philippi, etc. whom it would have been impossible to have
persuaded that the Apostles had wrote them some Epistles which must have been
already deposited in their hands. And besides that, it appears plainly that the
Books of the New Testament were composed before the destruction of Jerusalem,
because Jerusalem and the Church established at Jerusalem is often mentioned
therein, without the least hint that Jerusalem was then utterly destroyed.
Besides how could it come into any man's mind to forge such Books after the
destruction of Jerusalem, whose design was only to humble the pride of the
Jews, to induce them no longer to hate the Heathens as being strangers, and to
persuade them that tho God as yet suffered the carnal worship of their Law,
they ought not to expect to be justified by that. This I say was the end of the
New Testament, and especially the Epistles of St. Paul, who seems earnestly to
desire to unite the minds of the two Nations. And Heaven having sufficiently
declared it self against the Jews by the destruction of their City, the
confusion of their Tribes, and Families, and that general dispersion which made
them Tributaries to all other Nations, there was no need of any further reasons
to prove that the Jews were not the only Nation called to the Knowledge of the
true God. 'Twas enough that this proof was evidently written by the hand of God
in the just punishment of that people.

In the mean while, it is necessary to observe that by showing that the New
Testament was composed before the destruction of Jerusalem, I show also that it
is as ancient as the Apostles themselves: which affords us one determination
very advantageous to our Cause. So that this objection being very favorable
to, instead of proving any thing against us, nothing hinders but that we pass
on to the consideration of the second suspicion we were willing to entertain
concerning the Books of the New Testament.

CHAP. II.
Proving that the Books of the New Testament were never corrupted.
It Is certain that from the Apostles time to ours, the New Testament was ever
looked upon as sacred, and not to be corrupted, without impiety and Irreligion.
But whether it were Reason or Prejudice that made it so esteemed by the
Christians, I shall now examine. It is enough that the esteem men have of it
seems as ancient as the Book it self. Its being considered as the foundation of
all our hopes, and the original of heavenly Revelation, its being read and
ordered to be read in Public and Private from the Age of Clemens, Polycarp,
Justin and Iraeneus to ours: I say all this shows that it could not have been
corrupted in its Essentials. But this Truth very well deserves a more strict
consideration.

I say then how is it possible that all the World should have unanimously
conspired to corrupt this Book? For though one single Doctor of the Church should
have attempted it, yet the rest would certainly have opposed it. Though all the
Christian Doctors dispersed up and down the World should have agreeed to it,
yet the people would never have consented to it. Though the Doctors and the People
together should have been inclinable to it, yet sure their Adversaries would
not have failed to reproach them with it. The Jews and Heathens whose only aim
was to cry down their Religion, would never have concealed it. Julian,
Porphirius, and all other particular Enemies of the Christians would have drawn
some advantage from it. In a word, though the silence of their Adversaries had
favored so strange an Enterprise, yet the different parties, and various
Heresies which soon after sprung up among the Christians, were an invincible
obstacle to it.

It Is well known that immediately after the Death of the Apostles, the Church
was strangely disturbed by several various Controversies. For not to speak here
of the Gnostics, that abominable Sect, which deserves not the honorable name
of Christians, certainly the Opinion of the Millenarians (which Papias seems to
have been the Author of) founded upon the Apostolical Tradition fifteen years
after the death of St. John: the Controversy which soon after happened
concerning the Christian Passover, together with the Disputes of the Orthodox
against the Origenists concerning the Resurrection, and several other Articles
of the Christian Doctrine, I say these Disputes might easily have divided the
Christians in the first Century of the Church. Next to them succeeded the
famous Disputes of the Orthodox with the Arrians, and with what heat and
animosities they were carried on, is sufficiently known to all the World. But
however fatal all those Controversies were to the Church, yet they produced
that good effect by the direction of Providence, which orders every thing to
some good end, that they preserved the Revelation of the New Testament pure and
entire, and at present strengthen our belief against all suspicions we might
probably entertain in this respect.

For tho the Millenarians, the Origenists, and the Arians should have attempted
to corrupt the Scripture; yet how were it possible that the Orthodox which were
so exasperated against them, should have suffered it to be done; or that if the
Orthodoxes had had any such design, their Adversaries which were so incensed,
should have agreed with them in the same Intention?

Should I further grant this mutual agreement possible, doubtless the almost
infinite number of Copies, of Editions, and Translations made at first of the
New Testament, rendered the execution of that design impossible. For though a man
had corrupted one single Copy among all those Copies, or translated those Books
false, yet how could he corrupt all the other Copies of them which are
dispersed in the World? or how could he alter so many other Translations which
have been made of them in different times and in different places?

But supposing this were feasible, if the Writings of the Apostles were ever
corrupted, it must have been either in their Essentials, or in things of little
Importance; I mean by their Essentials, those miraculous matters of fact
related in the New Testament, as well as all those others which if true
demonstrate the Truth of the Christian Religion. Now if those Writings were not
corrupted in their Essentials, it necessarily follows that they contain several
true matters of fact sufficient to prove the Truth of Christianity. But if they
were altered in their Essentials, there must have been added to them the
Miracles of Jesus Christ, his Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, the pouring
out of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, the power the
Apostles had of speaking strange Languages, and of imparting miraculous gifts
to others. Now I affirm that all those matters of fact could not have been
added to the New Testament, unless the whole Book was forged; because the
subject matter of the New Testament consists of nothing else but of those
matters of fact, or if you will of such things as evidently relate to them, and
which would certainly be false, if those matters of fact were false. But let us
join Experience to Reason, and consider that if the Christians had corrupted
the writings of the Apostles, the Books of the New Testament would now be quite
different from what they were in the former ages; and that having been
continually altered from that time until now, nothing could be more apparent
than such an alteration. Yet it is easy to perceive the contrary, and it
evidently appears by an almost infinite number of places of the New Testament
quoted in the Books of the Fathers, that there never was a Book that suffered
less alteration by the revolution of years than that did.

There are but two things, in my opinion that may be answered to this Argument;
the first is, that in corrupting the Books of the New Testament, those places
quoted in the Works of the Fathers might also have been altered. But this
thought can never enter into any reasonable man's mind: for he must then suppose
that there was a person in a manner Immortal, who might have had time enough to
alter so many Books composed from Age to Age; and a man too so much Master of
other Men's hearts and understandings, as to have been able to corrupt a Book
the most universally read, and most carefully preserved that ever was, and to
alter also with it all the Books of the ancient Fathers, without any body ever
perceiving it, or making the least opposition against it.

The second thing that may be answered, is that this corruption of the
Scripture was done before any of the Fathers begun to write, that is, fifteen
or twenty years after the Death of the Apostles. But we need only recall to
mind all the reasons that persuaded us that the Books of the New Testament were
not forged by the Successors of the Apostles: and it will appear they are no
less conclusive in this place. In short, we need but join the Martyrdom of the
Primitive Christians (who were not certainly so Whimsical as to die in defense
of their fictions) with the passion the people had for the Writings of the
Apostles, the Divisions which disunited the Church immediately after their
Death, the variety of Translations, the number of Copies, the constant and
perpetual Tradition of the Ancient Fathers, the connection of the essential
matters of fact of the Gospel, which is such, that he that admits of one, is
obliged to admit of the other too, (as he that believes the Ascension of Jesus
Christ, is obliged to believe his Resurrection also, and he that denies those
matters of fact is no longer a Christian) the number of the Books which the New
Testament consists of, the Repetition of the same matters of fact in them, the
want of Time and Opportunity to invent, or essentially corrupt them, the
impossibility of it, unless the Book was wholly forged, the prodigious
multitude of people who must have been imposed upon in that respect, the nature
of the matters of fact they must have been made to believe, viz. that whole
Societies had received some Epistles from the Apostles, which contained such
and such things which they ought to have well remembered) the Experience of time
past, which evidently shows that from Clemens and Polycarp down to us, that is,
for sixteen Ages together, the Books of the New Testament were not essentially
corrupted; the distance of places where those Books must have been forged or
corrupted, together with the impossibility of making many fictions (which in
all appearance those Books would have been full of) pass for Truth, and that so
soon after the Death of the Apostles, when the World had their preaching yet
fresh in their memory; the silence of the Enemies of the Christians on that
account, who never mentioned any thing concerning that pretended forgery; the
distinction the Primitive Christians made at first between the Writings of the
Fathers and those of the New Testament, which they looked upon as the absolute
Rule and Standard of their Faith: All these considerations, I say, put together
plainly show us, and that too in an evident manner, that it would argue madness
in the highest Degree longer to entertain either of the two former Suspicions.

I pass on therefore to a third, which is, that the Apostles themselves
composed fables for the honor of their Master. But since this is the most
considerable of them all, and that which Julian, Mahomet, and almost every
Incredulous person of these times chiefly urge against us, it is but reasonable
I should more particularly and thoroughly examine it in the following Chapters;
for truly upon that chiefly depends the solid proof of our Religion.

CHAP. III.
That the Apostles did not Write what was false.
TO comprehend distinctly that the Authors we speak of did not impose upon us
in their Writings, it is fit to consider those Writings in particular one after
another. They consist of three principal parts, which are the four Gospels, the
Book of Acts, and the Epistle of the Apostles.

St. Matthew writ the first, and his Gospel is quoted by Clemens Bishop of Rome,
Disciple and Contemporary with the Apostles. Barnabas quotes it also in his
Epistle. And Ignatius and Polycarp who lived in the time of St. John. Justin,
Iraeneus, who lived a little after; Athenagoras, Tertullian, and all the other
Doctors of the Church which succeeded them, unanimously received it.

There is not only the Gospel according to St. Matthew, concerning which
'twould be a very difficult matter to entertain any reasonable suspicions; but
the Gospel according to St. Mark was also a while after written for a second
support of our belief. The same Fathers who testify of the one, testify also of
the other. Papias, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin speak of it; and St. Iraeneus
relates that Mark the Disciple of St. Peter composed his Gospel of those
matters he had heard the latter speak of.

St. Luke who accompanied St. Paul in all his Travells, wrote a third Gospel
which the Ancient Fathers have also received.

Lastly, St. John, the last of the Apostles composed a fourth Gospel toward
the latter end of his days, as the Doctors of the Primitive Church tell us; and
this Apostle declares at the end of it that he himself is the Author of it:
this is the Disciple, says he, which testifies of these things which he has
seen. chap. 21. 24.

It is to be observed first of all, that the four Evangelists, who all agree in
the plainness and ingenuity which appears in their Relations, have nevertheless
a very different style from one another. Thus St. John expresses himself after
a very simple manner if compared with that of St. Luke, who being a Physician,
ought to have written in a more lofty style than St. John, who was originally a
Fisherman. And this consideration removes the Suspicion we might entertain,
that all those Gospels were composed by one and the same Author.

Secondly, We may observe that although these Writers agree essentially in the
matters they relate, there is nevertheless some small difference betwixt them,
which very sensibly shows us, that they composed their Gospels separately:
Divine Providence having so ordered it the better to confirm ou^ Faith.

Yet our incredulous Adversaries will not stand to this Assertion. They will
perhaps imagine that the Disciples of Jesus having got together at Jerusalem
after the Death of their Master, took certain Measures to make men believe
certain supposititions matters of fact, which they very exactly and precisely
set down, least they should contradict themselves in the Testimony they should
give of them; and that after having founded several Churches by then preaching,
some of them took special care to digest those very matters of fact in Writing
which they had preached throughout the World, after having invented them. I
think this is the most plausible objection of theirs that is likely to be
raised against this subject.

But in order to confute this imagination, it might perhaps suffice to call to
mind what I have before mentioned, the absurdity there is in supposing that a
few simple and ignorant Fishermen dejected by the Death of their Master,
undeceived of the opinion they had entertained that he was their Messiah; and
so fearful that they fled when he was seized upon in order to his Crucifixion,
should contrive amongst themselves how to deceive other men, when they
themselves were so miserably deluded; that they should dare to invent a matter
of fact which would certainly fix an eternal blot and scandal upon their
Nation, by making the Jews be looked upon as so many abominable Murderers;
that all the Disciples should contrive this design together; that not one of
them should confess the Truth; that the distance of Places, the severity of
Punishments, the force of Truth, the Remorse of Conscience, the Pleasures of
the World, which they utterly lost by their Profession, should not be capable
to break off this unanimous contrivance of falsehood; that they should gladly
suffer for the confirmation of their Fables; that they should add to Constancy
a virtuous life; that these Cheats should preach nothing but Virtue,
Temperance, Charity, the Love of God and Humility; that they should command us
to love our Enemies, and bless them for the sake of God which curse us; that
Falsehood should immediately undergo the trial of torments; that the simplicity
of some gross sort of men should be capable of that nice Ambition, which
consists in making men desire to immortalize their own names by suffering
Torments and Death it self; and that the Malice of some impostors should be
capable to make Charity reign, to establish in the World all sorts of Virtues;
to destroy the Heathenish Idolatry, by making the true God be every where
adored, and to accomplish all those Oracles which concerned the calling of the
Gentiles.

But this consideration will be much stronger and more considerable, if we
consider the behavior of the Apostles in opposition to that of those
Heretics, who so much disturbed the Church almost in its infancy. What Pride,
self Interest and Ambition was there not seen in them? Their thoughts were
wholly bent upon making new Sects. Every one of them set up for a Ringleader
of factions. Simon called himself, the great Virtue of God, and his Helena the
Holy Ghost. Menander who succeeded him pretended that he was Virtue it self,
which was sent down from Heaven for the salvation of mankind. Basilides boasted
that he declared things more sublime, and far more wonderful than the two
former. And among this same rank must be also inserted Cerinthus, Carpocrates,
Marcion, etc. who all endeavored to excel one another, in the particular
design of raising themselves above all: not to mention at this time that which
they pretended; that those who had attained to a certain degree of Knowledge,
which according to them, was a state of perfection, might live as they pleased,
and give themselves over to all sorts of Passions. Such you see is the
Character of Impostors.

If the Disciples of Jesus Christ invented those matters which they wrote after
having preached them, they must themselves have looked upon Religion as a mere
Fiction. What is then the Reason they seem to us so different from those
Heretics which we just now mentioned? And wherefore instead of inventing, as
the Gnostics, such Doctrines as were favorable to their several passions, did
they on the contrary preach a Morality which wholly tends to mortify all Evil
and Irregular affections? Why did they not set up for Ringleaders of factions?
Why did not every one of them take a pride in himself? Why did they plot
together to raise another man; being so unanimous that they never contradicted
one another; so humble that there was not one amongst them that took upon him
to be Head and Master; so disinteressed that not one of all the Passions
incident to men seemed to have a share in their conduct?

Further it is observable, that those Ancient Heretics we just now mentioned
invented many points of Doctrine in opposition to one another. They talked of
Invisible Eternal Spirits. They reasoned about the principle of the World. They
gave out many very fantastical Ideas of Jesus Christ and of the Holy Ghost.
They established a subordination of Heavenly Virtues: and because all these
Doctrines did merely depend upon Speculation, and not on Experience, 'twas an
easy matter for them to use them to seduce the Simple and Ignorant.

The Disciples of Jesus Christ on the contrary confirmed whatever they said,
not as those Impostors by some Eternal Invisible Spirits, and some abstracted
and impenetrable Speculations, but by those matters of fact whose knowledge
merely depended upon the Senses themselves. Now it is well known that the Senses
of the most simple are as much enlightened as those of the most Learned, which
evidently denotes they had no manner of design of imposing upon men.

But it is not enough to show that the Disciples of Jesus Christ were not of
such a character as to invent those things which they preached: let us
therefore proceed yet further, and endeavor to make it appear that it is
absolutely impossible that the Disciples of Jesus Christ should have invented
those matters.

CHAP. IV.
That the Disciples of Jesus Christ could not impose upon men in the matter of
their Writings, or Preaching.
SInce the principal design of an Impostor is to conceal the cheat he intends
to play, it is very easy to observe his Intention and Cunning in his choice of
the Circumstances he relates.

For if he invents a matter of fact, he will certainly pretend either that it
happened long since; or 'twas in a remote Country; or that there were but few
Spectators of it, who are since dead; or that ^t is a singular matter of fact
which drew no Con^equence after it, and of which there can be no sen^ible
Evidence given. In short, whatever a man invents, he still reserves to himself
some means or other to bring himself off in case he were too far urged by some
people who might interess themselves in the thing related.

But here we observe on the one hand, that men are more particularly concerned
in the matters of fact which the Apostles relate, nay and all mankind. The Jews
who are represented in them as most abominable Parricides, could not look upon
them without some concern. The Christians whom the truth of these matters of
fact engaged to suffer Martyrdom, could not but examine them with attention.
And the Heathens whose Religion those matters of fact would certainly subvert,
if once acknowledged to be true, were very much concerned not to consent to
such a forgery. Lastly, the Highpriests were too jealous of their Authority,
the Magistrates too much averse to all new Sects, and the People too much
devoted to prejudice and superstition, ever to admit of these matters of fact
without a strict examination.

We observe on the other hand, that those very men who published them, were so
far from being sparing or cautious in their choice of the Circumstances they
related, that they set down expressly so many that must needs have been well
known; that either they must have been immediately convinced of their falsehood,
or we acquiesce in what they told us.

For I. if you ask, in what place did they testify and affirm the truth of
these matters of fact? We answer at Jerusalem, and in Judea, the very places
where all these things occurred. And lest you should any ways question it, we
will prove further by the Testimony of all Antiquity, that the Apostles
established by their Preaching a Church at Jerusalem.

II. Would you know the time? 'Twas in the space of three years that the
Miracles of Jesus Christ, his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension were brought
to pass: and a few Weeks after the Ascension, the Apostles begun to Preach
publicly in Jerusalem.

III. Would you know the witnesses of the truth of these matters of fact? We
can produce a great number of persons who both lived and conversed with Jesus
Christ himself.

IV. Would you fain know the nature of the matters of fact here attested? We
show you that they are very evident and singular ones; that the Sick are
healed, the Winds and Seas hushed, the Dead raised, a man put to death who
conversed with his Disciples, and ascended into Heaven, etc.

V. If you would know their number: we can show that the whole Life of Jesus
Christ was but one continual series of Miracles.

VI. Lastly, Would you know the proofs of all this? The Apostles themselves
boast of having received miraculous gifts, and that too by a good Title, as we
shall show in the sequel of this Work.

In the interim do but unite all these Circumstances together, and see what an
irresistible evidence arises from their Union? How could the Apostles persuade
so many persons concerned in this thing, so many that had both known and seen
Jesus Christ? Would they not soon have lost all Credit, if search had been made
into the places, and the truth of what they affirmed strictly examined? Or
rather, how is it possible that whilst they ventured to publish such things in
the very places where they must necessarily have been brought to pass, the Jews
should not have stopped the progress of the Gospel, by discovering to the World
so visible and evident an Imposture? For the Apostles did not publish only one
single matter of fact of this nature. They affirmed also that their Master had
raised Lazarus from the Dead, together with the Son of the Widow of Naim, and
the Daughter of Jairus; that he had healed almost an infinite number of people
possessed with the Devil, Deaf, Blind, and sick of the Palsy; and that his fame
had spread throughout all Syria.

Nor were the Apostles content barely to preach all these things, they put them
also down in writing, and their Writings are dispersed throughout all the
World. Therefore they hid not themselves, but were willing every one should
know the certainty of what they testified, and examine as much as they pleased
the matters of fact they related. They gave them out to the World, and exposed
them to be searched all manner of ways. But supposing I should grant those
Books to be written forty, fifty, or sixty years after the Death of Jesus
Christ, still is it evident that before that time there was a Church at
Jerusalem founded by the preaching of the Apostles; and it is certain that the
Apostles had declared by word of mouth the Miracles and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, which are the essential matters of fact contained in those Books.

For how could they otherwise persuade the World to worship a crucified man? or
convince them that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah? How was it possible the
Christians should look upon that Book as Divine, which went upon a supposition
of what was never done? By what kind of agreement should four persons who wrote
in different times and places, and copied not one another Writings (as is
plain if we read them over with never so little attention, and consider their
different manner of relating the same things) I say by what kind of agreement
should they have conspired to inform us of the same matters of fact, if the
Apostles had not first of all unanimously and universally published them? How
could the Apostles have persuaded men to turn Christians, had they not declared
the Miracles, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ; since Christianity
cannot subsist without these matters of fact? Thus we see it is to no purpose for
Impostors to disguise themselves, for all their shifts and tricks serve only to
discover them.

CHAP. V.
Where we shall more particularly examine, whether the Apostles had the Power
or the Will to deceive mankind.
THose men who have a design to deceive the World, must have more skill, wit
and cunning than others; which skill, wit, and cunning will appear in their
works in spite of all their Art, and subtilty.

But when I strictly examine those Authors whom we call Sacred, I neither find
Cunning, Wit, nor Affectation in their Books. Every thing they contain seems to
me very simple, naked and open. They all exactly relate their own Weaknesses
and imperfections. They do not conceal their true Birth and extraction. They
discover their ambition in their controversy, who amongst them should be the
greatest in the flourishing Kingdom of the Messiah; their gross ignorance in
the Questions they asked their Master, and one another, viz. What means this,
to rise again from the Dead? their cowardice in betaking themselves to flight
at the sight of the Soldiers that came to take away their Master, and their
incredulity in those scruples they raised concerning his Resurection.

All these things plainly discover the greatest sincerity and impartiality. But
yet there arises here a certain scruple which seems not altogether
inconsiderable, and may deserve a little consideration. Who knows (perhaps some
will object) but that this is an affected sincerity which prepossesses our
minds in their behalf, only to deceive us the more securely? In order to
overthrow this notion, I shall not assert that the Writers we speak of were
originally Fishermen and Publicans, and that it would seem very strange that
men of that Birth and Education should affect simplicity, and be capable of so
refined apiece of policy, of which there can hardly be given an example amongst
the most able Politicians, that ever took upon them to deceive mankind.

Neither shall I say, that since the four Evangelists composed their Writings
apart, 'twould be very surprising that they should all concur in the design of
imposing upon the credulity of men, by Writing after so simple and ingenuous a
manner; and that they should not only be entirely conformable to one another in
this respect, but also should agree with the other Writers of the New Testament.

It Is sufficient to observe, that they sometimes relate such things, as at
first view suggest those notions in us which Piety utterly rejects, and
Incredulity makes use of to oppose the Christian Religion, by attacking its
divine head. This they would never have done, had they only affected an
ingenuous simplicity. Thus it is asked, why Jesus Christ who was subject to his
holy and ever blessed Mother, according to the observation of the Evangelists,
should make her this answer, which is some what rough and severe: Woman what
have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come. Thus Julian the Apostate,
Celsus, Porphirius, and other Enemies of the Christian Religion, stick not to
say that Jesus Christ gave some marks of his weakness in the Garden of
Gethsemane, where the fear of Death made him sweat great drops of Blood, and
where he cried out several times, O my Father, if it be possible let Mat. 26.
39.
this Cup pass from me. They also pretend that this exclamation of Jesus Christ
when nailed on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? was an
expression of his despair.

I know not here what to admire most, either the impudence of these proud
Enemies of our Religion, or the force of Truth which still becomes stronger the
more they endeavor to shake it. For as for the first, If the Enemies of the
Christians wont believe the report of the Evangelists, how came they to know
that Jesus Christ uttered these words, which give them occasion to think he
wanted constancy? But if they will believe the report of the Evangelists, why
should they refuse to believe so many miraculous matters of fact, which the
Evangelists left to us in writing, after having been eyewitnesses of the same?

It is certain that we may find in our principles wherewith to explain those
places they bring against us. The words which Jesus Christ spoke to his blessed
Mother, give us only to understand, how very jealous he was of the duties of
his Calling. He spoke to her as a Mediator between God and Man, as the person
in whom she ought necessarily to believe in order to her Salvation; and who
doubts but in that quality he had some Authority over her?

As for the sorrowfulness he expressed in his Agony, it might proceed from a
double cause, the one natural, and the other supernatural. He might very well
fear Death as Man; and the pains inflicted on his Humane Nature might force him
to utter some innocent complaints. But that was not all that made his torments
grievous. He was loaded with the Sins of Mankind, and subject to the curse of
the Law. He looked upon God as his Father, but God offered himself to him as an
angry Judge. The more he loved his Father, the more sensible he was of the
Grief he sustained in being removed from him. The measure of his sufferings
consisted in the measure of his virtue; and what he says here to his Father, is
rather the Language of his Love, than that of his Despair.

But if the Incredulous should say they are not obliged to subscribe to my
explanations, because it is uncertain whether they have any other ground than
my bare imagination; I am willing they should entertain this scruple, and
cherish it till by establishing my principles, I have an opportunity of
answering yet more fully all those difficulties. But in the mean time I hold
that nothing can more demonstrate the sincerity of the Evangelists than those
places just now mentioned: and I affirm that the sincerity of the Evangelists
being well demonstrated, does invincibly prove the Truth of the Christian
Religion.

For certainly either those who composed the Gospels had a design to deceive
Mankind in behalf of Jesus Christ and his Religion, or they had no such design
at all. If they had any such design, they would have taken special care not to
set down those Circumstances of the death of their Master, which might give the
World an occasion to suspect he wanted Courage, or thought himself forsaken of
God. But if in writing the matters of fact contained in the Gospel, they had no
manner of design to deceive Mankind; we must then of necessity look upon them
as being very sincere Authors, who would not deceive us, unless they themselves
had first of all been deceived. So that all the question is, whether the
matters of fact they tell us of are such as are shown only by Illusion. And we
need here only consider whether all the Disciples could have fancied they saw
an infinite number of very singular and sensible Miracles, such as sick men
healed, Dead raised to Life, etc. and have believed that they themselves worked
miracles, when all the while there was no such thing.

It Is to no purpose here to allege, that the Evangelists affected an ingenuous
simplicity to avoid the suspicion of dishonesty. For had that been their
design, they would have taken special care not to furnish impious men with
places and passages on which they might raise imaginary triumphs. Nor is there
any reason to believe that the Evangelists related those words, because their
simplicity was so great that they had not judgment to discern whether they were
for or against their cause. For what probability is there that men who had wit
enough to deceive other people, should have so little in this occasion? Must a
man needs be wise and learned, when he chooses to represent his Master constant
and undaunted, rather than sorrowful unto Death? And yet it is not one single
Evangelist that relates the history of his passion after this manner, they all
agree in this respect. And how could this be so? but that they only proposed to
themselves to speak the plain truth, and they spoke it without considering the
impression it would make on Mankind, without examining whether the Incredulous
would take occasion from thence to slander the Christian Religion.

In the mean while, if what has been said here is not sufficient, I am willing
more particularly to examine the matters contained in the Gospels.

CHAP. VI.
Where we shall examine the matters contained in the Gospels, and see whether
they are capable of Illusion or Imposture.
THose Books contain an infinite number of extraordinary, divine and admirable
things; but the principal of them are reducible to these four heads, I. The
Birth, Genealogy, and Education of Jesus Christ, with all the Circumstances of
them, which we shall not speak of at present, least we should be too tedious,
having already mentioned them in our first part of this work. II. The Exercise
of his Office, confirmed by an infinite number of miracles from his Baptism to
his Ascension. III. The holiness of his life and conversation seen clearly in
several occasions, and shining throughout the various Actions of his life. IV.
His Doctrine and his Prophecies. From these four different heads spring forth
such beams of Truth as wonderfully illustrate this whole matter. Let us
therefore examine them in their order, and keep still to our usual method,
which is to raise as we go along as many difficulties as we can, and urge them
on with all their force, to stop if it be possible the complaints of the
Incredulous against us.

We may very well consider in the miracles of Jesus Christ, their number,
variety, and greatness, the noise they made in the World, and the manner in
which they were received. And first the Evangelists make appear the number,
variety and greatness of them, in telling us that he changed Water into Wine in
Cana, that he restored sight to the Blind, hearing to the Deaf, and health to
the Sick; that he cleansed the Leprous, healed the sick of the Palsy, cured one
of a withered Hand, another of a Dropsy* a third diseased with an Issue of
Blood, that he cast out many Devils, raised the Dead to Life, appeased the
stormy Winds and Tempests, and at several times wonderfully fed many thousands
in the Wilderness. These Miracles are very numerous indeed, seem very much
different from one another, and cannot proceed but from a Divine Power.

To this we must further add, that they are of such a nature as could not be
concealed from the knowledge of men, that they must necessarily have an
infinite number of witnesses, so that had the Apostles purely invented them,
they might soon have been contradicted by an infinite number of people.

And yet it seems the most inveterate enemies of Jesus Christ durst not
altogether deny the evidence of them; because they accused him of healing the
sick on the Sabbath Day, and pretended he cast out Devils by Belzeebub, the
Prince of the Devils: this sort of calumny being as it were an extorted
confession of his infinite Power, and a Testimony which they bore in spite of
themselves to the Truth of his Mission.

Besides, it is easy to believe that the Evangelists did not invent of
themselves what they make the Scribes and Pharisees utter on this account,
because they unanimously agree in the relation they give us of it; they
represent Jesus Christ refuting this calumny, and assuring us in this occasion,
that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost would never be forgiven, a thing which
could not easily enter into any man's mind: In a word, the Jews that came after,
being compelled to own that Jesus Christ had done several miracles, were
obliged to say that he had found out the true pronunciation of the great word
Jehovah, and that 'twas by the help of this pronunciation (a pattern whereof he
had found in the Temple) that he wrought so many miracles. See into what
extravagant opinions men necessarily fall into, when they endeavor to shun the
force of Truth.

But not to insist on all these vain Chimeras, methinks neither of these two
Truths can reasonably be contested. The first is that Jesus Christ pretended to
have worked many miracles. This is what his enemies reviled him with, when
standing round about his Cross they said, he saved others, himself he cannot
save. Let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. The second
is, that the Disciples who followed him, knew for certain whether he wrought
any miracles or not. For since we have here to do with evident and singular
miracles above the reach of Human Power, they could not but certainly know the
truth of them.

Things being thus supposed, I further consider, that of the many Disciples
Jesus Christ had, there were but two that proved unfaithful to him: but it was
not long before they did right to the Truth, tho each of them in a very
different manner. The one was moved with a sensible regret, and wept bitterly,
the other was so tormented with the remorse of Conscience, that he was forced
to make himself away.

Had Jesus been an Impostor, how came Peter to repent, and Judas to despair. If
he falsely boasted of many miracles, those two men, those two constant and
perpetual witnesses of his Actions, must needs have known it; and and if they
did certainly know it, whence could then proceed the Repentance of the one, and
the Despair of the other?

'Twould be to no purpose to use any Evasions in the history of Judas, which
the Writers of the New Testament have represented to us as a thing publicly
known to the World. This man (says St. Peter, in the first Chapter of the Books
of Acts verse 18.) purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling
headlong, burst asunder in the midst, and all his Bowels gushed out. And it was
known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem, insomuch as that field is called in
their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say the field of Blood. Is it
possible to be more particular in any thing? And could the Author of the Acts
be so foolish to imagine he could invent all these Circumstances, and make St.
Peter utter them without making him ridiculous and himself liable to be
contradicted

In like manner the Evangelists tell us all the Circumstances of the Death, and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. They say that at his death there was a great
Darkness, and a dreadful Earthquake, that the Rocks burst, and the vail of the
Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom. If all this were mere
Invention, those Writers showed but little reason in choosing such strange
Circumstances to impose upon men's belief. Was it such an easy matter to
persuade all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem that on the day Jesus Christ was
crucified, the vail of the Temple rent in twain, and several other notable
Prodigies were seen? Was it not a pretty way of getting credit amongst men? And
those men too who related such strange things contrary to the certain knowledge
of every one, and so soon after they must have been brought to pass, could they
gain over to their side so many thousand people?

As to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Evangelists relate that the Stone
of his Sepulcher was sealed, and a watch set over it; that the Soldiers said
the next day that the Disciples of Jesus came by night and stole away his body
whilst they slept, etc. If you doubt whether the Soldiers were suborned by the
chief Priests, and gave out that the body of Jesus Christ had been stole away
by his Disciples, St. Matthew will inform you of it in such a manner as will
infallibly clear all your doubts. Now, says he, some of the watch came into the
City, and showed unto the Chief Priests all the things that were done. And when
they were assembled with the Elders, and had taken Council, they gave large
money unto the Soldiers, saying, say ye, his Disciples came by night and stole
him away while we Slept. And if this comes to the Governors ears, we will
persuade him and secure you. So they took the money, and did as they were
taught: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews unto this day.
Chap. 28. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Here the Evangelist is far from designing to deceive the Public in those
things he pretends were publicly known. It is therefore to be confessed that a
watch was set over the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, and that some of the watch
reported such things as are mentioned by the Evangelists, or at least that it
was supposed, that that same was their report. The question therefore is,
whether the Disciples did really steal away the body of Jesus Christ from the
midst of a company of Soldiers that were appointed to guard it. But do but only
reflect a little on the person of the Disciples, who were no better than poor
and fearful Fishermen, on their Dispersion, their trouble and heaviness, the
triple denial of the stoutest of them all, together with all other
Circumstances of that Event; and it will appear that they were so far from
executing so dangerous an undertaking, that it was impossible such a design
could have ever entered into their heads.

And therefore Pilate was so truly convinced of the Truth of the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, that he wrote to Tiberius about it. And 'twas on the account
of Pilate's Letter, that this Emperor went ^o the Senate, and proposed the
insertion of Jesus Christ among the Gods. We have no Reason to suspect this
history, especially if we consider that Tertullian himself relates it in the
Apology which he addresses to the Senate and the Roman Emperor, who needed
only to have consulted their Registers to find the actions of Pilate, as they
were so often desired to do by all those who wrote Apologies in behalf of the
Christians.

In the mean time we have no great occasion of this outward Testimony, because
there can be nothing more inseparably interwoven than these truths are: And we
need only read carefully the Gospels over to be satisfied therein. We have seen
the miracles of Jesus Christ with all their Circumstances; we shall now show
that his holiness of life was no less extraordinary than his Miracles.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Holiness of Life of Jesus Christ.
IF Jesus Christ was neither the true Messiah, nor the Son of God, and if he
falsely boasted that he wrought many Miracles, his Disciples must necessarily
have considered him as an Impostor, as soon as his Death frustrated the hopes
and promises they received from him. And if they considered him as an Impostor,
there is little appearance they should propose him as a model of Virtue and
Perfection to mankind.

But supposing they had this design, we may reasonably imagine that having
neither the Learning nor Eloquence of the Authors of that Age, they would have
had no better success in drawing an imaginary Character of their Master, than
others in representing the Excellencies of those great men it was their
interest to flatter. Yet if we choose the politest Writings of this kind, the
lives of great men composed with all art imaginable, Panegyricks that cost
thirty years labor; add to these all the collected notionsof Virtue, the Wit
and Observation of the most passionate, judicious, and elegant Orators can
furnish us with; join, the Cato's and Aristides's together, nay separate their
Virtues from their imperfections, and ascribe to them all the good qualities we
find dispersed in other men; I will yet maintain that all these Ideas, Notions
and Characters come far short of that perfection the Evangelists make us
conceive of Jesus Christ, and that too without Hyperbole or Art, but by a bare
and simple recital of his Actions.

The Heroes of whose virtue the Ancient Heathens so much boast, directed their
Actions to no other end than the glory of their Country, or their own ambition:
Whereas Jesus Christ referred all his Actions to the Glory of God. It may
properly be said of them, that they aimed at nothing else but to furnish an
infinite number of persons joined together in a Society wherewith to satisfy
their most inordinate passions, as we have already observed elsewhere
concerning Cato. Whereas Jesus Christ designed only to subdue the vicious
desires and inclinations of men's hearts. The Ancient Sages would sometimes
renounce Riches and Honors, but 'twas only to become slaves to Glory. If they
overcame some small passions, 'twas only to submit themselves to the the
Tyranny of greater. They sacrificed their other affections to their Pride and
Ambition of Fame. Nay they were so puffed up with the conceit of their own
Wisdom, that they imagined themselves happier than the Gods, fancying they owed
the temper and inclination of their minds to none but themselves; that they
were free from any passion, and were sole Lords of all. Jesus Christ on the
contrary teaches us first to renounce vain glory. This is the first principle
of his Religion. God, says he, resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble. And he is so far from having us imagine we can be happy without the
concurrence of God, that he shows us the wretched weakness and corruption of
man when separated from his Maker. This the continual use of that prayer he
taught us, would fully instruct us in, though his Morals and most holy Life
should ^ot. The Ancient Sages of Antiquity either were, ^r seemed true patterns
of Justice: but Jesus Christ ^s the teacher and the true pattern of Charity;
and *it is by Charity rather than Justice that we resemble ^he Deity which
confers good upon men, without ^eing any ways obliged thereto.

It Is easy to practice Virtue when attended with Reputation and Prosperity, as
the Ancient Philoso^hers did; but difficult to continue virtuous as our ^aviour
did in the midst of poverty and ignominy, and in spite of disgraces and
persecutions. So ^ecessary is Esteem and Reputation in this life, that ^ seems
to be as it were the very nutriment of man's ^eart; and should men but consult
themselves, ^hey would find they cannot live without it. How ^ft do those who
think themselves incapable of ^er obtaining it, abandon themselves to such a
^espair as puts them upon the blackest villainies: which has occasioned some
Princes already odious or Cruelty, to defile themselves with all manner of
oluptuousness, as despairing of ever recovering ^at good opinion, they have
already lost in the ^inds of men? To see Christ hated, despised and ^posed by
the most considerable and leading men ^ongst the Jews, and not able to gain the
least credit or esteem, unless with some poor Fishermen so gross and ignorant,
that they could hardly understand what he taught them: would not it make one
think that he had all the Reason in the World to fall into a kind of despair,
and that since he could never hope for Reputation, to give himself over to all
sorts of pleasures, and make his condition the best he could? Yet we see that
being continually in disgrace and poverty, he omitted nothing of the severe
practice of virtue. When he was affronted, he endured it with a sweet and
gentle Patience. When he was despised, he went on boldly in his innocence. Though
his followers were simple and ignorant people, he still blessed God for it. I
thank thee Father, says he, because thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, but revealed them unto Babes. Mat. 11. 25.

But we should wrong the blessed Jesus by comparing him with the most admired
persons of all ages, since none can come in comparison with him who is only
like himself.

We need only reflect upon his life and actions represented to us by the
Evangelists, to see whether we can find in him the least shadow of Vice. Would
we know whether he was addicted to Voluptuousnes^ we need only consider that
his very Enemies dur^ not cast this reproach upon him. I confess the Mat. 11.
19.
Pharisees called him a Glutton and a Win^ bibber, a friend of Publicans and
Sinner^ but not because he was luxurious either in meat (...) drink; and they
meant only that he ought not (...) have eaten with sinners, such as the
Publicans were a reproach which Jesus Christ presently confound^ by this answer
no less worthy of his Wisdom tha^ Goodness: They that be whole need no
Physician, (...) they that are sick. Mat. 9. 12. Should we fancy hi^ Ambitious,
it is but considering what use he made (...) his credit amongst the people. He
privately withdrew, when they would have made him King; and always told them
his Kingdom was not of (...) World. Did he seek after vain glory? Who decl^^ed
the praise of John the Baptist? Did he ever flatter the Doctors of the Law? Did
he take any of those measures our pride generally uses to purchase esteem? How
did he exclaim against the vices of the Scribes and Pharisees? and with what
Authority did he speak to the People? Could he be suspected of design or self
interest, he would have aimed at some temporal advantage. And had he been a
Whimsical or Melancholy person, he could never have preached that excellent
Sermon on the Mount. Consider the solidity of his Answers to those that asked
him Questions, the beauty of his Maxims, which seem wholly to proceed from
Piety and Charity, and yet so sublime and excellent Morality, which is all
along contained in the Doctrine he taught the people on the Mount*

He expressed himself in a simple but noble Style, worthy the eternal wisdom of
God, and suitable ^o the simplicity of every man's understanding. And as if he
had lived only to do good, he was never weary of exhorting men to live well. He
traveled ^ver all the Villages of Galilee with an indefatigable ^atience. He
spent the days in instructing the Mul^itude, and the Nights in making his
supplications ^o God. He rejected none that offered themselves ^o him, and
considered not men by their outward ^ppearance. When he desired to be followed,
'twas ^ot for the pleasure he took in a great retinue, but ^he better to teach
the Multitude. When he eat and drunk, 'twas with those people only he had a
^esign to convert. When he spoke of the things of ^his World, he used them only
as Representatives ^f things above. When he sharply rebuked his Disciples,
'twas because they would put a stop to the work of his Ministry. When he was
desired to eat, he replie^ his meat was to do the will of his Father. When he
thirsted and came nigh unto any fountain, it was rather to put men in mind that
he was the spring of Life, than to quench any thirst of his own* Whatever
offered it self to his Senses, elevated his thoughts to something Divine. He
was far from that busy Curiosity, that Preference of himself before others,
that false Modesty so frequent among men, and indeed from all those other
affected Virtues, which no less discover the bottom of our Corruption, than our
Vices themselves. His concern for his family never came in competition with his
concern for the Kingdom of God. 'Twas not self-love, but a divine love which
was the rule of his affections, since he called all those who did the will of
his Father, his Father, Mother, and Brethren. If he was angry, 'twas his
concern for the glory of the Deity; and he was eaten up with the zeal of his
house, when he found they had made it a den of thieves. He not only patiently
endured but pardoned a thousand injuries, nay obliged himself to love his
Enemies, commanding all his true Disciples to do their bes^ Endeavors to bring
themselves to it. In a word, search and examine the heart of man as long as yo^
please, you will never find there such virtues as thos^ of Jesus Christ were.
Consider well the conduct o^ his whole life, and you will scarce sind the least
appearance of any of the inordinate passions or irreg^lar desires of other men's
hearts. Consider all the pleasures and profits of the World, and you wi^ find
they are things Christ never sought after. E^amine one after another all his
proceedings and a^ his Actions; and you will find they did not in the least
incline to the things of this World

After what manner can we think the Eternal Son of God must have lived in the
World, supposing he came into it, unless as Jesus Christ? What other language
ought he to have spoken but that of Jesus Christ? What kind of Virtues ought he
to have practiced but his Virtues? What kind of Charity ought there to have
appeared in him, but that of Jesus Christ? And whom ought he to have been
conformable to, but to that man, in whom we find something more than man, even
the Virtues of a God concealed under the fleshly vail of Humane Infirmity?

We cannot suspect that 'twas Ambition as well as his other Qualities that
exalted him so far above all other men, and that his design was only to raise
himself to the highest Authority in Religion. He must then have foreseen that
which afterward came to pass, that his Cross would be acknowledged in all the
World: And to foresee that he must have been a Prophet. But though he should have
foreseen all these things, still 'twas necessary he should have had Strength
enough to overcome himself, to overcome himself continually and in all
respects, to renounce all the pleasures of life, and expose himself to the most
cruel sufferings: but it was impossible his Soul should have been continually
strengthened to that degree by the bare consideration of a Glory that seemed to
be imaginary, and at such a distance too. In short we know partly what kind of
Virtues may proceed from the bottom of a worldly and ambitious heart, and we
also very distinctly know that so solid a Virtue, so Univer^al, so far from any
Hypocrisy and Affectation, so contrary to the Virtues of the World, of a
Character above Imitation, above those very Ideas men ^ramed to themselves of
it, could no more arise from ^uch a source as a worldly and ambitious heart,
than ^ight can be said to proceed from darkness.

But who will assure us that the Evangelists did not flatter their Master in
his Character, and represented him as he ought to be, not as he was? This
thought has yet less solidity than the former. For if this here be but a witty
conceit of those Writers, I ask how could some poor, simple and ignorant
Fishermen invent such a model of Virtue, as was never seen or thought of
before, and whose Idea is so far above what all Antiquity gives us of its
Heroes? Besides, the Evangelists make no Eulogies upon their Master, nor
aggrandise his Virtues, nor affect to give us a more particular view of his
best Actions: but they only give us a bare and simple Recital of them, without
any Art or Design; Nay such is their sincerity, or if you will their want of
judgment (for we freely permit the Incredulous to make what suppositions they
please) that they related such things as at first shock our thoughts, and which
Impious men chiefly insist upon, such as this complaint of Jesus Christ, My
God, My God, etc. Besides this, the Circumstances with which they relate all
the actions of their Master, will sufficiently convince us of their sincerity*
For is it probable the Evangelists should have invented or forged the
murmurings of the Scribes and Pharisees, who reproached them saying, Why do ye
eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners? etc. And that controversy betwixt the
ambitious Disciples, on whose account it was that Jesus Christ having taken up
a little Child, told them they must be like that Child, if they would qualify
themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. a wonderful discourse indeed both
for its shortness and simplicity, which sufficiently shows us the very Soul of
our blessed Lord! It Is not one single Writer of all these, that relate those
Actions, there are three of them, who wrote after such a manner as manifestly
evinces they copied not one another Writings. And if you would be further
satisfied, the Apostles themselves prove the Holiness of life of their Divine
Master, by imitating his Actions. The Primitive Christians show us how well the
Apostles lived by following their Example. If you should desire we should
produce some authentical testimonies of Holiness, Virtue, sweet and peaceable
temper of the Primitive Christians: there are abundance to be had in the
Writings of their very Enemies. We need only an indifferent Knowledge of
Antiquity, to banish all suspicions in that respect.

Thus the truth appears on all sides; and I sensibly perceive it as soon as I
frame any Idea to my self of the life and actions of Jesus Christ. Yet I am
willing however, that the Incredulous should not wholly conform their judgment
to mine; and if this Argument does not move and convince them as much as it
does me, they need only pass on to the consideration of others.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Prophecies of Jesus Christ.
THey will perhaps be much more affected with the Prophecies that occur in the
Gospel, several of which are very expressly delivered. But among the rest we
shall make choice of one which we shall particularly examine: it is that
concerning the final destruction of Jerusalem.

We may easily perceive how clearly it is set down by the Evangelists, who bring
in Jesus Christ fore^elling it, and how exactly 'twas afterward fulfilled.

The words of the Prophecy are these. And Jesus answering said unto him, see
thou these Mark 13. 2.
^reat buildings? There shall not be left one ^tone upon another, that shall not
be thrown down. etc. And when ye shall hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars, be ye
not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.
For Nation shall rise against Nation and Kingdom against Kingdom: and there
shall be Earthquakes in diverse places, and there shall be famines and troubles:
for all these are but the beginnings of sorrows, etc. When ye therefore shall
see the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing
where it ought not (whosoever reads let him understand) then let them which be in
Judea, flee into the mountains. Let him which is on the house top, not come
down to take any thing out of his house, etc. But woe unto them that are with
Child, and to them that give Suck in those days. For in those days shall be
affliction, such as was not since the beginning of the Creation which God
created unto this time, neither shall be again. And except that the Lord had
shortened those days, no flesh should be saved, but for the Elects sake, etc.
And then if any man shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or lo he is there:
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
show great signs and wonders to seduce (if it were possible) even the Elect.
But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

It is not requisite that a man should be very well acquainted with the Jewish
History, to know that this Prophecy was exactly fulfilled. Those who doubt it,
may consult the History Josephus wrote of it. There they will hear of Troubles,
of Wars, Rumors of Wars, of Famines, Earthquakes from place to place, which
preceeded for some years the final destruction of Judea. Therein they will find
Jerusalem surrounded with Armies, and trodden down by the Gentiles. There they
will read of a time, wherein 'twas much better for the Inhabitants of that
miserable Country, to forsake their abodes in the Cities, and to flee to the
Mountains. There they will see the Temple of Jerusalem burnt down and
demolished, without having one stone left upon another; and surely be convinced
that there was never Tribulation like unto the Tribulation of those days. They
will be no longer ignorant of the Abomination of Desolation set up in the holy
place which the Prophet Daniel speaks of, when they shall see the Jews rushing
into the Temple, and there cutting one another throats on a solemn feast day.
But if they would further consult our Ecclesiastical Historians, or the
Primitive Fathers, they would find them all agree in this Relation, that the
faithful Disciples of Jesus Christ, who were at Jerusalem, fled to a little
City called Pella, after having been forewarned of it by the Spirit; and there
will be no longer reason to think these Words of Jesus Christ obscure, But pray
ye that your flight be not in the Winter, etc. There are few people but what
perceive the exact Conformity of this prophecy with its Event; and we need not
at all question the certainty of it: But it is not so very certain that it was
not composed after the Event, and it will concern us to enquire into it.

It appears then first, that the Gospels wherein it is related, were composed
before the destruction of Jerusalem, because St. Luke wrote not the Book of
Acts, till some time after he had composed his Gospel, as he testifies himself
in these Words: The former treatise have I made O Theophilus of all that Jesus
begun both to do and to teach, etc. Acts 1. 1. Besides, it seems that St. Luke,
had written the Book of Acts before the destruction of Jerusalem; because he is
so far from speaking of that Event, that on the contrary he speaks of Jerusalem
as of a City that was still in being, and wherein there was a flourishing
Christian Church.

But perhaps this is not so much insisted upon; It may be further asked whether
that prophecy might not have been inserted in the Gospel by some Zealous
Christians, who having seen the destruction of Jerusalem, might have took
occasion from thence to honor their Master, by pretending he had foretold it.

For the clearing of this doubt, we shall observe first, that though this
Prophecy be the same in substance in the three Gospels wherein it is related,
yet it is expressed after a very different manner, which is sufficient to
persuade us that it was not inserted by one and the same Author in the Gospel
according to St. Matthew, in the Gospel according to St. Mark, and in the
Gospel according to St. Luke. For to examine the beginning of it only, it
appears that St. Matthew relates it thus, Chap. 24. And Jesus said unto them,
see ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left
here one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down. And as he sat upon
the Mount of Olives, the Disciples came unto him privately saying, tell us when
shall these things be, etc. Now St. Luke expresses himself thus, Chap. 21. And
as some spoke of the Temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones, he said, as
for these things which ye behold, the days will come in the which there shall
not be left one stone upon another. Here he does not say as St. Matthew, that
the Disciples as he sat upon the Mount of Olives asked him saying, Master, but
when shall these things be? etc. Lastly, after this manner also St. Mark begins
this Narration, Chap. 13. And as he went out of the Temple, one of his
Disciples says unto him, Master, see what stones and buildings are here. And
Jesus answering said unto him, see thou these great buildings? there shall
not be left one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down. And as he sat
upon the Mount of Olives over against the Temple, Peter, and James, and John,
and Andrew asked him privately, tell us when shall these things be, etc. This
last Evangelist perfectly explains and reconciles the other two together, by
delivering all the Circumstances of the matter of fact, viz. that Jesus was two
several times asked concerning the buildings of the Temple, and that the last
time was as he sat upon the Mount of Olives, from whence one might very well
see the Temple, and where that prospect gave occasion to his Disciples to
desire that he would explain what he said of its Demolishing, when he was yet
in the Temple it self. In the mean while it is to be confessed that the little
difference we perceive in this respect between the Evangelists, utterly
overthrows the suspicion we might entertain, that this Prophecy was forged by
some body or other, who had inserted it in all the three Gospels.

But II. it is worth our observation that the Disciples having confounded
together two very remote Events in the question they asked their Master, viz.
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end of the World, saying, tell us when
shall these things be? And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the End
of the World? Mat. 24. 3. Jesus Christ answered without undeceiving his
Disciples, and without distinguishing what they had thus confounded together.
Now what likelihood is there that a man who had seen the destruction of
Jerusalem, but could not imagine it should be attended with the End of the
World, should make the Disciples utter such a Question, without making Jesus
Christ answer the least thing for the clearing of it?

But rather III. how should he have been able to join in this Prophecy the
destruction of Jerusalem to the coming of the Son of Man in the Clouds with
great Power and Glory? How could that Man who had been an eyewitness to the
destruction of Jerusalem, have reasonably said, that presently after the
tribulation of those days, the Sun should be darkened, and the Moon should not
give her light; that the Stars should fall from Heaven, and the powers of
Heaven be shaken; that men's hearts should fail them for fear, and for looking
after those things, and that the World should mourn, etc. How were it possible
he should have intermixed all those Circumstances with the history of that
matter of fact, the falsehood of which he must needs well know, if he composed
the Prophecy after the Event?

But do we not fall here from one difficulty into a greater? For if all those
signs which were to accompany the destruction of Jerusalem, did not really come
to pass, wherein then lies the truth of this same prophecy?

To answer this Objection some think it sufficient to say, that Jesus Christ
expressed himself in this place after the usual manner of the Prophets, who
say, that Nature trembles, and Heaven and Earth is moved, when God visits men
after some extraordinary manner either in his Goodness, or Justice. They
further add, that the Judgments of Christ executed on the Jews, are represented
to us as a coming, and as a Singular coming, by reason of the terrible plagues
he inflicted on them. But what seems to me more reasonable and natural than
this is, that Jesus Christ thought it not convenient to undeceive his Disciples
who being prepossessed with a favorable Opinion of their Nation, thought that
Jerusalem should last as long as the World, and that the ruin of the one,
should be the ruin of the other. He therefore seemed to side with their
Opinion, and represented those two Events to them by the same signs.

And indeed I conceive there might be several Reasons which obliged Jesus
Christ so to act. For not to alledg here that Obscurity is the true Character
of all Prophecies, and that it was necessary this here should be somewhat
overshadowed, as well as the rest, lest any one should foreknow the time of its
Accomplishment, God having reserved that knowledge to himself, as it is
delivered to us in this same Prophecy, was it not also Necessary that Jesus
Christ should follow the ordinary Custom of all the Prophets, which is to unite
several very remote events together in one single Prophecy, to show that the
remotest things are nigh one another in the sight of God? Besides, the
Destruction of Jerusalem being the greatest and most perfect Description of the
End of the World, what could be more wisely thought of than to represent the
one to us by the other, according to the Notion of the Disciples, who
confounded those two Events together.

There happened Pestilences, Wars and Famines immediately before the
Destruction of Jerusalem: there will also happen the like immediately before
the end of the World. As the Tribes which dwelt in the holy Land, mourned to
see the effects of the Curse of Heaven falling upon their Nation; so shall all
the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and be astonished, when God shall destroy this
inferior World, and proceed to the last Judgment. As the Destruction of
Jerusalem happened not till the Gospel was preached throughout the World, that
is, in all the parts of the known World: so in all appearance the end of the
World will not happen till all the Nations which lay concealed and unknown have
been converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ. As there were seen false Christ's,
and false Prophets, before the final destruction of the Jews; so there will be
also false Teachers who shall endeavor to seduce men, before the End of the
World; and it will be often said, lo here is Christ, or lo he is there, before
the last day of Judgment. As before the destruction of Jerusalem Jesus Christ
gathered together in some Christian Churches the Elect, from the four Winds of
Heaven, and that by the preaching of the Apostles his Mystical Angels; so
likewise at the end of the World, he will send his Angels to raise his Elect
from the Dust and Obscurity of the Grave. For the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Dead in
Christ shall rise. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. As there were seen several Comets and
terrible Signs that foretold the Destruction of Jerusalem; as the Smoke of the
City and Flaming Temple hid the light of the day, and darkened the Sun and
Stars; so without doubt the end of the World will be also attended with Signs
and Prodigies much more terrible. St. Peter says, the Earth shall be burnt up,
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, etc. 2. Epistle 3. 10. As the
Destruction of the Jews happened after an unexpected manner; so also shall the
last day come as a thief in the night. As Jerusalem and the Temple were utterly
destroyed as soon as the Jews had completed the measure of their sins: so this
World which we inhabit must perish as soon as the end or Calling of all Nations
shall be fulfilled, as Jesus Christ himself says in that Prophecy we now have
under Consideration.

Besides, one may reasonably imagine the Disciples to be always prepossessed
with this Opinion, that the End of the World would immediately follow the
destruction of Jerusalem. For when it was reported among the Disciples that St.
John should not die, because Christ had said to one of them speaking of John
21. 22.
him, If I will that he tarries till I come, what is that to thee? They
stretched that till I come, as far as the end of the World: but they might have
confined it to the Destruction of Jerusalem, a time which the Apostles in
reality saw, and in which Jesus Christ visited the Jews in his justice.
Further, this Tradition being spread abroad, that the day of the Lord drew
nigh, the Thessalonians were so terrified at it that St. Paul to comfort them,
again sent them the following assurances to the Contrary. Now we beseech you,
Brethren, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Chrst is at
hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except
first, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2, 3.

In a word, there is no reason to wonder that that Prophecy of Jesus Christ so
faithfully related by his Disciples, should have left this Impression in their
minds. For Jesus Christ on the one hand had given such marks and signs of his
coming, that it seemed as if the last judgment was immediately to follow it;
saying, that he should appear as the lightning that comes out of the East; and
shines even unto the West: and on the other hand he had declared several times
that all those things should happen to that generation, that many of those who
were present with him, should not taste of Death until they had seen all those
things.

Since then Jesus Christ united thus two several Events in one and the same
Description, but two subordinate Events, as like unto one another as the Copy
and the Original may be, it follows thence that his Prophecy must have had two
accomplishments, the one very nigh, and the other remote. This in my opinion is
the true way of unravelling all those Difficulties. The Disciples confounded
together two very remote Events, and Jesus Christ suffered them to continue in
that Opinion. It Is necessary that the Event should justify the Prophecies, but
not that the Prophecies should be contrary to their Event. It is necessary
therefore they should be obscure before their Completion, but clear and easy
when once accomplished.

But however probable what I Have laid down may seem to be, I should be very
sorry any one should think I lay the stress of my argument upon it. I make a
distinction between bare Conjectures, and true and certain Principles; and I
leave all the Explanations I have just now given to the Readers judgment, to
use according to his Discretion. I am indifferent whether he uses my Notions,
or those of any other Man, to solve certain difficulties which may occur
therein: I shall only insist upon two certain Truths, which in my opinion admit
of no Difficulty. The first is, that this Prophecy is so circumstantially
related, that it is absurd to imagine it composed after the event: or that a man
took occasion from the Destruction of Jerusalem (at which none but Titus and
his Army were seen) to make Jesus Christ say, when he foretold that
Devastation, that he would come in the Clouds of heaven; that he would send his
Angels to gather his Elect from the four winds; that they would see him coming
with power and great glory; as the lightning that comes out of the East, and
shines even unto the West; that all the Tribes of the Earth should mourn at
his coming; and that day should come as suddenly as the fire of Sodom and
Gomorrah.

The second Truth which seems to me altogether unquestionable, is, that
notwithstanding that little darkness with which the Wisdom of God thought fit
to overshadow this prophecy, it was nevertheless in all Respects so very
exactly related in all its Circumstances, and so clearly fulfilled, that
supposing it composed before the Event, we cannot but acknowledge it to proceed
from a Prophetical Spirit. For what can we Read in the History of the Jews, but
what is included in this Prophecy? The beginning, the continuation and ending
of the Misfortunes of the Jews are all to be found in it. It does not foretell a
particular Captivity of that people, but a general dispersion of the whole
Nation: and they shall be led Captives into all Nations, Luke 21. 24. Jesus
Christ wept over Jerusalem on another occasion at his entering into it, and
uttered these Compassionate Words, O that thou had known, even thou, at least
in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! But now they are hid
from thine eyes. For the days shall come, that thine Enemies shall cast a
Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep the in on every side, and
shall ^ay thee even with the ground, and thy Children within thee, and they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another: because thou knew not the
time of thy Visitation. Luke ^9. 42, 43, 44.

And can any one believe that this passage of our Saviors weeping over
Jerusalem was also inserted in ^he Gospel? Were all those Prophetical Parables
in^erted too, in which Jesus Christ threatened the Jews ^ith their approaching
Destruction, telling them ^ne while, that the Lord would let his Vineyard to
other Husbandmen, after having destroyed them as so ma^y unfaithful servants;
another while that the King ^ho had invited them to the Marriage of his Son,
would and his Soldiers to destroy them, and burn up their City?

But not to go so far off, one of the Marks where^y they ought to have known
that the Event which esus Christ had foretold drew nigh, was that the ^entiles
were to be called to the knowledge of the ^ue God. This is expressly delivered
in the places ^e have already quoted. He therefore that insert^ this Prophecy
in the Gospel, must have imagin^ that in his time, the Gentiles had already
been ^lled to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. But since ^ere were then an
infinite number of Christians, disersed throughout World, since an infinite
number ^ Persons had the Writings of the Apostles in their ^ssession; How was
it possible either to alter or ^d thereto several Parables and Chapters, nay to
^rrupt three Gospels in three Essential places? If ch a thing had been done in
Asia, how could it afterward have been received in Europe, where there must
necessarily have been an infinite number of Copies of that Gospel? For of all
the Books of the New Testament, the Gospels were first composed.

And now do not the Incredulous as yet perceive that Truth overthrows more
scruples than they are able to raise against it. That they continually offer
Violence to thelr Reason, by resisting the Truth which appears so strong and
invincible on all hands; and that though their Reason is sometime perverted and
blinded by their Passions, so that they cannot see things in their due light;
yet the Objects, the Nature of things, and the Truth which is immutable, never
shift or turn a side to follow the foolish fancies of their Understanding, or
the perverse Inclinations of their Heart?

CHAP. IX.
Wherein we shall examine the matters contained i^ the Book of Acts.
THe matter of this Book may be reduced t^ these three heads, viz. the
Ascension of Jesus Christ, the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles,
and the Establishment of the Christian Churches by the successful preaching of
the Apostles All these things are of such a nature as could no^ possibly be
forged.

The Ascension of Jesus Christ is related with to^ many Circumstances to leave
us any reason to believe that the Disciples themselves were deceive^ therein.
The Author expressly affirms that Jes^ conversed the space of forty days with
his Discipl^ after his Resurrection; that he promised them the^ should be
baptized with the Holy Ghost, and commanded them to wait at Jerusalem for the
effect of that promise, that he carried them to the Mount of Olives; that he
was taken up in a Cloud, which carried him out of their sight; and that as they
steadfastly looked up toward Heaven, as he went up, two men stood by them in
white apparel, and promised them that Jesus Christ would come again in like
manner as they had seen him go into Heaven. So that ^t is no longer a question
whether the Disciples were deceived in this respect; but rather whether they
had a mind to deceive others by a false Relation of so Chimerical an Event.

For the perfect understanding of this Matter, it is sufficient to observe the
time in which the Disciples begun to declare it. And when the day of Pentecost
was fully come, says St. Luke, they were all with one accord in one place. And
suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it
filled all the house where they were sitting. And there ap^eared unto them
Cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it ^at upon each of them. And they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and begun to speak with other tongues, as the
Spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout
Men, out of every Nation under Heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them
speak in his own Language, etc. But Peter standing up with the eleven, lift ^p
his voice, and said, etc. Then they that gladly received his Word, were
baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
Souls, etc. And fear came upon every Soul, and many wonders and signs were done
by the Apostles, Acts Chap. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 14, 41, 43.

That this matter of fact was not invented, appears by the bare Consideration
of it: because this is a thing as must have been brought to pass at Jerusalem
upon a solemn feast day, before men of all sorts of Nations, and as I may so
speak, in the sight of all the Universe; and which Consequently is such as
could not possibly have been forged or invented.

What then can be objected to shake the Certainty of this History? Can it be
said that this Matter of fact was inserted in the Writings of St Luke, long
after the Death of that Author? But then it must at the same time be confessed,
that the whole Book was forged, because that is an essential and fundamental
matter of fact, on which the other things contained in the Book of Acts
altogether depend. Thus for instance, the preaching of the Apostles and the
success of it wholly depend upon it. Whatever is contained in their Epistles
absolutely relates to it. And lastly, every thing in the New Testament is
forged, if the coming down of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles be a mere
Invention.

Shall I believe that St. Luke himself invented this matter of fact, and that
no one ever spoke of it before him? If so, what was it the Apostles said to
those they preached the Gospel to? What did they ground their preaching upon,
but only on the Mission of the Holy Ghost? What other right but that had they
to preach?

Did the Apostles themselves to deceive Mankind, pretend that they had received
the Holy Ghost? This is the only plausible suspicion the Incredulous can
entertain; yet for all that it is absurd. For when was it they made this
Pretension? It must necessarily be either after they had founded a Church at
Jerusalem, or some time before. If it was after they had founded a Church
therein, how was it possible this Church should have been afterward persuaded
that the Apostles had received the Holy Ghost; that they had publicly spoken
all sorts of Languages, and that their preaching attended with several strange
prodigies, had been the occasion of the forming that Church?

But if the Apostles pretended they had received the Holy Ghost, before there
was ever any Christian Church established in Jerusalem, nay if it were by a
false attestation of this matter of fact, and many other such that they founded
this Church: the Apostles must of necessity have learned all the Languages in
the World since the death of their Master, and together with that the secret of
making the lame walk, and healing the sick: because these are what they call
the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

But perhaps it is a question whether there was ever any Christian Church
founded at Jerusalem? If so, then must the Ancient Doctors of the Church who
lived in different times and in different places, have conspired together to
deceive us in this respect; and the Jews and Heathens, and all other professed
Enemies of our Religion, as well Ancient as Modern, who never contested the
truth of this matter of fact, must utterly have lost their Reason.

In a word, supposing the Book of Acts composed long after the destruction of
Jerusalem, that is, when there could be no longer any flourishing Church in
that City, yet there is no point gained. For it is true still that the Apostles
set down the matter of fact we speak of, and that their Epistles are filled
with such things as visibly relate to it.

I shall not here further add that the Book of Acts mentions nothing of the
Death of the Apostles; which manifestly shows that it was composed during their
lives, and consequently in a time wherein the Church of Jerusalem flourished:
nor that it mentions nothing of the last destruction of Jerusalem, no not so
much as any of the signs or presages of it; which induces us to believe that
that Book was composed some time before that great Event; it being very
probable that the Author who composed it merely for the Glory of the Apostles
and of the Christian Religion, (as the Incredulous undoubtedly imagine) would
never have failed to have inserted in it the History of all those dreadful
Misfortunes which fell upon the Jews, and which the Christians look upon as the
effect of their rejecting the Messiah.

But since my design is not to leave the Reader the least shadow of a doubt, I
promise to prove by and by, that the Apostles both received and imparted many
miraculous gifts. In the mean while till the Method I have prescribed to my
self, gives me leave to enter upon that subject, I think it fit to make some
few Reflections concerning the success of the Apostles's preaching, which is
that essential head to which all other matters contained in the Book of Acts
relate.

CHAP. X.
Wherein we shall take into Consideration what success the Preaching of the
Apostles had.
THis matter of fact is related with very remarkable Circumstannces. As I. That
those men who first preached the Gospel were Fishermen, that is, gross and
ignorant people, of no appearance, or authority in the world. II. That those
men went about preaching that they had seen Jesus Christ risen from the Dead,
and ascending into Heaven, and that they had long before been Eyewitnesses to
his Miracles. III. That they offended by their preaching all the Powers of the
World, and exposed their persons to an infinite number of Dangers and
Misfortunes. IV. That they suffered them with Patience, or rather with Joy. V.
That the success of their preaching was so swift and sudden, as is almost
inconceivable.

In all this St. Luke has told us nothing but what our own Reason would tell
us. We may conclude that they were men of no extraordinary birth, or credit in
the World that first preached the Gospel, since no body has ever said any thing
to the contrary.

It Is manifest that those men ought to have testified that they had seen Jesus
Christ work many miracles, seen him risen from the Dead, and ascending into
Heaven: because they would never have converted so many Nations as they did,
had they only said they knew all those things by hear say: and besides that the
Epistles of the Apostles inform us that that was the subject of their preaching.

There is no doubt but all the Powers of the World persecuted these men: for as
much as Policy is an Enemy to all new Sects, and the People themselves are
always Jealous of their Religion.

It cannot be doubted neither, but that the Apostles very courageously suffered
the effects of that persecution: because had they recanted, or drawn back for
fear of punishments, their design would have miscarried in its very beginning.

Lastly, who can deny but that the success of their preaching was very swift
and sudden; in as much as in a short time there were several Churches
established in all parts of the known World? This is a matter of fact which was
never contested.

And therefore Reason, as well as St. Luke, tells us all these things. The Book
of Acts informs us of the Truth of them; and the Nature of things will not
suffer us to doubt but that they were so: which utterly destroys the suspicion
we might entertain, that they were all forged or invented.

In the mean time I cannot consider all these matters of fact, nor unite them
together, and observe the proportion they have one with another, without
presently believing the Truth of that Religion which they so plainly Prove and
Establish.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein we shall examine the matters contained in the Epistles of the Apostles.
Though the Ancients had not unanimously received the Epistles of St. Paul, though
Clemens, Polycarp, and Barnabas, had made no mention of the second Epistle of
St. Peter; yet it would be sufficient to observe that they were written to some
Churches, that is, to whole Societies, who for a long while preserved the
Originals of them, to assure us that they were not forged.

It Is then our concern to see whether we can find therein any Characters of the
Divinity of our Religion. We cannot Read St. Paul's Epistles without observing
therein I. The Piety and Charity of that Apostle. II. His Impartiality and
Contempt of the advantages of the World. III. His Courage in enduring
afflictions, which instead of disheartning, rather overjoyed him. IV. A
continual repetition of the Testimony which the Apostles bore of the Truth of
the Resurrection of the Lord. V. Such things which manifestly denote that St.
Paul had received the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost. and that those that
then believed very frequently received them.

The Piety of that Apostle so variously discovers it self in his Writings, that
we cannot think it dissembled without offering Violence to our Understanding.
For though a man should constrain himself upon some occasions, yet is it possible
he should after the very same manner during a great part of his life, in all
his Actions, in all his Words, in his manner of telling of things, which
oftener discovers the bottom of the heart, than the things he speaks of. I know
very well Hypocrisy covers it self with the external show of Virtue: but really
there is yet something which I cannot express, a simple and natural air in true
virtue, which is not to be met with in Hypocrisy: or rather Hypocrisy is
neither so subtle, nor clear sighted, but that it discovers it self on one side
or other, nay often it lets drop a wordwhich unmasques it to the eye of the
World.

However I am willing the Epistles of St. Paul should be strictly examined, to
see whether any thing but what is very natural and sincere can be found in
them. Could there proceed from the Malice and Perfidiousness of a man, who had
so lately accused his Nation of a Crime he knew to be utterly false, so many
Exhortations to fear God, so strong, so moving in themselves and so often
repeated, that they wholly take up the Writings of this Apostle? Could his
humility proceed from thence, whereby he refers every thing to God as to the
Center of all good things? so sincerely telling us, What have thou that thou
did not receive? And if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if
thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 4. 7. We are yours, you are Christ's, and
Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3. 23. Could his hatred too for vice arise from thence,
which upon all occasions he testifys and expresses after so strong and lively a
manner?

His Charity appears no less in his passionate concern for the sanctification
of his Brethren. All his Epistles are a continued serious of tender or moving
Exhortations, or rather ardent requests he makes them to love one another. He
desires they should live soberly, justly, and religiously. He addresses himself
both to Servants and Masters, to Poor and Rich, to Parents and Children, to
Young men and Old men. Having no prejudice nor hatred for any one, he pours out
himself in thanksgivings and blessings for all men, he speaks to them after a
very tender and moving manner. He calls them his little Children, his Beloved,
his Bowels, his Glory, and his Crown. And what was his design in all this? only
to inspire them with the love of God, and their Neighbor.

How does he extol the excellence of Charity. Though I speak, says he, with the
tongues of men, and of Angels, and have no Charity, I am become as sounding
brass or tinkling Cymbal; and though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and
though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me
nothing. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoices not in
Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth; bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Such is the Idea St. Paul had
of Charity, in which appears the force of Reason and of true Virtue, without
the fantastical weakness of superstition: he prefers Charity to miraculous
gifts, and therein appears the spirit of true Religion.

This consideration of the Character and Virtue of this Apostle is so much the
more considerable, that it forces us in despite of our selves, to assert^ one
of these two things; either that St. Paul was a wicked man, and a notorious
Impostor; or else that he had heard the voice of Jesus Chrict in the way to
Damascus, that he had received the Holy Ghost, and was truly the Apostle of
Christ. So that whosoever proves that St. Paul was no wicked person, does even
thereby prove the Divinity of Christian Religion.

I desire therefore the Reader thoroughly to consider the style of his Epistles,
and examine them from the beginning to the end, to discover the true Genius and
Character of them.

What is it this Apostle desires of God? that those whom he speaks to might
live good lives, and that God might be glorified by their works. What does he
complain of? Vice. What is it he chiefly praises? Virtue. By what motive does
he act, or speak as he does? By quite another motive than that of self interest.

St. Luke had already told us in the Book of Acts, that he worked for his
Living, and that his Employment was to make Tents. Whereupon we shall make
these two observations. I. That St. Paul having been a Pharisee, bred up at the
feet of Gamaliel, would have thought it beneath him to follow so vile a
profession, had he been worldly minded or ambitious. Secondly, that this
Apostle resolved to work with his own hands for his Living, in a time which
other people would have greedily embraced to acquire wealth. For what could
have been refused to those men, who opened to mankind the direct way way to
Heaven, and gave them certain hopes of Eternal Salvation? For it cannot be
denied but that was the opinion of the Primitive Christians with regard to the
Apostles.

But if St. Luke should be thought to have imposed upon us in the Relation of
this Matter, it is but hearing what St. Paul himself says of it, who certainly
would not have undertook to persuade those people of it against their own
proper knowledge. Behold, says he to the Corinthians, the third time I am ready
to come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you: for I seek not yours, but
you: For the Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for
the Children, 2 Cor. 12. 14. And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you,
etc. and then, have I caught you with guile? And in another place, Have I
committed an offense in abasing my self that you might be exalted, because I
have preached to you the Gospel of God freely? 2 Cor. 11. 7.

St. Paul would never have spoken to them after this manner, had he preached
only out of self interest, according to the Custom of those who carrying a
worldly mind along with them into the Sanctuary, are mere huchsters of
Religion, and make a Trade of the most sacred and sublime Mysteries of
Christianity.

But supposing St. Paul acted not by a principle of self interest, which is
generaly the center of other men's Actions, who will assure us that he owed not
his Virtues to Pride, which is another nice kind of Interest, to which some men
direct all their Actions?

I am very well persuaded that men may out of a capricious fancy ascribe the
best Actions to Pride, and give the name of Hypocrisy to the most sincere
Virtue. For what can put a stop to the continual rovings of a Soul, that
endeavors only to raise doubts and scruples? But then I also affirm that there
are such visible marks in the conduct and actions of St. Paul, as manifestly
evince in spite of Incredulity, that his Virtue was solid, and his self denial
^incere. But this I hope will more plainly appear by the following reflections.

We need but a very indifferent Knowledge of men's hearts and inclinations, to
know that as there are two different states into which men may fall, so
likewise there are two different sorts of Passions, which then arise in the
soul. Prosperity is the cause of pride with all the other Vices that accompany
it Poverty and Misery that of Covetousness, with all that is consequent upon
it. Not but that Covetousness is found sometimes even in Prosperity, as well as
Pride in the midst of Misery: but that is not my meaning. I only would say,
that Prosperity is as it were the Kingdom of Pride, and Poverty the Kingdom of
Avarice: because a man that is rich, being content in that respect, generally
seeks after Glory. Whereas a man that has scarce wherewithal to live, little
thinks of acquiring glory, but aims only at a bare subsistence. Whence it
follows that instead of vainly imagining that St. Paul designed to reduce
himself to extreme Poverty, and at the same time was very earnest in the
pursuit of Glory, it is rather more natural to believe, that he could not so
much as propose to himself Glory, as the only end of all his Actions, until
the first found himself exempted from Want and Misery.

Nevertheless this reasoning seems to carry with it the force of Conviction;
since there have been those who have despised riches only to gain the esteem of
men. It must therefore be further added (to distinguish St. Paul from this last
sort of men) that he was not only poor, and forced to labor for his living;
but that he suffered also all the Misfortunes and Disgraces a man is capable of
enduring. It Is well known how much Adversity dejects our minds, and humbles the
proud thoughts of our hearts, and we may venture to say, that had those
Philosophers we lately mentioned, been overwhelmed with a continual series of
Misfortunes, still leading on and following one another; had they been loaded
with Chains, marked with stripes, exposed to storms and shipwracks, to the
scorn of the learned, the bitter scoffs of Princes, the hatred of Magistrates,
and the fury of the People, as St. Paul was, their Pride would soon have been
abated, their hopes disappointed, and the Natural love of ease and quiet,
together with the impatience to get out of so wretched a Condition, would soon
have superseded all other thoughts.

Besides, those very Philosophers who so much despised riches and dignities,
despised them only out of self love, but not for the sake of others: since
being little concerned at the welfare of their neighbor, they commonly retired
into solitary places, or kept company only with other wise men, where they took
pride in applauding one another, for having renounced the World to give
themselves wholly up to the study of Philosophy. But here the Apostles forsook
every thing to labor for the Conversion of mankind. St. Paul made Tents, as
well as Abdolominus dug in a Garden: but the one ceased not to persuade men by
preaching the Gospel, whilst the other minded nothing but his own repose and
tranquillity.

Lastly, the Philosophers had this consolation that however they renounced
riches, they esteemed themselves happy in the enjoyment of true Virtue. For
blinded as they were by self-conceit, they were far from imagining their Virtue
false, and the Idea they had of its excellency, was their only comfort for what
they had lost of the things of this World. Whereas St. Paul and the other
Apostles being but Impostors, as Irreligious men suppose, could not have that
comfort which arises purely from the sense of ones own Virtue, but were wholly
deprived of the support of a Good Conscence, which keeps the soul from sinking
under the greatest dangers and afflictions. In a word, consider this matter on
which side you will, still you will find somewhat singular in the conduct of
St. Paul; and that no Character equals his Apostolical Character.

But perhaps some will object that St. Paul seems to boast a little too much in
some of his Epistles of the Excellence of his Revelations. He writes to the
Galatians, Chap. 2. 9. that he had received nothing from the most excellent of
the Apostles, or rather, that he was not behind even the very best of the
Apostles. That James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars of the Church,
had given him the right hand of fellowship; Chap. 1. 16. that after he had been
made an Apostle, he did not confer with flesh and blood, neither went he up to
Jerusalem to be there approved of by the other Apostles; Chap. 2. 11. that he
withstood Peter to the face, and blamed him because he deserved to be blamed.

But this difficulty cannot perplex those who shall be acquainted with the
reasons that obliged St. Paul to speak and act thus. There were several false
Teachers among the Galatians, who endeavored to destroy the fruit of the
preaching of that Apostle, by joining the Jewish Ceremonies to the Christian
Faith, and alleged for it the Authority of Peter, James, and John, whom they
had seen at Jerusalem. He therefore fearing lest under pretense of following
the Doctrine of the three principal Apostles of our Lord, they should subvert
his Work, undertakes to show that the Excellence of his Ministry was not in the
least inferior to that of any other Apostle. Under this consideration he
compares himself to the other Apostles in his Epistle to the Galatians,
beginning it after this manner. Paul an Apostle (not of men, neither by man,
but by Jesus Crist and God the Father; etc. And it is upon the very same account;
that comparing himself in his second Epistle to the Corinthians to some
Teachers, who endeavored to disturb him in his Ministry, he expresses himself
after this manner. Chap. 11. v. 22, 23, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Are they
Hebrews? So am I: Are they Israelites? So am I: Are they Ministers of Christ?
(I speak as a fool) I am more; in labors more abundant, in stripes above
measure. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I
beaten with rods. Once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck. In journeying
often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own
contrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils among false brethren, in
weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things that are without,
that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and
I am not weak? Who is offended and I burn not?

Can any one suppose that St. Paul would have presumed to speak so particularly
of all his afflictions, and with so much confidence, for the good of the Church
whom certain Seducers would have dissuaded from the faith, if those afflictions
had not been real and well known to the World? If what he asserts had been
false, sure he must have perceived that far from silencing his Enemies this
way, he rather supplied them with new matter to reproach him with? But if what
he asserts was true, who doubts but that he was strongly persuaded of the Truth
of the Christian Religion, when we see how much, and in what manner he suffered
in defense of the same? What piece of imposture, or mistaken principle can
inspire a man with so much confidence as this Apostle showed? Produce a wicked
man that can undergo a continual Martyrdom in defense of a cheat, and yet
breath out nothing in all his Writings but Zeal, Confidence, and Charity.
Produce a wicked man, who being just come out of Prison, shall strive to
re-enter into it, and continue preaching a Gospel, which has cost him so many
stripes; who being an Enemy to his own Nation, a perfidious seducer, who having
renounced all his possessions only for the sake of preaching to others, shall
yet not so much as receive his diet and clothing from them; Nay who after this
usage still preaching on, will not so much as exempt himself from any labor
(however vile and contemptible) for a livelihood; as St. Paul declared he would
not in his Epistles to those people, who would undoubtedly have refused him
nothing; who in fine, after all this, shall still refuse and without
affectation reject the glory which his preaching and self denial seem to merit;
and who to show the reasonableness of his refusal shall teach us to ascribe all
honor and glory to God as the first great Author of our Being, and principal
end of all our Actions. 1 Cor 9. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Even so, says he, has the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.
But I have used none of these things, that it should be so done unto me. For
though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for necessity is laid
upon me. Yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. For if I do this thing
willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed unto me. What is my reward then? Verily that when I preach
the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my
power in the Gospel. And in another place, Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I
count all things but loss, for the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung that I may win Christ.

Thus St. Paul rooted up all Vanity out of his heart. He was not carried away
with vain shows of glittering Virtue and Merit; But sought only the remission
of his sins. All his strength was in Christ. He affirmed that God had sent his
Son into the World to save sinners, of whom he was chief. He confessed that he
had blasphemed that holy name by which we must be saved; that he had persecuted
Jesus Christ in his members. He imputed his Conversion to Grace, and spoke of
nothing but of Grace. Now what could so much humble the heart of man as the
consideration of the Immense greatness of God, the wretched misery of mankind,
their desperate corruption, and the infinite Mercy of God manifested to them in
the sending his Son: all which took up the Discourses, Epistles and Mind of St.
Paul, who including all his designs in one, proposed nothing else to himself,
but the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified?

But some perhaps will object, is it not true that St. Paul in acting as he
did, got himself immortal honor? This the Event has sufficiently showed; and
therefore why should we not believe that St. Paul acted by a principle of vain
glory, having foreseen what would certainly happen?

Certainly it would be a very pretty conceit to imagine that Saul who was
prejudiced against the Christians, and a proud Pharisee, designing to
immortalise his name, should affirm an imposture that as much shocks our Reason
as that of the Disciples (if we may believe what the Incredulous say) that he
should have imagined he could deceive both present and future ages by such
gross fictions; that he could have drawn Strength, Courage, Constancy, Charity,
Piety, from such a chimerical project and perfidious design; that he should
have fought with beasts at Ephesus, out of the hopes of an imaginary
immortality, which one day would not flatter his ashes in the Grave; that he
should retain so much Pride in the midst of Shame and Torments; and that a vain
notion which is the usual effect of Idleness, Luxury, and Prosperity, should
immediately triumph over the most real, and most lively Sentiments of Nature.

But what of all this? St. Paul was perhaps a Politician, a man that understood
the World, who had some secret self interest in all his designs and practices.
But is it possible that his Character would never have been known? Would he not
have contradicted and so betrayed himself? Was there no way of discovering his
Ambition, when the people taking him for Mercury, would have sacrificed to him
in Lycaonia? And if we would reflect upon his Epistles, might we not find marks
of that prodigious Vanity which made him act thus? Let the Incredulous con^ult
themselves thereupon, and judge what they would have done on the like occasion.

Perhaps they could find in their hearts to turn ^mpostors, but never to suffer
for their imposture, ^r if they were disposed to suffer for an imposture, t
must be one that would in the end certainly pro^ure them great Riches; not one
that would oblige hem to renounce every thing, to suffer, and crown heir
sufferings with Martyrdom. It Is true, a man ^ay be disposed to renounce every
thing, and suffer ^eath it self for the good of his Country, the preervation of
his honor, or some other seeming ^wful Reason, but never in defense of what he
^nows to be a fiction. The thought of being re^embred by Posterity might
flatter his Pride; but ot so far as to oblige him to make this present life
^retched and dreadful, and to sacrifice to that ^ought all his real temporary
advantages. He ^ight find himself inclinable to deceive other men, ^d to accuse
his Nation of an imaginary crime, ^t not when he testifies an extraordinary
kindness ^r it, and does his utmost endeavors to sanctify it. He might
entertain the thoughts of seducing other men; but not at the same time discover
a wonderful Resolution in his Words, and a thousand virtues in his Actions.
Search as long as you please the hearts of men, you will never find all these
qualities united therein. As we cannot give an Example of it in the life and
actions of any man, so perhaps the Idea of it never entered into any man's mind.
What folly is it then to imagine, that all these things were really to be met
with in the Person of St. Paul, and of some other Fishermen? How can a man
ground such an imagination, unless upon a mind desperately resolved to deceive
it self?

But lest we should be thought without any ground to advance any thing
concerning the Courage of that Apostle, let us hear him speak himself. 2 Cor.
4. 17. For our light affliction, says he, which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. And in another place,
2 Cor. 7. 4, 5, 6. I am exceeding joyful in all our Tribulation. For wh^^ we
were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest: b^^ we were troubled on every
side; without were fighting^, within were fears. Nevertheless God that
comforte^^ those that are cast down, comforted us. And in the 12. Chap. of the
same Epist. v. 10 Therefore I take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am
weak then am I strong. Nay he pretends that all those who are animated with the
same spirit that he was, cannot forbear piously rejoicing in their sufferings.
But the fruit, says he, of the spirit is Lo^^, Joy, Peace, long Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Fait^, M^ekness, Temperance, Gal. 5. 22. That is the tr^^
Character of a Christian. And the Apostles desig^ in preaching was to plant
these Virtues in the mind^ of men. But let us see further some other marks of
the joyfulness and confidence of St. Paul. He expresses himself after this
manner in some of his Epistles. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10. We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body
the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be mde manifest
in our body. And in another place, yea, and if I be ^ffered upon the sacrifice
of your faith, I rejoice with you ^ll, for the same cause also do ye rejoice
with me, Phil. 2. ^7. From whence could proceed those motions of Joy which St.
Paul so naturally expresses, which no Art can imitate, which run through all
his Epistles from the beginning to the end, and which seem to spring from an
heart, which not being able to con^ain its inward pleasure and satisfaction,
opens and ^nlarges it self, and breaks forth into these lively ^xpressions of
Joy?

Certainly such sentiments as these could never ^pring from Nature. For Nature
sends forth sighs and groans under her sufferings. The Stoics who ^ndeavoured
to stifle her innocent complaints, pre^ended that a man might overcome himself
to that degree, as to preserve his mind serene and calm in ^he midst of
Torments: but the Stoics never went ^o far as to believe that joy could spring
out of the midst of the bitterness of afflictions. None but the Christians
could ever find unspeakable joy and comfort in the midst of their sorrows. Who
was that ^aul then that had thoughts so elevated? Only an ^mpostor if we will
believe the Incredulous. By that strength or power does he so much surpass the
^ertue of the Stoics? By the power of the greatest ^mposture that ever was.
And can any one really be ^erswaded of such a thing? For my part the only
^ifficulty I find in all this, is to imagine that the proud ^retended Patrons of
Humane Reason should be so ^nreasonable and Extravagant.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein we further examine the Epistles of St* Paul.
THe third thing to be observed in the Epistles of St. Paul, is, that they are
as it were a continual repetition of the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of
Jesus Christ, or at least of such things as essentially belong to them: so that
although the four Gospels should be lost, still the Substance and Essentials of
the Gospel are to be found in the Writings of St. Paul. Now this appears in the
beginning of almost every one of his Epistles. Concerning his Son, says he in
his Epistle to the Romans Chap. 1. v. 4. which was declared to be the Son of
God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the Resurrection from
the dead of our Lord Jesus Christ. But this appears yet more expressly in
several other places, as in the 15. Chap. of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, v. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. For I delivered unto you first of all, that
which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day
according to the Scriptures; and th^^ he was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve. After th^^ he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once: of whom
the greater part remain unto this present, but so^^ are fallen a sleep. After
that he was seen of James, th^^ of all the Apostles. And last of all he was
seen of (...) also, as of one born out of due time.

So boldly does this Apostle speak of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. He does
not only say in general terms that Jesus Christ was seen after his
Resurrection; but in particular that he was seen of Cephas, of James, of the
other Apostles, and of himself; that he was seen by five hundred brethren at
once, of whom the greatest part was then living, whom he appealed to as
witnesses of the Truth of what he said, and who might easily have contradicted
him if it had been false. But if so great a number of people really saw Jesus
Christ after his Resurrection, that matter of fact can never be false. For how
is it possible that five hundred, three hundred, nay fifty persons, should
maugre all punishments, conspire together to maintain a fiction? But if such a
number of persons neither saw, nor certified they had seen Christ after his
Resurrection: how should St. Paul have presumed to write this to an infinite
number of persons, who seeing and conversing with the Apostles, must have known
the certainty of it? How durst he name those whom he pretends that Jesus Christ
appeared to after his Resurrection? How great was his boldness to assign so
great a number of Witnesses of that Truth, and to affirm that the greatest part
of them were still living? How comes he to speak of it slightly, by the way, or
only as a thing universally known? He tells it, but not with any turn of Wit or
fineness of Expression, which Impostors use to varnish over a specious lie, who
use the more art and insinuation, the more incredible the things are they would
induce men to believe. But why should not he boldly assert the Truth of the
Resurrection, since as he pretends, the Holy Ghost evidently bare record of it?

In a word, St. Paul speaks in his Epistle of miracu^ous gifts as of a thing
universally known. He calls them the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and sometimes
only the Holy Ghost. He that should attempt to cut off from his Epistles every
place wherein he men^ions them, would certainly take away the most considerable
part of them. To one, says he, is given ^he spirit, the gift of Wisdom, to
another the gift of Knowledge by the same spirit; to another Faith by the same
spirit, to another the gift of healing by the same spirit; to another the
working of Miracles; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to
another diverse kind of tongues: but all these works that one and the self
same spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10,
11.

You see how St. Paul cursorily mentions this matter of fact, as a matter of
uncontested Experience. Mean while it is observable that we have not to do with
one single gift, but several miraculous gifts, in which there was no Artifice
or Illusion. For though it might be pretended that some certain people had
received the gift of tongues, and although those very people should not
immediately be found out by those, who perfectly understood those Languages;
yet how could there be others who expounded diverse Languages, and understood
men of all Nations, others who healed the Sick, others who by Faith wrought
miracles, etc.

But perhaps the Incredulous will not be satisfied with that one Text of
Scripture, and therefore here is another of the same stamp, 1 Cor* 13. 1, 2.
Though I speak with the tongues of Men and of Angels, etc. and though I have the
gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, etc. And though I have all Faith,
so that I could remove Mountains, etc. 1. Cor. 12. 29, 30, 31. Are all
prophets? says he in the foregoing chapter. Are all workers of Miracles? Have
all the gift of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all Interpret? But covet
earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you, a more excellent way. It Is
then he begins his Encomium of Charity, and prefers it before all other
miraculous gifts. In like manner he speaks in this place indirectly, and as it
were by the by of those gifts; and the manner of his Expression manifestly
shows, that this matter of fact was publicly known.

But if they should still require a greater demonstration of this Truth, such a
demonstration as seems to me above all subtilty of Cavils and Exceptions, it is
sufficient to observe that among all those Gifts, that of Tongues was so common
(by reason it was very often imparted by the Apostles's imposition of hands)
that there arose a great Disturbance and Confusion in the Church of Corinth
upon the account of it; because all those who had received that gift, being
desirous to speak strange Languages in the Church, the Congregation was not in
the least edified by it. And it obliged St. Paul to write to them very sharply
thereupon, to which end he particularly designed the 14. Chap. of his first
Epist. to the Corinthians, I would, says he to them, v. 5. that ye all speak
with tongues; but rather that ye prophesied that the Church may receive
edifying. Now to prophecy in the sense of this Apostle, is to declare the word
of God, and expound it to the people, I thank my God, adds he further v. 18,
19. I speak with tongues more than you all. Yet in the Church I had rather
speak five words with my Understanding, that by my voice I might teach others
also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Wherefore, adds he a little
further v. 22. Tongues are for a sign not to them that believe, but to them
that believe not: but prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but
for them which believe. That is, as any one may easily conceive, that the gift
of tongues which God had granted to the Church after a most extraordinary and
wonderful manner, was designed either to confound, or convert the Infidels by
that evident testimony of the Divinity of Christianity: whereas the gift of
prophesying, that is, of declaring God's Will, and expounding it to the people,
had been wholly given men for the good and Edification of the faithful. Now to
these miraculous Gifts St. Paul certainly alluded, when he said in his first
Epist. to the Thessalonians, Chap. 5. v. 19. Quench not the spirit. And it is
concerning those same gifts and signal miracles that he says to the Galatians,
O foolish Galatians, etc. Chap. 3. 5. He therefore that ministers to you the
spirit, and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of the Law, or
by the preaching of the Faith? Lastly, it is concerning these miraculous gifts
that the Apostle speaks, when he says, that the sign of his Apostleship was
manifested among the Corinthians, in all Patience, in Signs, and Wonders, and
mighty Deeds.

We may see to what perplexity and confusion the Incredulous are reduced; and
how angry soever they may be, there are but two sides they can take. They must
either assert that St. Paul had lost his senses, when he wrote those things we
just now mentioned; which they will never do, because their opinion is that St.
Paul wanted no cunning to deceive a great many persons: or they must confess
that the faithful very frequently received many miraculous gifts in the Ancient
Church; that those gifts were various; that there had actually been such
persons in the Church of Corinth, who had caused some kind of disturbance in
it, by speaking diverse Languages as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost; and
consequently they must own the Divinity of our Religion.

CHAP. XIII.
That we ought to look upon the New Testament as a divine Book.
I Doubt not but that we may certainly find several unquestionable Characters
of Divinity in that Book. For not to repeat here what we have already said in
our first part of this work, concerning the Books of the Old Testament, and
which is no less true of the New one, we cannot but admire the mutual agreement
of those Authors with Moses and the other Prophets. We cannot but be surprised
to see such an unanimous consent among those Writers, whether it be in the
things they relate, or in in the design of their Exhortations, or lastly, in
the record they bear. Never was Author seen so conformable to himself, as those
Divine Authors are to one another in the Essentials of their Doctrine. Where
can we find such a Character of Sweetness, Gentleness, and Simplicity, so much
Charity for Mankind, and Aversion to Vice, so many motives to Humiliation, and
so great a desire to glorify God? Where can we find such a Loftiness of
thought, and yet such a Simplicity of expression, such a mixture of joy and
sorrow, such heroical confidence in a forlorn state of Misery, such profound
Humility, and such presence and greatness of mind, which is the cause that
their Morality is the finest that ever was, and their thoughts more elevated
than those of other men, their design the noblest that ever entered into the
heart of man, that is, to gain all men unto God, having no self interest, or
refined Niceties of Policy, but only a fervent desire to succeed in their
Ministry?

I know that this here is matter of Inward sense, rather than Demonstration,
and that I shall never persuade the Incredulous that they may discover in the
New Testament that loftiness of thought and that divine Majesty, which I my
self perceive amidst that seeming rough and unpleasant Language, which is as it
were the bark and outward shell of it: but yet for all their obstinacy they
cannot deny these four following Truths, I. That never any known Impostor left
us such excellent Books as the Apostles, no not even Mahomet himself, who might
have easily borrowed their Notions, the better to disguise his own. II. That it
appears that their Writings are a thousand times more free from all Passions
and Humane Imperfections, than all the Books of the Wisest men among the
Heathens, where we see Pride as it were upon her Throne. III. That the
Character of the New Testament is infinitely more excellent than that of the
Writings of all the Fathers, who lived successively from the Apostles down to
us, wherein any one may easily observe a strange affectation, a particular
vanity of showing their parts and learning, and sometimes much heat and
passion; because they were far from the perfection in Christianity which the
Apostles had. IV. That the best sorts of godly Books written amongst the
Christians, from the Apostles's time down to us, I mean those Books that most
establish the peace and tranquillity of public Society, and chiefly tend to the
Glory of God, were written in imitation of the holy Scriptures, from which they
had their materials to compose them with. This is what in my opinion is very
sure and certain.

And as certain it is, that if the Apostles were not divinely inspired, they
must necessarily be Impostors, nay such abominable men, as desired only to
dishonor their Nation and to sacrifice to a vain flattering Idea of Glory, the
lives and fortunes of an infinite number of persons whom they encouraged to
suffer Martyrdom.

Let us now see whether we can persuade our selves that the most excellent
Books that were ever known, I mean those Books that are most proper to inspire
us with piety, with the love of God, and our Neighbor, that are the source of
the best matters that ever were written, and the original of the Piety and
Virtue of all those persons who were converted by them, were only the invention
of the most wicked men that ever were.

Certainly, since all Christians in all Ages considered this Book as Divine,
and as the rule of their Faith, whereby they distinguished it from all other
Books; it follows thence that all the Christians were either deceived in the
Essentials of it, and that their Faith was false, or else that Book must in
reality be of a Divine Authority: For such an Universal Tradition, so constant,
and so necessarily affixed to the end and design of Religion, can never impose
upon us.

It has been the Wisdom of Providence as we have already observed, to take care
that this Book should be left to us as entire as when it came out of the
Apostles hands: and the Primitive Christians who all assure us that it is of a
Divine Authority, tell us only but what right Reason obliged them to
acknowledge, and us as well as them. For the Word preached and the Word written
by the Apostles, differ not essentially from one another; so that if the former
be Divine, the latter must necessarily be so too. And who doubts but that Word
must be looked upon as Divine, which God himself authorized by so many Miracles?

Perhaps some will reply, that it would be of a very dangerous Consequence to
reason often after this manner; and that although a false Prophet should work
prodigious Miracles, yet we ought not to follow him upon a bare supposition
that God never assists an Impostor with his infinite Power. But this I own and
affirm also, that we ought strictly to examine both his Doctrine and Miracles,
to find out by that comparison the true Original of both. And therefore we have
this advantage, that we not only find here such miracles as excel all the power
of Hell; such as for example, the raising a man from the Dead; but that this
Doctrine also visibly bears all the Characters of one that proceeded from
Heaven. Those miracles on the one hand so great and numerous that the people
cried out, surely this is the finger of God, take away all suspicion of the
falsity and pernicious consequences of the Doctrine they confirm; because the
arm of the Lord is not usually employed in favor of an Imposture. And on the
other hand, that Doctrine which is so holy, and so perfectly tends to the union
and welfare of Mankind, which is so worthy of the love of God to man,
sufficiently warrants us that the Miracles whereby it is confirmed, proceed not
in the least from the power of Darkness, as the Enemies of Christianity seem to
believe. Hell never concerns it self either to unite or sanctify mankind.

All the Apostles expressly declare, that the word which they preached,
proceeded not from themselves, but God. But I certify you Brethren, says St.
Paul in his Epist. to the Galatians Chap. 1. v. 11. that the Gospel which was
preached of me, was not after man: for I neither received of man, neither was I
taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Thus when the Apostles were
assembled together at Jerusalem in the first Council that ever was held, and
wrote to some Chnrches concerning several questions that were then in
Agitation, they made use of this manner of speaking, For it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15. 28.

It appears then that the Apostles spoke by the Order and Revelation of God,
which was given several ways; viz. sometimes by Vision, as when St. Peter saw a
certain vessel descending from Heaven, as it had been a great sheet knit by the
four Corners, wherein were all kinds of unclean Beasts; and he was commanded
saying, Peter kill and eat, Act. 10. 13. on purpose to signify that he ought to
preach ^he Gospel to the Gentiles, who were no longer an unclean Nation in the
sight of God; sometimes by Dreams, as when a certain Macedonian appeared unto
St. Paul, commanding him to go into Macedonia, and preach the Gospel there:
sometimes by Ex^asy, as it is probable that St. Paul was caught up into the
third Heaven; but yet much oftener by the inward dictates of the Holy Ghost
formed as it were ^n their Souls, as when the Spirit said unto Peter concerning
the men which Cornelius sent to enquire for him, Go thou with them doubting
nothing: for I ^ave sent them, Act. 10. 20.

It Is true one might very well suspect these Reve^ations, if one single man
boasted of having had them imparted to him: but here we have several. God did
not reveal himself to them after one single manner, but after diverse. They
asserted not only that God had revealed some things to them in order ^o induce
Mankind to believe it, but they wrought many Miracles, spoke diverse Languages,
im^arted those Gifts to others, thereby converted the World, and exactly
fulfilled the Oracles of God. That spirit which filled them, and was
necessarily to fill them, because the time of the Calling of the Gentiles ^as
come, was outwardly produced by such effects ^s undoubtedly will confound the
Incredulous if they ^eflect upon them.

Certainly, if it be true, as it is, that God poured down his Spirit upon the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost, 'twas only that they might preach unto men by
their Ministry, unless it be pretended that the Tongues of the Apostles which
were exalted after a supernatural manner, so far as to speak all sorts of
Languages, were to confine themselves to that particular employ, and not to
reveal unto men the will of God. But if we ought to look upon that word as
Divine which those Tongues have preached, we cannot but look upon those
Writings as Divine in which that Word it self is contained.

I hope that whosoever shall seriously reflect on the Connection of all these
principles, will fully be persuaded that their Union is not to be dissolved. If
there was such a Book as the New Testament in the days of Clemens, Polycarp,
and of the Primitive Fathers, as without dispute there was, that Book could
never have been forged. If the Book of the New Testament could not have been
forged, it is impossible but that certain public matters of fact, which are
inserted in that Book as being publicly known by all the Christians, are true.
And if those matters of fact are true, it can never be denied but that the
Apostles received the Holy Ghost. If the Apostles did receive the Holy Ghost,
certainly their Writings must be looked upon as Divine. I have made choice of
these principles only among several others which I have established; but lest
any one should imagine that they subsist merely by their Connection, I desire the
Reader to remember that I have proved each of them apart by themselves, after
several different ways.

It is very true therefore that the New Testament, as well as our Religion, is
divine: for these two Truths are properly one and the same: The Christian
Religion cannot be Divine, if the Word or the Scripture which is the ruleof the
Faith of its Professors, be Humane; and the Scripture can never be Divine,
unless the Christian Religion be of an heavenly Original, and proceeded from
God. But it is fit that we should examine the Difficulties that are opposed
against this grand principle.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein we shall examine those Difficulties which may probably be raised
against the foregoing Truths.
TRuth is an Enemy to all shifts and tricks: let us therefore briefly consider
what doubts we may possibly entertain in the foregoing Truths. Let us give full
scope to our imagination to frame what suspicions we can as to the persons of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, their Miracles, the Resurrection of our Lord,
and the extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were
imparted to mankind by the hands of the Apostles themselves.

And I. to begin with the Person of Jesus Christ, there are some who believe
that Jesus Christ was an Essene, and that he borrowed from that Sect the purity
of his Morals and the soundness of his Doctrine. And indeed it appears from the
Description which Philo, and Josephus gave us of that Sect, that the Essenes
lived among themselves in a perfect union, that they possessed all things in
Common; that they looked upon one another as so many brethren, and that they
had very rational and sound Ideas of God and Religion. All this pretty well
agrees with the Nature of Chistianity. Besides it does not appear that Jesus
Christ ever opposed their Doctrine, when he pronounced so many woes against the
Scribes and Pharisees. And if it be true that Jesus Christ borrowed his
Doctrine from that Sect, we should have less Reason to be surprised at his
extraordinary Morality and Holiness of life. But it is easy to refute this
notion if we consider that there was no such Sect as that of the Essenes in
Galilee, which was the native Country of Jesus Christ; that the Essenes avoided
all correspondence with other men, as looking upon them as impure and profane,
and for that reason dwelt not in any great Cities: Whereas Jesus Christ
traversed Towns and Villages, taught multitudes, Preached in the Synagogues,
etc. Besides the Essenes abhorred Matrimony: whereas Jesus Christ made choice
of such Disciples as were Married; and lastly, that he had several Fishermen to
attend him, but none of them were Essenes.

But II. May we not think that Jesus Christ owed his knowledge to his
Education? But how could that be? For as much as he was bred up in the shop of
a Carpenter, as his Enemies themselves confess in their reproaches of him.

III. Some will object, that 'twas out of spite to the Scribes and Pharisees
and other Rulers of the Jews, that he first exclaimed so much against them, and
after invented on purpose to thwart them a Religion quite opposite to theirs.
But what had the Son of Mary to do with all those Teachers, since he neither
was Priest, nor Levite, nor pretended to any such dignities? What should make
him come in competition with them? Besides it is not sufficient to assert that
Jesus Christ seemed very much exasperated against their Doctrine and Behavior,
it must also be considered, whether he had not a great deal of reason to be so.

IV. It Is objected that perhaps he was ambitious of being thought a Prophet; or
it may be not rightly understanding certain Oracles, which seemed to determine
at that time the coming of the Messiah, he really thought himself to be that
Messiah.

But nothing of this is true. For Jesus Christ could not have thought himself
to be the Messiah out of mere simplicity and ignorance, nor have endeavored to
make the World believe it out of malice or deceit. We have no reason to believe
the former, if we consider his Morality and Doctrine; and his holiness of life
gives us no occasion to imagine the latter. The incredulous will soon be reduced
to an evident absurdity, if they assert that Jesus Christ was the most
ignorant, or most wicked of men; the most ignorant, if he thought himself to be
the Messiah, without being really so; or the most wicked, if he endeavored to
make other men believe it, when he believed it not himself: because one must be
wilfully blind not to perceive that the Christian Religion proceeds both from a
very clear principle, and a good foundation too.

V. But may we not say the same of Mahomet? The incredulous compare them often
together. They pretend that Jesus Christ and Mahomet might have been animated
both with the same Spirit. But of all the shifts of the Incredulous this is
certainly their weakest: and it is a plain demonstration that they have no
manner of Idea of the things they speak of, when they insist upon this
comparison.

For we can here produce several essential differences betwixt Jesus Christ and
Mahomet. Mahomet never pretended to Establish his Religion by working miracles,
although several have been imputed to him: Whereas Jesus Christ desired no
belief but upon the testimony of his extraordinary Miracles; being willing
thereby to convince the eyes and senses of his Disciples by sensible matters of
fact, and such miracles as he gave them also power to work themselves; when he
sent them forth to preach abroad his Resurrection and Miracles, at the same
time he threatened them with Death and eternal Damnation, in case they should
endeavor to deceive any body with fictions, or even disguise the Truth it
self. Mahomet left no such prophecies behind him, as have been accomplished:
whereas we have several of Jesus Christ which have been clearly explained by
their event. Neither the Books of the Old or New Testament bear the least
record of Mahomet; whereas the Prophets had foretold the coming of Jesus Christ
as of a Messiah, that was to unite the Jews and Gentiles, and to carry the
Covenant of God unto the ends of the World. Mahomet established himself in the
World by force and violence; but Jesus Christ only by patience and sufferings.
The former was environed with Soldiers, the latter was attended with Martyrs.
The one put men to Death, but the other received Death for our sakes. Mahomet's
ambition, who established such a flourishing Empire, was presently seen in the
success he had in his undertaking. But Jesus Christ was far from self Interest
or Ambition, since he withdrew himself when they would have made him King, and
declared his Kingdom was not of this World. Instead of encouraging the carnal
prejudices of his Disciples, he took care to undeceive them, and to foretell
all the Evils they were to expect. And though any should presume openly to
dispute all these matters of fact, still they appear by the end and success of
the Gospel, the design of which was to sanctify the heart, and calm the
disorderly passions of the Soul. Mahomet invented such a Religion which agreed
only with corrupted Reason, and the loose inordinate desires of the heart. He
made the scandal of the Cross to give place to the magnificence and grandeur of
the World; he took away the most spiritual and difficult matters of Morality,
to fill the minds of his Disciples with carnal and sensual Ideas. But not so
did our Savior act, who proposed his Cross to the minds of men as an
astonishing Paradox, and a continual cause of Mortification and Repentance.
Mahomet Established his Religion by the help of Ignorance and Darkness, by
suppressing such Books as might have enlightened men's Understandings, and by
requiring a blind submission from them. Jesus Christ on the contrary would not
have them believe his Doctrine, but as they found it conformable to that of the
Prophets, Search the Scriptures, says he, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, John 5. 39. Mahomet established himself in the World by dissembling and
disguising his thoughts: He promised in the beginning a toleration of all
Religions; carried it fair to the Christians, but afterwasds did his utmost
endeavors to extirpate them utterly. But Jesus Christ declared at first his
intention and design which was to save mankind, and overthrow Superstition it
self. Nor he, nor his Disciples used any Policy or Circumvention in this
respect. Mahomet died, but never rose, nor pretended to rise again from the
dead, thereby to show he was approved of God. Jesus Christ died, but it was
believed he rose again from the dead, upon the testimony of those who had seen
him after his Resurrection, and testified of the Truth of this matter of fact
to all the World, at the expense of their lives, and effusion of their blood.
Mahomet's Religion was invented, maintained and supported by Policy, but that
of Jesus Christ was at first offensive to all the Princes upon earth, and was
established in the World notwithstanding all their endeavors to the contrary.
Mahomets's Religion appeared at first view to be as it were the Triumph of
Humane Industry and Covetousness; but the Religion of Jesus Christ showed that
of integrity and justice in their full perfection, and Natural Religion in that
proper purity and simplicity that was restored to it by Charity. Mahomet laid
the foundation of a particular Monarchy, and established such Laws as, humanly
speaking, are serviceable only in those places wherein he has settled his
Dominion: but Jesus Christ has given us new Principles of union and
intelligence, very useful to the good of public society in general, and very
fit to cement the union of all men together by making the spirit of Charity
reign in the World. The coming of Mahomet did not sanctify mankind: but that of
Jesus Christ was attended with an innumerable Company of persons, who all
renounced the World, merely by the Faith they had in him. 'Twas not Mahomet,
but Jesus Christ who exactly fulfilled the Oracles concerning the calling of
the Gentiles, because Mahomet derived all his knowledge of the true God, from
Jesus Christ, as we have already showed. Lastly, Temporal Prosperity was the
true Character of the Religion of Mahomet, and it might be very well affirmed
that Mahomet was a Man of God, if it were true that all those who enjoy the
greatest Prosperity in the World, that is, all Tyrants, wicked, and unjust men
are the favorites of God. But the Character of the Religion of Jesus Christ is
patience, self-denial, innocence and a simplicity of manners; and certainly he
was approved of God, if God approves of virtuous, patient, humble, and
charitable men. It concerns now the Incredulous to answer all these
differences, if they would have us allow of this Comparison; for otherwise we
shall ever reject it, as being very ridiculous and extravagant.

CHAP. XV.
Where we further examine the objections of the Incredulous.
THe Incredulous are apt to raise as many suspicions against the miracles of
Jesus Christ, as against his person: because of all those proofs which
establish his Religion, there are none that can move the senses so much as that
taken from true Miracles.

I. Then they object, that Jesus the Son of Mary might have healed two or three
people either by chance, or by virtue of Second causes, and that that good
success might have got him afterward the name of a Prophet through the
ignorance of the people, who are wont to ascribe to supernatural Causes every
thing that is unknown to them. We answer that we have here a very great number
of miracles, all of different kinds, evident and sensible miracles, in their
Nature, unimitable and above all Imposture. Such are the Resurrection of the
dead, healing the Blind, the Lame, and the sick of the Palsy, etc.

II. They pretend that he might perhaps have suborned Witnesses to testify some
fabulous miracles. But how could this be? Since Jesus Christ had neither money
to give, nor dignities to promise; and as for cunning, Politic niceties,
Riches and Credit, they were only amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, and
Doctors of the Law, his implacable Enemies, who took all opportunities to
prejudice him, because he publicly censured their hypocrisy upon all occasions.

III. They object that Jesus Christ was so prudent as to work his miracles only
before three of his chosen Disciples, viz. Peter, James, and John. Now (say
they) who knows but that those three Disciples to flatter the ambition of their
Master, might have attested certain Miracles as true, which were not really so?

To remove this suspicion, we need only reflect upon the many miracles Jesus
Christ wrought in the presence of his other Disciples. He raised from the dead
the Son of the Widow of Naim, as he was a carrying to be interred. He raised
Lazarus from the grave in the sight of several Jews, who were purposely come
thither to comfort the Sisters of the Deceased Person. He tarried four days,
that it might not be said, he was not really dead. He permitted Lazarus to
converse with his acquaintance after his Resurrection, which gave occasion to
the Jews blinded with madness to conspire together to send him to the grave
again, whom the grave had just sent them for their Conversion.

IV. But is it possible that such great and such unparalelled miracles as
these, should make so little impression upon peoples minds? This Age is indeed
a wicked and prejudiced age: But yet what a noise would the Resurrection of a
dead man make now? How many would make it their business to be fully satisfied
of the truth of such a matter of fact? How few would doubt it, after having
known the certain truth of it? To this I answer, that the greatest part of
those who heard this Miracle, did not in the least believe it. Some ascribed it
to the power of Beelzebub; others to some other cause; some knew not what to
think of it, and therefore refused to enquire into it; others verily believed
that Jesus Christ and Lazarus had agreed together thus to seduce the people,
and this very likely was the opinion of those who sought after Lazarus to put
him to death; Others, though very few, took occasion from thence to glorify God.
But lest any man should wonder at the little impression this miracle made upon
the prejudiced and superstitious minds of men, 'twill be sufficient to make
these two following Reflections. First, That there have been several Jews who
freely acknowledged the Miracles of Jesus Christ, though they persisted in their
incredulity; choosing rather superstitiously to ascribe them to a certain I know
not what pronunciation of the word Jehovah, than to refer them totheir true
cause; which shows that the evidence of Miracles is not always of it self
sufficient to overcome the hardness of some men's minds when prepossessed with
prejudice. Secondly, That superstition it self has been sometimes carried on to
that degree as to extinguish utterly all the lights of Reason, and even to call
in question those very objects that are present to the senses, rather than be
obliged to renounce its prejudices. But it is not necessary to insist much upon
this last reflection.

It sufficiently appears from thence that there are such people in the World,
whose minds being prepossessed, will either call in question any palpable
truths, or else ascribe matters of fact truly miraculous to some fantastical
and extravagant causes. But there are none that are willing to die in order to
maintain that they were spectators of those things which they had really never
seen, especially when they profess to believe that imposture is a crime worthy
of Death; and when they might be so easily found out by so great a number of
witnesses, it would argue mere folly for any to pretend to impose upon men in
this respect. The Jewish Doctors had credit and authority enough over the
people, partly to stifle the knowledge they might have of those matters of
fact, or if that failed, at least to give such reasons of them, as would
certainly flatter the immoderate desire the Jews had to see not a sorrowful and
contemptible, but a glorious and triumphing Messiah. But the Disciples were too
weak to endure the severity of those Torments inflicted on them, had they been
mere Impostors; and were not surely so senseless as ever to think they might
easily persuade men to believe such matters of fact as the Resurrection of
Lazarus. For to endeavor to conceal a matter of fact of that Nature, one had
need only of prejudice and a wicked inclination; but to have a design to make
other men believe it when it was really false, one must be possessed with an
unaccountable and unheard of madness.

V. But you will say, let the opinion the Jews had of the Miracles of Jesus
Christ be what it will, still is it possible they could have no better
preserved the memory of them; and that Josephus for example, who carefully
relates the least sort of Events, and forgets not to mention certain Seducers
that had appeared in the World from time to time before him, should not in the
least speak of the Miracles of of Jesus Christ? It is supposed by some that
that notable testimony which he bears of him, was a pious fraud of his, or a
mere Invention of the succeeding ages. We shall not enquire into the truth of
that at present. We are willing to take things in the worst sense, and we have
three several replies to make this objection, concerning the silence of
Josephus in this respect. The first is, that those who probably inserted in the
Writings of that Author that notable place which has given occasion to the
Criticism of the Learned, might for a continuation of their design, have
blotted out every thing that Josephus really tells us on this account; and
which perhaps though less advantageous to our cause, is yet sufficient to show
that Jesus Christ was held as one that wrought many Miracles. The second, that
Josephus being a Pharisee might probably have concealed the wonders of the life
of our Savior, out of the hatred he bore to our Religion. And the last is,
that as this man had endeavored to insinuate himself into Vespasian's favor,
by foretelling him that he should be Emperor; and had ascribed to him several
prophecies of the Old Joseph. de bello Judaico. lib. 3. cap. 14. 7, 12.
Testament, which promised that a King should come from the East; it is highly
probabable that this Author being a Courtier, would not out of complaisance to
Vespasian and his Children, mention the least thing of a man, who had pretended
he was the Messiah, and to whom other people ascribed those famous prophecies,
whereby he had endeavored to ingratiate himself in that Emperors Esteem. And
certainly it is very unlikely to suppose that a man who had carefully related
the least Circumstance of the life of Herod the Great, should have forgot the
Murder of the Children of Bethlehem, if at the time he discovered the cause of
that Murder, he had not been afraid to discover also the dread Herod had upon
him at the birth of the Messiah, and the Opinion then current among the Jews,
that the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem.

It Is however certain, that this Author could not have concealed any such
events as these, but only out of Ignorance or Policy. He could not have done it
out of ignorance; and the Incredulous themselves will not presume to think that
Josephus was altogether ignorant that Jesus Christ had been put to death at
Jerusalem; that he was accused there of seducing the people; that he had
several Disciples to attend him, whose number in his time increased yet daily;
nay that there had been a very numerous Church at Jerusalem, composed of
persons of that persuasion. And certainly there must have been Christians in
all Judea, since there dwelt a very considerable number of them at Rome, under
the Emperor Sueton. in vit^ Claud.
Claudius Caesar, as it appears more at large by the History of Suetonius. It
must therefore be out of Policy that Josephus made no mention of them: and we
can never suspect him of having had a design to conceal by his silence, those
Impostors which arose amongst the Jews, because he speaks of all the rest; nor
to spare the shame and confusion of his own Nation, because he so particularly
made it his business to discover the fury and leudness of that people. Let any
one thoroughly consider all these things, and he will then necessarily confess
that the silence of Josephus which was occasioned merely by Policy, cannot but
be very advantageous to our cause.

VI. But lastly, It Is objected there is nothing more frequent than to see some
men endeavoring to make others believe those miracles as were never in being.
It is very well known how strangely people have always been infatuated in this
respect, and what an easy matter it is to impose Tacit. lib. 5. Histor. cap. 13.
upon them. Tacitus relates that Vespasian being one day at Alexandria, he
healed two blind men; and that this matter of fact would have been altogether
incredible, hadnot the whole Court been an eyewitness to it.

We answer, that it is very likely Vespasian was willing to be thought to have
done some miracles, in respect of those prophecies which seemed to promise him
the Empire of the World, according to the false application Josephus had made
of them to his person. He was at first well enough pleased to see that Jew
flattering him by such an agreeable prediction: but being sometimes after come
to Alexandria, and perceiving that his concerns successfully went on, he
thought it behoved him to persuade the people that he was called to the Empire
by Divine Inspiration; and doubtless with that design he commanded two men that
counterfeited blindness to be brought unto him, on purpose to work upon them a
false Miracle. But giving this objection a greater latitude, I answer that
there are no miracles whatever but what I verily believe to be true, and which
appear to me past all contradiction, if they have those ten Characters which
any one may observe in the Miracles of the Apostles. I. If they were as the
former, foretold in the Ancient Oracles. II. If they are very frequent, very
numerous, various, and evident. III. If the Authors of them were a simple and
disinteressed sort of people, who in all appearance had neither malice enough
to have a design to deceive, nor understanding enough to have the power to do
it, nor boldness to undertake it, nor credit to maintain it. IV. If those
Miracles are so tried by the prudence and industry of the most skilful men in
the World, that they not being able altogether to deny the truth of them, are
obliged to refer them to several odd and extravagant causes. V. If there is an
innumerable company of Witnesses who die, and rejoice to die in the testimony
not that they only heard of them, but that they both saw and worked them
themselves. VI. If the end of those Miracles is not to satisfy men's passions or
loose desires, but to sanctify their hearts and regulate their manners. VII. If
those persons which both testify and admit of them, seem on the one hand to aim
at nothing else but their own Salvation, and that of their brethren; and on the
other if they are persuaded that their Salvation is inconsistent with imposture
and deceit. VIII. If those who testify them, proffer to do the like, if they
pretend themselves able to impart any miraculous gifts to others; and if by the
help of that sensible means, and of that proof, which they call the conviction
of the mind, they make greater progress than ever the most fortunate
Conquerours did by the force of their arms. IX. If those who refuse to allow of
all these miraculous matters of fact, must unavoidably fall into an infinite
number of self evident contradictions, as for instance, to believe that the
wisest amongst men are the most foolish, and the most constant the most
deceitful. X. If all those matters of fact are so strictly united to one
another, that it is impossible to own the one, without presently granting the
other too; and so inseparably interwoven with some other undeniable matters of
fact, that cannot be called in question without utterly renouncing our Sense
and Reason. And Lastly, If they end in the Resurrection of a man, who was
vainly sought for in his grave after his death, notwithstanding his Sepulcher
had been sealed and surrounded with a watch; of such a man whom above five
hundred witnesses affirmed they had seen, and who conversed with his Disciples
forty days after his Resurrection, as they unanimously testified,
notwithstanding all the punishments inflicted on them for the same. The
incredulous must either show us to be deceived, in ascribing all these
Characters to the Miracles of Jesus Christ, or else forbear making such
comparisons.

CHAP. XVI.
Where we further examine those Difficulties which may be raised against our
principles.
THose who regard not the Master of the House, doubtless will not respect the
person of his Servants. The Incredulous no doubt have many things to object
against the Disciples of Jesus Christ. They will ask why the number of them was
so small, wherefore he chose them so poor and ignorant; since your famous
Teachers, such as the Pharisees amongst the Jews; the Stoics amongst the
Heathens, wo^ld have probably gained his Sect more credit and respect:
Wherefore was he attended with Publicans and Sinners, nay even with Harlots?
And Lastly, Why should we rather believe the testimony of the Disciples
concerning their Master, than that of those men whom the Jews employed to
signify that Jesus a Galilean was an Impostor, and that his Disciples had taken
away his Body by night from the Sepulcher wherein he had been laid. Justin is
the man who speaks of those chosen by the Synagogue to spread abroad this
report, in his Dialogue against Tryphon.

It will be easy for us not only to answer all their objections, but even to
draw from them several very considerable advantages to our Cause.

For as to the First, We answer that besides the twelve Disciples, commonly
called Apostles, which Jesus Christ had chose to himself in the beginning, he
also sent seventy others, who were not only eyewitnesses to all his Actions,
but also the very instruments he made use of to advance his Kingdom: that the
truth of his Resurrection was testified and seen by above five hundred brethren
at once, and that the miraculous gifts which fell on the Disciples after the
Ascension of their Master, and the Miracles which God wrought by their hands,
had as many witnesses, as their were people that believed there preaching.

As to the second, we answer, that the choice of such vile contemptible
instruments as God was pleased to make use of for the Execution of the greatest
and most noble design, is one of the most considerable proofs that every thing
here was solely transacted by the finger of God. Had he chose for his Ministers
the Princes and Potentates of the World, some would perhaps have ascribed the
wonders of Christian Morality to Policy, and the design of keeping people in
obedience, by obliging them to a charitable Union among themselves. Had he
chose Philosophers, some would have ascribed their heroical selfdenial to the
singularity and pride of their Sect, or to those elevated thoughts which
Philosophy had inspired them with. Had he chose Orators, some would have
thought that they might have seduced men by the charms of their Eloquence. Had
he chose very Powerful and Rich men, some would have attributed the success of
their preaching to their liberalities. He chose therefore mean and contemptible
persons, who had ever lived in great simplicity, and labored under an obscure
condition, to show more clearly that the success of the Gospel was the work of
God and not of Men.

In answer to the third Objection we assert, that though Jesus Christ was usually
attended with Publicans and Sinners; yet they were Sinners converted by the
efficacy of his Doctrine, they were Publicans regenerated, whose testimony of
the Christian Religion was the more authentic, as it more plainly evinced that
this Religion was the only one truly capable of sanctifying Mankind. Certainly
I cannot perceive a more evident sign of the Divinity of our Saviors Mission
than to see that he acted with so much efficacy, that sinful women came, and
washed his feet with repentant tears, and wiped them with their Hairs; that one
word of his could draw Levi from the receipt of Custom, oblige Peter, and
Andrew, to follow him, to forsake their Nets, their Boat, and even their Father
Zebedee.

But some will say, if Jesus Christ made his Disciples utterly renounce all
worldly advantages, 'twas merely by the hopes he gave them of a blessed and
eternal life, and consequently it was to their advantage thus to renounce them.
I grant it: but then I say this consideration makes for us, and is more than
sufficient to give an invincible Demonstration of the Truth of the Christian
Religion. For if the Disciples did verily expect an everlasting Life from Jesus
Christ; and if it was purely on the account of that interest, the greatest
indeed of all our Interests, and of that hope, far stronger than all their
passions, that they suffered such torments for the name of Jesus (as we must
either believe it, or look upon the Disciples as so many Fools or mad Men) I
say if the Disciples hoped for eternal life from him, it necessarily follows
thence, that they sincerely believed him to be what he professd himself to be;
since they could not expect eternal life from an Impostor. And if they believed
his calling to be true, they likewise believed his Miracles and Resurrection to
be so too. And if they thought his Miracles and Resurrection true, it follows
thence that they were necessarily so; it being impossible that the Disciples
should have deceived themselves in certain matters of fact which required only
seeing, hearing and feeling.

Let the Incredulous use what Shifts and Evasions they please, I dare say they
can bring nothing but absurd impertinencies in answer to this argument, which
we look upon to have the force of Demonstration. If the Apostles expected
everlasting life from Jesus Christ, it follows thence that they could not look
upon him as an Impostor, nor abet his Imposture, nor be Impostors themselves,
as they necessarily must have been, were not the Christian Religion infallibly
true. Now it is most certain that the Disciples did hope for everlasting life
from Jesus Christ, because he never proposed any other object to their Faith,
he foretold them nothing but Crosses and tribulations in this life, publicly
declaring that his Kingdom was not of this World; besides Experience and Reason
taught them the very same thing; they themselves declared in all their Epistles
that they expected nothing but crosses and tribulations in this life, comparing
it to a Warfare, a Wrestling, the World to a Field of Battle; calling
themselves the Champions of Jesus Christ; and continually rejoicing that they
were to suffer in hopes of the Crown that was reserved for them.

As to the Fourth Objection, we answer that we are willing to compare the
Witnesses of the Synagogue with those Writings of Jesus Christ. The Witnesses
of the Synagogue testified that which was unknown to them, that which they had
not seen, and which they therefore could have no certain Knowledge of. For who
can believe the report of the Watch? If they really saw any one taking away the
body of Jesus why did they not prevent it? But if they did not see it, how can
their Testimony be valid? But as for the Disciples of the Lord, they testified
those matters of fact which their Eyes were Witnesses to. That which we have
seen, say they, with our Eyes, which we have heard with our Ears, and our Hands
have handled of the Word of Life, declare we unto you, 1 John 1. 1. The former
Witnesses were Soldiers, the latter Martyrs. The former endeavored to persuade
men by force, the latter persuaded them maugre all the violence offered to
them. To be such a witness as the Apostles were, there is need of Constancy and
persuasion. To be such a one as those suborned by the Synagogue, there is need
only of fury and violence. But was there never a one of either party that
recanted his Opinion? Yes without doubt, and this consideration alone is
sufficient to decide the Controversy.

Saul a servant of the Synagogue going one day to Damascus, not only to testify
that Jesus Christ had been a Seducer, but also to persecute all those that
believed on him, was on a sudden changed, and became a Disciple of him whom
before he went about so furiously to persecute. Judas on the contrary a
Disciple and Apostle of Jesus Christ, renounced his Master, and delivered him
to the Jews who put him to Death. Here are two several witnesses who seem to
recant their opinion, but consider the different end of their Recantation.

Saul was a Pharisee, the Son of a Pharisee, and consequently a Member of a
Sect particularly exasperated against Jesus Christ. He had obtained letters
from the Sanhedrin or grand Council at Jerusalem, to the Synagogues of Damascus
to demand assistance from them against the Christians that dwelt therein, whom
he had purposed to himself to drag along to Prison, and to put to Death, as he
had done several others before. He was therefore on his journey, and drew nigh
unto Damascus: he was upon the point of satisfying his rage and fury; but on a
sudden he is altogether changed. What was there that could have obliged this
Witness thus to recant? What proffers were then made to him, or who was then in
a condition to make him any? What unexpected force so suddenly overthrew all
the designs and prejudices of a man that was just going to shed the blood of
Christians? He went about afterward preaching that he had seen Jesus Christ,
that a great light shone round about him, that the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven were revealed unto him. He affirmed that God had set him forth unto the
World, and that he became a Spectacle unto Men and Angels, 1 Cor. 4. 9.

If men will not credit his report, let them try him by torments, and see what
effect they will have upon him. Let them load him with Chains, and cast him
into Prison, let them expose him to Wild beasts at Ephesus; let the Elements,
Men, and Devils be all at once set against him; let them scourge him, drag him
along, stone him, let them bring him from Jerusalem to Cesarea, from Cesarea to
Rome, increase and prolong his Afflictions, Saul the Witness of the Synagogue
it is true recanted his opinion; but Paul the Witness of Jesus will never recant
his.

Having seen the strange alteration which happened to the Person of the
Minister of the Synagogue, let us reflect a little on that which happened to
the Person of the Apostle of Jesus Christ. Judas betrayed his Master, and
received for his reward thirty pieces of Silver. But how comes it to pass he
was so much disturbed after he had done it? The Jews, the Romans, the People,
the Doctors, the Magistrates and Judges, all favored his crime, and let him go
unpunished; yet the remorse of his own Conscience tormented him to that degree
that he could not rest any where; and at length not being able to overcome his
Despair, he made away with himself: and the Wisdom of God so ordered it, that
the Jews themselves preserved the memory of that astonishing event, by buying
with that money a field which is since called Aceldama, because it was the price
of blood. What a strange difference we find in these two Persons of Judas and
Saul? Judas killed himself in the midst of his Prosperity; but Saul rejoiced in
the midst of his afflictions. Judas prevailed upon by the Synagogue could not
be comforted by the same, but died in despair. Paul became the Disciple and
Witness of Jesus, and to him the Cross of Jesus was matter of the greatest joy.
God forbid, says he Gal. 6. 14 that I should glory, save in the Cross of my
Savior Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World.
Will any one believe that Judas was his own Executioner merely out of remorse
for having betrayed an Impostor to the Jews? Or that St. Paul derived from the
sense of his infidelity, the courage he showed in all his sufferings. Certainly
it may be very properly said, that they were both the Martyrs of God, but only
with this difference that Judas was so against his will, but Paul voluntarily.
If the constancy of the one testified in behalf of Jesus Christ, the despair of
the other was no small honor to him. And the only difference is this, that
Paul was properly a Martyr, but Judas in spite of himself a witness of the
Truth of Religion.

CHAP. XVII.
Where we further answer the Objections of the Incredulous.
OF all the Objects which the Christian Religion offers to our understanding,
there is no one seems more to shock the Reason of a prejudiced and incredulous
person, than the Death of the Messiah. The Cross of Jesus Christ was, according
to the Expression of an Apostle, a scandal to the Jew and a folly to the Greek.
But in our opinion there is nothing bears more visible characters of Greatness
and Divinity than that does. The Incredulous tell us, that could we but rid our
selves of all our prejudices, we should be heartily ashamed to entertain such
strange Ideas of God. And we also tell them, that could they once but free
themselves of those passions which darken their understanding, they would
certainly admire with us the wonders of so Divine an object. Who then is in the
wrong in this thing? That will best appear by the answers we shall make to
their objections.

We find in the Person of Jesus Christ one who suffered himself to be seized
upon, and was afterward nailed on a Cross, not having any one to deliver him
from the power of his Enemies. This they object was a mark of his Weakness.
For, say they, had he been the King of the Jews, why did he not come down from
the Cross, and all the World would have believed on him? He died as one
condemned by the grand Council of the Jews, which God himself had established.
This was he as was found guilty. He was seized with sorrowfulness even unto
Death the day before his Passion, and cried out bitterly when he gave up the
Ghost. This shows his wretched condition. He was made to suffer a punishment
proper only for Slaves. It cannot therefore be doubted but that he died a most
infamous Death. And who can imagine that Weakness, Guilt, or at least
Condemnation, Wretchedness and Infamy should be the true Characters of the Son
of God? Thus the Incredulous argue. We answer that Jesus Christ suffered by the
determinate Council of God; since the Scriptures foretold that he was to be
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, that he was to
make his Soul an offering for sin* that he was to be cut off, but not for
himself. And St. John the Baptist seeing him coming to him, at a time wherein
it was very unlikely he should ever suffer, called him the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World, John 1. 29. Jesus Christ suffered
voluntarily; he foretold all his own Sufferings to his Disciples, inviting them
to take up their Cross and follow him. He told them that he had made choice of
a Company of miserable and afflicted Wretches in the World who were
notwithstanding to overcome the World, and by their sufferings establish the
Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth. He freely owned to them that he was not come to
settle peace in the World, but the sword, that God would smite the Shepherd,
and that the Sheep should be scattered, that they were to drink of the same cup
with him, and be Baptized with his Baptism, that is, to taste the bitter cup of
his Afflictions, and be Baptized with him with a Baptism of Blood. He
intermixed his suffering with theirs, that they might the better bear them in
remembrance. If we should in the least doubt whether Christ foretold his
sufferings, we need only consider the design of the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
and the time wherein this Ceremony was instituted. For unless we should call in
question the real institution of that Sacrament, and so affirm that the
Disciples out of an unaccountable and fantastical Extravagance, pretended only
that Jesus Christ had instituted that Ceremony, when there was no such thing:
it will appear that Jesus Christ foresaw his Death, that he prepared himself
for it, and affirmed he suffered it voluntarily for the Salvation of Mankind.
The Sacrament of the Eucharist which he instituted in cold Blood certifies us
of all these things. But because an involuntary Death would argue a certain
kind of weakness, it is also most certain that nothing can better evince the
strength and courage of Jesus Christ, than that though he foresaw the horrors of
an infamous and painful Death, yet he exposed himself to it with such a
constant will and firm Resolution, that by his example he showed his Disciples,
how he would have them imitate and commemorate his sufferings.

Jesus Christ was condemned to Death by a Nation seditiously stirred up against
him, and by a Sanhedrin envious of his Glory: but he was justified by the
Conscience of Judas, whose remorse for having betrayed him, forced him to kill
himself, and by the solemn declaration of Pilate, who washed his hands in the
presence of the Jews, to show that he was innocent of the Blood of that just
Person. He was justified too by the voice of the Centurion, who saw the
prodigies his Death was attended withal, and soon after by the mouths even of
those who sought his ruin, and who being pricked to the heart, cried out to the
Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do, Act. 2. 37. And certainly it is a
very great glory to our Messiah, that the most guilty Conscience, the most
unjust judges, the most insensible and hardened sort of Soldiers, and the most
barbarous Murderers should even bare record of his Innocence.

Jesus Christ suffered, but it was for our sakes: he gave himself up to the
sorrow and anguish of Death, and made his life an offering for Sin. And if
those wounds are counted honorable which a Subject receives sighting in the
presence of his King, and if those which a King receives for the safety of his
Subjects are esteemed yet far more glorious: what Glory then did Christ
deserve, who suffered in the presence and by the will of his Father for the
Salvation of his People and Children, and who by his sufferings established
such an Empire which no power can dissolve?

Lastly, Jesus Christ suffered a punishment proper only to Slaves; but we are
also very certain, that during the time of his sufferings, he showed himself to
have a power over Nature her self, since the Graves were opened at his Death,
the Rocks rent, the Sun was darkened, and the Vail of the Temple was rent in
twain: And it is impossible that the Disciples of the Lord should have invented
so sensible and signal matters of fact, against the fresh and public knowledge
which those men that lived in their days had of it, without being guilty of
such an Extravagance which is more than humane.

But here we will ask the Incredulous in our turn, whether a voluntary Death,
an innocence publicly owned, the sorrows and anguish which a man suffered out
of Charity to the World, the homages which even insensible Creatures paid to
him whom men scorned and condemned, were not certain Characters worthy of the
Messiah that had been promised us?

Indeed if you take away the proofs which evidently show Jesus Christ to be the
Son of God, you may then call his Cross a scandal to him and the World, but
whilst those proofs shall be left entire, his Cross will serve the more to
illustrate his Majesty and Grandeur, and we shall not only then assert that it
was a voluntary Death which he underwent, and a Death that was foretold us; but
we shall also show that it is as it were a looking-glass-like, wherein we may
see at once all the virtues of man, and all the Attributes of God. There we may
find the patience of a man, who suffered every thing from his equals, and from
those who ought to have been his Servants and Disciples, the Charity of a man
who prayed for them that put him to Death; the Constancy of a just man, who
bore the burden of the iniquities of mankind; and the constancy of an innocent
man, who at once as it were wrestled with the fury of men, and the Justice of
God. There we may see the Masterpiece of Divine Wisdom, the designs of our
Enemies frustrated, and the designs of God triumphing over the vain opinions
and projects of men; the propitiation of sins made for us by the most dreadful
parricide that was ever committed or conceived; the Synagogue buried in his
grave whom they barbarously put to Death in defense of their privileges; the
Romans crowning a King with thorns who was to rule over all Nations, and
putting a Reed instead of a Scepter into his hands, flesh and blood showing us
in the Death of Christ the true pattern of mortification; Jesus Christ dying
attended with almost infinite numbers of Martyrs, who were willing to die in
imitation of him, who was Conqueror of the World only by his shame, who
crucified the flesh by the preaching of his Cross, and procured Rest and Peace
to the Souls of them that dyed by the Anguish of his Agony.

We may also see the Justice and Mercy of God clearly manifested in his Death.
For what other Victim could have better evinced Gods hatred for Sin? What
present could have been made unto men, that could have better discovered Gods
love to them? The Incredulous therefore reproach us with the meanness of an
object, wherein the virtues of men, and the attributes of God himself are shown
in their greatest height and perfection.

But let him that any ways doubts, it, consider the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ which is as it were a key that opens all these Events to us. To dye and
remain under the power of Death, is indeed an evident mark of weakness and
misery: but to dye and yet overcome Death by rising from the Grave, is the mark
of a supernatural power and a divine glory. Thus Jesus Christ descended into
the lower parts of the Earth for no other end but to ascend into Heaven, as the
Eyewitnesses of that great and notable Event did plainly testify.

But the Incredulous will not believe their report, and they further pretend,
that they can find in history the example of a testimony very like that, which
was nevertheless without contradiction reputed Plutarch in the life of Romulus.
to be a mere Imposture. We read say they, that after the Death of Romulus,
there was a certain senator, who having always lived in the repute of a very
honest man, certified that Romulus was ascended into Heaven, where he was
inserted among the Gods, and that this Monarch had appeared unto him, etc. Is
not this a matter of fact not unlike that which the Disciples testified of
Jesus Christ throughout the Universe?

It Is very like it indeed, only it has these following differences; there you
read of a single person testifying that he had seen Romulus ascended into
Heaven; but here you have a very great number of people who certifiy'd that
they had seen Jesus Christ after his Resurrection. There it is pretended that a
great and triumphant Monarch during the course of his life, was inserted
amongst the Gods after his Death; (which agrees well enough with the common
notions of the Vulgar) but here that a man died a Death proper only to Slaves;
that he rose again and ascended into Heaven, which is a thing that could not
easily enter of it self into any man's mind. There a Senator made use of a lie
to free the Senate from the accusation of having murdered their King; but here
we find men who exposed themselves to Death, and to torments, if it were
possible more insufferable than Death it self, to bear witness of that they
looked upon as a Truth. There it appears that 'twas a cuning man who softened a
multitude enraged for the murder of their King, by imposing upon their belief:
but here we have only simple and ignorant persons, who by their testimony
convinced even the most obstinate amongst the Learned, and engaged them also to
suffer Martyrdom. There a single person barely affirmed without any proof, that
Romulus had appeared to him: here we have such Witnesses as convince us of the
Truth of their Testimony by the most real and sensible proofs in the World,
viz. the extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost conferred upon
them, and which they themselves frequently imparted to others.

But lastly, it may be objected that we see now a days certain Enthusiasts and
Quakers pretending themselves inspired by the Holy Ghost, who reveals to them
as they say, both what they should do and believe, whereas all men of sense
know very well they do but dream all this while; and perhaps too the Disciples
might have falsely pretended they had received the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. It
will soon be seen how wretchedly foolish and trivial this same objection is, if
it be only considered that tho these Enthusiasts vainly boast of their being
divinely inspired, yet they pretend not to confirm their Doctrine by working
any Miracles, or speaking strange Languages, etc. They think themselves
inspired in respect of their Doctrine only; and since they commonly speak in
the style of the Holy Scripture, which they have continually before their eyes,
we have no reason to wonder at their taking for an inspiration a continual
repetition of that they have so often read over. But the Apostles not only
pretended themselves inspired by the Holy Ghost, (that they might not advance
any thing but what was Orthodox and conformable to the Holy Scriptures) but
they affirmed also they had received some supernatural and miraculous gifts,
the truth of which they could at any time justify by their Works. And if you
should doubt it, you need only observe they did not prove the same by mere
speculations, but by calling to bear witness of what they said, the senses of
those they spoke to, nay the eyes of the Jews themselves both their Masters and
their Enemies too. He therefore being, say they, by the right hand of God
exalted, has shed forth this which ye now see and hear, Acts 2. 33. If you
should doubt whether St. Peter really spoke just after this manner to the Jews;
the multitude of those Proselytes converted by the evidence of this
Demonstration, and a whole Church purely founded by the efficacy of the same,
will sufficiently warrant the certainty of it. Should you suppose that the
Disciples deceived the multitude, we will only remind you that they had to deal
with several learned and skillful Adversaries, though they themselves were but
simple and ignorant People. If you should imagine that the Vulgar delighted in
suffering themselves to be thus miserably deluded, we will only put you in
mind, that there could be no Faith more Grievous or terrible, according to the
judgment of men, than that which they embraced when they turned Christians;
that it highly concerned them thoroughly to examine such matters of fact, the
belief of which obliged them to suffer Martyrdom; that those of Berea who daily
took care to compare the holy Scriptures, to know whether all things were
really so as St. Paul had told them, certainly would not have failed to consult
their eyes and ears, to be assured whether the Apostles had any reason to
pretend they could do signs and wonders; this latter examination being more
sure and easy than the former; that 'twas not once or twice only St. Paul
boasted of having made himself known by many signs, miracles and wonders
wrought by him in the presence of those he wrote his exhortations to; that
every one of his Epistles is full of Declarations of this kind, or of those
things visibly relating thereunto; that he derived both his Arguments and the
motives of his exhortations from that undeniably known effusion of the
supernatural graces of the Holy Ghost. Certainly no man can imagine St. Paul so
senseless as to write to the Corinthians in these Words, Wherefore, Brethren,
covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues, 1 Cor. 14. 19.
supposing those gifts had not been actually visible in the Church; nor would he
have taken so much care to remedy those disorders which arose from the abuse of
those miraculous gifts, as we have already observed he did. Neither would he
have warned them that the end of Prophesying was to edify the faithful, but
that the gift of Tongues as being miraculous was to convince the Incredulous.
Lastly, he would never have undertook to correct the disorders of men, who
valued those extraordinary Gifts more than Charity it self, as we see he did
when he observed, that whether there were prophecies, they should fail, whether
there were Languages, they should cease: but that Charity did never fail.

But we may easily see by his words how fully he was persuaded of these things.
He had so great an admiration for so many miracles, signs, and wonderful works,
which the Spirit of God wrought in the sight of men; that he knew not well what
suitable name to give to that Divine principle. Sometimes he called it The
excellency of the power of God, 2 Cor. 4. 7. sometimes, the exceeding greatness
of his power, Ephesians. 1. 19. sometimes, the Excellency of the power of his might,
Ephesians. 6. 10. All which expressions are to the full as Natural as they are
strong, and discover to us beyond all the arguments in the World the Idea St.
Paul had of those miraculous gifts, and consequently that too which we our
selves ought to have of them.

SECTION III.
Wherein we shall endeavor to carry even to a Demonstration, the proofs drawn
from the external evidence of the matters of fact contained in the New
Testament, and the inward sense we have of them.
CHAP. I.
Of the Natural Temper, Dispositions, and Inclinations of the Disciples, and
what sort of prejudices they were possessed with, when Jesus Christ manifested
himself to them.
WE cannot better discover what Impression the matters of fact related in the
Gospel may have, or ought to have wrought upon the minds of the Disciples, than
by considering what sort of prejudices they were till then possessed with. We
shall therefore begin this third Section with the examination of them.

Since the Disciples of Jesus Christ were originally Jews, they must needs have
been possessed with these five following prejudices. I. They were fully persuaded
that the Kingdom of the Messiah was to be attended with temporal Prosperity.
II. They imagined that the Messiah would restore the Kingdom of Israel to its
former Glory, and once more raise up the house of David out of that disgrace,
and almost oblivion it had lain under, to its ancient Power and Majesty. III.
They believed their Law to be of an eternal duration. (Now by their Law I do
not here understand the Moral Law only, but the Ceremonial one too, or rather
the whole body of it in general, containing both the Moral and Ceremonial Law.)
IV. They esteemed their Sacrifices to be the most sacred and most inviolable
Duty of their Religion, and they were far from imagining that those Sacrifices
enjoined by their Law should on a sudden cease, as soon as one Man was put to
Death. V. And lastly, they could not consider the Gentiles but as an unclean
and abominable sort of people in comparison to themselves. For besides the sin
of Idolatry (which the Jews accounted so capital a crime as to deserve that God
should for ever cast them off who were guilty of it) the Heathens were
variously polluted and defiled according to the notions the Jews had of their
Law, since they used none of those Ceremonies that were absolutely necessary to
their external Sanctification, by avoiding all uncleanness and legal Impurities.

As to the first prejudice, it can never be doubted but that the Jews expected
a temporal Prosperity from their Messiah. For besides that the Prophets seemed
to have disposed them thereto by so many excellent and noble Prophecies uttered
concerning him, who knows but that they might look upon Herod the great (tho
born an Idumean) as the true Messiah who was to come, being surprised at the
noise of his Victories, the pomp of his Triumphs, and that constant Prosperity
that continually followed his Reign?

Nay it seems very probable, that Herod himself had a design to be taken for
the true Messiah, and therefore caused the Temple of Jerusalem to be
demolished, on purpose to re*build it after a more glorious and magnificent
manner; since it was the received opinion of the Jews of those days that the
Messiah was to have been the glory of that House, according to all the
Predictions of the Prophets.

But whether there be or no any grounds for that conjecture, it is true at least
that his surprising victories and prosperity had made so great an impression
upon the minds of the Jews, that a very considerable number of them imagined,
that Herod was the Messiah whom the Prophets had promised, and who was to raise
their Nation to the height of Happiness and Prosperity. For this opinion gave
rise to the Sect of the Herodians that is mentioned in the Gospel.

And we ought not to wonder at it, since the corrupt heart of man delights in
nothing so much as worldly grandeur and temporal prosperity. Therein consist
the pleasures of great as well as mean Persons; and he that shall but consult
the History of Mankind* will find that from the beginning of the World, those
Societies which were distinguished from others by the splendour of honors, or
enjoyment of temporal prosperity, still prevailed over all the rest.

The Second received opinion of the Jews was, that their Messiah was to restore
the Kingdom of Israel to its former glory. For on one hand their Prophets had
taught them that the House of David should reign, and endure as long as the Sun
and Moon; And on the other they were sensible that the House of David was
partly extinguished, and partly fallen into disgrace and humiliation. They
expected therefore from the Messiah, that he would restore it again. And although
the people had for a long time been governed by several Kings not descended
from the Tribe of Judah; yet they still fed themselves up with that imaginary
hope.

But above, all the Jews were firmly persuaded of the perpetual Duration of
their Law, that is, that people should continually come up from all parts of
the World to worship in Mount Sion, and offer up variety of sacrifices in the
Holy Land. 'Twas this Law they had heard so often mentioned in their infancy,
which their Parents, their Elders and their Teachers had so often entertained
them with in their common discourse.

They heard every body speak of Jerusalem with a great deal of respect, and
'twas reputed a great oath among them to swear by the City of the great King.
They considered the Levites as so many Sacred Persons; and the Priests as the
Visible Ministers of an invisible God that was pleased to dwell among them.
They sent yearly to Jerusalem the tenth of their goods; and brought an infinite
variety of victims to be there offered up to God. They thought they could
neither be acceptable in the sight of God nor man, unless they practiced all
the Customs their law prescribed them, touching their purity and external
sanctification.

They had seen the greatest severities inflicted upon the infringers of that
Law: and the four sorts of punishments ordained by the Law against the
Violaters of it (viz. that they should be strangled, or cut off by the Sword,
or Burnt, or stoned to Death, according to the enormity of their crime) were
continually before their eyes, and almost daily executed upon those that were
guilty in breach of the Law; so that they could not but look upon the
prescriptions of the Law as sacred and inviolable duties, they were obliged to
perform. Now it is obvious to every one how great an impression these
punishments must necessarily make upon the minds of the meaner sort of people*

They were filled with the thoughts of their Festivals and Solemnities, which
were so very proper to fix and stay their minds by that great number both of
Ceremonies and Circumstances they were attended with. Thrice every year they
were enjoined to go up to Jerusalem, during such certain sacred times, which
they were obliged to observe with a particular devotion; and it was forbidden
them to discourse any thing else during the Passover, but of the sorrowful
Captivity which the ancient Israelites endured in Egypt, Exodus 13. 8. Neither
were they permitted to eat any thing for seven days together but unleavened
Bread, in token of that Bread of affliction which their Forefathers had eaten.
They were commanded to kill as many Lambs as there were Families dwelling in
Jerusalem, in token of the ancient passage of the destroying Angel over the
Houses of Israel. The Feast of Pentecost was to be commemorated with no less
solemnity, at which time they were obliged to offer up to God the first fruits
of the earth* It was a part of their Duty to observe yearly a solemn and
general Fast the tenth day of September, as also to rest from all manner of
Labor the first and last day of the Feast of the Passover, as well as the day
called Kipur, in which they were not suffered so much as to eat, or drink, or
anoint, or wash themselves. They were obliged to dwell seven days together in
Tents during the Feast of Tabernacles, which Ceremony was particularly designed
to commemorate the abode of the ancient Israelites in the Wilderness.

Now every one knows that the greater number of Festivals and Solemnities there
is in any Religion, the more impression they make upon the minds of the people,
who are apt to think that Religion chiefly consists in external Rites and
Ceremonies.

It Is certain that the great number and variety of sacrifices prescribed in the
Law of Moses, and duly performed by the Jews, was capable enough to produce
this effect in the minds of the people. For they thought every thing was to be
offered to God. They offered him men, which was called Consecration. They
offered him the fruits of the Earth, which was called Oblation. They offered
him their Liquors, which was termed Libation. They offered him Spices which
were burnt in his presence, and that was called Burning of Incense. Lastly,
they offered him four-footed Beasts, which was more properly called Sacrifice.
They offered him also Burntofferings, and other ordinary Sacrifices. They
offered Sin Offerings, and Peace Offerings. They offered some set sacrifices,
and others accidental and occasional. They offered two daily, one in the
morning, and the other in the evening; as also an extraordinary one every week,
and another extraordinary one every month, and new ones on every solemn feast
day. They offered them either for the sins of the people in general, or for
those of private persons in particular. But on the day of the solemn expiation,
they offered then two sacrifices, the one which the High Priest offered for
himself and his whole Family at his own proper charge, and the other he offered
at the charge of the people, for the sins of the people. Then they chose two
he-Goats, one whereof was offered as a sacrifice for sin, and was burnt out of
the Camp, or City, and the other was sent into a desert near a mountain called
Hazazel, where it was cast down head long. Which being done, the High Priest
clothed in white Raiments, entered into the most holy place, holding a Censer
in his hands full of hot burning Coals, on which he would sprinkle all sorts of
spices, the smoke whereof made a kind of cloud, which covered the Mercy-seat
all over, on which he would then power the Blood of the he-Goat that had been
slain in the Porch. This being done, the High Priest pulled off his sacred
Robes, and having put on again his usual Garments, returned back to his own
House, accompanied by all the people, who ended the day with festivals and
rejoycings, because the High Priest was come out from the presence of God safe
and sound. So great a number therefore and variety both of Ceremonies and
Sacrifices, could not but naturally have a great power over the minds of those,
who from their infancy had had all those objects continually before their eyes.

We ought to make the same judgment on their different kinds of purification.
For as Custom and Education only make us think Nudity a shameful and unbecoming
state for any man to be seen in; so Custom, Education and Religion, which is
often of more force than either, made them esteem all those unclean, who had
contracted any legal impurities. The camp of the Israelites in the desert, and
afterward the City of Jerusalem was divided in three parts: the first was the
place or habitation of God himself, who dwelt either in the Tabernacle, or the
Temple. The second was that of the Levites, who dwelt round about the
Sanctuary: and the third was that of the people, which was separated from the
Temple by that of the Levites. In like manner they distinguished three sorts of
unclean persons: The first sort were only excluded from the Temple or Dwelling
place of God; such were all those who had touched any dead Carcass, or were
uncircumcised: The second being looked upon as more unclean than the first,
were shut out both of the first and the second habitation, viz. out of the
Temple and the Habitation of the Levites, that is, they were entirely excluded
out of Mount Sion, such were all Women after Child bearing, or all men and
women that had any natural or accidental impurities: Lastly, the third, the
most unclean of all were excluded out of those three Habitations, and utterly
sequestered from the Society and Communion of the people. Such were all Lepers
who were not only looked upon as defiled, but also as persons who might easily
defile other people, and who to distinguish and make themselves known in those
very places where they lived a part by themselves, were obliged according to
the Hebrew Tradition to wear torn garments, to let their hairs grow, and walk
about with their faces covered with a vail, as if they were capable of defiling
other men by their very looks, or as if other men were afraid to contaminate
their eyes by looking upon them, as it appears by the allusion of the Prophet
Isaiah to that custom, in the prophecy contained in his 53. Chap. v. 3. We hid
as it were our face from him, that is, as the Comment imports, as one hides
his face from a Leper.

It is certain that so many cautions being required of them to avoid the
contracting of any legal impurities, to cast out from among them the unclean
persons, to purify themselves either by Washing, or Sacrifices, or the Ashes of
a red Cow; as also the prejudices which this Custom supported by Education, and
strictly enjoined by the Law of God, so naturally suggested in their minds; I
say it is certain that all these motives were the original cause of that
invincible aversion the Jews had both for the Gentiles, who were in diverse
respects very unclean in comparison to them, and for every new Religion that
might either permit, or not at all insist upon those corporeal and external
Impurities.

Add to this the profound reverence they had for the Temple, which the Ancient
Israelites used to call with such transports of Admiration, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord; The respect they had for the Levites, to whom God
had committed the care of the Temple, Numb. 18. and the Priests in whomwas
required so much purity, that they were never to perform their Sacerdotal
office without having first washed their Hands and Feet, who were to bless the
People, to burn Incense and offer the common and ordinary offerings, and who
also were anointed as well as Kings and Prophets, to show how acceptable they
were in the sight of God.

Add also to this, the great care their Lawgiver had taken to engrave their
Religion on their Walls, and even upon their Garments, which latter were to
have the Law, or at least the greatest part of it, written upon them, as also
the pious care that same Lawgiver had taken to sanctify the Estates of the
Rich, in teaching them how to consecrate them to God, and to comfort the poor
in their necessities, by enacting such admirable Laws designed only for their
Subsistence, Levit. 19. Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 24.

Lastly, To all this you may yet further add those wonderful Laws of Equity and
Justice, whereby their Lawgiver had so prudently determined what Judgments
shouldbe executed in the midst of that people: those Laws which seemed to be
only the first and most just determinations of the Law of Nature, and which may
and ought to serve for an example to all Civil and Political Laws established
in the World.

Now from all this it necessarily follows; First, That the Disciples could not
look upon Jesus Christ as the Messiah who was to come, and whom their Nation
expected with so great impatience, without expecting from him a Temporal
Happiness and Prosperity. This plainly appears by the request which the Mother
of Zebedee's Children made to Jesus Christ when she came to him, saying, Lord
grant that these my two Sons may sit, the one on the Right Hand, and the other
on the Left in thy Kingdom, Mat. 20. 21. The Disciples therefore must
necessarily be strangely offended to hear that their Master was not come to
command, but to serve, and give his Life as a Ransom for many; that he should
be the greatest in his Kingdom who was most humble; and that the greatest was
to be as the least, and as one that serves.

Besides, how strangely must their hopes be crossed to see that nothing but
Misery, Poverty and Afflictions, continually attended the profession they had
embraced, of following Jesus Christ.

They must have certainly found something or other in their Master, which
recompensed the loss of that Temporal Prosperity they so eagerly thirsted
after, and made them patiently endure all sorts of Afflictions; and that
recompense could be nothing else but the Doctrine or Miracles of Jesus Christ.
Yet 'twas not his Doctrine, because they understood it not for along time, as
is evident by so many vain, frivolous, absurd and ridiculous questions that
were offensive, and savoured of little respect to their Master. Besides, what
was most holy and most proper to persuade men to embrace his Doctrine, was that
part of it which was most spiritual, and that part was hid from them, and they
could not understand it, because their minds were filled only with gross and
carnal Ideas of the World, as it appears by their Discourses to their Master,
which they themselves relate after so simple and ingenuous a manner. They must
then necessarily have found in Jesus Christ such miracles as served them
instead of all their other desires. And it is by them chiefly that Jesus Christ
proved the truth and Divinity of his Calling to them. He told them that the
Father had not left him without a witness, but that the works which he did,
testified that the Father had sent him. And on another occasion he solemnly
declared that there was a greater witness than John the Baptist, adding that
the works which the Father had given him to do, were those that should testify
of him.

But perhaps it may here be objected, that John the Baptist could draw a great
multitude after him, and be esteemed a Prophet among the Jews, without having
wrought any Miracles, at least none that we know of, or meet with in the
Gospel, and consequently that it is no wonder if Jesus Christ as well as John
the Baptist drew a great number of Disciples after him, not so much upon the
account of his Miracles, as his extraordinary Piety, and the promises he made
them of an Eternal Life. To this I answer First, that though we read of no kind
of Miracles that John the Baptist wrought himself in the whole Course of his
Life, or of his Ministry, yet it is sufficient that his Birth was signalized by
a very surprising Miracle, which was sufficiently known by all his Nation, to
make them expect great and wonderful matters from him. Secondly, I say that as
John the Baptist wrought no Miracles, so neither was he looked upon as a
Prophet that was to have done any. He was not that Messiah of whom it had beeen
foretold that he should be the desire of all Nations, that he should be called
the God and Savior of the World, at whose coming God would shake Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and the dry Land. He was no more than his forerunner: He was
the voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his Paths straight, Matt. 3. 3. Thirdly, John the Baptist declared only to them
the coming of the Messiah, which could not but very much please the Jews, and
which perfectly well agreed with their Hopes and Opinions. His Ministry had
nothing but what was very grateful and pleasant. And it was not requisite he
should work any Miracles to exhort the Jews to receive the most welcome
tidings they could ever hear of. But it was not so with Jesus Christ, who was
obliged to show the Messiah in his own Person, and him too so contrary to that
Idea they had framed to themselves of him, even from their infancy. So that he
could not choose but exasperate them against him. And to this (if I may mention
it by the way) we ought to refer the different success of the Ministry of John
the Baptist, and that of Jesus Christ, which was signified in the predictions
of the prophets, who foretold that John the Baptist should reconcile the Hearts
of the Parents to the Children, but on the contrary, that Jesus Christ would be
a stumbling block, and an offense to Israel.

Since the Jews so eagerly expected the coming of the Kingdom of the Messiah,
they framed a very agreeable Idea of him to themselves, as they do still to
this day. They invested him with all the Splendour and Glory they could possibly
wish to themselves. They painted him (if I may so speak) in Colors suitable to
their own Pride and Ambition. They expected they should speedily have Kings of
the Earth for their nursing Fathers, and Queens for their nursing Mothers, nay
they imagined no less than to have them immediately for Man Servants and Maid
Servants. These things they had been told of from their Infancy; and that
Carnal and Temporal Messiah they fancied, was as it were the Idol of their
Hearts. Soon after John Baptist appeared in the World, who setting forth the
Kingdom of the Messiah in such terms as the Prophet Daniel had made use of
before him, publicly affirmed that the Kingdom of Heaven was at Hand, Mat. 3 2
At the report of this agreeable voice, all the people ran in crowds to hear it
from Jerusalem, from Decapolis, from Judea, from Galilee, and from the Cities
beyond Jordain. John preached Repentance to them as a necessary preparation to
become partakers of all the Benefits they were to expect under the Messiah: and
they willingly hearkened to his preaching. He exhorted them to be reconciled to
one another, and so to become Subjects of the same Heavenly King: they
renounced then all their differences and quarrels, the dear expectation they
had of their Messiah stifling in their hearts all Passions and Resentments. But
when John the Baptist had as it were led them by the Hand to Jesus Christ
himself, they were strangely surprised to find in him nothing of what they
expected. They found in him Poverty, where they thought to have found Riches,
Shame and Afflictions, where they thought to have met nothing but great
Splendour and Temporal Glory. For this Reason therefore they rejected him with
Horror and Abomination; all their thoughts being on a sudden changed into
indignation and anger against him, in whom before they had fixed all their
imaginary hopes.

But though the generality of his Nation cast him off, there were yet a certain
number of persons who were willing to follow him; and that number daily
increased in proportion as Jesus Christ's sufferings and afflictions increased.
There were at first but twelve whom he called to his Service. Then sent he
seventy others abroad, who were succeeded by a great may others after his
Death. And their number further increasing with the fury of the Sanhedrin,
there were at length many seen who testified in behalf of that crucified man.

But how come those Disciples to follow a Messiah so contrary to their first
Ideas and received opinions? How is it possible they should not have been
discouraged at his Cross, unless Jesus Christ had promised them to do signs and
wonders? How could they have been with him night and day for three Years and an
half, without inquiring into that important matter of fact, or knowing whether
he were really able to do Miracles or not? Or how is it possible when they
found their mistake, that Jesus Christ was but an ordinary sort of a man,
incapable of working any signs or wonders, they should not have forsaken him as
a Whymsical Impostor? How could their minds be so suddenly changed, as to look
on Humiliation and Meanness, Misery and Afflictions, as upon the true and real
Character of the Messiah, they I say, whose minds Education had filled only
with carnal Ideas of the flourishing Kingdom of the Messiah? But above all, how
could they be present at the Crucifixion of their Master, without being reduced
to the last greatest Consternation and Confusion?

So that the second Consequence which may very well be drawn from these
principles already established, is that the Disciples having always imagined
with their Fathers and Mothers, their Brothers and Sisters, their Teachers and
Elders, and in general with their whole Nation, that their Messiah should have
restored the Kingdom of Israel, and having understood those words in a literal
sense, it is impossible but that they should be extremely offended to see him
wearing a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, when he was nailed on the Cross, and a
Reed instead of a Scepter in his Hand: Nay more than this, it is morally
impossible but that this object must have rooted out of their Hearts all
thoughts of Pride and Ambition, and all pretensions to Greatness and Temporal
Prosperity, which their Blindness had caused them to conceive upon this man's
account; unless there had happened since his Death such supernatural and
extraordinary things, as were able to revive in their Heart such great hopes as
these.

Thirdly, We shall conclude from the Principles we have already established,
that the Disciples as well as all other Jews, being as it were tied to their
Religion by what they had Seen and Heard, by their Inclination and
Understanding, by their Interest and Piety, by their Customs and Education, and
by the Advantage wherewith they might well flatter themselves of being
distinguished from all other Nations of the World, and being further as it were
wedded to it by that great number of Ceremonies and Customs, the Justice and
Holiness of which they could no way doubt of, since they had been so exactly
prescribed them by the Law of God himself; it cannot be supposed but that they
imagined their Law to be of an eternal Duration, and that being extremely
averse to every new sort of Worship which was contrary to that of Moses; they
could not have so suddenly altered their opinion, nor could there have happened
so strange a revolution in the Hearts and Minds of so many persons united, and
as it were linked by so many respects to the Law of Moses; that in so small a
period of time the Souls of all those Jews should have been so entirely
changed, as that they should begin to look upon the Jewish Religion as upon a
Dispensation granted with a proviso, and which was to come to an end, and for
the future be considered only as a thing altogether useless and out of Date.

I confess that this principle was not first of all approved of in the World
without great contest and difficulty, and that there were for a while certain
Judaising Christians who taught others that the Law of Moses was still in
force, and that it was necessary to Salvation, to join the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ with the Ceremonies of the Law: But then it is well known they were only
either some of Christ's Enemies who started these questions out of a particular
design to make a division in the Christian Church, or some Jews turned
Christians, as yet very weak and not fully strengthened in their belief, whose
scrupulous Zeal and blind Superstition caused all those Controvesies. But
however, it is evident that the true Disciples of Jesus Christ, and especially
the Apostles, were not long in an error as to this point. They affirmed that
men were justified only by the Faith of Jesus Christ without the works of the
Law. And it is manifest that in the first Council held at Jerusalem, the
Disciples of our Lord abolished the Customs and Rites of the Ceremonial Law.

But at last it is of no great moment, whether the Ceremonial Law or Religion
of Moses was abolished, ten years sooner or later. Still it is certain that it
was sometimes abolished, or rather to speak more exactly and truly, it was
fulfilled by the Gospel, and so the observation of it ceased.

Now I demand how it is possible that those men who were so devoted and
bigoted to that Law, who made it the object of their thoughts and most common
discourse, should so great a number of them, and in so short a time, with one
common consent renounce that Law which Piety made so venerable, and Honor and
Interest so valuable in their Esteem? Whereas so many ages elapsed before the
coming of Jesus Christ into the World could not wear out of their minds that
profound esteem and respect they had for that Law. For though they had often
broke it in several respects, yet it may be said in their behalf they almost
always looked upon it as inviolable. And can we suppose that so many ages as
have passed since the Death of Jesus Christ, could not remove that persuasion
so deeply rooted in their Mind, that their Law was to be eternal: and yet that
a few years should persuade that great multitude of Disciples, converted by the
preaching of the Apostles, that all those Rites and Ceremonies were become
invalid by the Death of a Man, whom the Sanhedrin had condemned to be executed
as a Malefactor, without any extraordinary or supernatural accident
intervening, which should occasion the framing to themselves such Ideas so
particular, and so contrary to their first Prejudices?

Certainly we may very well affirm, that our Incredulous Adversaries have too
great a value for imposture and ignorance, when they imagine that an universal
delusion, and unanimous consent to a Lie, could convert Nations, Sanctify
Mankind, and spread the Knowledge of God throughout the World, according as it
was foretold by the Scriptures; or that a few simple and ignorant Fishermen,
whose knowledge extended no further than their Employment, should discover the
defects and imperfections of the Ceremonial Law, and introduce instead of it a
Spiritual worship, as really more conformable to the Nature of God who is a
Spirit, and more worthy of man who is a Spirit, and more worthy of man who is a
Reasonable Creature; that those simple and ignorant men should discover the
Sacrifices under the Law to be only Types of the Death of a man, who was
condemned to be executed as a Malefactor; that they should attribute this
thought to John the Baptist, and make him express it only in these words,
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, John 1. 29.
Words so full and comprehensive, that they contain the whole sum of Christan
Religion: And Lastly, That they should invent Mysteries so very different from
men's ordinary Thoughts and Conjectures, and so far above the Capacity of the
most judicious and learned, that it may deservedly be said of them, that they
are such things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive them, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Lastly, Experience tells us how difficult it is for persons already advanced
in years, to renounce the Common practices generally approved of in the World,
especially when authorized by Religion and Education. How hard would it be for
us Christians to live as the Jews? And yet it would be more difficult for them
to live as we do. Because we look upon all their Customs as things very
indifferent in themselves, whereas they always looked upon our Practices as
scandalous and unlawful. How then was it that not only one or two Jews, but
thousands who had embraced Christianity, no longer in the least scrupled to
converse with the Gentiles, nay to to live with Heathens, who before were an
Abomination in their eyes?

You will say this was not without many considerable difficulties, and was the
cause of several great Animosities and Disputes. I grant it; but yet it appears
the Ceremonial Law was utterly abolished presently after the Death of Christ;
the Apostles having determined that it had been accomplished in his Death, and
that it was not Lawful to join the Carnal Ceremonies of the Law with the
Spiritual worship of the Gospel. And I say, that had not the Apostles both
testified the Miracles and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and wrought very great
wonders themselves, it was naturally impossible they should have executed so
great a design, especially in so small a time.

For certainly if we consider the Disciples as born Jews, they must necessarily
have been very much devoted to their own Law.

If we consider them as poor and mean people, they could not but have been
passionately fond of that Law which gave such wonderful precepts for the
Administration of Justice, and the relief and comfort of the Poor.

If we consider them as simple and ignorant men, they could not but have a
blind love and obedience for their Law, as all ignorant People have for the
external objects of Religion.

Lastly, Should we consider them as prepossessed with the usual prejudices of
their Nation, they must necessarily have expected a Glorious and Triumphant
Messiah, who instead of abolishing the Law of Moses, should have established it
throughout the World.

Yet we need only consider the event to clear the truth of this matter. We
shall not insist upon all the Reflections we might easily make hereupon; It Is
sufficient to have taken notice of those things by the by, because they may
serve in some measure to illustrate the particular examination we shall make of
the Miracles of the Gospel.

We have already considered them in general, sufficiently to convince all
reasonable Persons. But it may not be amiss to insist more particularly on
them, that we may confound the Obstinate and Incredulous, and make them at
least truly sensible of their Error, though perhaps we cannot reclaim them from
it.

To do this better, we shall lay down four miraculous matters of fact, which
shall be as so many centers of the Truth we enquire into, because there are
several lines and degrees of Evidence and Light which necessarily lead us to
the Truth of each of these matters of fact, and then we shall join them all
together, the better to form a full and perfect Demonstration of them.

CHAP. II.
The first Center of Truth: a particular consideration of the Miracles of Jesus
Christ.
WE dare say that such is the nature of these Miracles, that the composers of
the Gospel durst not, could not, would not have forged them, had they been
really false.

I say they durst not, because they could not but have been publicly known. To
prove this I shall lay down four Examples of them, which are I. The History of
Zachariah the Father of John the Baptist. II. The History of the Massacre of
the young Children of Bethlehem. III. The miraculous feeding of several
thousands at several times in the Wilderness, with a few Loaves and some small
Fishes. IV. And Lastly, the supernatural prodigies which happened at the death
of Jesus Christ himself.

As to the First, we may observe that the Subject upon whom this great Miracle
was wrought is a Priest; a Priest who daily performed the functions of his
Ministerial office, and was then actually burning Incense in the Temple of
Jerusalem, at a very remarkable time, during which the people who expected him,
were very intent at their Prayers to God in the outward Part or Porch of the
Temple, whilst he himself was in the Holy Place.

Now though the Historian had observed only concerning the Birth of John the
Baptist, that Zachariah and Elizabeth his Wife were far advanced in years, and
that the latter till then was thought Barren, yet that event would have
employed something so extraordinary and surprising, that one might have been
almost positive that the Evangelist durst not have been so bold as to forge it,
against the public knowledge which all the Jews must then have had of it. How
then durst any one have affirmed that Zachariah wholly lost the use of his
Tongue whilst he was in the Temple; that all the people were Eyewitnesses of
it; and that he remained Speechless, till the time was come wherein he was
obliged to give a name to that wonderful Child which God had given him in his
old age, notwithstanding the Barrenness of his Wife? Supposing the Gospel
wherein this matter of fact is related, was composed long after that Event:
still it is true that St. Luke composed his Gospel before his Book of the Acts
of the Holy Apostles, and that he composed the Book of Acts sometime before the
destruction of Jerusalem, as we have in another place already observed, and as
it is without doubt true. Then supposing also forty, fifty, or sixty years, if
you will, had past since all these things had happened, and before St. Luke
composed his Gospel; can forty, fifty, or sixty years be sufficient to persuade
several thousands of people, nay all the Inhabitants of that great and
flourishing City of Jerusalem, that they had seen either with their own eyes,
or that their Forefathers had seen one of their Priests wholly deprived of the
use of his tongue, because he had seen a Vision in the Holy Place, and yet that
he recovered it precisely and exactly at the time he was obliged to give a name
to his Child?

Certainly, had none but Zachariah's Relations been acquainted with the Event
of those things, yet it would have argued rashness in any man to invent any
thing false concerning them. For what an extravagance would it have been in any
one to pretend to invent it, against the public Knowledge of a whole and very
numerous Nation, so solemnly assembled together, and so intent upon that Event,
nay so surprised at that prodigy, or if you will (according to the Incredulous)
so fully satisfied that there was nothing in it but a vain Chimaera and
delusion. And the people, says the Historian, waited for Zacharias, and
marvelled that he tarried so long in the Temple. And when he came out, he could
not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a Vision in the
Temple: for he beckened unto them, and remained Speechless, Luke 1. 21, 22.

But the manner in which Zacharias was healed is no less surprising. And it
came to pass, says the Evangelist, that on the eighth day they came to
Circumcise the Child, and they called him Zachariah after the name of his
Father. And his Mother answered and said, not so, but he shall be called John.
And they said unto her, there is none of thy Kindred that is called by that
name. And they made signs to his Father, how he would have him called. And he
asked for a Writing Table, and wrote saying, his name is John. And they
marvelled all. And his Mouth was opened immediately, and his Tongue loosed, and
he spoke, and praised God. And fear came on all that dwel't round about them:
and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the Country of Judea,
Luke 1. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65.

Thus it appears this History consists of two Parts, the first whereof was
known to all the City of Jerusalem, and the other was spread abroad throughout
all the Country of Judea, and certainly it is absolutely impossible any one
should have in the least designed to impose upon the World in that Respect,
against that double knowledge they must have had of that matter of fact.

For then the Evangelist would have taken away all possibility of belief from
his Narration by the choice of those Circumstances he inserted into his
History. Now it does not seem natural for an Author who wrote the History of
Jesus Christ and his Miracles, in a time wherein it was so strictly examined,
and the followers of that Sect were adjudged and condemned to Death with so
much Severity, in a time wherein as he himself makes the Jews of Rome tell it
to St. Paul, speaking to him at the latter end of the Book of Acts Chap. 28. v.
22. For as concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.
I say it does not seem Natural that that same Author who knew it, ^ay observed
it himself, should have published such matters of fact, the falsity of which he
would soon have been convinced of by twenty thousands of people, who must have
been present in the Temple with Zachariah, or at least heard it related by
those who were there present.

One of the most dangerous errors which the Incredulous plunge themselves in,
is that they imagine that the same distance of time which is between us and
those matters of fact related to us, is also to be found between those very
matters of fact themselves, and those who so related them. And they perceive
not that whereas with respect to us it is many ages ago since all those things
came to pass, yet 'twas but a little while since these things must necessarily
have happened with respect to the Disciples who published them to the World,
either by their preaching or writings.

Now for St. Luke to have invented such matters of fact, must either have
argued in him a certain drolling Mirth and pleasant Gayety of Spirit, in
telling such stories so gravely, or else he must have had but a very mean
opinion of Men's sense and understanding in his time, to think they could so
easily be deluded and imposed upon.

The History the Evangelists give us of the coming of the Wisemen of the East
into the City of Jerusalem, of Herod's suspicious Concern, and the cruel
cautions he used to secure his own Crown, by commanding all the Young Children
that were in the City of Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof to be slain,
from two years old and under, according to the time he had diligently enquired
of the Wisemen, I say this History is much of the same stamp with that we just
now considered.

Had the Evangelists only told us in general, that the Wisemen saw a Star in
the East, which they took to be the Star that signified the Birth of the King
of the Jews, that would have been somewhat more suspicious. Had they told us
only that those Wisemen came to Jerusalem, that would not positively have
concluded much. But when they tell us that they came publicly to Jerusalem,
not any way concealing themselves, or the cause of their coming, and that the
whole City was alarmed and concerned at it; Does it seem natural that a man
should fancy he could persuade so great a City as Jerusalem was, that it had
been disturbed and surprised at the arrival of Certain Wisemen, who were come
to worship the King of the Jews? That a man* who had proposed to himself to
relate certain Fables whom it concerned that they should pass for true and
certain matters of fact, should yet pick out such circumstances as those were,
to vent abroad to a Nation that knew so very well the falsehood of them? For if
we consider who it was that related these things. 'Twas Matthew who was born a
Jew. And who did he relate them to? Why to several thousand Jews that had
embraced Christianity, and who dwelling at Jerusalem, knew full as well what
had happened therein both in their days and in those of their Fathers, as they
know at Paris what was done in that City in the days of Cardinal Richelieu, or
as they know at London every thing that happened in those of Oliver Cromwell;
and at Stockolm in those of Gustavus Adolphus: And now I pray consider whether
it be probable any man could have made the like matters of fact believed in any
of those great Cities by such a successful forgery; or whether he could have
gained over to his side several thousands of people by the mere strength of his
Fictions.

But if I grant that the Evangelist had boldness enough expressly to denote the
coming of the Wisemen, and the impression it made on all the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem against their public knowledge, nay against the memory of those
things they had then fresh in their minds; at least it cannot be denied but that
the consequences of that coming, and the Dependencies of that first event are
of such a Nature and Character, as not possibly to have been forged or invented
by the most bold faced and impudent Writer that ever was.

There are here two or three Circumstances so naturally and inseparably united
one with the other, that it is impossible to grant one without granting the
other too. No man can doubt of the coming of the Wisemen to Jerusalem, if he
allows that this coming forced Herod to assemble the Grand Council of the Jews
to know of them where the Messiah should be born: neither can he doubt of the
answer that was made him by the Sanhedrin, if he owns that Herod sent his men
into Bethlehem, to slay the young Children that were there from two years old
and under. So that if it can be made out that this last matter of fact was
true, the other two will not need much proof.

Now I affirm that the Evangelist durst not assert this last matter of fact,
had it been utterly false. For what! Since the reign of Herod surnamed the
Great was so well known, that the least of his Actions was publicly talked of;
how could any one have presumed to impute falsely to him a Massacre so notable
and extraordinary as that must have been? The City of Bethlehem had not as yet
been destroyed, when the Evangelist wrote those things; and therefore supposing
the things false, there were so many Witnesses of the Falsity, as there were
Inhabitants yet living in that City. That City was not so far distant from
Jerusalem, but that those Christians who dwelt in the latter might have very
well known the certain Truth of them. Besides, there was a very great Commerce
between those two Places; and the time from the Birth of Jesus Christ to that
in which this Gospel was composed, was not so long as to have given occasion to
so improbable a Fiction. Suppose a Man in these latter Days should take upon
him to make us believe that one of the present Kings in Europe, or if you will,
of those who reigned forty or fifty Years ago, caused two or three thousand
Children to be slain in their Cradle, that so he might involve in that Massacre
the Ruin of a Child, whose Destiny he suspected would prove fatal to him:
Certainly it is not very probable we should credit such a Fable, or that any
one durst pretend to publish it; nay, had so much as the least Thoughts of it.
But then it is much more improbable, that any one should endeavor to persuade
those Men to the Belief of it who lived in that Kingdom, or in those very
Places where such a thing was supposed to have happened.

But to come a little nearer to the Death of Jesus Christ. The Evangelists
represent him to us as having lived thirty Years obscurely in the World. Now
had it been their Design to put us off with Stories, they might have persuaded
us, that Jesus Christ, during his abode here, had been often wrapped up into
Heaven, or transported into far Countries, where he had done many Signs and
Wonders; nay they might have told us too, that for the space of thirty Years he
had continually wrought very sensible and wonderful Miracles in the midst of
the Jews: For it was as easy for them to suppose such a thing as all the rest.
Yet it appears that the Evangelists include all his Miracles in the three last
Years of his Life: And what is the Reason of it? Because they wrote nothing but
Truth. But we shall not here insist much upon this Consideration.

What is most certain is, That the Evangelists having delivered in their
Writings, that Jesus Christ had done a great many Signs and Wonders before a
great number of Witnesses, and having set down the Time and Place when and
where they were done, they must necessarily have been void of all Shame, as
well as Reason, to relate such things as these, if they were false. They tell
us, That Jesus Christ, with a few Loaves and some small Fishes, miraculously
fed in the Wilderness, at one time, five thousand; and at another, three
thousand men; besides Women and Children. Now I am at a stand to imagine how it
can be thought natural for one Man to undertake to persuade several thousands,
that they had been wonderfully fed, and not only to relate the bare matter of
fact it self, but also bring in Christ reproaching the Multitude, that they
followed him not purely for the sake of his Miracles, but the Loaves he fed
them with; and then the Multitude excusing themselves, and saying, that Moses
had fed their Forefathers, and that he must also feed them, if he would have
them believe in him; as also Jesus Christ bidding them on this Occasion to
labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27. and to that end promising to give them his Flesh
to eat, and his Blood to drink: All which Expressions are indeed very
extraordinary in themselves, and such as no Man ever made use of before him.

But there are matters of fact related in the Gospel more extraordinary and
surprising than these* There is nothing so remarkable, and which strikes us so
much with Astonishment, as the Description the Evangelists give us of the
Prodigies that attended the Death of Christ: And behold, say they, the vail of
the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did
quake, and the rocks rent, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of
saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection,
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many, Matthew. 27. 51, 52, 53.

We shall not here insist on each particular Circumstance that attended this
miraculous matter of fact; neither shall we nicely examine the Resurrection of
those Saints whose Bodies came out of their Graves, and appeared unto many in
the City of Jerusalem. It will be sufficient for us to consider only those
Prodigies which drew the eyes of the whole World, and could not but universally
cause a public Consternation, and make a fearful Impression on the Minds of
Men. Now I affirm, it cannot naturally enter, I shall not say into the Mind of
a sincere honest Man, but even into that of an Impostor, to imagine he could
ever be capable of making others believe things so notoriously known, as those
we now have under Consideration must have been, had they been false.

It Is not many Years ago since a certain Man was Executed at Paris for calling
himself the Holy Ghost, who had a few Disciples, and some Followers: but his
Sect was soon buried, together with him, in his Grave. Now let us suppose, if
you will, that his Disciples had preached after his Death, and composed a new
Gospel, filled only with the Doctrine and Precepts of that Man, who was thought
by them to be no less than a divine Person: I ask then (whatsoever Extravagance
you may suppose them to have been guilty of) whether you can conceive it could
have entered into their Minds to persuade the People of Paris, that the very Day
on which that Man who called himself the Holy Ghost died, the Church of Nostre
Dame was either thrown down or demolished, that its Altars and Statues were
broken down; that there happened an Eclipse of the Sun, the greatest that ever
was known, accompanied with such a mighty Earthquake, that even the Rocks were
rent; and that all these Wonders wrought so great an Impression upon the Mind
of a certain Captain that guarded the Body of the executed Person, that he
believed in him? Doubtless these whimsical Men could not have taken a more
effectual way, not only to hinder others from believing their Report, but even
to undeceive all those who might till then have been led away by that
pernicious Sect, than to insert in the Gospel they were to compose of the
Doctrine of their Master, such Circumstances as would have contradicted the
public Knowledge and fresh Remembrance every body had of things so lately
done, and to advance such matters of fact as would immediately have been proved
to be false by the public Testimony every body could give of them. Now all
this may be very well applied to the Disciples of Jesus Christ. For supposing
those Disciples were very great Impostors, we cannot reasonably ascribe to them
any other Design than that of deceiving Men, by making them receive Falsehood
for Truth: And it is sufficient if they had that Design, and were not wholly
void of Reason, to make us think they could not have had ^^e Boldness to invent
such Circumstances as these, and afterward publish them to the World.

But after all, was there not a very numerous Church (...) in Jerusalem when
that Gospel was composed? And did not that Church consist of many thousands of
People who dwelt at Jerusalem, and knew perfectly well whatever had happened at
the Death of Jesus Christ? Certainly no Man can doub^ (...) it, unless he has a
mind voluntarily to (...) himself. Those very Christians then of Jerusalem saw
all those things which happened at the Death of Christ: for they were the Men
that had been converted by the preaching of St. Peter, and the other Apostles;
and who, being pricked to the Heart, cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we
do? Acts 2. 37. They had seen then that the Sun was not eclipsed, that the
Rocks rent not, that there happened no Earthquake, no surprising and
supernatural Prodigy at the Death of Christ: And if they saw none of these
things, they could not but look upon the Report of the Evangelists as a
scandalous Lie and notorious Falsehood, designed to seduce them from their
rational Belief, and persuade them out of their Senses. But it is farther
observable, that not one only, but three Evangelists, have written these
things; who, as appears evidently, did not compose their Gospels together, but
separately, and at different times, and yet all agree in their Relation of that
notable Circumstance of the Death of Christ. And no doubt but they all agreed
also in the Relation of it, when they preached the Gospel by word of Mouth.

Who then can reasonably believe, that when the Disciples preached the Gospel
in Jerusalem, in order to establish a Christian Church there, their Design was
to persuade the Jews that they must not believe their own Eyes? and that what
they had seen, was not that thing which they had seen? Who can imagine that
those very Jews themselves who were present and assisted at the Death of Jesus
Christ, should suffer themselves insensibly to be persuaded that that fabulous
Recital was a very true Narration, and believe that really to have happened
which they certainly knew never came to pass? Who can even suppose that the
Apostles could fancy themselves able to make the Jews look upon a crucified Man
as the Object of their Adoration and Worship, by proposing to their Belief the
most impudent and apparent Lies that ever were invented since the Beginning of
the World?

But it will concern us carefully to consider the rending of the Vail of the
Temple; for that Circumstance is so very singular, that it is sufficient of it
self to stop the Mouths of our incredulous Adversaries, who though they should so
inconsiderately and wilfully delude themselves, as to suppose, that the Day
whereon Jesus Christ died there happened by chance, or rather, according to the
ordinary Course of second Causes, a real Eclipse, which had indeed seemed
supernatural to the ignorant Vulgar, but had nothing supernatural in it self;
yet what can they say to the Vail of the Temple's being rent in twain from the
Top to the Bottom? Could there be any natural Cause why it should be rent
precisely and exactly at the time when Jesus Christ suffered Death? or could
any exterior Darkness produce such an Effect?

Perhaps some will object, that the Primitive Christians were simple and
ignorant People, and that nothing could be easier than to delude and impose
upon them. I grant it. But then what great Learning was required to know
precisely whether all those so sensible and so notable Prodigies had really
fell out upon the Day of Christ's Death?

We have already shown, that among the several Circumstances of the Life and
Death of Jesus Christ, there were several which the Disciples durst not have
invented or forged, had they not been really true.

We must add in the second place, that there were a great number of other
Circumstances which the Disciples could not have forged had they designed it.
To say nothing of the great number of Lame People whom our Savior caused to
walk, of the Sick of the Palsy to whom he restored the Use of their Limbs, of
the Deaf whom he caused to hear, and of many others diversely affected with
various Diseases, whom he wonderfully healed to the great Amazement of whole
Multitudes that followed him, and cried out, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel, Matthew. 9. 33. I say, to pass by all these Miracles, I shall insist only
upon the Dead he restored to Life.

To raise a Dead Man to Life again, is certainly the most surprising, and which
in all Countries and all Ages has been always looked upon as the most
impossible thing the Mind of Man is capable of imagining. We read only an
Example or two of it in the Old Testament; and Men then had hardly any Notion
of it. Besides, to raise a Dead Man to Life is no doubtful Miracle, which may
any way be reduced to natural Causes, but it must necessarily be granted, that
nothing but a supernatural Power can effect it.

Yet it was by raising the Dead to Life again that Jesus Christ was willing to
testify of himself. And the Evangelists could not have imposed upon Men in that
respect: It Is true, they might perhaps have deluded those Men that lived in a
Climate and a Time very distant from theirs; but they could not have deceived
the Jews in those things that had happened in their Days, and of which they
were Eyewitnesses. This will appear more evidently, if we consider that the
Evangelists (as was said before) did not write their Gospels together, nor
assisted one another in the Composure of them, and yet they agree in the
Relation of almost the very same matters of fact, and the very same Miracles,
not at all differing in the setting down the Times, Places, Persons, Witnesses,
and all the Circumstances of those matters of fact which they testify and
affirm. At Naim they tell us Jesus Christ raised a Man to Life again that was
carrying away to be buried. He commanded the Bier to stop, and the Dead rose up
at that very instant. The Man that was raised was the Son of a Widow. The
Daughter of one Jairus being dead, he went up into her Chamber, and with a Word
restored her to Life again, notwithstanding the Players upon Musical
Instruments, the Mourners, Attendants, and other sorts of People, whose
Business it was, according to the Custom of those Days, to look after the
Obsequies of the Dead, had at first laughed him to scorn. Lastly, He raised
Lazarus from the Dead in Bethany, before several Jews, and in the Presence of
Martha and Mary, Lazarus's Sisters. He raised him to Life again four Days after
he had been dead, and when he began already to stink. Such are the Things which
the Jews learn in a Book that was composed in their Days, and which gives them
the History of a Man whom they saw giving up the Ghost after he had been nailed
on a Cross, and of his Miracles also that he wrought in the midst of them.

Now these matters of fact are, in my Opinion, so circumstantially told, that
one must presently discover the Cheat, if there be any: for the Names both of
the Places and the Persons themselves, are very exactly related. Every body
knew too well, whereabouts lay the City of Naim: And the raising of a dead Man
to Life, was too considerable an Event for any one to need any long Enquiry to
be satisfied about it. Jairus was a Man very well known, and lived in a very
good Repute: he had many Friends and Relations, so that nothing could be easier
than to enquire whether his Daughter had really been raised from the Dead.
Bethany was not above fifteen Furlongs distant from Jerusalem; and Lazarus
himself was an Inhabitant of Bethany. He was then living, or at least his
Sisters were; or if neither of them all were alive, yet there were still a
sufficient number of Jews surviving, who had both seen and conversed with him
after his Resurrection.

Had all these miraculous Resurrections we have set down been false, it is
certain the Jewish Doctors and Elders who took all the Care imaginable either
to suborn false Witnesses against Jesus Christ, or corrupt one of his
Disciples, either to make him pass for a Glutton and a Wine Bibber, a Friend of
Publicans and Sinners, or for a Sorcerer, who cast out Devils only by Beelzebub
the Prince of the Devils; I say, it is certain that these Jewish Doctors could
never have failed of presently convincing those Gospels of Imposture and
Deceit, as soon as they should have been published. For to do this, 'twas only
requisite they should go out of the City of Jerusalem, and visit those Places
where those pretended Miracles were supposed to have been effected; not but
that there were too, in Jerusalem, Men of Bethlehem, of Gadara, of Naim, of
Bethany, of Capernaum, and of other Places where Miracles were wrought, of whom
they might have inquired the Certainty of them. But though the Hatred of the
Enemies of Christianity should not have been of it self sufficient to discover
the Cheat, yet at least those Christian Proselytes who dwelt at Jerusalem, and
were Members of that flourishing Church established there, must have had the
Curiosity either to see those very Men whom Jesus Christ had raised to Life
again, or at least to see those who had been Eyewitnesses to the Resurrection,
or to speak to their Relations and Friends, or to visit those Places where
those Matters were said to have been brought to pass. Accordingly the Gospel
tells us of a very great number of Jews who went to Bethany, on purpose to see
Lazarus, who had been raised from the Dead: Of which We have the less Reason to
doubt, who since those days have seen almost an infinite number of People
undertake a Voyage into the Holy Land, not with a Curiosity to see Men that had
been raised to Life again, or to hear whole Cities testify of that Event; but
purely to visit those Places where all those matters came to pass, and to
behold those Mountains and Rocks which are thought to have been honored with
the Presence of the Son of God. But Men went daily from Jerusalem to Bethany;
so that every thing that was done in Bethany, was very well known at Jerusalem.
Although therefore neither the Jews, the professed Enemies of the Christians, nor
the Christians, zealous for the Honor of their Master, should have taken no
manner of care to instruct themselves in these things; yet since they were
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, they must necessarily have very distinctly known the
Miracles that Christ wrought in Bethany; and consequently, they must have
presently rejected, as a manifest Forgery, the History of the Resurrection of
Lazarus, had it been utterly false.

And this Argument is so much the stronger and more convincing, since the
Evangelists relate not only one or two Miracles of our Savior's, but their
Gospel is a continued Series of miraculous Circumstances, or rather a Catalogue
of the Sick that were healed, of the Blind restored to Sight, and of the Dead
raised up to Life again. So that the very first Impression which this Gospel
commonly makes upon Men's minds, is, that Jesus Christ, for the space of three
Years, or three Years and an half, as long as his Office lasted, wrought more
surprising Miracles than have been either seen or known since the Beginning of
the World. And so to believe the Gospel, is firmly to believe, that Christ
worked those Miracles which are so often and so circumstantially repeated in
it, and so inseparable from the other Parts and Accidents of his Life. It must
not then be affirmed, that the Primitive Christians embraced Christianity
without enquiring in the least into the Miracles of Christ: for that implies a
Contradiction. Neither must we say, that they believed those Miracles without a
due Examination of them. Such Things as these indeed require no very great
Examination; but they could not avoid examining them had they endeavored it:
for it is not wholly left to my Choice either to know or not to know the Things
which are done in the Place which I inhabit: neither does it wholly depend upon
me to believe or not to believe certain matters of fact that are contradictory
to public Knowledge. And though a Man, under Pretense of Religion or otherwise,
should endeavor to make me believe he had raised a dead Man to Life again in a
Village a few Miles distant from the Place I dwell in, whom I might have both
seen and known after his Resurrection; or if I had not seen him my self, many
others had both seen and known, and many went to see: I say, all this is no
more left to my Choice to know or not to know, than it is left to my Choice to
be Mad or in my Senses.

For the better apprehending the Strength of this Argument, I shall make this
Supposition. What if we, being fully persuaded that Christ did all those
Miracles the Gospel relates, had gone up to the City of Jerusalem in the time
of the Apostles themselves, and reached thither just at the Evening of that Day
of Pentecost on which St. Peter Converted so many People, by convincing them
that he had received the Holy Ghost: I dare maintain first, that we could not
have forborne examining such Things which made so great a Noise; then secondly I
affirm, that however willing we might have been to delude and impose upon our
selves, we could not have been so much as twenty four Hours at Jerusalem,
without knowing very distinctly the certain Truth of all those matters of fact.
It would have been no very great Trouble for us to have enquired how Lazarus
did, and his two Sisters Mary and Martha; and though by chance they might have
been all three dead, to have desired to speak with their Friends and Relations,
or with those that had seen Lazarus, and eaten with him both before and after
his Resurrection. In like manner we might have easily spoken with the Friends
and Relations of Jairus, and with those too of other People whom Christ had
healed, or raised from the Dead in the different Parts of Judea and Galilee:
and that was so much the more easy because Commerce was much more stirring
between the Metropolis of Judea and the other Cities of the Holy Land, than
between the Metropolis and the other Cities of the other Provinces; the Jews
being wont to go up to Jerusalem at least on every solemn Feast Day. Nay
farther, we might have enquired about the Truth or Falsehood of those wonderful
Prodigies which, as the Gospel tells us, attended the Death of Christ: And
since it was impossible that several thousand Witnesses should have been
imposed upon concerning so great a number of evident and sensible matters of
fact, so in like manner it would have been absolutely impossible we should have
become Christians only for twenty four hours, after we had left Jerusalem,
supposing those matters of fact had been utterly false.

I have already shown that the Life and Death of Jesus Christ were attended
with such wonderful Circumstances, as the Evangelists durst not have presumed
to invent had they been utterly false, neither had the Power to forge, or make
one single Person believe them, had they designed to impose upon Men's Belief.
There remains only for our full Conviction in this matter, to show that they
would not have forged them, had it been wholly left to their Choice.

I shall not here allege that the Miracles of Jesus Christ, according to the
Recital of the Evangelists, were attended with such Circumstances, and so many
strange Events, that it is inconceivable the Disciples should take any Pleasure
in inventing them: such is, for Example, the tempting of our Savior; a strange
and most scandalous Passage indeed to all those who are not fully acquainted
with the true Mystery of it, since it represents Christ to us as being in the
hands of the Devil, who sported himself with his Weakness though he was not able
to overcome his Virtue; one while placing him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple,
whence he advised him to cast himself down, another while upon an exceeding
high Mountain, from whence he showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
Glory of them. Now to see a Man in the hands of Satan, would be a Sight that
would shock us, to see a just Man, would be an Object more terrible; but to see
a Prophet himself, would be a Wonder that would create Horror in us. What must
it be then to see a Divine Person in his Clutches, or rather one that is both
God and Man, one that was called by way of Eminence, the Just, the Holy, the
Man without Sin or Blemish, the greatest of all the Prophets, in ^ine, the Son
of God himself? He must necessarily be much mistaken, that can imagine that
such Thoughts as these could have naturally offered themselves to any Man's
Mind, much less to the Mind of Ignorant People, who judge of Things by the
Prejudices they are generally possessed with. It Is true indeed, Christ is
represented to us in the Gospel as surrounded with Angels who ministered unto
him after his Temptation; but yet that Circumstance is so far from removing
that which may seem offensive and surprising in that Event, that it rather
makes it the more strange and incomprehensible; nothing so ill befitting a Man
who was but just now in the Power of the Devil, and carried about by him
wherever he pleased, as to be immediately after waited upon by Angels. Add to
this, the uniting of so many mean Circumstances with so many glorious ones that
occur in his Nativity, in his Life, and in his Death, to instance in Christ's
lying in a Manger, whilst he was praised by the Hosts of Heaven; his having not
a Hole wherein to lay his Head, whilst at the same time he commanded the Fishes
of the Sea to bring him Money to pay Tribute to those who asked it of him; his
showing a great deal of Fear, nay even apparent Weakness, whilst he shook the
whole Frame of the World, and made the Earth tremble, and the Sky to become
dark; his begging of his Father that the Cup of his Sufferings might pass away
from him, when at the same time he so well had prepared himself for Death, as
to have instituted a Sacrament for a Commemoration of it, unto the End of the
World, his complaining that his heavenly Father had forsook him, whilst he
promised Heaven to a Thief that glorified him upon the Cross. An hundred other
mysterious Contrarieties there are, which Divine Providence inspired the
Evangelists to write against their professed Opinions, against the Biass of their
Passions, and their natural Ideas, that their Gospel might have a more
extraordinary and more divine Character.

But these are not the Circumstances I mean, when I speak of such extraordinary
ones in the Life of Christ, as the Disciples would not have forged if they
could. By them I mean all the sensible and extraordinary Miracles which Christ
himself wrought, and his Disciples have related to us; and these, I say, the
Disciples would not invent, had they been false; which I prove by these two
invincible Arguments.

First, that by their relating them, and above all, their mentioning both
Places and Persons as it appears they have done, they manifestly engaged
themselves both to maintain and evince the Truth of them. Certainly they
doubted not but that they should be called to give an account of them, They who
so very well kn^w how difficult it had been for them to escape free when their
Master himself was put to Death. They knew they should be compelled to maintain
what they had thus affirmed, and they knew also they could never be able to
defend their Imposture, if they should by chance be confronted with the
Witnesses they mentioned. And all this is no very hard thing for any one to
foresee; a Man, though not over-wise, may easily presage these Things, and it is
sufficient that he be in his Senses to make him cautious of advancing such
Matters as he thinks himself incapable to maintain, the Falsehood of which would
be presently discovered by the very Witnesses he mentions, by the Places he
sets down, and the other Circumstances of the matter of fact he thus exposes to
public View.

2. The Second Argument which proves that the Evangelists would never have
forged the like matters of fact, supposing they had been altogether false, is,
that by counterfeiting them, they necessarily rendered themselves liable to be
put to a great Confusion, when they should find themselves obliged to perform
the very same Miracles. For, besides that it was very natural for any one to
say to them thus; If it be true that your Master has wrought so many strange
Miracles, surely he has also given you Power to do the like your selves; it
being well known that the first thing they taught was, that Jesus Christ had
sent them abroad with Power to perform the very same Works he had done. 'Twas
no time therefore to use Shifts, or stand doubting and shuffling, they were
obliged either to suppress what they knew concerning the Miracles of Jesus
Christ, or to perform the same themselves. Christ himself, when he sent them to
preach in the different Parts of Judea, commanded them saying, Heal the Sick,
cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils, freely you have received,
freely give, Matthew. 10. 8. And these are the Characters he gave of the calling
of his Disciples. And these Signs shall follow them that believe; in my Name
shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take
up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they
shall lay hands on the Sick, and they shall recover, etc. And they went forth
and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and comfirming the word
with Signs, etc. Mark 16. 17, 18, 20.

Thus it appears they could not well relate what Jesus Christ had done, without
at the same time publishing what they themselves were obliged to perform for
the further Confirmation of the Gospel: so that they did not relate the least
Miracle, without at the same time affirming they were able to do the like. It
must therefore certainly be one of these two things, either that those Men had
utterly lost their Reason, or that they sincerely believed the Miracles of
Jesus Christ.

Had they thought them to be false, they would neither have engaged themselves
to maintain an unwarrantable Fiction, by setting down so many Circumstances
more than sufficient to discover the real Truth of it; nor have rendered
themselves liable to Shame and Confusion, by relating such Miracles they were
not able so much as to imitate, at that very time when they professed
themselves absolutely capable of doing every thing their Master himself had
done.

Thus it appears to us, that the Miracles of Jesus Christ are such matters of
fact which the Disciples had neither the Boldness, the Power, nor the Will to
counterfeit, supposing they never had been done. And I think this enough to
convince us in this respect, and to make us look upon those Miracles which have
illustrated the Life and Death of Jesus Christ, as a Center of Truth that will
infallibly persuade us of the Truth and the Divinity of the Christanity we
profess.

CHAP. III.
The second Center of Truth. A particular Consideration of the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ.
HAving spoke of the Miracles of Jesus Christ, we come now to his Resurrection;
an Event which ought chiefly to be considered in the Connection it has with
those Miracles: For if this Resurrection be true, without dispute those
Miracles are so too; And if those Miracles are true, one cannot easily doubt of
the Truth of our Savior's Resurrection.

Now to take away all Scruples that may arise in our Minds concerning the Truth
of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, it is but reflecting a while upon Christ
himself, upon the Jewish Doctors, who used all possible Care and Precaution to
prevent so much as a Report after his Death, that he was risen from the Dead
upon the Testimony of the Watch appointed to guard his Sepulcher, upon the
Procedure of the Apostles, and the discourse of all the Disciples in general;
and lastly, upon that ready Disposition of Mind found in a great number of Jews
to embrace Christianity a^ Jerusalem a few Weeks after the Death of Jesus
Christ, and at a time when nothing could be easier than to enquire into the
Truth of his Resurrection.

As for Jesus Christ, the Evangelists unanimously tell us that he had several
times foretold his Death and Resurrection to his Disciples: Nay it is
observable, that those very Predictions are oftentimes intermixed either with
such Circumstances as do not easily of themselves enter into any Man's Mind, or
with those which seem to have no manner of Relation one with another; which
proves that they cannot be the imaginary Conceits of a pleasant Fancy, that
delights in the Invention of Fables. It is very improbable that the Evangelists
should have invented the Discourse of Jesus Christ with St. Peter concerning
the Sufferings that should certainly besall him at his going up to Jerusalem:
And it is worth taking notice of, that St. Peter had but just made a very
excellent Confession of what Jesus Christ was, in Presence of all the other
Disciples, telling him, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God; and that
Jesus Christ had crowned this admirable Confession with that extraordinary
Promise of his, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona. For flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And I say also unto
thee that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church; and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it, etc. Matthew. 16. 17, 18. Immediately
after Christ foretold what Death he was to suffer from the Chief Priests and
Scribes; but added withal, he should rise again the third Day. Whereupon St.
Peter rebuked him, and said, Be it far from thee, O Lord: this shall not be
unto thee. But Jesus Christ instead of approving of that seeming Concern and
Affection his Disciple had for him, severely reproved his Indiscretion in these
words, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me for thou savourest
not, etc. This History seems to be very natural and sincere, and that mixture
of Circumstances which in all probability have no manner of relation with one
another, could not of it self easily enter in any Man's Mind. St. Peter's
Confession was excellent, and the Promise Jesus Christ made him was
extraordinary: Nay the very Expression of it implied somewhat strange and
difficult. But above all, it seems at first view that Jesus Christ too
rigorously censures the great Zeal which Peter showed for his Person, and it
does not seem very natural that he who told him, Blessed art thou Simon
Barjona, and promised to make him a Pillar of his Church, should tell him
presently after, Get thee behind me Satan. It Is plain, a Man must, in spite of
himself, perceive that it is ^he force of Truth, and not the natural Agreement
of those Circumstances that obliged the Evangelist to join them both together
in one and the same Recital. And that which necessarily occasions this
Reflection of ours is, that Jesus Christ had really foretold his Death and his
Resurrection, before ever he had suffered the one, or the other was brought to
pass.

But what proves this better than any thing else, is, that Jesus Christ, upon
cooler Thoughts, and the very Day before his Passion, did such a thing as had
never been done before, and which doubtless never will be done again; and that
is, he instituted a Memorial of that Death he was just upon the point of
suffering: He foretold that he should suffer Death from the Chief Priests, the
Scribes, and the Doctors of the Law: Nevertheless he might have easily avoided
it if he would by retiring into another place. But he chid, or rather stormed
at the Indiscretion of Peter, who would have diverted him from that Death;
therefore he considered it as an Event that was to be attended with very happy
and saving Consequences with respect to Mankind. And what happy Consequences
could his Death have been attended withal, unless it was to have been
immediately followed by his Resurrection?

He first instituted a Memorial of his Death, and then voluntarily suffered it:
He commanded that it should be commemorated, therefore he regarded it as an
Event which was to be the Means of our Salvation. He foresaw that it would be
commemorated; he foresaw then what would most infallibly come to pass, and that
too in a time when there was but little Appearance of its ever happening. He
did not say, that they should commemorate his Death only till he rose again,
but till his Second Coming. He foresaw then, that he should speedily rise
again, and that after his Resurrection he should depart in order to return
again at the End of the World.

Besides, no reasonable Man can imagine that the Evangelists had wholly
invented the Account of the Institution of the Eucharist: For there is a great
deal of Difference between a Doctrine and a Practice. A Doctrine can hardly be
forged, especially because it must be concerted by the Consent of several
Persons: But a sensible Practice, a thing in Use, and as it were a speaking
Doctrine, can much less be palm'd upon Mankind. And certainly 'twould be the
greatest piece of Folly imaginable in any one, to think that a dozen poor
Fishermen, astonished and cast down at the Death of their Master, and
undeceived in the Opinion they had entertained that he was to have restored the
Kingdom of Israel, Persons who knew not what things might come to pass by their
publishing the Doctrine of that crucified Man, that that they should go and
invent the Institution of the Eucharist with all the Circumstances of it, and
make Jesus Christ utter these Words, This is my body which is broken for you:
this is the New Testament in my blood: Words that implied something new and
very surprising, which have given occasion to so many Contests, and are liable
to such different Interpretations; Words which S. Paul and the Evangelists
unanimously set down, but without any mutual Compact, as appears by the little
Variety there occurs in their Recital of them. I say, it would be very
extravagant to imagine that the Disciples had in the least thought of inventing
these Words, or that History of the Institution of the Eucharist; so that we
need not insist longer on any farther Proofs of it. We have already touched
upon it in another Place, and upon another Subject. The only Consequence we
shall draw from it here is, that Jesus Christ foresaw his Death, prepared
himself for it, and suffered it voluntarily. Whereupon I argue thus:

If he foresaw that he should die, and if he voluntarily offered himself up to
Death, he then either foresaw that he should rise again, or he did not foresee
it. If he did not foresee it, with what kind of hopes then did he comfort his
Disciples? What was it he promised them? Or what proposed he to himself by his
Death? Why did he not shun it, as he might yet have done when he was at Supper
with his Disciples? What meant he by instituting a Memorial of his Dead Body,
if that Dead Body were always to abide under the power of Death, and rot away
as it were in the Presence of his Disciples?

And if he thought he should rise again, as we may very reasonably imagine he
did, I say he himself could not have believed it, but only upon the Experience
he had already made of that Power which had restored Sight to the Blind, Health
to the Sick, and Life to the Dead. For he could not think his own Miracles
false, and yet at the same time believe he should rise again from the Dead. If
he thought he should rise again, he also thought his Miracles to be true. And
if he believed his Miracles to be true, his Miracles must of necessity have
been really so; because they were of a Nature incapable of Illusion and Deceit,
at least with respect to those who wrought them. Jesus Christ could never
imagine that he had filled five thousand Men at one time, three thousand at
another; that he had raised to Life the Widows Son of Naim; the daughter of
Jairus, and Lazarus of Bethany; that he had made St. Peter walk upon the Sea,
etc. if all these things had not really been true.

No one surely can doubt but that Jesus Christ foretold his Resurrection, if he
considers that it was upon this Account only that the Jewish Doctors appointed
a Watch to guard his Sepulcher, and commanded the Stone of it to be sealed.
Sir, we remember, said they to Pilate, that that Deceiver said, while he was
yet alive, after three days, I will rise again. Command therefore that the
sepulcher be made sure until the third day, lest his Disciples come by night,
and steal him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from the Dead. so the
last error shall be worse than the first. Pilate said unto them, ye have a
watch, go your way, make it as sure as you can* So they went and made the
Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch, Mat. 27. 63, 64, 65,
66. This is such a matter of fact which the Disciples could not, durst not
invent against the public knowledge every body had of it, and which besides
agrees very well with the other Circumstances of that Event. For how came that
Report to be spread in Jerusalem, that the Watch slept when the Disciples took
away the Body of Jesus, had they not really set a Watch to guard his Sepulcher?
And what necessity was there to appoint a Watch to guard it, had it not been to
hinder the Disciples from reporting abroad, that he was risen from the Dead?

And if Christ really believed that he should rise again, he could not have
believed it, but upon the Truth of his Miracles, neither could he have believed
his Miracles to be true, had they been false. Thus it appears that the
Connection of all those Circumstances, if narrowly considered, forms as it were
a kind of a moral Demonstration, which cannot but thoroughly convince any just
and reasonable Man.

But let us not slightly pass over that matter of fact, but having seen what
Christ thought concerning his Resurrection, let us next consider the Opinion of
the Scribes and Pharisees concerning it, and the Report the Soldiers made that
were appointed to guard this Sepulcher. For the Consideration of those
Circumstances may give us some light in the Discovery of that matter of fact,
the most important and the most essential that ever was, or ever shall be
hereafter.

In the first place, the Scribes and Pharisees, and generally every Member of
the Sanhedrin, being instigated by the very same Spirit that had induced them
to put Jesus Christ to Death, were in a great Apprehension lest his Disciples
should take away his Body, and afterward report abroad that he was risen from
the Dead. We may judge how much they thought it for their Interest to prevent
it, by the Attempts they had already made to put him to Death. And it is very
probable, that since the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ was to have been guarded but
three days, they took all care imaginable before hand, for fear the Watch, through
negligence or otherwise, should have suffered that Body to be taken away, which
it so mightily behoved them to keep in their Custody.

But let us consider the Event of all this. The Soldiers that watched the Body
could not hinder it from rising out of it is Sepulcher. How so? Was it because
they were afraid? or were they bribed not to discover the Business? Had they
been bribed, one might very well imagine it was not in behalf of the Disciples,
that they would run the hazard of losing their Lives for their Negligence or
Treachery. What then were they afraid? But how could the Watch prove so
fearful, and the Disciples on a sudden so courageous, as to attempt the taking
away the dead Body of one from whom they had so lately fled while he was yet
alive? Besides, How could those Soldiers have reported such things as they did
without manifestly contradicting themselves? For if they were asleep, how did
they know that the Disciples of Christ had taken away his Body? But why did not
the Sanhedrin, for their own Honor, and the Respect they bare to the Truth,
put all those Soldiers to the Rack? And if that Thought came not presently into
their Heads, is it not natural to think they would have done it, when they
found awhile after, all Jerusalem inclinable to believe in that crucified man,
and that about six thousand Souls had already believed in him in one day, and
that too but fifty days after his Death? Certainly the Soldiers that watched
his Body were still at Jerusalem; And the Sanhedrin had still the same Power
and Authority as before. It highly concerned them to punish the Negligence of
those Soldiers, or make them confess the Secret of their Perfidy, and who it
was that suborned them. I say, it highly concerned them to make that strict
Examination, both to justify their own Procedure, and prevent the utter Loss of
almost an infinite number of Persons that had already sided with the Disciples
of that pretended Impostor. But this is not all. When on the Day of Pentecost,
that is, fifty days after the Death of Jesus Christ, the Apostles showed
themselves in the City of Jerusalem, to testify there that they had seen him
risen from the Dead, and that after he had several times appeared to them, and
was gone up into Heaven, he had poured down upon them the miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, why did not the Sanhedrin then, who was
so highly concerned in discovering the Authors of the taking away the Body of
Jesus Christ; I say, why did they not seize upon the Apostles, and so make them
confess how all things had happened? Why did they not confront them with the
Watch? Why did they not cast Joseph of Arimathea and those Men in Prison, till
they had made them confess what was become of that Body, as also every other
Circumstance of their Imposture?

It Is already very unlikely, that if the Disciples of Christ had come by night,
and had stolen his Body away, they durst have showed themselves and appeared in
public, nay immediately confessed that they were his Disciples. It is much
more credible they would have hid themselves after such an Action; and that if
they preached at all, it would have been to People more remote, and not in
Jerusalem, the very Place where those things had happened, nor in the Presence
of that very Sanhedrin they were so much afraid of, and had so much offended.

Why then did not the Sanhedrin take the ordinary Methods made use of to
discover Criminals? They were very ready by Threats, Torments, and
Persecutions, to oblige the Apostles not to preach up the Name of Jesus Christ,
but they never accused them of having stolen away the Body of their Master
whilst the Watch slept. They durst not enter upon that Examination; for they
knew well enough what the Soldiers had told them, and 'twas that very thing
which made them so apprehensive.

We all know well enough how Men generally act upon the like Occasions. Had the
matter so happened as the Soldiers afterward reported, those very Soldiers
would not have failed pursuing some one of the Disciples of Christ throughout
the whole City of Jerusalem, on purpose to make him confess the plain truth by
the many Torments they would have made him suffer; and the Scribes and
Pharisees together with the other Doctors of the Law, would on their side have
made such an exact Enquiry into the matter, that they would have at last found
either some Witnesses, or some other Evidence, to prove the stealing away of
that Body upon them. And that would have been no very hard task for them to
perform; because it had been done during the Celebration of one of their Solemn
Feast-days, when the People of Jerusalem were never so intent upon any
Spectacle, as they had been upon the Sufferings of Christ; when what had so
lately happened to such an extraordinary Man, had filled every body with
Amazement: witness that which the Evangelist makes a Disciple utter on the way
to Emmaus, as he was discoursing with Jesus Christ himself not Knowing it was
him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which
are eome to pass there in these days? And since those men who had appointed a
Watch to guard the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, had in all probability very
expressly charged them to take care lest any of his Disciples should come by
night and steal his Body out of the Sepulcher, it is repugnant to Reason, and
contrary to all outward Appearance, to suppose that the second night after the
Soldiers were placed there, they should fall into so deep a sleep, as that the
Disciples should be bold enough to hazard the taking away of this Body, or be
able to roll the Stone away from the Sepulcher, and break the Seal; that they
should have Time enough, Leisure, Freedom, and so little Fear as to untye and
take away the linen Clothes wherein he was wrapped up, and the Napkin that was
about his Face: For the Evangelists unanimously relate that they found the
Sepulcher in that state.

Yet these are not the strongest Arguments that may be brought to evince the
Truth of that matter of fact. We must also pass on from the Consideration of
the Soldiers that watched the Body, to that of the Apostles themselves. Had
they testified falsely that they had seen Jesus Christ risen from the Dead, it
was either with a mutual Agreement, or without one. Now it cannot be without a
mutual Agreement; for an Error that is not supported by an unanimous Consent,
must necessarily fall of it self to the ground, and it would have unavoidably
so happened, while one would have affirmed that Jesus Christ was risen from the
Dead, another that he was not at all risen; one would have said that he
appeared unto many, and another that he appeared to one only; another, that he
appeared to no Body; one would have related the matter one way, another another
way, and in fine, the most honest and sincere would have frankly confessed that
there was nothing at all in it.

But if they unanimously agreed to contrive this Imposture, there must have
been then several Persons who agreed together constantly and unanimously to
relate a matter of fact, which they knew to be utterly false. Now that is a
thing altogether impossible.

1. First, Because it is inconceivable, that a man should willingly expose
himself to all sorts of Punishments, and even to Death itself, on purpose to
testify a matter of fact which he knew very well to be utterly false. 2. That
though there should have been, by an unheard of Prodigy, one single Person of
that mind, yet it is the height of Extravagance, to imagine that there were a
very great number of Persons that took on a sudden that dangerous and fatal
Resolution, especially such as had behaved themselves before after a manner
quite opposite to that, and showed not only a great deal of Caution, but
Fearfulness in several other Occasions. 3. That tho a very great number of
People should have agreed together to bear Witness to a Falsity, yet it could
never be thought so of those who looked upon Lying and Perfidy as Sins that
were altogether inconsistent with their Salvation; neither could it be thought
of those, who if they allowed the Resurrection of Jesus Christ to be a mere
Fiction, must allow also that they had followed a Phantom, a Chimerical
imaginary Messiah; and if they owned that they had followed a Phantom, they
must likewise confess their own mutual Extravagance. 4. That this mutual
Agreement could never have been so carried on, but that some of them, to avoid
Punishment, would have discovered the Intrigue to the Jews with all its
Circumstances, it being most certain, that since Jesus Christ had been so very
basely betrayed in his Lifetime, it is more probable he would be so served
after his Death: For they might indeed have expected some Reward from him when
living, but they could hope for nothing from him after his Death, but Misery
and Torments, Shame and continual Remorses, for having followed a deceitful
Impostor. 5. And lastly, It Is not to be questioned, but that the very same
Principles which had dissolved their mutual Fidelity, would more probably break
off their mutual Treachery. And since the Love and Affection they had had for
their Master, supported by a strong Persuasion on their side that he was the
true Messiah, had not been capable to maintain and keep up that mutual
Fidelity, which made them say not very long before, Let us go there also, that
we may die with him, John 11. 16. so that they fled, and wholly left him to the
Power of his Enemies, can we reasonably suppose that having been undeceived of
the Opinion they had entertained of their Messiah, they should yet
notwithstanding their Shame, Fear, and dejected Condition, presently after
unanimously agree to maintain and affirm a most horrid Lie, on purpose to
blemish their Nation, by laying an imaginary Crime to their charge, and
maintain it too to that degree that not one of them should recant, or
contradict himself, but all of them unanimously suffer the severest Torments,
only to affirm that they had seen what they had really never seen?

It Is yet further observable, that this was not a mutual Agreement carried on
between twelve Apostles only, but also between all the Disciples of Jesus
Christ in general, who made up a very considerable number. For Jesus, after his
Resurrection, appeared one while to some Women, whom he commanded to tell his
Brethren that he was a going before them into Galilee, another while to Peter
alone, and then after to the Twelve. One while he went out to find them as they
were a fishing upon the Sea, and bless their Toil with a considerable Draught
of Fishes; Another while he was in the midst of them, when they had met
together to pray to God. Some time he sat at Table, and eat and drank with
them; At another time he gave them several Instructions, and reminded them of
those things he had taught them before his Death. At one time he manifested
himself to above 500 Disciples, at another he convicted an unbelieving Disciple
by making him feel his Hands and his Feet, saying, Reach hither thy finger,
behold my hands, etc. and be not faithless but believing, John 20. 27. One
while he appeared to two Disciples as they were a going to Emmaus, discoursed
with them, and expounded the Scriptures to them by the way; At another time he
assembled his Disciples together, and commanded them to teach all Nations,
baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

It may not be amiss to reflect a little upon that vast Multidude of Disciples
who testified they had seen Jesus Christ after his Resurrection. St. Paul, some
where in his Epistles, affirms, that Jesus Christ appeared to above five
hundred Brethren at once; and adds, that the greatest part of them were yet
alive, but some were fallen asleep. Now it is most certain, that St. Paul would
not, durst not, could not speak after that manner, had there not been a great
number of Disciples still living, who testified that they had seen Jesus Christ
after his Resurrection. I would fain know, whether it be possible for so great
a number of persons unanimously to contrive such an intolerable Imposture as
that must needs have been, were there nothing of Truth in what they advanced.
Truly it seems to me to be a thing not possible for a man to imagine, much less
to put in Execution.

A Man must do Violence to himself barely in supposing that so many Disciples
should falsely affirm that they had seen Jesus Christ after his Resurrection:
For one must thence suppose, that that great number of Persons were not really
Men; and that whatever they had been during the rest of their Lives, they had
put off their Humanity immediately after the Death of Jesus Christ.

They were indeed Men till that time; and their Behavior pretty well evinces
that their Sentiments were such as self-love and self-preservation generally
inspire us withal: for they expected and were in hopes of something. They
followed none other but Christ, because they expected from him what generally
all the Jews expected from their Messiah, according to the Ideas they had
formed themselves of him. They were afraid of Death: They dreaded the Fury of
the Sanhedrin: They flattered themselves with the Hopes of seeing themselves
restored to their former Glory: They begged of Jesus Christ to deliver them out
of approaching Dangers, if at any time they were in hazard of their Lives, or
exposed to any Tempest.

But since the Death of Jesus Christ, they seemed to have put off their
Humanity; Their Minds and Hearts were not disposed like those of other Men.
They neither hoped for, or expected any thing. For indeed what should they hope
or expect from the Profession they made of being Disciples of Jesus Christ, if
they knew that he was not risen at all according to his promise? What could
they hope for, if he who had promised them Eternal Life, and affirmed himself
to be the Resurrection and the Life, was to be for ever subject to the Power of
Death? Before while they trusted in Jesus Christ they were afraid: Now when
they trusted no more in him, their Fear vanished. Since they could not expect
any thing from another Life, they were resolved not to be any way concerned for
this, but to mind only a Future State. What is the meaning of this preposterous
Change? Formerly they thought they should do God great service, in suffering
for Christ's sake, whom they supposed to have been their Messiah; and yet they
were then faint-hearted and fearful: but now that they were assured they did
God no manner of service by adhering to the Gospel; but rather blemish their
own Reputation by maintaining a Cheat, they became on a sudden constant and
courageous, undaunted in the greatest Dangers, and invincible in the midst of
the most violent Trials. Who can comprehend all this?

Certainly, if we have but the least Common Sense we cannot but perceive that a
Cheat in so evident and sensible a matter of fact as that must have been, could
not be unanimously carried on by so many thousands of People. For supposing one
Man was diposed to Lie, who knows but another would be as inclinable to tell
the Truth; especially since there was nothing to be got by Lying, but Prisons,
Torments, and Death itself, whereas telling the Truth would have gained them
Credit, Friends, and Estates, by pleasing those in whose Power it was to
dispose of Riches and Offices of State. And had any one of them imagined that
some of the rest would certainly contradict him or themselves, he would have
been for that very Reason incapable of agreeing with them to carry on that
Cheat; Now it is naturally impossible but that this Thought must have offered
it self to the Mind of every one of them, and consequently such a mutual
Compact or Agreement was absolutely impossible, unless it so happened that that
whole Multitude had suddenly been bewitched and infatuated by the same kind of
Folly, and that too at one and the same time, as soon as Jesus Christ had given
up the Ghost.

However they must have been void of all Self-Love, and that natural Affection
Men usually bear to themselves, nay they must have been altogether insensible
of the cruel Stripes they underwent, and the Persecutions wherewith they were
almost overwhelmed; and that Insensibility and Extravagance must not only have
been an ordinary one, or of a short continuance, but of the longest Duration,
and strongest Force that ever was known.

CHAP. IV.
The third Center of Truth. A particular Consideration of the Ascension of
Jesus Christ.
THE Ascension of Jesus Christ, is a third Center of Truth, which we ought to
have continually before our eyes, in order to consider the Arguments it
contains for the Truth of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ our Savior.

This Ascension was preceded by several Apparitions of Jesus Christ, and
followed by an extraordinary Effusion of the miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, sufficiently manifested to all the Inhabitants of the City of Jerusalem;
so that it seems to want no Illustration.

It rather proves it self, and that too by its own proper Characters: For it is
a thing unheard of, that several Persons should agree to testify after that
manner so signal an Imposture as that must have been, had not the Ascension of
Jesus Christ been a real Event. But let us thoroughly consider all the
Circumstances of it.

As the Resurrection of Jesus Christ justified the wonderful Passages of his
Death, so likewise does his Ascension justify those of his Resurrection: For
though one should suspect that the Eyes of the Disciples might by chance have
been suddenly dazzled, and so they thought they had seen what they in reality
never saw, yet they had time enough to recover themselves out of this dazzling
Amazement; for it was forty days after Jesus Christ was risen from the Dead
before his Ascension. Had it been a Spirit that appeared to them, and frightened
them, yet had they time enough to come to themselves again, and know certainly
that the Spirit they saw was not really their Master. For they saw him and
heard him: They handled him, they eat and drank with him. Had it been through the
obscurity of a darksome Night that they had imagined they had seen some
Representation of their Master, instead of a true and full sight of him, they
could not long continue in their Error: But it was in full day that they saw
the Stone rolled away from the Sepulcher: 'Twas in full bright day that Christ
so often manifested himself to them, and discoursed with them, and afterward
ascended into heaven before their eyes.

Had the force of their Desires, their Fears, or Affections, disturbed their
Senses, we should have less Reason to wonder at it, tho even in that case the
thing would seem altogether unaccountable, it being morally impossible that the
Senses of so many People should all at once be so confined to one wonderful
Object, and so disturbed at the same time. But they had time enough to get out
of their Confusion and Astonishment; and their Minds were very sedate and at
ease when Christ made them Eyewitnesses of his glorious Ascension. In a word,
had it been a private and silent Interview, we might have much more Reason to
doubt; but Christ appeared to his Disciples with a particular Design to
discourse with them. He gave them several Instructions; he forbad them to
depart from Jerusalem, until they had received the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. He
made them several Promises, and such surprising ones, that they are fit only
for a God to make, and a God to perform: for he promised that he would be with
them even unto the End of the World. He instituted two Sacraments; he commanded
them to baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, as well as to commemorate his Death in the Passover. Nor was
that all. He had many long and coherent Discourses with them. He spoke to them,
and they answered him. They were at first incredulous; but he convinced them of
the Truth of his Resurrection, notwithstanding their Scruples and their
Infidelity. He rebuked them several times for their little Faith; at least they
tell us so. The Evangelists relate what Christ said to Thomas, and what Answer
Thomas made: And both their speeches were too surprising to be so soon
forgotten. Thomas being struck at the Wonders of his Resurrection, was the
first that gave Christ a Name which he was not wont to bear in the Stage of his
Humiliation, calling him, My Lord, and my God, John 20. 28.

The Disciples asked him, Whether he would at that time restore the Kingdom
unto Israel: but he answered them, that it was not for them to know the Times
and Seasons which the Father only had in his power. Lastly, The Evangelists
give us no less the History of Jesus Christ risen from the Dead, than that of
Jesus Christ living and conversing before his Death among the Jews: and we
affirm, we have as much reason to believe one as the other. For indeed, Why do
we believe there was ever any such Person as Jesus Christ? We believe it
certainly, because it is, in humane speaking, morally impossible that so many
Persons should unanimously tell us they had seen him, that they discoursed, eat
and drank with him, nay saw him suffer Death at Jerusalem; I say, they would
never have told us all this, supposing, there were nothing at all in it. But
then ought not that same Reason to persuade us likewise that Jesus Christ both
lived and conversed forty days with his Disciples, since so many Persons saw
him, discoursed, eat, and drank with him, saw him present in the midst of their
Assemblies, nay touched and handled him?

But (perhaps some will object) were that certainly true, Why then was there in
those days so many Persons that refused to believe the Ascension of Jesus
Christ? Why it is no hard matter to find the reason of this; 'twas because if
they had once acknowledged the Truth of the Ascension of Jesus Christ, they
were obliged to die Martyrs for that Truth; and no doubt Men were as
worldly-minded in those days as they are now.

So that methinks it appears hitherto very clearly, that the Disciples of Jesus
Christ were neither capable of deceiving themselves, nor of being deceived by
others, as to the Truth of the matters of fact they testified. It is a very
difficult matter (I had almost said impossible) that they should have deceived
themselves in the Miracles of Christ which they relate, because they so exactly
set down the Circumstances, the Names, Places, and the Persons themselves; nay,
they pretend they themselves were sent by their Master into all the Parts of
Judea, to work there the very same Miracles they attested. But though they should
have deceived themselves in the Miracles of Christ, yet they could not possibly
deceive themselves in his Resurrection. For they knew well enough what a dead
Body and a living Man was, they could easily distinguish between them; and
those things are of such a nature as not to be capable of Illusion or deceit.
Yet though we should supose that the disciples had been deceived in the
Resurrection of Christ, yet they could not have been imposed upon in the last
miraculous Event of his Ascension. It could never come to pass, that after
having seen a Spirit, they should yet converse with him forty days; that that
Spirit should suffer himself to be handled, that he should give them
Instructions, make them several Promises, and afterward be caught up into
Heaven in their Sight, they all the while looking upon him, and adoring him as
he was ascending into Heaven, and understanding distinctly the Discourse of the
Angels which promised them, that he should so come again in like manner, as
they had seen him go up into Heaven.

It would be to no purpose here to allege with Spinosa, That the Evangelists
have not exactly described all the Circumstances of the Event they relate, and
that had they taken special care to do it, it would perhaps so happen that the
Circumstances which they thought sit to conceal, would make us comprehend, that
those which they have related proceeded from Natural Ca^ses: For, I desire to
know what can be more expressly declared, or more often repeated in the Gospel,
than the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ into Heaven? And how can
any Man reasonably imagine, that it was natural, and according to the regular
Course of second Causes, to see a Man that had been crucified, and laid in a
Sepulcher where a Watch was appointed to guard him, rise out of that Sepulcher
again, appear alive to several Men that touched and handled him, and afterward
ascend into Heaven in their sight?

Certainly that very Ascension of Jesus Christ, cannot but convince the most
suspicious and scrupulous Person, that it was an Event purely divine and
supernatural: For otherwise, our Incredulous Adversaries might imagine (since
they are everlastingly raising Doubts) that the Body of Jesus Christ might have
been taken down from the Cross before the Breath was gone out of it; that
Joseph of Arimathea, who was his Disciple, tho he durst not own it publicly,
might have dressed his Body, and recovered him out of his Swoon by the strength
of the Remedies he gave him; that he might have laid another counterfeit
Dead-body in his place, and buried it; and that afterward Jes. Christ might
have privately showed himself to his Disciples, not daring to appear in public
for fear of falling a second time into the hands of the Jews, and suffering a
true and real Death, instead of that imaginary one he had suffered before.

But this Fiction is absurd and incredible, and that for several Reasons.
First, Because the Evangelists relate, that Christ had his Side pierced with
the Lance of a Soldier, which thing alone was enough to give him his Death.
Secondly, It is very improbable to think that the Jewish Sanhedrin, who had
condemned him to die, nay who had taken such care to set a Watch over his
Sepulcher, should yet suffer his Body to be taken down from the Cross before
the Breath was gone out of it. Lastly, because it can never be supposed that a
Man who hung several Hours together on a Cross, should yet escape Death, and
show himself not long after safe and sound to his Disciples.

But that which will immediately remove all these Doubts, is, that Jesus Christ
not only rose from the Dead, but also ascended into Heaven in the sight of his
Disciples. And this is so sensible and evident a matter of fact, that they
could never have been imposed upon in that respect.

So that it may very well be affirmed, that the Argument for the Truth of the
Christian Religion chiefly depends upon that Important Inquiry, whether the
Disciples designed to impose upon us, by relating to us a false Event, which
they did not believe themselves. Now if we can clearly prove the contrary, we
shall invincibly demonstrate the certain Truth of our Faith.

Let us therefore in order to it, closely stick to the Examination of that
matter of fact, the most essential and the most important that ever was, and
endeavor to discover whether it be possible we should have been imposed upon
by those Men, which could not deceive themselves.

If we would suppose that the Disciples of Jesus Christ deceived us in their
relation of a fictitious Event, we must also necessarily suppose these three
things. 1. That their Illusion or Imposture must be a thing that was possible
to be put in Execution. 2. That it must be of some Use or other to them. 3.
That it must be such as Men, and only Men make use of. Now it is certain, that
their pretended Illusion here in question, could not have any of these three
Qualities. 1. It could not have been possible, because it must have been agreed
upon by many Persons who all knew the bare Truth of the matter of fact it self.
2. It would have been of no use, for what could those Men propose to themselves
in inventing such a Fiction? 3. It could not be such as Men usually contrive,
because from the Beginning of the World till now, we never heard of any Man
that invented Lies, on purpose to have the pleasure of being hanged, scourged,
burnt, or executed upon a Scaffold.

1. As to the first, I Will grant you if you will, that Peter with some other
Disciples might have taken away the Body of Jesus Christ out of the Sepulcher,
either by tricking the Watch, or taking the Advantage of their sleeping; or
lastly, by bribing them with Money: I Will grant you too, if you will, they might
have easily persuaded the whole Company of Disciples, who were too credulous
and too eager in swallowing of Novelties, that Jesus Christ had appeared to
them indeed, and that he was risen from the Dead; I Will grant you likewise, that
the other Disciples might have imagined thereupon they had seen some Visions,
or thought they had seen him in several Places and on several Occasions: but
then I ask, How they could have all agreed together concerning the truth of his
Ascension? By what Charm or Cunning could Peter and the other Apostles have
made them see that which they never saw or heard a Man speak, whom they really
never heard? By what Machine could they have caused the Clouds to descend? Or
by what sort of Enchantment could they have produced two Men in white Raiments,
telling them, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen him go up into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. By what secret Power could they
have so deeply imprinted in the Minds of the Disciples, the Words which Jesus
Christ spoke to them after his Resurrection, the Reproaches he made them of
their Infidelity, his Promise of sending the Holy Ghost to them, his forbidding
them to depart from the City of Jerusalem, and the Command he gave them to
Baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost; I say
how could they have done all this, if all these things were but the witty
Conceits of their Imagination and Fancy?

Certainly tho St. Peter or some other Disciple of Jesus Christ, should have
formed to himself the Design and Plan of so Signal a Cheat, and tho he should
have set down in writing all the Articles one by one, which he was obliged to
make other Men believe against the plain Truth, yet he could never have been so
bold as to propose any such thing to those Men, who were prepossessed with the
Opinion that Lying was a great Sin, but Truth and Sincerity, on the contrary, a
great Virtue. Nay, it is even impossible it should ever come into his Head, to
frame so Signal an Imposture upon so sad and sorrowful an Event as the Death of
Jesus Christ. Neither does it appear that his Mind or his Thoughts were any
ways bent upon any such Design. And tho he should have been induced out of a
Spirit of Revenge, to invent such a Lie to discredit the Scribes and Pharisees,
yet it cannot be supposed he should have been so very silly, as to imagine that
the rest of the Disciples would consent to that Imposture, or be willing to
maintain it at any rate whatever, out of mere Complaisance to him.

Such is the Nature of Mankind, such the Frame and Temper of their Hearts, that
they will admit of no Falsity, unless covered with a specious show of Truth. So
that when any thing is so evidently false that every Body must necessarily be
sensible of it, we have no Thoughts of attempting to make others believe it; as
for instance, it will never come into my Head to make other Men believe that I
have Wings, and that I fly, etc.

We might here repeat what has been said concerning the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: either the Disciples looked upon Jesus Christ before his Death as the
promised Messiah, or else they did not look upon him as such. If they
considered him as the promised Messiah, they then believed his Words, and
thought that he would truly rise again; and if they did expect that he would
truly rise again, they consequently believed he would come himself out of his
Grave, and so it was not at all necessary they should steal his Body away. And
if they did not consider him as the promised Messiah whilst he was alive, it
must follow from thence, that they were Seducers and Impostors even before the
Death of Christ. Now how can any one conceive that those Seducers should not
have been terrified at the Punishment inflicted on their Master, or that such a
terrible Example of the most rigorous Justice designed too for them, should not
put an end to their frontless Impudence? Above all, How can it be supposed that
those wicked and perfidious Disciples durst have proposed to the other
Disciples, who were really Sincere and True, to join with them, and so testify
that they had seen Jesus Christ ascending into Heaven?

Truly I don't see what any Man can allege except one of these two things,
either that they were all sincere and honest Men, or that some of them were
honest, and the rest Cheats. If they were all sincere and honest Men, as their
Manners, their Discourse, their Conduct, and a thousand other Characters of
them evidently show, then is it absolutely impossible that any such Cheat could
have been carried on amongst them. But if they were all a pack of cheating
treacherous Impostors, then it was the first time that ever a Society of
cheating perfidious Rogues was erected, who seemed to have had no other Design
than to sanctify Mankind.

But what Man, be his Thoughts never so confused and irregular, be his Reason
never so corrupt, can yet imagine that so many mean-spirited, simple and humble
Men as the Disciples were, should immediately become the most Lying notorious
Cheats, out of no other Design then to involve themselves in ruin? If some of
them were false and others sincere, and if the latter were at all imposed upon
by the former, which is the most our Incredulous Adversaries can imagine; yet
even then I assert, that such a Cheat could not have been carried on by them.
For supposing Peter never so smooth and Eloquent, never so adroit at
Dissembling and Insinuation, yet how could he possibly persuade so great a
number of Persons to believe against their Senses, that they had seen that
which they really never saw, or handled that which they had never handled; that
Jesus Christ after having given them many Precepts and large Instructions,
which he left very deeply imprinted in their Minds, ascended into Heaven in
their sight? But should I grant he might have persuaded them of the Truth of
his Resurrection, yet how is it possible he could persuade them of the Truth of
his Ascension?

Had St. Peter but so much as proposed it to them whom he designed to delude,
it would have been for that very Reason impossible but that they should have
found out his Design to cheat them. But he would not sure presume to propose to
them the joint Contrivance of such a fabulous Story, nor would he have found
(tho he had been bold enough to have proposed it) any that would have assisted
him in so senseless a Design, much less maintained his Extravagance, and least
of all exposed themselves to a thousand Torments on purpose to maintain it.

2. But secondly, I observed that such an Imposture would have been of no
manner of use to them. It is enough to have proved that it was impossible to be
put in Execution to satisfy any reasonable Man how needless and useless it
would be to advance it. It Is true, there have been in all Ages and Countries
such Men as would have been very willing, for their own Advantage, to make
others believe improbable Stories and Fictions, had the thing been but
practicable: but because they could not effect it without such a mutual Concert
among several Persons to maintain it, as is altogether impossible, for that
very Reason it never came into their Minds upon serious and cooler Thoughts.

It would, no doubt, be of very singular Advantage to those Princes, who so
earnestly desire to procure themselves an extraordinary Respect and Veneration
from their Subjects, and for that Reason very seldom appear in public, and
hardly ever show themselves to their Poople; I say, it would be of great
Advantage to them, if they could but once persuade their People that they were
of a Divine Race, and came down from Heaven: but because they judge such a
Design impracticable, they reckon it a thing altogether useless and needless
ever to undertake it.

Certainly we may as well affirm that the Design of making other Men believe
the Ascension of Jesus Christ against the real truth of the thing, and inward
sense of their own Consciences, would have been altogether as useless and
needless; because it does not in the least appear that the Disciples could
propose to themselves any reasonable Design in maintaining such an incredible
Story.

3. Nay it was a thing not only wholly useless, but as we observed in the third
place, such a one as Men don't usually Design, or contrive. It could not enter
into any one Man's mind, much less into that of so many different men at once,
to fancy that they could persuade other Men to credit such an impudent Lie as
that must have been, or to dare undertake to make others believe it, to think
in the least that they could succeed in so strange a Design, or that others
would have acted in it jointly with them, to imagine that they could be able to
endure the most rigorous Torments, and the severest and most cruel Afflictions,
or that the Cheat which they unanimously had agreed on, would have been both
believed and approved of throughout the World; nay what is more, that Men
should repent and become Holy and Righteous out of a Respect and Reverence they
bo^e to an Impostor, and that Virtue and Piety should have been established in
all the Parts of the World by the means of an extraordinary Cheat.

To this we may add, that considering this Design of theirs another way, it is
not, cannot be such a one as any Man would conceive or endeavor to put in
Practice. It is absolutely impossible to find any Man so much an Enemy to
himself, as willingly to lose his Quiet, his Liberty, Friends, Relations and
all his Acquaintance, only to assert and defend a Lie, that must unavoidably be
attended by such fatal and sorrowful Consequences. For Nature is not insensible
of Grief and Pain. As she is exposed to Griefs and Sufferings, so when she
suffers it is with Reluctance, Complaints, Sighs, and Tears. She cannot accustom
her self to bear slightly Contempt or Infamy. Nothing disturbs and exasperates
her more, nothing makes her more impatient than Mortifications and Disgraces.
How then is it possible so great a Company of People should on a sudden
renounce all those inviolable Sentiments of Nature which no Violence can root
out, on purpose to maintain that they had seen a thing, which they really never
saw? This is a Consideration that cannot be too often repeated.

Lastly, it is such a Design as is not in the nature of Man to conceive. For,
to maintain an Imposture with such Constancy as the Disciples did, is such a
piece of extraordinary Courage as is above the Nature or Power of Man. An
Impostor that thinks and knows himself to be one, whose Mind tells him that he
acts contrary to his Natural Sentiments, cannot go long undiscovered. He is
seized with Remorse, and his Conscience is awakened. He trembles and unwarily
discovers himself to the World upon the least danger he meets with. He is ready
to confess the whole Cheat, as soon as he is brought before his Judges, and is
frighted with the Punishments of a secular Power; and he never fails of
betraying himself, either by confessing the whole Business, or maintaining what
he has advanced after so weak and fearful a manner, that he will not be long,
(if but closely urged to it) before he discovers the whole Truth. For such is
the usual Temper of Men upon such an Occasion. And if a single Person that
should not act thus in this respect, would be looked upon as an unheard of
Prodigy, how much more shall an infinite number of People be looked upon as
such? Who can imagine that so many Persons should either on a sudden renounce
their humane Nature, or be of a different make from all other Men since the
Beginning of the World; For my part, I cannot conceive how it should be, and
therefore look upon this as a most sensible and evident Truth. But we must yet
carry on this Conviction further, by following those Notions which it has
pleased God in his Wisdom to put into our Mind upon this Subject.

CHAP. V.
The fourth Center of Truth. A particular Consideration of the Effusion of the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost upon the Disciples.
THE last Degree of Evidence that occurs in the Demonstration which sensibly
proves to us the Truth of the Christian Religion, is, the Truth of a fourth
matter of fact, naturally proved by its own proper Characters; and that is, the
Effusion of the Holy Ghost on the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

This Demonstration of the truth of Christian Religion has three different
Degrees of Evidence, which also consist in the three Parts of the Testimony of
the Apostles. The first whereof is this; Jesus Christ the Son of Mary did such
Actions as cannot but be supernatural and miraculous; such are, for instance,
the Resurrection of the Dead which we have been Eyewitnesses of. The second
is, We, even we our selves, have received the Power to work Signs and Wonders,
and such as are equal to those of Jesus Christ himself, as he foretold and
declared it several times unto us. The third is, We have not only the power to
do those Miracles, but can also impart it to others: and those we shall
hereafter convert will know themselves to be the true Disciples of Jesus
Christ, in that they shall work Signs like unto ours, and to those which Jesus
Christ himself wrought.

The first Degree of this Evidence must necessarily convince us. For it is a
very convincing Demonstration indeed, to have present to one's Eyes, nay in
ones own Disposal and Power, the Witnesses of the Miracles of Jesus Christ, and
such Eyewitnesses too, that both heard what he said, saw every thing he did,
familiarly conversed with him, and often questioned him concerning the
Difficulties that offered themselves to their Mind; and lastly, such Witnesses
who all unanimously deposed the very same matter of fact, and boldly maintained
it even in the midst of the most cruel Torments; And yet such Witnesses as
these had those who were first converted to the Christian Faith.

But it is a thing yet somewhat more persuasive to hear those Men affirm, that
they had not only seen the Miracles of Jesus Christ, but that they themselves
were able to work the same Miracles. Certainly, of all the Witnesses in the
World, those are soonest to be received and believed, who proffer to show you
the very Things they testify.

But what seems to me to be the last Degree of Evidence, and the clearest
Demonstration, is, that those very Witnesses undertook to convince Men of those
matters which they affirmed to be true, not only by relating those Miracles
which they saw Jesus Christ do, not only by profering to do the like
themselves, but also by promising to enable those People (who should believe
their Words) to operate the very same things: For they imparted the
extraordinary and miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost to their Proselytes, as it
appears by the Example of the Centurion Cornelius. And those Gifts became
afterward so frequent and visible, that Simon Magus would have bought them for
Money: They were so very remarkable, that they made great and public
Impressions on the Minds of several Jews, who were already converted to the
Gospel of our Lord, and praised God for his having also visited the Gentiles.
Lastly, the Gospel which those Disciples preached, tells us that such should be
the Signs that followed the true Disciples of Jesus Christ, namely, that they
should heal the Sick, etc.

Certainly how strong soever the obstinacy and prejudices of the Incredulous
may be, yet they cannot any longer hold out against the powerful Convictions of
that threefold Truth. It is impossible that the Disciples should bear witness
to the Miracles of Jesus Christ, if they had not been true; neither can we
suppose they would have had the Boldness, Power, or Will to do it. It is
impossible they should have contrived together such an unparalled Imposture,
by agreeing among themselves to preach the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus
Christ, of which they were never Witnesses.

But it is extravagant to imagine that the Apostles boasted they were able to do
Miracles, merely to have other Men believe those of Jesus Christ, and it argues
yet a greater Extravagance, to suppose they promised all those they should
convert to him, to make them able to work the very same Miracles they attested.

Besides, we are to consider two things in the Revelation made to the Apostles
on the day of Pentecost: viz. the Symbol or Token of the Presence of the Holy
Ghost, and the Effects or Gifts of the said Holy Ghost. And it is not easy to
imagine how the Disciples could be deceived in either respect: I am willing,
however, for once to suppose that they might have been deceived in those
external and corporeal Symbols; that they might fancy they heard a mighty
rushing Wind, of which there was really no noise; that their Eyes being dazzled
they might have taken that for Fire which was not Fire; yet this Supposition
would certainly be a little too extravagant. For tho the Apostles, by reason of
some Imperfection in their Organs, or some outward Illusion, may have fancied
that they saw Fire where no Fire was, yet it is a very difficult matter for a
wandering Imagination (as they must be supposed to have had then according to
this Notion) to have joined Fire and a Sound together; and much more difficult
also to have perceived that Fire in a form which was most agreeable to their
Ministry: and that must have been a very fortuitous Chance indeed, that could
thus modify that Fire, and make it appear as Cloven Tongues like as of Fire,
which sat on each of the Disciples when they were assembled together. Besides,
it would be very strange they should be all of them liable to the same
Delusion. But what then? still this Supposition is too extravagant. Is it so?
If you will, we'll suppose it true. But then tell us, how we shall express the
wonderful Effects of that Effusion, those durable and lasting Effects which
were still extant, though the Wind had ceased blowing, though that Sound which had
filled the whole House was no longer to be heard, and though that Fire and those
Tongues had vanished away.

For certainly 'twas never intended those surprising Effects should be
concealed. The Apostles immediately spoke all sorts of Languages, and that too
before all Nations of the World. They converted one while six thousand People,
at another three thousand by one single Sermon, and only speaking this to their
Auditors, Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received
of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye
now see and hear, Acts. 2. 33.

We'll grant, if you will, that Jesus Christ did no manner of Miracles; It will
produce no great Consequence, so long as it appears that the Apostles did
several: Nay, they chose for that very end, the Sick that were most known. They
took a lame Person, for instance, that was publicly known to all the City of
Jerusalem for such a one, to make him walk and leap before all the People of
that great and flourishing City.

'Twould have been a strange thing indeed, if the Apostles had attempted to
show false Miracles to those People that were ten thousand times more subtle
and refined than themselves: But it would be yet far more strange, that after
having preached a false Resurrection of their Master, they should have
undertook to prove it by working a false Miracle, which must necessarily have
been immediately discovered.

But I Will grant, if you will, that they might have been so extravagant, as to
undertake it, and that the Jews whose chief Interest it was to discover their
Cheats and Artifices, might have been so far void of Common sense as not to
make the least Inquiry into it, or Examination about it. But what then will you
say to this, which in my Opinion may serve for an invincible Demonstration;
namely, that the Apostles not only pretended themselves able to work Miracles,
but also to give their Disciples Power to do the same?

Did any one ever hear of a Society formed by the preaching of certain
Impostors, who gave this Character of the Truth of their preaching, that they
would impart to others the Power of working the same Miracles with themselves,
who conferred miraculous Gifts upon those they baptized, but miraculous Gifts so
evident and so sensible, that they themselves could not doubt but that they had
truly received them; nor they on whom they were conferred form any lawful or
reasonable Objection against them?

This Consideration is so much the more convincing, because those Gifts we here
speak of were durable and permanent, at least, during the Infancy or first Age
of the Church. I confess indeed, that the Holy Ghost foretold that Prophecy
should vanish away, and the Gifts of Tongues should cease; which is a very good
Reason to prevent our wondering at the Cessation of those Gifts in our days.
There were none but Faith, Hope, and Charity that were to endure to all Ages.
But I am also certain, that the miraculous Gifts lasted as long as the Apostles
themselves, nay they were yet extant long after their days, till God himself
had settled Christian Churches in all Parts of the World, the Scaffolds having
been only taken down, when the Building was finished. And this no Man of sense
can reasonably doubt of, especially when he sees that the Apostles so
frequently allude to this Matter of fact, after so simple and so natural a
Manner. The Gift of Tongues therefore, and all other miraculous Gifts, were
durable and permanent in respect of those they had been conferred upon. The
Father was seen to discourse about them with his Son, and the Son with his
Father. And it gave Occasion to the Jews who wondered that the Holy Ghost was
also imparted to the Gentiles, to giorify God for it.

But I am willing some Men should make the most violent Supositions they can;
at least, they will not refuse to allow that the Apostles, who pretended to
impart the Holy Ghost to other men by the Imposition of their hands, and who
proffered to make it descend upon their Proselytes by baptising them; who went
about preaching every where that the Time was come, wherein according to the
Prophecy of Joel, the Holy Ghost was to be poured upon all Flesh; and who in
their Gospels and Histories they composed of the Life of their Master, affirmed
upon serious Reflection, that, these signs should follow them that believed,
etc. I say, it is to be presumed they will not refuse to allow, that those Men
sincerely believed they had received, and were able to impart the Holy Ghost to
others. Perhaps it was their Mistake, if you will have it so; but that is not
the thing I now contend about. Whether they were mistaken indeed, or not, still
it is evident, that unless they had sincerely believed that Mistake, or that
professed Opinion, they durst never have made such Promises: It Is plain enough,
that a Man who did not think within himself that he had received the Miraculous
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, would never promise to impart them to others.

Now I would desire the Reader carefully to consider this last Principle, it
being necessary to give an invincible Demonstration of the Truth of
Christianity. In a word, if the Apostles sincerely believed they could speak
all sorts of Languages, and had received the extraordinary and miraculous Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, I affirm, that it was absolutely impossible they should have
been Deceivers as to the other matters of fact: For it is impossible they
should believe they had received those miraculous Gifts, unless they also
believed the Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ to be true;
and it is impossible they should have believed the Miracles, Resurrection, and
Ascension of Jesus Christ to be true, if all those Events had not been true
indeed; because, as we have already plainly made it appear, it is not possible
that those matters of fact should have been capable of Illusion and Deceit.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein we shall join all the miraculous Matters of fact together, and form
thereby a full and perfect Demonstration of them.
SHould we consider all those Events in general, we might form an invincible
Demonstration of them, by supposing the three following Principles, which in my
Opinion will hereafter appear to be very evidently proved.

The first is, that the Apostles, and the rest of the Disciples of Christ did
really testify his Miracles, Resurrection, Ascension, and the pouring out the
Holy Ghost on the Apostles. The second, that they sincerely believed what they
so testified. And the third, that they having firmly believed that Jesus Christ
wrought many wonderful Miracles, that he was risen from the Dead, ascended into
Heaven, and had poured out his Spirit upon all his Disciples, of all which
Events, they were Eyewitnesses, it must necessarily follow from thence that
all those things were certainly true.

The first of these Principles is undeniable in it self. For it appears that
these four Events were the whole subject Matter of the preaching of the Holy
Apostles; which too is plain, because they themselves tell it (...) their
Writings, or rather because their Writing^ (...) continual History of them;
because they (...) o^ any thing else in all their Epistles, but of those four
wonderful Events, in those Epistles they wrote to whole Societies, who so
carefully preserved them as Writings of the greatest value; because there is no
fragment, page, or scarce a line in all those Writings, but what either relates
those matters of fact, or evidently supposes them; because there can be no
Christianity established in the World without this Foundation; because they
have been confirmed to us by Persons who lived since the Blessed Apostles, and
discoursed familiarly with them; because the publication of those things was
the cause of the establishing very numerous Churches almost every where in the
days of the Apostles themselves; because Reason and Common sense sufficiently
assure us, that the Jews and Gentiles could never have believed in a crucified
Man as such, without being at the same time also taught that he was risen from
the Dead; because the Faithful only believe the last Resurrection, upon their
certain hope and strong persuasion that they are to be made like unto the
glorious Body of their Divine Redeemer; because it is manifest that the Authors
of the New Testament copied not one another Writings, and yet unanimously
agree in the relation of those four surprising Events, as being the very
essentials of their Doctrine; because the Primitive Christians would not have
sanctified themselves, nor utterly renounced the enticing charms of the World,
but that they trusted wholly in a Man that was risen from the Dead, and
ascended into Heaven; because the most obstinate, and most insolent Enemies of
Christianity never entertained the least scruple in that respect, nor presumed
to deny but that Christ's Disciples boldly testified of him that he was risen
from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven; because the Jews always acknowledged
this to be the testimony of the Apostles; and lastly, because the union of all
those and many other Circumstances we have already handled, render the thing
itself wholly undeniable and evident in the highest degree: so that it is
almost to no purpose to insist any longer on the proof of the first Principle.

The second is no less certain than the first. For it is evident that the
Apostles sincerely believed that whatever they related was most certainly true;
because those things they delivered to us in their Writings, were the Motives
and Incitements they had to their Virtue, self denial, and patience so often
tried in the dangers they underwent; because they made such simple and natural
allusions to them, that it is absolutely impossible, one should not perceive
their being truly persuaded of the truth of them, in so much that they were
convinced of the future Happiness of their condition, mauger all the reasons
they might have to think it should be Miserable and Sorrowful; because 'twas
this very persuasion which gave them the Courage they had to expose themselves
to the greatest Dangers, and undergo the most severe trials; because they
rejoiced with one another in that they were thought worthy of spending their
lives and whatever else was dearest to them, for the defense of so good a
Cause, tho they must needs have very well known the cheat they had forged among
themselves, if what they said was not certainly true; and above all, because
they pretended to show very sensible and miraculous proofs of the matters of
fact which they had delivered.

In fine, the last of these Principles is still (if I may so speak) more
evident than either of the former. For it is impossible that the Disciples of
our Lord should have been deceived, 1. in such evident matters of fact, the
Truth of which they might so easily have been assured of by sensible
Experience; 2. in so great a number of matters of fact, so different from one
another by their Circumstances; and 3. in such matters of fact that were so
linked and united one with another, that whosoever grants but one, must
necessarily grant the truth of the rest.

And now let the Reader but thoroughly consider all these things within himself,
and I am fully persuaded he can never doubt of any of these three Principles.
For he cannot so much as deny one of them without an extraordinary reluctance
in his mind, which will force back the truth upon him. Should he say that the
Apostles never preached the Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus
Christ, nor the pouring out the Holy Ghost on the Apostles themselves, 'twould
be as great a falsehood as if he should say, that there were never any such Men
as the Apostles, or that they were not the Disciples of Christ, nor preached
that Men must necessarily believe on him; and it is most certain that he will
presently reject all these propositions, as being absurdly false and
extravagant in themselves.

Again, should he say that the Apostles did not sincerely believe the Miracles,
Resurrection, Ascension of Jesus Christ, nor the Effusion of the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, it is as much as if he should affirm they did not pretend to work
any Miracles, speak strange Languages, or think themselves capable of Imparting
those gifts to other Men: and consequently as much as if he should advance,
that the Apostles wrote none of all those Epistles that were ascribed to them;
that they preached not publicly at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, nor
settled any Church therein, or taught Men that they should steadfastly believe
in the Gospel.

Lastly, should he say that the Apostles sincerely believed all these things,
but yet that none of them were true, it is as much as if he asserted that they
had neither Eyes, Ears, nor Memory; and that several thousands of People were
all deprived of their Senses by the same kind of bewitching folly, so that
those who embraced the Doctrine which they taught, must at the same time
precisely and necessarily have lost their Reason; and yet it is evident that
folly is the only Principle that makes us lead good lives, and sanctifies the
corrupt Affections of Men.

It is certain, that by considering the union of all these Circumstances
together, there arises from them such a Moral Demonstration, as is worth all
other Mathematical Demonstrations in the World. But to be as brief as possible,
I say that this Demonstration after all, consists in the two following
propositions. As thus the Disciples of Christ sincerely believed his Miracles,
Resurrection, Ascension, and the Effusion of the gifts of the Holy Ghost. It
follows therefore, that these four Events are most certainly true. The
Consequence of this argument is evident, because these are matters of fact that
were altogether incapable of Illusion or Deceit, and in which it was absolutely
impossible they should have been deceived. For tho the Disciples might have
been decieved in one single Miracles, yet how could they be deceived in several
Miracles at once? Tho it were possible they might have been deceived in the
Miracles of Christ, yet they could not be deceived in his Resurrection. Though
they might have been decieved in his Resurrection, yet they could not be
deceived in so many sensible Marks which Christ gave them of his Presence after
he was risen from the Dead; and above all, in his Ascension. Though they might
have been deceived even in his Ascension, yet they could not be deceived in the
Effusion of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, because they had a continual
Experience of that last Miracle. They knew whether it was true or not, there
had appeared to them Cloven Tongues like as of fire; but still they knew yet
much better, whether they had really received the Gift of Tongues, which were
represented to them by that external Symbol: the Holy Ghost having particularly
chosen that Gift above all others on purpose to make it the more remarkable;
because of all sorts of Gifts, this is certainly the most unimitable, and the
least capable of Error and Illusion.

For pray how is it possible, I should persuade my self that I can speak the
Persian, Chinese, and Arabic Tongue, or that I understand all those Languages
when they are spoken to me, had I no such Gift of Tongues? And if it be so rare
a thing to see one single Man possessed with that foolish kind of Madness as to
imagine such a thing, it is most certainly impossible that a great number of
Persons should fancy that they on a sudden spoke all sorts of Languages in the
World, when there was no such thing.

It must then necessarily be granted, that though the Disciples of Jesus Christ
might perhaps have been imposed upon in all the other matters of fact, yet they
could not be deluded in this. For a Man cannot be ignorant whether or no he
speaks those Languages which were before wholly unknown to him, much less can 2
Men be so, much less again 12, and much less still 70, and since every one of
these Persons must necessarily know what passes within himself, it is
impossible they should all believe they had received the Gift of Tongues, when
there was no such thing.

The Consequence therefore of our Argument is most certain, most evident and
undeniable, if ever any thing was so; and the Principle of it will appear to be
so likewise.

The Disciples of Christ sincerely believed his Miracles, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the Effusion of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. If you would be
more fully convinced of this, it is but reading the New Testament over from one
end to the other: There you will find that Sincerity and that full Persuasion
in their disinteressed Self-denial, which sprung from the Knowledge they had
that Christ, as their only treasure, was ascended into Heaven; there you will
see their Joyfulness in Afflictions arising purely from the Testimony they bore
to the Truth; their Charity and Piety wholly inconsistent with the Character of
Impostors; their Humility, Purity, Patience, burning Zeal, and that fervent
desire they had to Kindle all those Virtues in the Souls of others: these being
two undeniable matters, first that the Disciples of Christ showed themselves to
have the most natural sentiments of Piety and Virtue imaginable; secondly, that
Piety and Virtue can never proceed from Imposture and Deceit. There you will
also find the plain Honesty of the Disciples, and the Sincerity of their
Persuasion in the style of their Discourse. For if it be true, that Languages
express the Genius and Manners of the People; it may be very well affirmed,
that the Language of Christ's Disciples fully expresses the Miracles of the
Gospel by a particular Energy, which distinguishes the style of those Authors
not only from that of all other Men, but also from that of the Law. You will
meet with the same Sincerity even in that great number of obscure and difficult
Texts which the Evangelists relate: For on one hand it is impossible that they
should counterfeit or invent those Precepts, or those difficult and obscure
Sayings which they make Christ utter to the People, and on the other it is most
certain, that those difficult and obscure Texts almost always include some
miraculous matter of fact, or at least some Allusion to those supernatural
Miracles. First then, I say, that the Evangelists invented not those obscure
and difficult Sayings they make Christ utter, which are truly very numerous:
For how should those poor Fishermen have been industrious enough to forge and
invent such Things which all the Doctors as have lived these sixteen hundred
years down to us, were hardly able either to understand themselves, or make
other Men comprehend?

Besides it is certain that those obscure and difficult sayings, either contain
the History of those miraculous matters of fact we are now speaking of, or else
include such plain and natural Allusions to them, that it is easy for any one
to perceive that he that relates those Texts, both supposes that those matters
of fact were certainly true, and publicly known to the World. Thus for
instance, why did our Lord say that there was not a greater Prophet than John
the Baptist born of a Woman? 'Twas not surely because of his Miracles, for he
did none: Neither was it because of his extraordinary Piety. For Moses called
the meekest of Men, was without doubt in that equal to him. 'Twas then because
of the advantage he enjoyed both in Seeing and Hearing the Messiah. But how
comes our Savior to add that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven was greater
than him. Must we understand by the Kingdom of Heaven, that Kingdom of which
John himself said, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Was it not rather because
John saw none of all the Wonders of that Kingdom which the least of Christ's
Disciples had seen? Which indeed was the reason that our Savior told them,
Blessed are your Eyes, for they see, and your Ears, for they hear. For verily I
say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous Men have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them. Matthew. 13. 16, 17. Now all this evidently
supposes the Miracles of Christ, and all the other mavelous Events which
serve for a Confirmation of our holy Religion.

What he also said himself concerning Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is
altogether strange and very surprising. Nay the very name he gave to that sin
implies something in itself Singular and Extraordinary. For no body before him
ever expressed himself after this manner. Men were not ignorant that sinning
against God was a very great Crime, but they had no Knowledge of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, much less were they satisfied if there was any harm in
Blaspheming against him. This unusual Language necessarily proceeded from a new
Revelation, and from new and different objects not seen or heard of before. For
the Jews knew not what the Holy Ghost was (if we take that word in the Sense of
the Evangelists.) Nay there were some of them who tho converted to the Gopsel
of Christ, yet still were ignorant of the true meaning of that Expression. In
the mean while if we will but consult the Writings of the New Testament, and
therein the Gospels, the Acts of the Holy Apostles, and the Epistles of those
great and extraordinary Men, they will presently inform us that by the Holy
Ghost must be understood in most of those places, the extraordinary and
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Spirit imparted to the Men of those days; and that
to Blaspheme against him, is downright Blasphemy against that Divine and
Glorious Principle of all things, which was, the cause of all the Perfections
and Miracles of Christ, and gave such Power unto Men.

So that there is first in that Text such an obscurity as proves that the
Evangelists could not have thought of inventing it, had not Christ himself
really uttered these very words; and secondly, it undeniably supposes the
miraculous matters of fact, the Pharisees were wont to ascribe to the Power of
Beelzebub, wherein indeed Chiefly consisted the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

In like manner this Text, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
John 3. 5. implies a very puzling Difficulty; because it was not usual formerly
for Men to express themselves after this manner. It is a very difficult matter
indeed to understand the true meaning of that Text, but it is yet far more
difficult to invent it; and all the Doctors in the World might put their Heads
together, and yet never be able to invent the like Text. Above all it was not
natural for the Jews to invent any such thing, because they had no such objects
amongst them as could fill up their Minds with any such Ideas. When we suppose
the Baptism of the Holy Spirit conferred upon Christ's Disciples, we may then
easily comprehend the true meaning of that mysterious but very remarkable
Expression. We might also add to this Text, that other which mentions the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire.

In like manner it pleased God in his Wisdom that they who related to us the
History of Christ's Resurrection, should tell us also some things which we
cannot at first view easily comprehend (tho they have a true and reasonable
meaning) on purpose to make us understand that as it was impossible those
obscure and difficult sayings ascribed to him by them should come of themselves
into their thoughts, had not he really spoke them, so consequently it can never
be supposed that those Men should have forged the History of Christ's
Resurrection, or their Discourses with him after he was risen from the Dead, as
for instance, these Words which he spoke to Mary, touch me not, for I am not
yet ascended to my Father, John 20. 17. We could make almost an infinite number
of such Remarks as these, which though they cannot come up to an evident
Demonstration, yet are very proper to make us sensible of the Truth of those
matters of fact we are now speaking of.

The Sincerity of the Disciples will further appear by the great number of
Circumstances with which their Narrative is filled, some whereof are so
singular, that they cannot easily enter into any Man's Mind, and others so
unbecoming their Master, or d^^^dvantageous to themselves, that there is not
the least Probability they could have any Desire to forge them; others are so
inseparably united with those Events which must necessarily have been well
known, that they durst not so much as think of forging them against the public
Knowledge every body must have had of them, as we have already proved at large.

But lastly, it is not our present Design to insist purely upon probable
Reasons, though never so probable and sufficient of themselves, to form a true
and perfect Demonstration when joined together. I therefore proceed to that
which is in itself wholly Demonstrative.

Now the whole Demonstration of the Truth of Christian Religion depends upon
this Argument; namely, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ sincerely
believed his Miracles, Resurrection, Ascension, and the Effusion of the Gifts
of the Holy Ghost; whence it follows, that all those matters of fact are most
certainly true.

We have already given an invincible proof of the Consequence of this Argument,
by showing that it was impossible the Disciples should have been imposed upon
in all these matters of fact; that though they might have been deceived in the
Miracles of Christ, yet they could not be imposed upon in his Resurrection;
that though they should have been imposed upon in his Resurrection, yet they
could not be deceived in his Ascension; and that though they should have been
deceived in his Ascension, yet they could not be so too in the miraculous Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, which are matters of fact that they knew by inward sense,
and continual Experience.

I prove also the Principle of this Argument, viz. that the Disciples of Christ
sincerely believed all those matters of fact by the same Gradation. I say then,
that the Disciples could not impose upon Men as to the Miracles of Christ, not
only because they asserted them at the Expense of their own Quiet, of their
dearest Blood, and even of their Lives, but also because they mentioned the
Places, the Occasions, the Time when they were done, and generally all the
Circumstances absolutely necessary to discover the Truth, and render the Design
of imposing upon Mankind altogether impossible, and besides that, they
confirmed those Miracles by others full as great if not greater than they were,
which they pretended to do even in the sight of those to whom they preached the
Gospel, not only telling them, That which we have heard, which we have seen
with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the
word of life declare we unto you, 1 John 1. 1. (alluding thereby to Christ's
having delivered himself to be touched and handled by his Disciples after his
Resurrection) but also adding these Words in another place, Therefore he has
shed forth this which ye now see and hear: there being this further very
remarkable in those Expressions; namely, that they pretended that the Holy
Ghost descended not in great abundance upon them till after Christ's
Glorification. For they make this Truth one of the chief Articles of their
Gospel, the Holy Ghost, said they, was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified, John 7. 39. Thus it appears what it was they understood by
the Holy Ghost, not the Grace of God only which they had already received when
Christ was yet with them, not a few of the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
for they had partly received them when they were sent into the different Parts
of Judea to preach the Gospel and work Miracles in the Name of their Master,
but also that extraordinary and abundant Effusion of the miraculous Gifts which
they received on the day of Pentecost. For as they were then obliged to speak
to all sorts of Nations, so they received the gift of speaking diverse Tongues,
and were baptized and filled with that Spirit which they had received but in
part before. And this they called the receiving the effect of the Promise,
which every one of the Evangelists also termed, Baptising with the Holy Ghost
and with fire.

But though it were not possible for us to prove that the Disciples sincerely
believed Christ's Miracles, yet it must be granted, that they sincerely
believed his Resurrection; it being impossible that they should either
unanimously agree to testify the same, notwithstanding all the severe Trials
they were forced to undergo in a time they must otherwise have been so much
dejected, or that they could be able to maintain that Cheat with so much
Constancy as they did. And the same thing I also affirm of his glorious
Ascension.

Certainly, though the Sincerity of the Disciples might be justly suspected in
both these two last Events, yet it can never be called in question concerning
the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost: For, if Christ's Disciples were not
truly sincere, then they necessarily knew themselves to be Deceivers, and
consequently not able to work any Miracles, or speak all sorts of Languages:
And if so, they could not have boasted that they were able to do both, and make
this an Essential Article of their Gospel. Nay they could not so much as have
any Thoughts of attempting it. And were they (as some pretend) persuaded that
they could perform no Miracles, nor speak any Language but their own; it is
impossible that they should yet declare that God had sent them to work
Miracles, and preach to all Nations in the World in their respective Tongues.
It Is yet still more impossible they should promise to enable their Proselytes
to perform the same Miracles, and speak all sorts of Languages, so that they
themselves and those to whom they spoke, should equally be sensible of it at
the same time: For, if the Disciples knew by Experience they could speak no
Language but their own, they would easily know by the same Experience that
their Proselytes would soon perceive how falsely they had promised them the Gift
of several Languages.

And though one single Disciple of Christ should have been so foolish and stupid
as not to perceive it, yet it cannot be that all of them together should be
besotted with the same kind of stupidity.

Should we suppose that all the Disciples had undertaken to persuade their
Proselytes, that they had conferred upon them the Gift of Tongues, yet we cannot
suppose that those Proselytes would believe it against their continual
Experience to the contrary: For, if the Disciples knew by Experience, they
could speak no Language but their own, by the same Experience their Proselytes
would have known that they had not received the Gift of Tongues. And though one
single Person might have fancied he had received it (which is yet impossible in
it self) yet a whole Multitude could never be persuaded of it; and it is still
much more impossible that this pretended Illusion should have grown so
universal and durable, that St. Paul not only supposed but found it settled in
the World, and undertook to reform the Disorders which arose in several
particular Churches concerning the Use of the miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Spirit. And though Christ's Disciples might have promised out of a particular
Design of their own, to impart these miraculous Gifts, which they were sensible
they had not, and make other Men speak such Languages, as they neither
understood, nor spoke themselves; and though a Multidude of Proselytes and
Disciples might have persuaded themselves against their own Experience and
inward Sense, that they understood those things which they understood not, or
spoke those Languages which they really spoke no more than they did before
their calling; yet it is still impossible that those miraculous Gifts,
supposing them to exist only in the imaginary conceit of the one and of the
other, should have such an effect as any way to move the sight of the
Spectators, or make the Jews glorify God in that they had seen his Spirit
descend upon the Gentiles. But granting all this possible, though this Illusion
should have taken place with respect to the Gift of speaking diverse Tongues,
yet men could not be deceived in the Gift of interpreting them, and much less
in all the other Gifts of the holy Spirit.

Add to this the consideration of the Patience of the Disciples, of their
Holiness of Life, their Charity, their Zeal, their unaffected way of expressing
themselves, their Self-denial, Sincerity and plain Ingenuity. Methinks all
these Characters put together, necessarily and evidently convince us, that the
Disciples were plain, honest, sincere Men, that had not in the least any Design
to impose upon us; so that this Truth needs no further Demonstration.

It may not however be amiss, to remove some few small Difficulties which may
seem to oppose what has been said concerning these miraculous matters of fact.

The first difficulty is to know how the Enemies of the Gospel could be able to
extinguish the Knowledge of so many extraordinary and miraculous matters of
fact, which seemed sufficient to convert all Mankind, or at least those
Countries where all those things came to pass.

I answer, first, those matters of fact were not in the least stifled or
concealed. They were so far from it, that they converted an infinite number
both of Jews and Gentiles, and that too in a very short time. Secondly, there
were several external Causes which very much contributed toward the weakening
the Impression they would otherwise have made upon Mankind. For first, the
Elders amongst the Jews endeavored as much as they could to persuade the
People, that all those Miracles were nothing but the product of some Magic
Power, or a kind of compact with the Devil.

Secondly, Those that were in Power were so much exasperated against the
Disciples of Christ, that whosoever resolved to embrace his Doctrine, must
immediately prepare himself to be cast into a Dungeon, or executed upon a
scaffold. Nay, to undergo if possible, any thing more sorrowful and fatal than
this. And because nothing makes a greater Impression upon Men than to see
Punishments inflicted on others, all Parents strictly charged their Children
not to hold any Conversation with the Christians, least they should see them
end their days in the midst of Torments. Nay they were very cautious and strict
themselves in avoiding their Society: which was the reason that keeping such an
extraordinary distance from the Christians, they shut their Eyes and stopped
their Ears that they might not hear their Words, nor see the Miracles which
they performed.

Thirdly, The Doctrine of the Apostles was so contrary to the Opinion the Jews
had been prepossessed with, that they could not but hate and avoid it. For the
Cross of Christ became a scandal to the Jews, and was treated as a folly by the
Greeks.

Lastly, The Christian Religion putting an end to the bondage of the Law, and
the Religion of the Heathens, a Jew then could not be converted to Christanity,
without utterly renouncing what he always esteemed inviolable; nor could a
Heathen believe in Jesus Christ, without looking upon that as profane, which he
thought before most sacred. Hence it is that the holy Scripture speaks to us of
the effects of the Gospel attended with the power of the Holy Ghost, as of the
Creation of new Heavens, and of a new Earth.

If we add to this, the extraordinary care the Jewish and Heathenish Priests,
and the Magistrates of both Nations took to smother the light of the Gospel;
and the Weaknesses and Passions of Men, who were unable to sustain so much as
the Idea of the torments that were invented, on purpose to hinder the progress
of Christanity: I say if we consider this, we shall have no Reason to be any
longer astonished at that which at first view so much surprised us.

But secondly, it may be asked why the Historians among the Heathens never
mentioned any thing of those mighty Wonders of the Gospel, which yet deserved
to have the most considerable place amongst the many other Events they have so
carefully related.

We answer, That this Consideration proves nothing against the truth of those
Matters of fact we have so firmly established. First, because it is needless
and extravagant to draw any further Consequences from a Principle which proves
more than enough already. It Is true, the Heathen Writers say little or nothing
concerning Jesus Christ, for they hardly knew his Name. Suetonius speaks of him
after this manner, Judaei tumultuati sunt Cresto impulsore. But what then? Does
it follow that because Suetonius hardly knew the Name of Christ, that there was
no such Person as Christ, or that he was not really called Christus? The
Heathen Authors you see relate not how several Christian Churches were in a
small time settled at Rome, at Corinth, at Ephesus, at Sardis, at Smirna, at
Philippi, at Thessalonica, etc. But must it follow from thence, that there was
no such thing? Certainly if any matters of fact were true, this was undoubtedly
true. I grant indeed, that the Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus
Christ were all matters of fact that might be doubted of, yet we may at least
affirm that the Establishment of those Christian Churches, composed of such Men
as believed all those things, was a thing not to be doubted of. This was a
matter of fact very important and remarkable. Yet it was not in the least
mentioned by the Historians of that Age, therefore the Objection goes too far,
it proves too much, and so consequently proves nothing.

Secondly, I say, that the Historians of those Times have so ignorantly treated
of the Jewish Affairs, that we need not wonder they appear so little instructed
in the Knowledge of what concerned the Christians, whom they supposed to have
been a Sect belonging to the Jews. For if it appears that the History those
Authors composed of them agrees not very well with the Gospel of the Apostles,
it is but comparing it with that of Josephus, and we may clearly see that it
agrees no better with one than with the other.

Lastly, the Heathen Authors considered the Christian Religion as a kind of
Magic, and a detestable Superstition, which aimed at the total Destruction of
Mankind. It is certain that some Men earnestly endeavored to make it pass for
such, among those who lived both in the Time of the Apostles, and long after
them; and it was very dangerous to give it any other Name. The World was
divided between the Friends and Enemies of Christanity: Those who were the
Friends of it, professed it, and delivered not only by word of Mouth, but in
Writing, what they knew concerning the Wonders of it. As for its Enemies, they
neither had the Boldness, Power, or Will to write ofit as the former had done:
They would not do it, lest they should wrong their own Cause, and dishonor
their own Religion: And they could not do it, because they themselves were not
so well acquainted with the Miracles of Christanity, having always been afraid
to converse with the Christians, and esteemed the Belief of those Men a very
sorrowful and dangerous Persuasion; since by professing their Religion, they
were sure of getting nothing but Torments, and Death it self. Lastly, they
durst not presume to write things as they really were, though they had been never
so well acquainted with them; because their own Writings would accuse them of
having embraced Christianity, a Crime which was so severely punished in those
days, that it would unavoidably have brought upon them certain Death and Ruin,
or at least, after their Death, Shame and Infamy upon their Families.

But thirdly, it may be asked why the Apostles who had Power to heal the Sick,
and raise the Dead, did not raise all the Dead to Life again, nor heal all the
sick that were in Judea, because then all the World would have been forced in
spite of themselves to believe in Jesus Christ. We answer, That this Question
is much like what the Murderers of Jesus Christ said to him upon the Cross, He
saved others, let him save himself, let him come down from the Cross and we
will believe in him. Nay it is all one as if a Man should say, If there be a
God, why does he not show and manifest himself after a sensible manner, by
speaking to men immediately from the highest Heavens? and then they would all
be forced in spite of themselves to acknowledge him.

But God does not desire us to acknowledge him against our own Inclinations;
and consequently, he is not obliged to manifest himself as we in our
extravagant Desires would have him, but as it seems best to his infinite
Wisdom. Had Christ or his Apostles raised all the Dead they found to Life
again, we should then, contrary to the Design of the Almighty, have had no
other Faith but what depended entirely upon our Senses. It is enongh that they
healed almost an infinite number of Sick People, and raised not only one, but
several Dead Men to Life: So much indeed was absolutely necessary to confirm
the Truth of their Calling. Because they were not only to make Men believe in a
crucified Savior, and adore him as the Son of God, but also to oblige them,
for the Confirmation of their Faith, to undergo Martyrdom. More than this would
have been but superfluous, because they were not obliged to alter the Economy
of Faith, but only to perfect it, not to make Men believe against their own
Inclinations, but conformably to the Lights of their own Understanding.

But though I should grant all these Difficulties to be greater than they really
are; yet we ought to regulate our speculative Opinions by some Arguments drawn
from matters of fact, and not on the contrary, regulate the Arguments drawn
from matters of fact by any speculative Opinions. And this is such a general
Maxim, that it holds good in all respects.

Many Difficulties arose at first about the Belief of the Antipodes. Some
pretended that such an Opinion was contrary to Reason; others affirmed, it
could never be reconciled to the Principles of Religion: And both Parties
raised several notable Objections against it. But as soon as the thing was
evidently proved from undeniable matter of fact, all their Objections and
Difficulties were turned into Ridicule.

Some Philosophers have pretended to prove by Arguments, that Motion is
impossible: But since we have daily Experience that there is such a thing as
Motion, we let these Philosophers talk on, and choose rather to believe our own
Senses.

And I dare affirm (without begging any Excuse for the Boldness of my
Assertion) that there never were, nor never will be any matters of fact,
against which we might not raise several plausible Objections and considerable
Difficulties that are merely speculative. Some are daily raised against the
Flux and Reflux of the Sea, against the Attraction of the Loadstone with Iron,
the Source or Head of the River Nile, against Comets and Meteors, nay even
against the peopling of the World, and the Propagation of Mankind. We readily
grant the Incredulous, that several considerable Difficulties may be raised
against the Mysteries of Religion, as we see there are no less considerable
ones daily raised even against the Mysteries and secret Operations of Nature.
But I still affirm, that we must renounce the Evidence of Sense, if we prefer
any Difficulties of mere Speculation before those Arguments which are taken
from undeniable matters of fact.

Though we should argue only upon the Nature of Things, and the Principles of
Natural Religion, it would appear, if we compare the Obscurities which cause
those Difficulties, with the Evidences which clear them, that the latter would
gain more upon our Belief than the former; and this Truth we think we have
sufficiently proved in our first Part of this Work. But though we should meet
with nothing else but Difficulties in those natural Principles, without any
Lights at all to clear them, yet ought we to banish all Scruples and Doubts
that arise merely from Speculation, the better to embrace the Opinion which
proceeds from the Arguments drawn from undeniable matters of fact, unless we
have a mind to be guilty of an Absurdity not to be met with; which is wholly
contrary to common sense and Reason.

But having thus evinced the Truth of the Essentials of our Religion, namely,
those matters of fact contained in the Writings of the Apostles; it remains
only, that we make Men further sensible of them, by laying down a few short
Remarks which we shall make on several places of the New Testament, whose whole
Purport shall be either to persuade us that the Apostles did really teach all
these matters of fact, or assure us that they sincerely believed the things
which they declared, or else to make it appear, that they could not have been
imposed upon in those matters of fact. For from those three principles is
formed the Demonstration of the Truth of the Christian Religion.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE Gospel according to S. Matthew.
CHapt. II. 1.
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, behold there came Wisemen, etc.
Those Wisemen were of all Nations the first that came to pay their Homage to
Jesus Christ. The Priests and Elders amongst the Jews being consulted
concerning the Birth of the Messiah, freely owned he was to be born in
Bethlehem, and were quite of another Opinion than the Modern Jews, who pervert
the Meaning of the Prophecy of Micah Chap. 5. As to what concerns us we affirm
that the History of the coming of the Wisemen could not be falsely invented.
I. Because it agrees admirably with the Prophecy of Balaam, Numb. 24. 17. where
he Cries out, I shall s^e him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh:
There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. A
Star of the Wisemen, indeed, and a Scepter of Jesus Christ. II. The Evangelist
could not have made the whole City of Jerusalem believe, that they were
troubled and astonished at the Coming of those Wisemen: and much less persuaded
the Inhabitants against their own public Knowledge, that Herod had so
barbaroufly shed so much Innocent Blood. III. Herod must necessarily have been
told that the Christ or Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem, because thither he
sent directly the Ministers of his execrable fury. IV. And lastly, Joseph fled
into Egypt, and was afraid to return again into Judea, when he heard that
Archelaus Reigned in the room of his Father Herod: A Circumstance that
wonderfully agrees with all the rest.

Chapt. III. 1.
In those days came John the Baptist. In this Chapter John foretells the
Destruction of the Jews in these Words, O generation of Vipers, who has warned
you to fly from the wrath to come? and now also the ax is laid to the root of
the Tree: therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down, and cast into the fire, etc. He foretells also the Effusion of the Gifts
of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, in these words, I indeed baptize you with
water unto repentance: but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, etc. He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Lastly, John saw the Holy
Ghost Descending upon Jesus under such a form as truly denoted the gentleness
and mildness his Life was to be attended with, and he heard that voice from
Heaven, this is my beloved Son, etc.

These three matters of fact have a necessary connection with the Principles of
our Religion, if they be true, as they will evidently appear to be to all who
shall seriously consider and reflect upon them. 'Twould be to no purpose to
suspect the Evangelist of having forged that prediction of the Destruction of
Jerusalem, which he makes Jesus Christ himself utter, because that Gospel was
compiled long before that Event.

It would be as little to the purpose to pretend, that that other prediction of
the Baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, was falslly inserted into the
History of John the Baptist. For what likelihood is there that the Disciples
should have made John the Baptist utter such a prediction, had they seen
nothing like it? And if they were truly baptized with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire, why should any body refuse to believe that St. John the Baptist foretold
it?

Chapt. IV. 1.
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, etc. Had the
Evangelists proposed any other Method to themselves in all their Writings, but
to speak the plain truth, they would never have represented Christ to us as
being delivered into the power of the Devil to be tempted of him, who set him
one while upon the Pinacles of the Temple, and another while upon an exceeding
high Mountain. In all this Relation we have certainly a most undeniable mark of
their Truth and Sincerity.

Verse. 19.
And he says unto them, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. Who is
this that without Riches, Arms, and Authority, nay without any assistance from
Men, pretends to convert ordinary Fishers into Fishers of Men? How came any
such Thoughts into his Mind? What a strange Design is this? What a rash
undertaking! Nay what confidence joined to so great a weakness! For Jesus
Christ to fortel and execute that project, he must not only have been absolute
Master of his Disciples to convert them so wonderfully; but also of their minds
to enlighten them, of their Hearts to make them less sensible of all wordly
objects; He must have been an absolute Master of suturity to foretell it, of
time present, to Dispose of it, of those Men's Inclinations whom he was thus to
change, of their resistance, and continual struglings and oppositions against
him, nay he must have been absolute Master of all the Enemies of his Name; in a
word, of all Events and Junctures whatsoever.

Verse. 24.
And his fame went throughout all Syria. It Is certain that the Evangelists
could never have made the World believe that Jesus Christ was become famous for
his Miracles, had he really neither wrought, nor pretended to work any
Miracles. Besides, herein was Jesus Christ distinguished from John the Baptist,
that the former wrought many notable Wonders and Signs, but the latter was
famous only for the innocence of his Life, and purity of his Manners. And if
Jesus Christ passed for a person who really did several Miracles, it remains
only for us to know, whether those Miracles be true or false, and that solely
depends upon the examination of the Witnesses that saw them, the nature of the
matters of fact themselves, and the Enemies that so firmly opposed them, etc.

Chap. V. 1.
And seeing the multitude, he went up into a mountain, etc. And he opened his
mouth and taught them, etc. I shall not say any thing concerning that excellent
Sermon which Jesus Christ preached on the Mount. We need only read it over to
be satisfied that it is an abstract of the most Sound, Pure, and Spiritual, the
most impartial, sublime, and surprising Doctrine that ever was thought of. Read
it therefore I say, and you will as much be surprised at his Doctrine, as the
Multitudes that heard it.

Chap. VIII. 1.
When he was come down from the mountain, etc. In this Chapter we read of the
cleansing of Lepers, of healing sick Persons that were absent and far off by
the efficacy of his word, of his calming the Storms and Tempests of the Sea, of
his casting Devils out of those that were possessed, of the consternation the
Gadarenes were in at the loss of their Herd of Swine, and their surprise to see
those healed that were possessed with Devils: all which are such matters of
fact as the Evangelists could not have been persuaded of by a mere Illusion,
nor the Disciples make others believe against their own public Knowledge.

Verse. 11.
And I say unto you many shall come from the East and West, etc. Who was it
that had thus enlightened the Mind of Jesus Christ, as to make him so clearly
foretell the calling of the Gentiles?

Verse. 22.
But Jesus said unto him follow me, and let the dead bury their dead. This was
certainly the expression of a Man that had so deeply reflected upon the vanity
of the World, and was truly persuaded of the Misery and Corruption of Mankind.
For did ever any Man but him speak after this manner?

Verse. 34.
And behold the whole City came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him they
besought him that he would depart out of their Coasts. Here were a sufficient
number of Witnesses who might have easily convinced the Evangelists, had that
matter of fact been false.

Chap. IX. 1.
And he entered into a Ship, etc. In this Chapter Jesus Christ calls Matthew
from the receipt of custom, heals a Woman that was diseased with an Issue of
Blood twelve Years, restores sight to two blind Men, raises a young Girl to
Life again, and heals one that was possessed with a Devil. Now Matthew who
compiled the History of all these matters of fact, and whom no interest
whatsoever could have obliged to follow Jesus Christ to the prejudice of his
own repose, could not but know certainly what force or secret Power had
compelled him to follow Christ. And Jairus knew very well whether or no his
Daughter had been raised to Li^e again, his Friends and Relations had been
informed of it, the Neighbors and Minstrels who were already come to solemnize
her funerals, could not be ignorant of it. In a word, the Blind, the Lame, and
the Sick of that Town, could not but tell whether they really experienced that
healing virtue which proceeded from his very garments. But who can suppose that
so many Persons should have known the certain Truth of that matter of fact, and
yet that the Disciples themselves should not have known it? And supposing they
knew it, how is it possible they could have so unanimously agreed to impose
upon all the World at the expense of their lives, and against their own
temporal interest?

Verse. 5.
For whether is it easier to say, thy Sins are forgiven thee; or to say arise
and walk? There is no suspecting a Man's proceedings that proves by several
sensible and healing Miracles the Authority he assumes and ascribes to himself.

Verse. 13.
But go and learn what that means; I will have mercy and not sacrifice. A
Spiritual worship is the only worship that God delights in. The ceremonies of
Moses's Law were only agreeable to him as they were founded upon the Obedience
that is due to God. This Obedience derives its whole perfection from a willing
compliance out of love and Charity. For a forced and constrained obedience can
never be acceptable to God. That which is most excellent in Charity, is Mercy,
which consists in forgiving injuries, and doing good to others without
expecting any return from them. For a man may do good to another through a
principle of vain Glory. But the works of mercy proceed from another motive,
and are a product of a noble disinteressed nature. Mercy then is the only thing
that is acceptable to God in Religion: and both Scripture and Reason tell us
so. But the World was so ignorant of this truth, when Jesus Christ first took
it for a fundamental maxim of his Religion, that nothing could be more
surprising to Men than his expressing himself after this manner.

Verse. 13.
For I am not come to call the righteous but Sinners to repentance. An
expression that thunders out against Hypocrisy, roots out of our Hearts that
false Pride and vain Confidence we have of our selves, humbles mankind,
glorifies the mercy of God, and makes us sensible of the use and necessity of
repentance, and in a more especial manner evidently shows the self-denial of
our Lord.

Chap. X. 1.
And when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples he gave them Power, etc.
The Evangelist was not afraid of being contradicted by the twelve Disciples of
our Lord, whose names he sets down, when he said, that Jesus Christ had given
them power to heal all sorts of Diseases among the People.

Verse. 5.
These Twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, go not into the
Cities of the Gentiles, etc. but go rather to the lost sheep of the House of
Israel. These words remove all suspicions which our incredulous Adversaries may
entertain, that the Author of this Gospel was willing to favor the Gentiles in
prejudice to the Jews.

Verse. 7.
And as ye go preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Was Jesus
Christ in a fit condition to make himself known for that Monarch who was to
come, unless he had first been endowed with an infinite Power?

Verse. 8.
Heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils: freely ye
have received, freely give. Is it possible that Jesus Christ could have made
his Disciples believe they had freely received that which they had not in the
least received? How bold then must that command have been to work so many
Miracles?

Verse. 9.
Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass, in your purses: nor scrip for
your journey, etc. Christ wa^ not content to choose poor Men for his Disciples
he s^rther obliged them to become poorer than they were. He forbid them to
provide themselves any thing, designing to nourish them wonderfully by his
Providence. He resolved so to dispose the Hearts of those that should believe
in their words that they should feed and cloth them. This indeed was spoke
like the Master and God of Nature.

Verse. 22.
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake. Christ flattered not his
Disciples, but foretold them from the very beginning of their ministry, all the
evils that were to befall them. Now what can be suspected in all this?

Verse. 23.
But when they persecute you in this City flee into another: for verily I say
unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel, till the Son of Man
be come. This Text is somewhat difficult, because it does not plainly appear
that the Prophecy it contains was exactly fulfilled. But this very Difficulty
serves to confirm our Faith. For why should the Evangelist write this, he who
lived to see the success of that matter? He knew well enough that in his time
the Gospel had been preached not only in all the Cities of Israel, but almost
in every Country in the World, though Jesus Christ had not yet come in all his
Glory. Doubtless it was because he intended to relate things as they really
were in themselves, and ascribed no more to his Divine Master but just the very
words he uttered. And although Holy Writers by the coming of Jesus Christ
commonly understand his last coming in his Glory, yet that same expression does
also sometimes signify the Judgments which God executed upon the Jews, when he
sent the Romans to destroy their City: which explanation plainly solves the
whole Difficulty.

Verse. 34.
Think not that I am come to send Peace on earth: I came not to send Peace but
a Sword. A Terrible declaration indeed for those Men who, according to the
vulgar error of the Jews, imagined that the Messiah should have raised them up
to the height of Happiness and temporal prosperity! But who is he that was bold
enough to foretell that his Gospel should disturb the Peace of the Universe? How
comes it he did not rather foresee that that Gospel would unavoidably be
involved in the darkness of Silence and Oblivion, having such weak Defenders to
maintain, and such formidable Adversaries to oppose it? Does it seem natural
that a Man who dwelt on the Borders of the Lake of Gennesareth, should have
pretended to make other Men rise up one against another by the bare efficacy of
his word, without any Arms, Riches, or Authority, being only got at the head of
ten or twelve miserable Wretches, who knew nothing beyond the mending their
nets?

Verse. 28.
And he that takes not his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me.
Did ever Man get himself any followers by such declarations as these?

Chap. XI. 4, 5.
Jesus answered and said unto them, go, and show John those things which ye do
hear and see: The Blind receive their fight, and the Lame walk, the Lepers are
cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, and the poor have the
Gospel preached to them. Jesus Christ convinced not his Disciples by mere
speculations, but by evident Objects of Sense.

Verse. 12.
And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Did ever Man in so mean
and miserable a Condition as he was in, speak thus? Whence had he this
Confidence? And what sort of Language is this?

Verse. 21.
Woe unto the Chorazin, etc. What probability is there that Christ should thus
reproach the Jews who dwelt in all those Countries, unless he had really wrought
several Miracles amongst them?

Verse. 28.
Come unto me all ye that Labor, etc. There have been many Societies formed in
the world since the beginning of it; but there never was one like this; nor was
it ever seen that a Man should assemble a Company of Sinners, that were full of
Repentance, and charged with heavy remorse and inward sorrow for their Crimes.

Chap. XII. 13.
Then says he to the Man stretch forth thy hand; and he stretched it forth;
etc. How is it possible that Christ could impose upon the Spectators in so
sensible a matter of fact as this? Or how could the Evangelist select only such
matters, on purpose to make others believe them, against the certain knowledge
they must have had to the contrary?

Verse. 15.
And great multidudes followed him, and he healed them all. Here were a great
number of Witnesses indeed!

Verse. 24.
But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, this Fellow does not cast out
Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. This accusation is an Homage
those false Teachers were compelled to pay Christ. For when they said that he
wrought Miracles by the Power of Beelzebub, they thereby acknowledged that he
performed several.

Verse. 50.
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is
my Brother, and Sister and Mother. The ordinary sort of Men have no other rule
or standard of their affections but selflove. They seek themselves (if I may so
speak) in different Objects, and love nothing else in their neighbors, but
that proximity which unites them together. They have generally more or less
affection for their fellow creatures, according as they are more or less nearly
related to them; because selflove is the origin and measure of all their other
Passions. But this Man Christ Jesus, through an astonishing prodigy, entirely
loves, or utterly hates external Objects, not as they have any reference to
himself, but as they refer to God. The love of God is the rule of his
Affections. He seeks God in all Objects, not himself or his own satisfaction.
He loves other Men not according as they are related to him by the proximity of
nature, but as they are related to God through an effect of his Grace. What a
nobleness of thought, what elevation and loftiness of mind is here contained in
this one single sentence?

Chap. XIII. 16.
But blessed are your Eyes, etc. When a Man speaks after that manner, his mind
must be very fully and thoroughly persuaded of what he says. And none but a
Heart that leaps for joy at the Reflection upon some extraordinary satisfaction,
is able to express itself thus.

Verse. 31, 32.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a grain of Mustard seed, which a Man took
and sowed in his Field. Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is
grown it is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree; so that the Birds of
the Air come and lodge upon the branches thereof. The progress of Christianity
which had such weak and imperfect beginnings, is wonderful, and the prediction
of it is no less strange and surprising.

Chapt. XIV. 21.
And they that had eaten were about five thousand Men, etc. Here were five
thousand Witnesses.

Verse. 36.
And as many as touched him were made perfectly whole. 'Twas an easy matter to
confute the Gospel, and to convince those of Deceit who declared such things,
had not the Enemies of it been afraid to make the least enquiry into it, least
they should immediately discover the Veracity of it.

Chapt. XV. 30, 31.
And great multidudes came unto him, having with them those that were Lame,
Blind, Dumb, Maimed, and many others; and he healed them. Insomuch that the
multidudes wondered when they saw the Dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the
Lame to walk, and the Blind to see, and they glorified the God of Israel: Is it
likely that St. Matthew could have deceived himself, and yet have been an
Eyewitness to all these things? Or that he left the receipt of Custom, and
embraced poverty and misery; on purpose to make us believe a parcel of Stories?
Durst he tell us such things, the falsity of which he would soon have been
convinced of by almost an infinite number of People? And was he not afraid lest
some Persons should have enquired about them in those very places where he
affirmed those things had come to pass. Nay rather, was he not ashamed to write
such things in a time when every body must necessarily have had them fresh in
their memory, had they really came to pass? How could he persuade his Brethren,
who must have been Witnesses to all those Events? Can we think they would join
with him to maintain such an Imposture? Or can we imagine that without a mutual
contrivance they could have agreed together to relate it, and invent the most
impudent Lie that ever was, on purpose to oblige Men to become Faithful, Holy,
and Just. Credat Judaeus Apella.

Chap. XVI. 18.
And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. All the Powers of the
World opposed the growth of the Christian Church; every passion of Man's Heart
made War against her, every Age caused her to undergo new trials. All kinds of
Punishments have exercised the Patience of her Children, and all the charms in
the World have been offered to seduce her; But yet in spite of all those
Powers, that Church made up of Persons that renounced the World was preserved,
and oftentimes increased by the frequent persecutions and oppositions it met
with. Neither could it be otherwise, since Christ himself had so foretold it.

Verse. 23.
But he turned and said to Peter, get thee behind me Satan: for thou savourest
not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men. How comes it that St.
Matthew having represented Peter making an admirable Confession to his Master,
and receiving such an advantageous Character from him, should represent him
immediately after as severely checked in these terrible words? Can this
incoherence be thought natural in those Persons who write nothing but of their
own Invention? And what can be the Mystery of so severe a reproof from Christ?

Verse. 28.
Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here which shall not taste of
Death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom. We leave it to the
Interpreters to solve all the Difficulties of this text, and to determine
whether the coming of Christ may not be taken for the Judgments he executed, on
the City of Jerusalem; At present we shall only draw this Consequence from it,
viz. That this Gospel was Written whilst all the Disciples were alive. For how
can it be supposed these words could be Written after the Decease of the
Disciples, and yet not be in the least explained?

Chapt. XVII. 2.
And was transfigured before them. There was never a more Singular Event in all
its Circumstances than this, nor one more difficult, nor less obvious to enter
into the imagination of Man.

Verse. 4.
Then answered Peter and said to Jesus, Lord it is good for us to be here, if
thou will let us make here three Tabernacles. What a strange piece of stupidity
was this? and how well does it appear how incapable such gross and ignorant Men
were of entertaining the least Design of imposing upon others! Besides, what
makes St. Matthew relate this Circumstance? What Honor could accrue thereby to
Peter? and how could it of itself enter into his mind?

Verse. 16.
And I brought him to thy Disciples and they could not cure him. In this
passage appears the Evangelists sincerity. For nothing else could have obliged
him to relate that Circumstance, or make him so freely own the defects and want
of Faith in a Society he himself was a Member of.

Chap. XVIII. 3.
Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little Children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That Children should be so
simple, no Man ought to wonder, because their want of knowledge is a pure
effect of their Age: but that even Men should be obliged to return from the
most refined Notions of worldly policy, from that sinful cunning and dexterity
so often seen in them, to a State of a Holy and Amiable Sincerity. That they
should at once become simple and prudent, righteous, and religiously wise, is
such a thing that Men are wholly unacquainted with, and which discovers to us
both the greatness and highest perfection of that Person, who taught Men a
Doctrine so sublime and elevated.

Verse. 4.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little Child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. How different are these Notions from the
common ones of Men! How different is the Kingdom of Heaven from all worldly
Empire! And how well does it appear that such surprising maxims as these; could
not possibly proceed from the mind of Man!

Verse. 9.
And if thy Eye offend thee pluck it out, etc. By the Eyes here are to be
understood our darling Sins, or whatever else is dear to us. So that Christ
hereby teaches us that we ought to sacrifice to the glory of God whatever we
dearly prize, and value most. Did ever any teacher less flatter men's vanity?

Verse. 22.
I say not unto thee, until seven times, but until seventy times seven. This is
a certain number made use of for an uncertain one, which signifies that we must
continually forgive, that Mercy has no bounds, and that Charity cannot be
limited. Who does not see that such a concern to unite all Hearts together, to
banish all misunderstanding amongst Men in giving so vast a latitude to Charity
and Mercy, can proceed from none but him, that was Master of all Hearts, and
the common Father of Mankind?

Chap. XXI. 43.
Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof. This is indeed a very
express prediction of the Calling of the Gentiles.

Verse. 46.
But when they thought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude; because
they held him for a Prophet. What could be so remarkable in Jesus Christ that
he should be taken for a Prophet, but the efficacy of his Doctrine, and the
Miracles whereby he confirmed it?

Chap. XXIII. 36, 37.
Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this Generation. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest, etc. Here the Destruction of Jerusalem
is very plainly set down.

Chap. XXIV. 28.
For wheresoever the Carcass is; there will the Eagles be gathered together.
The Body of Christ crucified was the Carcass, and the Roman Standards where the
Eagles which were to fall upon the City of Jerusalem where the Carcass was.

Verse. 34.
Verily I say unto you, this Generation shall pass till all these things be
fulfilled. The same Reflections must be made in this place as we have made above.

Chap. XXVI. 13.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole
World, there shall also this that this Woman has done be told for a memorial
of her. A Prophecy that has been sufficiently fulfiled.

Verse. 28.
For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of Sins. Did ever any Man act, or speak after so unheard of and
surprising a manner? Can we find a Man who not only foretells his sufferings,
but also establishes beforehand some memorial of a Death he might easily have
avoided? And who but Christ ever took upon him to shed his Blood for the
Remission of the Sins of Mankind?

Verse. 38, 39.
Then says he unto them, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, etc.
And he went a little further, and fell on his Face, and prayed saying, O my
Father if it be possible let this Cup pass away from me. It Is easy to explain
what this exceeding Sorrow and Agony was, yet it must be confessed that it
presents us at first view with an Object very surprising, and that it cannot be
imagined that those Men whose chief Design was to invent such things as should
be most for their Masters Honor, should yet give us such a Description of his
Sufferings. At least we find here the sincerity of the Disciples, which
sincerity shows us that we ought without scruple to receive the rest of their
Relations.

Chap. XXVII. 42.
He saved others, himself he cannot save; if he be the King of Israel, let him
now come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. By this Text it appears
that Christ passed for a Person that had performed several Miracles.

Verse. 45.
Now from the sixth Hour, there was darkness over all the Land unto the ninth
Hour. How is it possible they could have made a whole City believe such a thing
were it not true?

Verse. 51, 52, 53.
And behold the vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were
opened, etc. How could St. Matthew have persuaded Men to such things as these
against their own knowledge to the contrary? Could the Vail of the Temple, or
the Rocks be rent, could the Earth quake, and the Graves open, and yet the Jews
know nothing of it? To whom did the Evangelist relate all these things? He
wrote them before the Destruction of Jerusalem, nay in the days of the Apostles
themselves, and consequently in a time when there were several thousands of
People still living that could witness the Truth of them. How then could he so
much as imagine he could deceive so many Witnesses concerned in the business to
whom he preached these things, and whom he designed to bring over to his Party;
nay some of whom had already embraced the Gospel, and formed a very numerous
and considerable Church at Jerusalem, where all these things had happened, and
where he attempted to persuade others to the belief of them?

CHAP. VII. Wherein we shall further produce out of the other Gospels, several
Places very proper to make us truly sensible of the Divinity of the Christian
Religion.
St. MARK.
CHapt. I. 14.
Now after that John was put in Prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom of God, etc. All these Expressions the Gospel, or good
Tidings, the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, etc. are very strange and
extraordinary. And because our Ears are somewhat used to them, we do not
reflect on them so much as we ought. Certainly it must be a strange kind of
mutual agreement that several Fishermen made together, to go preaching about
the World, and call the Subject of their preaching by the name of Gospel.

Chap. IV. 19.
And the Cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of
other things entering in, choke the word, etc. It Is not usual for other Men thus
to declare open War against their Passions; or if they do, they fail not
presently to discover themselves, and lay open their own Hypocrisy to the World.

Verse. 41.
And they said one to another, what manner of Man is this, that even the Winds
and Sea obey him, etc. We too may as well say, what manner of Man is this, that
not only the Sea, and Winds, but Diseases, Graves, Death, Hell, Earth, Men, and
Devils, all obey him? For it is observable, there was nothing within the bounds
of Nature but what was sensible of his Miracles.

Chap. VI. 2, 3.
From whence has this Man these things? And what wisdom is this which is given
unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? Is not this the
Carpenter, the son of Mary, etc. Whence rather proceeds this astonishment of
theirs, and what is the reason of this sort of reproach, had not Christ wrought
several Miracles amongst them?

Verse. 4, 5, 6.
But Jesus said, unto them, a prophet is not without honor but in his own
Country, etc. And he could not do many mighty works there, save that he laid
his hand upon a few sick folk, and he healed them. And he marvelled because of
their unbelief. Every thing in this passage carries with it an Air of Truth
without the least semblance of Falsity. For he that would invent a story, and
desire other Men should believe it, would never make choice of such
Circumstances as these.

Verse. 56.
And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or Cities, or Countries, they laid
the Sick in the Streets, and besought that they might touch, if it were but the
border of his Garment, and as many as touched him were made whole. It is
impossible for any Man to impose upon other People in such matters of fact as
these.

Chap. VIII. 27, 28.
And by the way he asked his Disciples, saying unto them, Whom do Men say that
I am? And they answered, some say John the Baptist; but some say Elias; and
others one of the Prophets. Here we may observe what a great Impression Christ
's Miracles had already made upon other Men's minds.

Chap. XIV. 33.
And He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy. To own that Jesus Christ
was reduced to this State, nay him whom they would have Men look upon as the
Son of God, is the effect of a strange and surprising sincerity.

Verse. 62.
And Jesus said, I am: And ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right
hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Did ever any Criminal
brought before a Tribunal of Justice speak thus?

Chap. XVI. 17, 18, 20.
And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name they shall cast out
Devils, they shall speak with strange Tongues; they shall take up Serpents, and
if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the Sick, and they shall recover, etc. And they went forth and preached every
where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with Signs, etc.
Either all these matters of fact must have been necessarily true, or St. Mark
must have been strangely besides himself, when he related them. Let us
consider. What is it that he relates? Or whom did he design to impose upon? nay
what time did he choose to effect it? How could he possibly persuade the
Disciples that they had done such Miracles, as they were never able to do? And
how should they persuade themselves, that Christ had given them that power to
do Miracles, which they never received?

St. LUKE. Chap. I. 64.
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his Tongue loosed, and he spoke, and
praised God: And fear came on all that dwelt round about them, and all these
sayings were noised abroad throughout all the Hill Country of Judea. No man is
so mad, as to pretend to impose upon Men's belief in matters of fact so public
as these; he would rather make choice of passages scarce heard of, or at least
but obscurely known.

Chap. II. 16.
And found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe lying in a Manger. Great was the
exactness of these Writers in giving us a simple Relation of things as they
really were. What can seem more contrary and irreconcilable one with another
than all these Circumstances? A Child sleeping in a Manger, but a Child whose
Nativity was declared, even by Angels, and celebrated by all the Host of
Heaven; a Child that was banished the Society of Men, but elevated in dignity
even above the blessed Spirits; a Child that was inconsiderable and of no
esteem on Earth, but great in Heaven, and adored by Angels; that was indeed a
while after his Birth worshipped by some Wisemen, that brought him Presents,
but soon ^orced to fly into Egypt for the safety of his Life. Certainly there
appears nothing like a Fiction in all these Circumstances.

Chap. V. 19.
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in, because of
the multitude, they went upon the Housetop and let him down through the tiling
with his Couch into the midst before Jesus. Do such things as these enter
easily of themselves into a Man's mind, who writes nothing but of his own
invention.?

Chap. VII. 38.
And she stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with
Tears, and did wipe them with the Hairs of her Head, and kissed his feet, and
anointed them with the Ointment; 'Twas easy to know the Redeemer of the World
by that saving alteration he was seen to make in those that followed him.

Chap. IX. 45.
But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they
perceived it not. Great indeed was the Evangelists sincerity; who stuck not to
own the ignorance and stupidity of the Disciples!

Chap. X. 19. 20.
Behold I give unto you Power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all
the Power of the Enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you: but
rather rejoice because your Names are written in Heaven. A certain Character of
true Religion indeed, which sets a greater value upon Spiritual benefits than
any miraculous Gifts, although the latter are more transcendent in the Eyes of Men
than the former!

Verse. 41, 42.
And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and
troubled about many things: but one thing is needful. And Mary has chosen that
good part, which shall not be taken away from her. Did ever a deceiver, or a
Man whose mind was set upon this World, express himself after this manner?

Chap. XI. 27, 28.
And it came to pass, a certain Woman of the company lift up her voice, and
said unto him, blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have
sucked: But he said, yea rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God and
keep it. It was impossible for any one to flatter Christ. For he having no
regard to himself, nor taking any pleasure in the satisfaction of other Men's
inordinate desires, had his whole Heart fixed upon God; his Eyes, his Ears were
bent wholly upon his service, and his sole Felicity consisted in seeing his
Father feared and adored. Nothing could be pleasant, nothing acceptable to him
but true Piety. And that because God was the Center of all his Actions, and the
love of him was as it were the Spring that gave motion to all his desires and
affections. So great was his Behavior and so sublime his Thoughts.

Verse. 40, 41.
Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without, make that which is
within also? But rather give alms of such things as ye have; and behold, all
things are clean unto you. The Pharisees contended only for outward and
corporeal Purity: but Christ for that which is Spiritual and Internal: Which
think ye of the two knew best the Genius of true Religion?

Chap. XII.
But he said unto him, man who made me a judge, or a divider over you? Christ
utterly renounced all the cares and business of this World, and would scarce
hear them mentioned. So strangely had he weaned his Thoughts from the World.

Verse. 30, 31.
For all these things do the Nations of the World seek after: and your Father
knows that ye have need of these things. But rather seek the Kingdom of God,
and all these things shall be added unto you. Christ designed to form a Society
that should wholly consist of such Persons as were utterly to renounce the
World, and not busy their Thoughts about temporal concerns, such as were to
lose all their possessions, and suffer all kinds of Punishments to be numbered
among his Followers. Did ever yet such a great and extraordinary design enter
into any Man's Mind?

Chap. XIV. 33.
So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple. A strange and terrible Declaration indeed, which does
not at all become a flattering Impostor!

Chap. XXIV. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53
And ye are witnesses of these things. And behold I send the promise of my
Father: but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power
from on high. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his
hands and blessed them. And it came to pass while he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and carried up into Heaven. And they worshipped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great Joy: And were continually in the Temple
praising and blessing God. In these words we find four several things worthy of
our Reflection, 1. The Promise of the Holy Ghost, 2. The Ascension of Christ, 3.
The Joy of the Apostles. And 4. Their continual assiduity in praising God. How
could St. Luke have made his Brethren believe, that Chrict had promised them
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that he ascended into Heaven in their sight, that
the Disciples were exceeding joyful, and continued daily in the Temple,
praising and blessing God? And if he could persuade none of them to believe it,
what could be his design in writing it? How comes it to pass that they all
suffered Martyrdom in defense of such an incredible Fiction?

St. JOHN. Chap. I. 8, 9.
He was not that light, but was sent to ^ear witness of that light. That was
the true light, which ^ightneth every man that comes into the World. John was
originally but a Fisherman; who then could have infused these sublime Notions
into his Mind?

Verse. 14.
(And we beheld his glory, the glory as of the ^nly begotten of the Father)
full of Grace and Truth. There plainly appears in this discourse the steadfast
persuasion of a Man who had seen with his eyes what he testified, and the
fullness of an Understanding that was truly convinced of what he asserted; nay
the persuasion of an Author that thought no expression could be strong enough
to utter what he thought, and who united together several Ideas different from
one another; because a single Idea could not perfectly represent what he would
say. The word Glory was not sufficient of it self, and therefore he further
added a Glory full of Grace and Truth.

Chap. III. 7.
Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born again What could be more
extraordinary than this discourse? And how strangely persuaded was he that
spoke it, that we must be entirely changed before we can enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven?

Verse. 13.
And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even
the Son of Man which is in Heaven. Certainly this Man spoke not like other Men;
whatever he says here seems either to be very extravagantly blasphemous, or
something above the sublimest Thoughts of Men. If then the purity of his
Manners, his Holiness of Life, his short, clear, expressive Precepts that seem
to savor of nothing but Piety and true Holiness, together with the surprising
and wonderful effects of the Gospel, force us to look upon the former part of
the expression as Blasphemous, we cannot at the same time but believe the latter
to be so too.

Verse. 31.
He that is of the Earth, is earthly, and speaks of the Earth: he that comes
from Heaven, is above all. Tho John the Baptist had not said this, we might
have known Christ by his own words to have been the Lord of Life come down from
Heaven.

Chap. IV.
But whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give, shall never thirst; but
the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of Water springing up
into everlasting Life. These expressions are something more than humane. Had
Christ thought like other Men, he would certainly have expressed himself so too.
But he thought no otherwise upon earthly things than as they served to make us
understand those that were Spiritual. What ever he met with he made use of only
for that design. He seemed to live here upon Earth for no other purpose than to
guide us in the way to Heaven. To Fishermen he spoke of becoming Fishers of
Men. To those who valued themselves upon their Birth, he spoke of being born
again. When they spoke to him about eating, he answered that his meat was to do
the will of his Father. And when he sat on the side of the Well, he spoke of
his divine Grace as of a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. Who
is not filled with admiration when he considers these things?

Verse. 24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth. This was telling Men in short what they should have known, and what all
till then were wholly ignorant of. This was what is most conformable to a
reasonable nature, and the Principles of natural Revelation, what distinguished
true Religion from Superstition, what the wisest among the Heathens had not
been able to discover at a time when reasoning and speculation were at the
height, at least what they had but a very faint Knowledge of, what the Prophets
themselves had spoke of but obscurely, and what the Jews who in the days of our
Savior minded nothing in Religion but the External Corporeal part of it, were
wholly ignorant of. What manner of Man then was he, who alone had so much
Wisdom?

Chap. V. 25.
Verily Verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead
shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. He that
could raise the Dead to Life again might well speak after this manner: But such
Expressions would have been extravagant in any other but him.

Verse. 36.
But I have greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father
has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me. Those works must have been very extraordinary indeed,
since he preferred the witness they bore of him before that of John the
Baptist. For were it otherwise he would have exposed himself to the scorn of
those that heard him.

Verse. 44.
How can ye believe, which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor that comes from God only? He that designs to deceive others does not
express himself after this manner. Christ should rather have made use of the
vanity and weakness of Men, which is nicely to be touched and delicately to be
wrought upon in such cases.

Chap. VI. 14, 15.
Then those Men when they had seen the Miracle that Jesus did, said, this is of
a Truth that Prophet that should come into the World. When Jesus therefore
perceived that they would come and take him by force to make him a King, he
departed again into a mountain himself alone. 'Twas not out of any weakness or
fear that Christ refused to put himself at the Head of those that would have
made him King. He that foretold his sufferings, and established a memorial of
them, nay he who assembled together a Company of distressed Wretches, whom he
vouchsafed to lead about, would not surely have been afraid os the fortune of
War, since he might have been followed by an innumerable company of People, who
would have daily increased, being deluded by the common Opinion of those days,
that he was to be a great King. What then deterred him from it? Only his
Humility.

Verse. 35.
I am the Bread of Life: he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that
comes to me shall never thirst. Did ever any man use an expression like this?
How can a Man be the Bread of Life? And what can be the meaning of this
expression? Was going to Christ enough to satisfy hunger and thirst? No one but
an Enthusiast, or one that was really come down from Heaven to instruct
Mankind, could have expressed himself thus. But who is he that shall dare to
Blaspheme against the Wisdom of that Divine Person?

Verse. 63.
The Flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit
and they are Life. This Comment excellently justifies the Wisdom of that
wonderful Teacher, and clearly shows us what we should think of those seeming
Paradoxes he advanced in the foregoing Verses, so contrary to all our former
Ideas and Prejudices.

Chap. VII. 17.
If any Man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self. This is the best and surest Rule whereby we
may judge of Christ and his Gospel. And therefore for a Man to be persuaded of
the Doctrine of Christ, it is first requisite that his Heart be rightly
disposed, rather than his understanding fully enlightened. Men at Christ's coming
into the World were wholly ignorant of this great and noble Truth. They made a
Science of Religion, which none could understand but the learned. And the
Reason of Man which would know every thing but scarce knows any thing
perfectly, proudly assumed to itself the privilege of judging in matters of
Salvation. But were that a certain Rule to go by, the proud would be the
greatest Favorites of God, and the more Men strove out of vanity or ambition
to become learned, the clearer insight they would have into Revelation. That
indeed would be proper to make a considerable progress in humane Sciences: but
the Science of Salvation is not to be acquired but by Holiness and Humility.
For Virtue is a practical Habit. The more Simple and Ignorant we are, the more
our Eyes will be open. The better we live, the less scruples we shall
entertain. The more we love God, the more sensible we shall grow of his
admirable Precepts. What great Wisdom then does this Maxim contain, which Men
in past Ages were wholly ignorant of, and which the present Age scarce yet
understands?

Verse. 37, 38, 39.
In the last Day that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If
any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes on me, as the
Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. (But
this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. For
the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.)
How could the Evangelist have made Christ utter such words as these, and a
little after added this Annotation concerning the Effusion of the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, had he really seen nothing happen that was like it? Who sees not
plainly that the Parenthesis supposes that Event to be well known, since it
informs us of the Reason of it?

Verse. 40, 41.
Many of the People therefore when they heard this, said of a Truth this is the
Prophet: Others said, this is the Christ. But some said, shall Christ come out
of Galilee? All these Disputes and little Contests manifestly show the great
impression the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ had already made upon Peoples
minds. Besides they are of such a Nature as not easily to be thought of by a
Person who could invent Lies.

Chap. VIII. 7. 10, 11
So when they continued asking him, he lift up himself and said unto them, he
that is without sin among you, let him first cast a Stone at her, etc. When
Jesus had lift up himself, and saw none but the Woman, he said unto her, Woman,
where are those thine Accusers? has no Man condemned thee? She said, no man,
Lord. And Jesus said unto her, neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more.
There is no need of a Comment to understand the Divine energy of these words. A
Heart rightly disposed will sooner be sensible of it, than able to express it.

Verse. 51.
Verily, verily I say unto you, if a Man keep my sayings he shall never see
Death. How could Christ advance such a Paradox? Or how is it probable that John
should make him utter it, he who had already seen several of his Master's
Disciples die? These words then must secretly imply something more sublime and
uncommon, than appears to us at first sight: And those who taught them had
deeper Understandings, and more piercing Judgments than other Men.

Chap. XI. 25.
I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, tho he were dead,
yet shall he live. This is such a strange discourse as was never met with
before.

Verse. 43, 44.
And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus come forth:
And he that was Dead came forth, bound Hand and Foot with Gravecloaths: and his
face was bound about with a Napkin, etc. Nothing can be more circumstantially
told than this matter of fact. Lazarus had been Dead about four Days. He was
buried, and a Stone had been rolled over his Grave. Nay he already began to
Stink. Some of the Jews that were there present murmured, and said among
themselves. Could not this Man who opened the eyes of the Blind, have caused
that even this Man should not have died? John 11. 37. And others that were come
to comfort the two Sisters were there assembled. The Dead Person was raised to
Life again, he was seen, and heard to speak. Several that were there believed
in Jesus Christ, so that the great Council among the Jews was terrified at it,
and the Chief Priests and Pharisees being gathered together upon this Occasion,
many of them cried out, and said, What do we? for this Man does many Miracles.
If we let him thus alone, all Men will believe on him, and the Romans shall
come, and take away both our place and Nation, etc. Had this matter of fact
been falsely invented, how durst the Evangelist so exactly describe it with all
its Circumstances? Why did not others make a strict enquiry, and dive into the
Bottom of it? Did the Christians want Enemies to do it, they who were
continually exposed to the Persecutions of all the Powers upon Earth? This
Gospel was believed at Jerusalem, which place was yet extant, and Bethany was
but a few Furlongs distant from Jerusalem. The Falsehood alone of that single
matter of fact, which was so signal and so publicly known, would have utterly
overthrown the whole Fabric of the Apostles New Religion, given up the Cause
to the Jews, and universally silenced the Christians. Why then did they not
manifest the Truth upon the Spot?

Chap. XIII. 35.
By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another. A Divine Mark indeed! and a Character not in the least to be suspected!

Chap. XIV. 11, 12.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me
for the very works sake. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in
me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works than these shall
he do. What could the Evangelists think when he related these things, if he was
truly convinced by his own experience, and by that of his Associates, that
Christ 's Disciples could not perform any Miracles?

Chap. XV. 24.
If I had not done among them the works which none other Men did, they had not
had Sin. He continually laid before their Eyes the Testimony of his Works.

Chap. XVI. 2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service. It Is evident by this
prediction the Evangelist ascribes to Jesus, that the Disciples did not then
expect, nay were not to expect any thing but crosses and tribulations. What
then could support them in their present sufferings, and the dismal prospect of
worse to come, but the hopes of such a reward as is inconsistent with the
quality of Impostors. A Name which our Incredulous Adversaries are pleased to
give them?

Verse. 33.
In the World ye shall have Tribulation; but be of good cheer I have overcome
the World. He was continually foretelling them what misfortunes they were to
expect. This in all appearance should have disheartened them; but it only served
to try their Patience, and confirm the Word which they preached.

Chap. XVII. 25, 26.
O Righteous Father, the World has not known thee, but I have known thee, and
these have known that thou have sent me. And I have declared unto them thy
Name; that thy love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in
them. Can a Man imagine that an Impostor should express himself thus? Is
falsehood then so different here from what it usually is, and does it breath out
nothing but Virtue, Innocence, Love, and Charity? Has it altogether that Spirit
of pure Holiness and elevated Simplicity, of ineffable consolation, and
wonderful Trust and Reliance upon God, which run's through all the latter
Discourses Jesus made to his Disciples, to comfort them for his approaching
Departure?

Chap. XVIII. 36, 37.
My Kingdom is not of this World, etc. Pilate therefore said unto him, art thou
a King then? Jesus answered, thou say that I am a King: And for this cause
came I into the World, that I should bear witness unto the Truth. Every one
that is of the Truth hears my Voice. Jesus plainly declared that his Kingdom
was not of this World: Yet he called himself King. Had he been an Impostor, he
would have pretended to have reigned somewhere, or at least showed some
Ambition of it.

Chap. XX. 25, 26.
The other Disciples therefore said unto him, we have seen the Lord. But he
said unto them, except I shall see in his hands the Print of the Nails, and
thrust my hand into his Side, I will not believe, etc. Jesus says unto him,
Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed: Blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed. Could any one have made Thomas believe
that he had been more incredulous than the rest of the Disciples, and that he
would not be persuaded till he had seen and felt the Body of his Master?

Chap. XXI. 3.
Simon Peter says unto them, I go a fishing: They say unto him, we also go
with thee. They went forth, and entered into a Ship immediately; and that Night
they caught nothing. But when the Morning was now come, Jesus stood on the
shore, etc. Christ being Dead, the Disciples betook themselves again to their
former employment, for they could not subsist without doing something to get a
Livelihood. And Jesus after his Resurrection appeared sometimes to them on the
Sea shore, where they were a fishing. What can be suspected in all this?

Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Then Peter turning about* sees the Disciple whom Jesus loved, following,
which also leaned on his Breast at Supper, and said, Lord, who is it that
betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this Man
do? Jesus says unto him* if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that
that Disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die;
but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? This is the
Disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these things, etc. Can we
imagine that the Evangelist himself invented this Report, which he pretends went
about concerning his Immortality? And do such Thoughts come into a Man's Head?
However do but observe how all the particulars of this matter hang so one upon
another, that whosoever grants one of them, must grant also the rest. For the
Report spread abroad that John should not die, was grounded upon the Answer
which Christ returned to Peter; and he returned not that Answer to Peter, till
after his Resurrection, and after having foretold Peter himself, with what kind
of Death he should glorify God. This connection therefore plainly shows us what
we ought to believe upon this account.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein we shall further produce from the Acts of the Apostles, several Places
very proper to make us truly sensible of the Divinity of the Christan Religion.
CHap. I. 8.
But ye shall receive Power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye
shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, etc. unto the uttermost part of the Earth. ^et these Witnesses be
strictly examined, let their Patience be tried with all kinds of severe
punishments and it will then appear whether it be possible ever to force them
to recant their Opinion.

Verse. 26.
And the Lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles.
In this election there appears neither Bribe, Preeminence or arbitrary
Partiality; so different was that Society from these now established in the
World.

Chap. II. 13:
Others mocking, said these Men are full of new Wine. These sort of
Circumstances are of excellent use to show the Exactness and Sincerity of the
Historian.

Verse. 22.
Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you by Miracles, and Wonders,
and Signs, as ye your selves also know. How came they to know it had Christ
wrought no Miracles among them? And what a strange piece of Confidence must it
have been in the Apostles to speak thus?

Verse. 41.
And the same Day were added unto them about three thousand Souls. What but the
wonderful Power of the Holy Ghost given to the Apostles, could make so many
Proselytes?

Verse. 44, 45.
And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them to all Men as every Man had need. A holy
Society indeed consisting of none but such as had given up all their Interest
in this World, and glorified God by offering up themselves, and what was
dearest to them, as a sacrifice to him. What could they hope for, who
absolutely renounced every thing for the sake of Christ? Let a Man reason never
so much upon the manner of uniting Men in a Body together, it is certain there
was never a more effectual method to form a Society than Charity. For it makes
those things equal which humane Passions had before distinguished; it subverts
all competition, destroys all interest, banishes the designs of Pride and
Ambition, and all the little distinctions Vanity creates. In a word, it unites
Men in a State wherein they all equally enjoy the same Revelation, the same
spiritual Worship, and the same Faith, Hope, and Charity. All which represents
as it were on Earth the Joys we may partake hereafter, and gives us a lively
Image and Idea of Heaven. And what greater Miracle than this can be brought to
prove the Divinity of a Religion?

Verse. 46.
And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread
from House to House, did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart.
What Perseverance, what Joy, nay what Simplicity of Heart did the Apostles here
show, supposing them to have been Deceivers? For we must either acknowledge
them to be such, or else allow the Gospel they preached, to be most certainly
true and Divine.

Chap. III. 8, 9.
And he entered with them into the Temple, walking and leaping, and praising
God. And all the People saw him walking and praising God. Is it an easy matter
to make other men believe such matters of fact as these, supposing they were
altogether false?

Verse. 12.
And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the People Ye Men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this? Or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
Power, or Holiness we had made this Man to walk? Had Simon Magus performed such
a Miracle, he would certainly have took all the Honor of it to himself, and
now more confidently than ever affirm, that he was the great Power of God.
Observe I pray here a Character of Ingenuity, Humility and Sincerity, which
cannot be sufficiently expressed.

Verse. 16.
And his name through faith in his name, has made this Man strong, whom ye see
and know: yea, the faith which is by him, has given him this perfect soundness
in the presence of you all. This multiplying expressions of the same thing may
not so well please some Men, and seems to be an empty flourish of words, or a
putting some good words finely together to signify little; a thing not
agreeable to the true Eloquence Men ought to use. But here it is not really so.
The Apostles here regarded not Politness in the least, but rather were afraid
they could not use expressions strong enough, to let them know that it was not
in their own Names, but in the name of Jesus Christ, that all these things were
done. It Is no matter then whether the Ear was offended at it or not, provided
the Understanding humbled itself in the presence of God, and ascribed that
extraordinary Miracle to none but Christ himself.

Verse. 14.
But ye denied the holy one and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted
unto you. Observe how little he knew what it was to flatter those Men he spoke
to!

Chap. IV. 4.
Howbeit, many of them which heard the word, believed, and the number of the
Men were about Five thousand. How could S. Luke, who wrote in a time when the
Church of Jerusalem consisting of so many Proselytes flourished, I say how
could he have made so many believe such miraculous matters of fact, as had they
been real they must have seen them with their own Eyes?

Chap. V. 15.
Insomuch that they brought forth the Sick into the Streets, and laid them on
Beds and Couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by, might
overshadow some of them. Behold the completion of that Prophesy of Christ, who
foretold that his Disciples should do far greater works than himself.

Verse. 32.
And we are his witnesses of those things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom
God has given to them that obey. Christ daily convinced the Unbelievers by the
Testimony of his Works; and his Disciples convinced them by the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost imparted to them. Is there then, any Dream or Euthusiasm, any
Illusion, or Distraction of mind, any mutual erroneous Compact in all this? or
rather do we not here visibly perceive the Wisdom, Truth, and Power of God in
this occasion?

Chap. VII. 51.
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost: as your Fathers did so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your
Fathers persecuted? All Deceivers and Impostors use quite another method, to
flatter those they design to draw over to their side.

Verse. 59, 60.
And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. Stephen died praying to God for his Enemies, in imitation
of Christ. But he was not seized with Sorrow, Anguish, or Fear; he cried not
out, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? Could not he that represented
the Servant so Courageous, have given us an excellent Description of the
constancy of the Master, but that he had proposed to himself to write nothing
but the Truth.

Chap. VIII. 14, 15, 16.
They sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were come down, prayed for
them that they might receive the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was fallen upon none
of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus) By these words
it is plain, that every body might indifferently receive the Holy Ghost; but
the Apostles alone could impart it to others. A distinction that is very
remarkable. But it appears yet farther, that the Gifts of the Holy Ghost were
so notable and visible, that whosoever had received them, could not but
presently be sensible of it: And tho this Discourse of St. Luke might be wholly
invented, yet it may well be supposed, that it was invented upon some probable
Grounds and Reasons, and there can be no other for it but this, that in this
time the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were imparted to the faithful; for
otherwise, to talk thus, would be very impertinent and extravagant.

Verse. 20.
But Peter said unto him, thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought
that the gift of God may be purchased with Money. How comes Peter to deal so
nicely and delicately were he an Impostor indeed as well as Simon Magus?

Verse. 22, 23.
Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. How different are these expressions
from those of a Man whose Conscience accuses him of Imposture and Infidelity.

Chap. IX. 7, 8, 9.
And the Men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but
seeing no Man. But they led him by the hand, and brought him unto Damascus. And
he was there three days without sight, and neither Eat nor Drank. Had St. Luke
designed to impose upon our belief in this rehearsal, he would have managed it
with more Judgment. For what necessity was there of his relating how that St.
Paul had Company with him, when the Light of God shone round about him? What
made him quote the place, the occasion, and the Witnesses, of whom the
Synagogue might have easily known the whole Truth? How could he make them
believe, that the Men which accompanied Saul, led him by the hand to Damascus,
and that he continued there three days and three nights deprived of his sight?

Verse. 16.
For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my names sake, etc.
The whole Life of S. Paul was an exact accomplishment of this Prophecy.

Verse. 31.
Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria, and
were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the Comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied. How strange and surprising was the progress of the
Gospel, which founded so many Churches almost every where in so small a time!

Verse. 34, 35.
And Peter said unto him, Eneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole; arise, etc. And
all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord. Doubtless
those Men here mentioned knew well enough whether there was any such Miracle
performed; And those Churches which consisted altogether of Proselytes, who
must necessarily have been Spectators of that Miracle, could not be imposed
upon in this respect.

Verse. 41, 42.
And he gave her his hand, and lift her up; and when he had called the Saints
and Widows, presented her alive. And it was known throughout all Joppa; and
many believed in the Lord. This was a Miracle notorious enough, and there were
Witnesses sufficient to contradict and convince the Author of this Book,
supposing this Miracle had been only a framed Story and a Sham upon Men's
belief.

Chap. X. 45, 46, 47.
And they of the Circumcision which believed, were astonished as many as came
with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the Gift of the
Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with Tongues, and magnify God. Then
answered Peter, can any one forbid Water, that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Gift of the Holy Ghost, as well as we? What was the
meaning of that astonishment in those of the Circumcision? It Was because they
had not seen till then that the Holy Ghost was imparted to the Gentiles. The
very mixture of such Circumstances as these, is often of it self sufficient to
convince us of the Truth of any narration.

Chap. XI. 18.
When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto Life, This
indeed was the Language of the Holy Ghost; the perfect style of God; And the
very expression of the heavenly Jerusalem!

Chap. XII. 18, 19.
Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the Soldiers, what
was become of Peter. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he
examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to Death. A
circumstance that cannot be forged, and which excellently confirms the relation
of Peter 's miraculous Deliverance.

Chap. XIII. 3.
And when they had fasted, and prayed, they laid hands on them. This Historian,
who represents the Disciples continually fasting and praying, could not devise
that matter of fact, supposing it to be false. He would be very extravagant
that should believe, that the Apostles led an ill course of Life, and plunged
themselves in all sorts of lewd Debaucheries. Their Words, their Actions
convince us of the contrary. Yet it may be said that they were Villains indeed,
if what they preached was false: But if they were downright plain honest Men,
as their speech necessarily evinces to us, then was their preaching also
necessarily true.

Verse. 12.
Then the Deputy when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the
Doctrine of the Lord. 'Twould argue but little Judgment in any one that designs
to impose a Fiction upon Men's belief, to pitch upon Circumstances, as are
contrary to public knowledge. The Conversion of a Deputy, was certainly an
Event very remarkable.

Chap. XV. 39.
And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed asunder one
from the other; and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus. This
Historian is very exact in relating the least occurrences. He is sincere too,
since he scruples not to relate the Contentions which arose among the Apostles
themselves.

Chap. XX. 12.
And they brought the young Man alive, and were not a little comforted. Can any
thing be more surprising or convincing, than the Resurrection of the Dead?

Chap. XXIV. 25.
And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled, and answered, go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee. Great indeed was the Divine efficacy of his
words, which made a Judge tremble, sitting on his Tribunal of Justice, and
before the Chains of his Prisoner.

Chap. XXVIII. 30, 31.
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired House, and received all that
came unto him, preaching the Kingdom of God, etc. Here ends the History of
the Acts of the holy Apostles written by St. Luke. It Is manifest he compiled it
before the Destruction of Jerusalem, because he mentions nothing of that Event.
Neither do the Gospels or Epistles of the Apostles speak of it: But they often
speak of the sudden coming of the Lord, or of the Judgments he had resolved to
execute upon the Jewish Nation.

CAHP. IX. Wherein we shall yet farther produce from the Epistles of St. Paul,
St. Peter, and St John, several Texts very proper to make us truly sensible of
the Divinity of the Christian Religion.
Epistle to the Romans.
CHap. I. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Paul the Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the
Gospel of God, etc. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of
the seed of David according to the Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God
with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the
Dead. Men generally insert all their Titles in the Epistles they write; but St.
Paul inserts the whole Gospel in his: And what was the reason of it? Because
his Mind and Heart were so full of it, that he could not speak of any thing
else. Jesus Christ was his Alpha and his Omega, his Beginning and his End.

Verse. 7.
To all that ^e in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints; Grace be unto
you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Did ever Man
before him write in this style? He directs his Discourse to those only that
were called to be Saints: He does not vainly complement them after the usual
way of the World, but wishes them the Peace and Grace of God. Certainly he
would not have wrote thus, had he been an Impostor, or an Enemy to his Country
Men, who endeavored to render them odious throughout the World, by accusing
them of an imaginary Crime.

Verse. 16.
For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto
Salvation, to every one that believes, etc. How strongly persuaded must that
Man be of what he says, who expresses himself after so pathetical a manner! And
how well does the fullness of his mind appear by all these manifold and
multiplied expressions?

Chap. VIII. 37, 38, 39.
Nay in all these things we are more than conquerours, through him that loved
us* For I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, etc. An
immovable Constancy indeed! and a Divine confidence which he so naturally set
down* and which could not possibly arise from the Soul of an Impostor!

Chap. XI. 28, 29.
As concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your sake; but as touching the
Election, they are beloved for the Father's sake. For the Gifts and calling of
God, etc. Why did St. Paul here speak so movingly and tenderly of the Jews? And
why did he earnestly endeavor to soften and mitigate the Minds of the Gentiles
toward them? Whence comes that inclination both of his Heart and Affections to
favor those implacable Enemies, who sought nothing but his Destruction and
Ruin? Certainly a Man that had forsaken his own Nation out of spite, or a
desire of revenge could not be of such a Temper.

Chap. XII. 2.
And be not conformed to this World; but be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind, etc. We have here a Man who having been wholly changed, having
acquired new Knowledge, new Habits, and new Affections, speaks of nothing but
of being transformed, renewed, and becoming a New Creature, etc. A Man who
having been enlightened in his way to Damascus speaks of nothing but of
illumination, of a Light that shone from Heaven, of a Kingdom of Light. A Man
in fine, who having had mercy shown him in the midst of the fury of his
persecutions, speaks of nothing but Pardon and Grace. It Is an easy matter to
collect his History from his very expressions.

Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love, in Honor
preferring one another: not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit; serving
the Lord: Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in
prayer; distributing to the necessity of Saints; given to hospitality. Bless
them which persecute you: bless and curse not; rejoice with them that do
rejoice, etc. Can we suppose these to be the words or thoughts of an Impostor?

Chap. XIII. 5.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. Religion as it were Cements the good and welfare of a State,
and Piety seems inseparable from the public good of a Society; because God, by
whose appointment Kings reign, is the prime Author of Religion.

Verse. 12, 14*
The night is far spent, the day is at hand, etc. But put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. This
Author's words continually follow and express his thoughts. He considered the
Gospel as a Light that dissipated all the erroneous Darkness and Ignorance of
his Mind; he considered Christ as one that supplied all his wants and
necessities. He was therefore obliged to make use of such unusual and
surprising expressions.

First Epistle to the Corinthians.
Chap. I. 13.
Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the
name of Paul? A singular and uncommon piece of Humility! since Men are not by
nature displeased and disquieted at those, who endeavor to pay them too much
Honor.

Chap. II. 4.
And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of Man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power. It is beneath a King, to study
how to adorn his Discourse, and make use of the Charms of Eloquence, when he
goes about to speak to his Subjects to whom he shows mercy, and prescribes
Obedience. Such a way of dealing would be much more beneath the Holy Ghost.
Wherefore Paul opposes the power of the Holy Ghost, which serves him to confirm
the Gospel, to the Eloquence of the Men of his Age, which he absolutely
contemns and despises. For the latter may, but the former cannot be suspected.

Chap. III. 5.
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed? Those
Men were not like Simon Magus, Cerinthus, S^turninus, Basilides, Menander, etc.
who positively affirmed themselves to be the power of God, the Word, and the
Prophet, and who strove to excel one another in extravagant Vanity.

Chap. IV. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Even unto this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own
hands: being reviled, we bless: being persecuted we suffer it: being defamed we
entreat: we are made as the filth of the World, and are the offscouring of all
things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved
Sons I warn you. Did Paul imagine he could easily impose upon those he wrote
this Epistle to, in those matters which must have been so publicly known? Or
did he think he could incite them to emulate his Patience by such narrations as
every body knew to be utterly false?

Verse. 19, 20.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know not the speech
of them which are puffed up, but the power. For the Kingdom of God is not in
word, but in power. By these words it appears that the extraordinary and
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost justified in those days the mission of the
Pastors of the Church; and indeed what can be less liable to suspicion than
such a mark and sign of them?

Chap. V. 5.
To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. The Apostles testified of the
Gospel by their works, and not their words only.

Verse. 11.
If any Man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one, do
not eat. What strange Severity was this! What amazing and wonderful effects,
what surprising changes in Men were produced by the Gospel! Believe it, if you
can, after what has been said, that this was a Society of Deceitful Impostors,
as it must need be confessed, supposing their Testimony false.

Chap. VI. 9, 10, 11.
Be not deceived: Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. Had the
Testimony of Jesus been a mere Imposture, how could he have sanctified Mankind?
And what could be the design of the Apostles, in deceiving Men to make them
righteous, in making a false Belief serve to lead them to the practice of all
Virtues? For such notions as these our Incredulous Adversaries must necessarily
entertain.

Chap. XII. 28, 29, 30.
And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly, Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of healing, helps,
governments, diversities of Tongues. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are
all Teachers? are all workers of Miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do
all speak with Tongues? It appears that the Apostle by this enumeration of the
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, supposes them to have been very common in
the Church, as being a matter of fact publicly known. Was he then out of his
Senses to talk thus? We have seen Men who falsely boasted they could work many
Miracles: but we never heard of any that pretended to make a numerous Society
believe, that they also could work Miracles, when they had not indeed the power
to perform any.

Verse. 31.
But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent
way. He preferred Charity before Miracles themselves, and all the miraculous
Gifts of the holy Spirit. How different then was his opinion from the Vanity,
Ambition and Superstition of the World!

Chap. XIV. 24, 25.
But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
secrets of his Heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a Truth. This was the Gift of
knowing the secrets of Men's Hearts, which this same Author speaks of in
another place, saying, tho I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, etc. Was there ever any Seducers seen, who to prove their mission
pretended themselves able to know the secrets of Man's heart? How comes this
Author then to speak of it cursorily, and as a thing generally known to them
all?

Chap. XV. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19.
But if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not risen. And if
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is vain also;
yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God,
that he raised up Christ; whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise
not, etc. And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your
sins. Then they also which are fallen a sleep in Christ are perished. If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
Nothing can better acquaint us with the persuasion of our Apostle than these
words. For I pray observe after what manner he relates the Opinion of those
men, who thought there was no Resurrection of the Dead. He seems very much
surprised to see them prepossessed with any such Opinion, after what they had
known of Christ 's Resurrection, of their Happiness that slept in him, and the
Afflictions they endure in this Life, which they could not endure without some
reason, some hope, and expectation of future Happiness.

Verse. 32.
If after the manner of Men, I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, what
advantageth it me, if the Dead rise not? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die. Since the beginning of the World, Men of wordly Minds and carnal
Appetites, who aim only at the good things of this Life, have always argued
thus; and indeed they would have a great deal of reason in arguing thus, and
pursuing their reasons, were there no Resurrection of the dead.

Chap. XVI. 21.
The Salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. If any Man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. He begun still, and ended with
Christ, which evidently shows the strong persuasion of his Mind.

Second Epistle to the Corinthians.
Chap. I. 8, 9.
For we would not brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble, etc. That we
should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. By these
words we perceive what troubles they underwent, and what hopes they had to
sustain them in their Sufferings.

Chap. II. 14, 15, 16.
Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
makes manifest the savor of his Knowledge by us in every place. For we are
unto God a sweet savor of Christ, etc. To the one we are the savor of Death
unto Death; and to the other, the savor of Life unto Life: and who is
sufficient for these things? And who is sufficient to express all the force and
energy of these words, unlike the false Charms of humane Eloquence, yet such as
are easily discerned by an Heart rightly disposed?

Chap. IV. 6.
For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. The Eloquence of Men which is generally above the thing it
represents, has usually but one Idea to represent one single object: But if
that Idea be a complex one, then it is composed of several others,
proportionable and agreeable to it. There cant well be in this sort of
Eloquence a mixture of various Ideas and different Metaphors together in one
and the same Period. But on the contrary, the Eloquence of the Holy Ghost which
is always inferior to those Objects it lays before us, makes use of several
different Images and Ideas at once, because a single one could not express what
it endeavors to represent: As for instance in these expressions, M^l. 4. 2.
Luke 1. 78.
The Sun of righteousness with the healing of his wings, has visited us through
his tender mercies; as also in this place, where the Apostle thought he could
never say enough, this is a light which shines; which shines into the heart,
which gives the light, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ. For a Man to express himself thus he must really be very
strongly persuaded of what he could say. The Orators of this World are usually
Masters of their own Thoughts; but this Writer here was as it were filled, and
wholly taken up with the greatness of the Object he was about to represent.

Verse. 15.
For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the
thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God. Thanksgiving, Gratefulness,
Acknowledgement, Glory of God, Charity, Confession of their Frailties, Prayer,
Exhortation, etc. are the only Subjects that all the Writings of those
pretended Impostors are full of.

Verse. 17.
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. No Writer ever spoke with so much
energy, because no Writer was so strongly persuaded of the Truth of what he
delivered.

Chap. V. 17.
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. What Teachers ever
required such things of their Disciples? What mean these Words, and this
strange Exhortation?

Chap. VI. 1, 4, 5, 6.
We then as workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain, etc. but in all things approving our selves as the
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings,
in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the
Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned. Do such Exhortations usually come from the Men
of this World, or rather do they not proceed from the Holy Ghost himself?

Chap. VIII. 18.
And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospel,
throughout all the Churches. He speaks of St. Luke in this place; and what he
says of him is sufficient to make us understand that the Gospel according to
St. Luke was read even in those days in all the Christian Churches, which
overthrows all suspicion that that Gospel had been filled with sham Stories of
certain matters of fact, in a time when every body had yet fresh in their
Remembrance, all that came to pass in those days.

Chap. XII. 12.
Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in
signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. St. Paul wrote these things to several
numerous Churches, and to whole Societies. And can we suppose he could persuade
them that he wrought so many Wonders and Signs among them, when he wrought none?

Chap. XIII. 5.
Examine your selves, etc. prove your own selves, etc. how that Jesus Christ is
in you. What mean these Expessions? We are in Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ is in
us. And whence come they? Who first established such a strange Language? And
who did the Apostles learn this Style from, a Style till then unknown to the
World? Had Men ever said before that time, Caesar is in us? No surely, because
they had never received the Spirit of Caesar, But the Disciples had received the
Spirit of Jesus Christ

Epistle to the Galatians.
Chap. III. 4, 5.
O foolish Galatians! etc. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? If it be
yet in vain. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works
miracles among you, does he it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
faith? What means this Interrogation, If the Miracles and the miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost had been only mere Fictions? Is it
possible we should not perceive the Truth of that matter of fact, by the
ingenuous simplicity wherewith this Author takes it for granted, when he makes
it a Principle of his Arguments, and takes an occasion from thence to censure
the Galatians after so sharp and severe a manner?

Chap. VI. 12, 14, 15.
As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be
Circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ,
etc. But God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new Creature. Great indeed was his Faith! for he would not subscribe to their
Maxims, who constrained the faithful to be Circumcised, tho he might have
thereby avoided a sharp Persecution. But he shows us that the Circumcision of
the Heart only was acceptable to God; that none but the New Creature could be
for the future agreeable to him: A Circumcision indeed infinitely more painful
than the first, and a New Creature established upon the Ruins of the World, the
pleasures of which are so dear to us* Certainly it is impossible this Doctrine
so spiritual, so holy, and so necessary in it self, should have proceeded only
from Flesh and Blood.

Epistle to the Ephesians.
Chap. III. 17, 18, 19.
That ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the
love of Christ, which passes all Knowledge, etc. Had the Apostles been such
Deceivers as the Incredulous would have them to be, what mean those transports
of admiration as often as they reflect on the mercy of God, which every Page of
this Book is full of? Were they then deceived? No surely, because they could
not be imposed upon in such certain matters of fact. Had they then a mind to
deceive other people? That could not be neither, because their Writings seem to
be designed only to induce Men to fear God.

Chap IV. 24, 25.
And that ye put on the New man, which after God is created in Righteousness
and true holiness. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man truth with his
neighbor, etc. A strange and surprising Discourse indeed! but which would have
been much more astonishing should it have been uttered by the mouth of an
Impostor.

Epistle to the Philippians.
Chap. I. 29.
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him,
but also to suffer for his sake. The Stoics, who had so much distinguished and
raised themselves above all other Men by their sublime Morality, had ever
imagined that the Wise man might very well preserve a tranquil and sedate Mind
in the midst of his Afflictions; and they were so much intoxicated with Pride,
that they were altogether insensible of any Pain or Torment. But the Disciples
of Christ went yet higher. They looked upon the most cruel Sufferings as upon
so many Benefits, and so many causes of Joy, and Peace, and Ineffable
Consolation and Comfort. They cried out, I rejoice in my sufferings, etc. I
delight in Stripes, in Afflictions, etc. Nay more than this, they returned
Thanks to God for having been thought worthy to suffer for his Name's sake.
Their Afflictions gave rise to their Gratitude. And all this, because they were
supported by a Divine hand, and were most certain to obtain an everlasting
Reward. A strange thing indeed, that this Certainty only should be absolutely
requisite to demonstrate the truth of Religion! The Apostles could never have
entertained any false hopes of reward, because their hopes were grounded on
what they had seen, and on the miraculous Gifts of God they had both received
and often imparted to others. We cannot then doubt, but that they had the hopes
of a future Reward in prospect, unless we will be wilfully Blind and Ignorant.
So blind must the Incredulous be, who wilfully shut their Eyes, and refuse to
be convinced of so evident a Truth.

First Epistle to the Thessalonians.
Chap. I. 4.
For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
Holy Ghost, etc. By these words it appears that the miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost continually testified of the Gospel.

Chap. III. 4.
For verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we should suffer
tribulation; even as ^t came to pass, and ye know. The Disciples of Christ had
been prepared by him, and had prepared themselves, nay prepared their
Successors also to suffer patiently according to the Words of this Apostle, who
says in another place, 2 Timothy 3. 12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. It Was therefore in cold Blood, with their own choice
and free deliberation they suffered such Torments.

Chap. V. 27.
I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all the holy
brethren. St. Paul feared not in the least his being contradicted, or convinced
of any Falsity he had advanced concerning his Afflictions, and the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost. And therefore he commanded that his Epistles should be read to all
the holy Brethren.

First Epistle to Timothy.
Chap. III. 16.
And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness; God was manifest in
the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into glory. This mystery cannot be
invented only by Humane understanding, for several Reasons. 1. Because it is so
great and sublime, that Men tho never so learned and quick sighted in other
things, yet would never have been able to find it out of themselves, barely by
the Scrutinies of their Reason. 2. Because they were only poor Fishermen that
preached it. 3. Because this so sublime and magnificent Object proceeds, if I
may so speak, from the Death and Sufferings of a Man, who was condemned and
punished with the most rigorous Punishments that could be thought of. For it was
only after the Passion of Christ, that the Disciples went about preaching every
where the wonderful works of God. 4. And lastly, because the contemplation of
it depends upon Experience it self; and although this mystery appears at first
view infinitely exalted above the reach of our capacity, yet it must have been
both seen and touched by the Disciples. They certainly saw Christ, and beheld
his glory as the Glory of the only Son of God, full of Grace and Truth. They
saw with their Eyes that Flesh in which corporeally dwelt an entire fullness of
the glorious Godhead. They were fully convinced of the extraordinary excellence
of his Mysteries and the perfection of his Holiness. They themselves received
the Gifts of that same Spirit in which God himself was justified. They saw
Angels ascending and descending to minister unto him. They preached it
themselves to the Gentiles, and so compelled the World to believe in him by
their Patience and Preaching, which was continually attended with the
Demonstration of that Spirit and the Evidence of those Miracles performed by
them in the Name of Jesus. Lastly he ascended into Heaven in their sight. So
that these are all sure and certain proofsof the Truth of that great Mystery
which cannot in the least be suspected.

Second Epistle to Timothy.
Chap. III. 15, 16.
And that from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, etc. All Scripture
is given by inspiration. There is no maintaining false Religions in the World
but by the help of Ignorance, Negligence, and a blind Submission. But the
Christian Religion cannot be suspected of any such defects, because it is wholly
founded upon Instruction and Knowledge. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal Life, John 5. 39.

Chap. IV. 7, 8,
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness. St. Paul was
drawing nigh toward his latter end; and the words of a dying Man are always to
be regarded. Whence then comes that cheerful Joy, the Apostle so naturally
expresses in this occasion? His Hopes, had they been of this World, must have
been soon buried with him in his Grave, and his Happiness too at an end. Whence
then derived he that great Confidence which he seems to have had? Was it from
the inward sense of a guilty Conscience, which reproached him for having
betrayed the Synagogue, blemished his Country Men, deceived Mankind, testified
of a Seducer, and forged such fictitious Visions by the most signal Imposture
that ever was? Let any one believe it if he can.

First Epistle of St. Peter.
Chap. I. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the Dead. The Mind of those Writers was so full of the
Salvation that was revealed to them, that they were never weary of returning
thanks to God for it.

Chap. II. 17, 18, 19, 20.
Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King. Servants be
subject to your Masters, with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, etc. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently; this is acceptable with God, etc. It is a strange thing,
we should be desired to own that a mutual Agreement of Malice and Falsehood,
which really is a wonderful Agreement of Piety, Charity, Obedience, and
Righteousness. Paul expressed himself like Peter, and Peter spoke like Paul.
They both acted and suffered alike; nay they bore the very same Testimony,
being endowed with the same Patience, practicing the very same Virtues, and
discovering one and the same Wisdom in all their words. Now what have we any
reason to suspect in all this?

Second Epistle of St. Peter.
Chap. I. 16, 17, 18.
For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of his
Majesty. For he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came
such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my well beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we
were with him in the holy Mount, etc. This is a Witness who spoke of what he
had seen; who suffered Death in defense of the Truth of his Testimony; who saw
it not alone, for several others had seen the same thing; who spoke not out of
any principle of Interest, or concealed what he knew through any fear, or
apprehension of Death; and who for all that did his utmost endeavors to
sanctify Mankind, and bestowed all his Time, his Labor and his Life in
advancing such an extraordinary work, which is so little to be suspected. And
if so, what Man is there that can reasonably mistrust him?

First Epistle of St. John.
Chap. I. 1, 3.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of Life, declare we unto you, etc. If you should doubt whether the
Apostles did really go about testifying every where that they had seen with
their Eyes, both the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, it is but learning it
from their Epistles, and their own words too.

Chap. II. 1.
My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. But what
was it to him whether Men sinned, or not? Did ever the design of sanctifying
Mankind and contributing to their Salvation at the cost of ones Blood, ones
Liberty, ones Life, enter before into any Man's Heart but theirs?

These and the like Reflections are of themselves sufficient to give the Reader
a relish of those Truths, and incite him to make some of his own, as shall more
effectually instruct, and convince him: For my part I have made several, which
perhaps satisfy me better than they would any body else. And no question but he
will also make several of his own that will convince him far better than those
of another. In the mean while let us pass on to the consideration of the
Substance of that Religion which Christ himself did bring into the World. For
after having considered the outside, it is very necessary to look into the inward
part of the Building.

SECTION IV.
Wherein we shall prove the Truth of the Christian Religion by the
Consideration of it is Nature and Properties.
Several Portraitures in which it may be considered.
HItherto we have insisted as it were upon the Shell and Bark of Religion; we
have examined the proofs taken from matters of fact, being the first that
offered themselves to our mind: It seems therefore now Expedient we should
discover as it were the Substance and Spirit of Christianity, and so proceed to
those other proofs drawn from the Nature of it, and that by showing the truth
of it by it is Beauties and proper Excellencies. But because this is too copious
a Subject for us who study Brevity, we shall endeavor to reduce what we have
to say into as small a Compass as we can; and since we cannot allow our
Reflections their due and proper Extent, to give at least some Plan or Draught
of the same, as shall supply that defect.

And tho the Christian Religion may be considered under several different
Faces, because in this respect it is like unto its Object, which has no Bounds
to confine it is Extent; yet methinks we may give an Idea just and adequate
enough to our present design, by considering it in eleven different Draughts or
Portraitures. I. In the Multitude of Testimonies given in favor of it; which
we shall touch upon cursorily, because we have already partly examined them all
II. In its essential opposition to all false Religions that ever were. III. In
it is Effects, which can only justly be referred to a Divine and Supernatural
Cause. IV. In the Purity of its end. V. In it is Suitableness to the Heart of
Man, which it undertakes to reform. VI. In the Relation it has to the Glory of
God, which it should advance. VII. In it is Morality. VIII. In it is Mysteries.
IX. In the conformity of it is Mysteries to the light of Reason. X. In that
exact proportion it bears to the Jewish Religion. XI. And lastly, in that
proportion it bears to Natural Religion.

I hope these Portraitures will, like so many degrees of Light, wonderfully
illuminate the Minds of the incredulous, and discover to them the truth and
certainty of the Christian Religion, by the sublimity and excellencies of it.

I. Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in the multitude
of Testimonies given in favor of it.
THough Testimonies be somewhat foreign and exterior to the Christian Religion,
and therefore may seem improper to discover the Perfection of it: Yet it will
appear they do discover it, if we but carefully unite them together, and so
consider well their joint union and agreement.

We cannot but have a very great Idea of a Religion which the Wisdom of God has
been pleased to confirm unto us by Nine several Testimonies, each whereof would
have been singly sufficient to discover the Truth of it.

The first is that of the Prophets, who all testified of Jesus Christ by a long
and continued series of Prophecies, some far plainer than the rest; for some of
the Prophets saw almost as clear in the Night (as I may so speak) of shadows
and figurative Types, as we can in the Day, of their exact accomplishment, as
has been already shown.

The second is that of John the Baptist, so much the more certain because it
was foretold in the old Testament, and Christ and his Disciples continually
referred the Jews to that Testimony; so much the more considerable, because we
cannot suspect John the Baptist of having been guilty of any base complacency
toward the Jews, or mean designs for his own Interest; The Wisdom of God
having been pleased to set him above such Suspicions, by the Austerity of his
Manners and his unusual way of living, set down in the Gospel with such a
strange and particular Description.

The third is that of the Apostles, those witnesses, whose Constancy was tried
by the severest Punishments inflicted upon them; yet they boldly resisted the
Violence offered them by so many Torments they endured, Torments sufficient to
extort even from the greatest Malefactors a confession of their Crimes: Yet
here is the difference between Them and common Offenders; that the latter are
compelled unwillingly to undergo the Torture, but the Disciples of our Lord
rejoiced in being thought worthy to suffer. Malefactors indeed know certainly
they shall be executed, if they confess the Truth; but the Disciples of Jesus
would have had much more reason to fear Death, had they disguised the Truth by
any close Deceit.

The fourth Testimony is that of the three Persons which bare record in Heaven,
the Father when he declared in Jordan, that Jesus Christ was his well beloved
Son, in whom he was well pleased; and in another place, I have glorified him,
and will glorify him again: The Son, when he testified of himself by his
Miracles: And the Holy Ghost, when he confirmed the Testimony of the Son by the
Effusion of his extraordinary and miraculous Gifts upon the Disciples.

The fifth is that of the Conscience of Men, which acknowledges freely that the
Christian Religion can remove our Fears, comfort us in our Afflictions, humble
our Minds in the midst of plenty, and strengthen them in poverty; in a word,
sanctify us by delivering us from our sins; and so consequently supply all our
wants and necessities.

The sixth is that even of the Enemies of our Religion, who have been forced to
speak favorably on our side. The Jews and Gentiles have testified in our
behalf, the Wisdom of Providence, and the convincing force of Truth having
obliged them tacitly to own that Truth, against which they had declared
themselves such inveterate and implacable Enemies. The ancient Jews believed
that the famous Gem. tract. San. Cap. 11.
prophecy Jacob uttered upon his Deathbed, The Scepter shall, etc. was to be
understood of the Messiah: This their own Writings testify, and their Talmud
acknowledges, that that Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, who was to be
bruised for our iniquities, and from Gem. tract. San. Lib. 12.
whom they hid their faces as from a Leper, was the true Messiah. Nay, they are
forced to have recourse to the extravagant Fiction of a double Messiah; and
even by that they pay a kind of homage to the Truth. The Samaritans were of
Opinion, that the Messiah was shortly to appear in the World, as is evident by
the discourse of Christ with the Woman of Samaria. And this the Jews were so
strongly persuaded of, that some of them chose rather to own Herod the Great
for the Messiah, tho an Idumaean and wicked Prince, than renounce an Opinion
they were prepossessed with, and which was so deeply rooted in their Minds.
Others led away by the same Opinion, cast their Eyes upon one Agrippa,
descended from Herod, who was engaged in the Roman party. Others also
instigated by the same hopes, followed a certain Robber into the Wilderness.
And the Jews seeing their City just ready to be laid in Ashes, imagined that
their Messiah was just upon manifesting himself. Nay, the merciless
Ringleaders of those factious Wretches, who tore one another in pieces during
the devastation of Judea, so obstinately sought after one another's Ruin, only
because they expected to vanquish the Romans, and so become the Conquerours of
the World, that were to fulfill ancient Prophecies. Few Ages after, they turned
to one Barkokebas a villainous Robber, only because they thought him the
Messiah, according to their Computation of the years of his coming. Josephus, a
great Man and well versed in the Scriptures, imagined as well as others that
the Time prefixed for his coming was accomplished; or if he did not really
think so himself, he took at least an occasion from that Opinion commonly
approved of in the East, to ingratiate himself with Vespasian. Herod the Great
himself terrified and amazed by all these Reports, made his fearful
apprehension remarkable by a deluge of Blood. Then did the Jews acknowledge
that in the days of the Messiah there would be no Government; No Magistrates,
nor any Commonwealth left in Israel. But Gem. Tract. San. Cap 11.
afterward the necessity of maintaining their Opinion against us, made them
have recourse to several different Evasions. Not many Ages after the coming of
Jesus Christ into the World, when they found that their Messiah did not appear,
some of them began to say that he had hid himself; others that he was come
already in the Person of Hezekiah; others that his coming was put off, by
reason of the crying sins of the People; nay, they went on to that degree of
impiety and irreligion, as to pronounce them cursed who should calculate the
years of the coming of the Messiah. From all which we see plainly that by these
their Confessions and Shifts, they in a manner bear witness (tho unwillingly
and without design) to the Christian Faith.

As for the Heathens, besides the authentic Testimony of Pliny the younger
Tertul. Apolog. 5.
concerning the Innocence of the Christians, and besides that of Tiberius
concerning Jesus Christ, whom he would have inserted among the Gods, being
himself astonished at the surprising Wonders which he had heard of him; we all
know, that there See a discourse concerning Universal History by the Bishop of
Meaux.
have been several famous Emperors who were not able to conceal from the World
their favorable Opinions of the Christian Religion; that some of them had for
Inscriptions in their public Edifices several Maxims of the Gospel; that
others would have consecrated Churches for the Use of the Christians; and
lastly, that others professed themselves Admirers of the Morality of Christ.

But what shall we say of the Jews and Gentiles, who not being able to deny
Christ's Miracles, were forced to refer them, some to a Magic Power, and
others to a certain I know not what mysterious Pronunciation of the word
Jehovah. So strange a thing it is that even the very Enemies of our Religion
should thus testify of it, and yet scarce perceive it.

The seventh Testimony is that of several strange Events, which the Wisdom of
God so ordered that they firmly establish the Truth of Christianity. Of these
there are several very remarkable; but it shall suffice at present to mention
Three only, which among the rest deserve a particular Consideration; the First
is, the Destruction of the four Monarchies, which had sorely afflicted and
harassed God's People, at the end of which the Kingdom of Heaven was
immediately to be established; the Second, the entire Destruction of the Jewish
Government, and the signal Devastation of the holy Land, an Effect of the
divine Wrath poured out upon that Nation; the Third and last, the Settlement of
the Christian Church, or the Calling of the Gentiles, attended with so many
Circumstances as plainly show that nothing but the hand of God could perfect so
great a Work.

The Eighth is that Testimony given of Christ by the Revelation of Moses: And
the Ninth that which is given of him by Natural Religion: But of these two
Testimonies we shall not speak at present, for as much as we design to end this
Work with a particular Consideration of them.

In the mean time, it is plain the Christian Religion must be true, because it
was confirmed by the Testimony of so many authentic Persons which cannot be
suspected of Deceit: And it would be extravagantly ridiculous to imagine, that
the Prophets should have so clear an insight into Futurity, merely to
countenance and authorize a Fiction; that John the Baptist having been at first
taken by the Jews for the Messiah, should renounce the Honor which that Title
would have conferred upon him, only out of Love and Complaisance to an
Impostor; that the Apostles and the rest of the Disciples should so readily
sacrifice their Estates, Reputation, Repose, and Life it self to a Person they
knew to be a false Christ; that the Heavens should countenance a Flam and a Lie
by working such signal and sensible Miracles; that the Heart of Man should have
found every thing that can supply it is Wants and Necessities in a mere Cheat;
that even the Enemies of our Religion should countenance and approve of our
false Prejudices; that all Events should so exactly coincide with an erroneous
Imposture; and that the Revelation of Moses and Natural Religion should thus
testify so palpable a Fiction.

To this we may add the Necessity and Importance of the Christian Religion,
since the Wisdom of God leads us to it by so many different ways; as also the
admirable Perfection and Transcendency of it, since in a manner Heaven and
Earth, the Time past and present, Events ordinary and natural, as well as those
supernatural and miraculous, since the Prophets and Apostles who were
altogether unknown to one another, have agreed unanimously to reveal it, and
propose it to us as an Object for it is transcendent excellency worthy of our
greatest Admiration.

II Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is opposed to all other
Religions.
ALL these Truths will more evidently appear, if we consider the Christian
Religion in it is Opposition to all other Religions. The Excellency of the
Christian Religion consists in that it has Advantages which other Religions
have not, and yet none of their Faults.

I say, no other Religion has Advantages equal to those of the Christian
Religion; for no other can boast of it is having been confirmed by ancient
Prophecies. Even Mahomet thought it better to oblige Men to call the Scripture
in question, than do derive any Arguments from it which might serve to confirm
his Mission; as appears by his not boasting that he had been preceeded by any
Forerunner who made his paths straight.

There are indeed several Religions which perhaps may have had their Martyrs:
But what sort of Martyrs? superstitious Men who blindly exposed themselves to
Death without knowing what they did; like those Barbarians who prostrated
themselves by thousands before their Idol, that their Colossus might crush them
in pieces with it is Wheels as it passed along. But no Religion besides the
Christian was ever confirmed by the Blood of an infinite number of sensible
understanding Martyrs, who voluntarily suffered Death in Defense of what they
had seen; who from vicious and profligate Persons became Saints upon the
Confidence they had in their Master, and who at length being dispersed in all
places of the World, by their Death gained Proselytes* and making their Blood
the Seed of the Church, cheerfully suffered Martyrdom, having certain Assurance
of being crowned after their Death: A certain Assurance which they derived from
what they themselves had formerly seen.

We find other Religions which pretend to be confirmed and authorized by
several Signs and extraordinary Events from Heaven* The Romans See Min^t. Feli^.
used to attribute to their Religion all the Advantages they got over other
Nations: And the Mahumetans pretend that the great Successes God was pleased to
give their Prophet, were so many certain and undeniable Marks of the Truth of
their Religion. But to pretend that temporal Prosperity is a certain Character
of a true Religion, or Adversity that of a false one, is to suppose, as we have
already said else where, that the most profligate Wretches, provided they are
happy in this World, are the greatest Favorites of God. But certainly it is not
Prosperity or Adversity* simply considered, but Prosperity or Adversity as
foretold by God or his Prophets that is a certain Character of true Religion:
And when we affirm that several extraordinary Events bear witness to the Truth
of Christianity, we mean only those Events which had been foretold by the
Prophets; as for instance, the calling of the Gentiles, the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and the establishment of the Christian Church. Finally, there may be
several Religions that may deceive, but none but the Christian Religion that
can truly satisfy Mankind. There are some Religions grounded upon fabulous
Miracles, and confirmed by Witnesses easily convinced of Imposture; but none
but the Christian Religion is firmly and solidly establish*t upon true Miracles
and valid Testimonies. It appears then, that no Religion in the World has such
extraordinary qualifications as the Christian Religion; of which it must also
be affirmed, that it is free from all such Defects as are incident to other
Religions.

We need no deep search, no great sagacity or penetration of Mind to discover
this Truth: For it is manifest that the Christian Religion is not designed for
the satisfaction of the carnal and worldly Appetites of Men, as that of the
present Jews, who aspire only after temporal Prosperity and worldy Pomps: Nor
is it a Monstrous medly, like that of the Samaritans, made up of a ridiculous
mixture of the Pagan and Jewish Religion. Nor is it impious and cruel, like
that of the Gnostics; nor has it any of the Faults or extravagant
Superstitions of the Pagan Religion. But since we have not leisure to oppose it
particularly to all the Errors of other Religions, we must be contented to show
in this Comparison, the advantages the Christian Religion has above all the
rest, by laying down the following Rules:

I. Greeks, for Example, added several things to that Religion they received
from the Egyptians; and the Romans to that they had received from the Greeks.
Menander s^^ll improved the ^ottish Impieties of Simon Magus; and Saturninus
and Basilides added to those of Menander. And the reason is, because Men are
never weary of inventing, nor the People of believing Novelties. But it is not
so with the Christian Religion, which was wholly delivered by Christ, is
entirely contained in every one of the Gospels, and even in each Epistle of the
Apostles. What ever alterations Men have thought fit to make in the Doctrine
Christ brought into the World, did only corrupt the Purity and Spirituality of
it* as appears by the great disproportion there is betwixt the Apostolical
Doctrine, and the ordinary speculations of Men.

II. Gnostics chose the Night to cover the Impurity of Juvenal.
their abominable Mysteries. And the Romans exposed themselves to the satirical
Railery of their Poets, (...) being so careful to conceal the Worship they paid
to their Goddess Bona. Julian and Porphyrius set all their Wits to work, either
to set off the ridiculous and offensive Ceremonies of Paganism, or to palliate
their Superstition by several various explanations of it; as when they so
st^ffly affirmed that they worshipped one only supreme God, tho they
acknowledged at the same time other Subordinate Deities depending one upon
another; and when they endeavored to justify the Worship they paid to their
Idols, by using many subtle and nice Distinctions.

It is certain there is a Principle of Pride implanted in the Hearts of Men,
which is the Reason they cannot endure to be accused of entertaining any absurd
and extravagant Opinions; so that* when ever their Passions have made them
embrace a Religion which seems not very reasonable, they employ all heir Wit to
make it at least appear consonant to Reason. But the Christian Religion
requires no Veil to cover it, no mysterious Silence, no dark Dissimulation, or
close Disguise, although it proposes such kinds of Objects to us as are vastly
contrary to all our Prejudices and received Opinions. The Apostles freely
confess that the Preaching of the Gospel is as it were an apparent Folly; but
yet they assure us God was resolved to save the World by that seeming Folly.
They knew that the Death of Christ became a scandal to the Jew, and a folly to
the Greek; yet they publicly declared, that they were determined not to know
any thing save Jesus Christ and him crucified. And how comes it then that they
did not in the least mince, or endeavor to soften the sense of that seeming
Paradox (so far were they from concealing it) but that they were strongly and
fully persuaded of the Truth of that adorable Mystery, and that the abundance
of their Understanding served only to make them more fully comprehend the
efficacy of the Cross?

III. Poets or Philosophers; and that they generally spring from the sportive
Conceits or witty Speculations of the Understanding; which is the reason they
were not so universally approved. The Philosophers always derided the Religion
of the Vulgar; and the Vulgar understood nothing of the Religion of the
Philosophers. Socrates ridiculed the Religion of the Athenians; and the
Athenians accused Socrates of Impiety and Atheism, and condemned him to death.
The Christian Religion alone is approved of as well by the Philosophers as the
vulgar People, as neither depending upon the Ignorance of the latter, nor
proceeding from the Learning of the former. It has a divine Efficacy and
agreeable Power suitable to all Hearts: It is adapted to the Capacity of the
most simple and ignorant, tho infinitely raised above the Philosophy of the
Wise: It is sublime without being nicely speculative, and simple without being
mean; in its Sublimity preserving its Clearness, and in it is Simplicity
preserving it is Dignity. In a word there is nothing so great nor so
inconsiderable in human Society, but what may some way fall under it is
consideration, and it is equally approved of and admired by all.

IV. Christian Religion brings them from the Objects of Sense to those of the
Understanding. We all know that the Heathens when they Deified Men, or
worshipped a Deity under an human Shape, they were so far paying that Deity a
Worship due to a Spiritual Nature, that their Adoration consisted in several
Games, Shows, and diverse Exercises of the Body. The Jews and Samaritans by
their eager Disputes, whether God was to be worshipped in Jerusalem, or in
Mount Gerazim, extinguished Charity, the true Spirit of Religion, in their too
hot defense of the external part (...) 58. 5.
of it. Nay, the Prophets complained formerly, that the Jews made (...) to
consist in bowing down their Heads as a ^^^rush, and putting on Sackcloth and
Ashes. And the holy Scripture observes, that the Priests of ^ Kings. ^8. 28.
Baal were wont to cut themselves with Knives and Lances, when they sacrificed
to him, as if there were no other way to make their God hear their Prayers, but
by inflicting such Punishments on their own Bodies. The modern Jews cannot be
persuaded that we have been called to the knowledge of the true God (tho they
find we all profess to put our trust and confidence in him) because they
perceive not that we use any Corporeal Ceremonies. And the Mahumetans, more
irreligious than superstitious, make their Religion and its Happiness depend
chiefly on their Senses* when they Worship, they turn themselves toward Mecha,
as the Jews did toward Jerusalem, and earnestly desire of God that he would
gratify their Senses; and tho they have a sort of a Religious Respect for the
Letters that compose the Name of God, and the Paper it is written upon, yet
they are enjoined to oppress Men that bear the Image of God, by their Religion,
which breaths out nothing but Violence, Fury, and Oppression.

The Reason why Men usually refer thus every thing to their Senses, is because
a Worship that is corporeal and sensual is far more easy: It is much easier
for a Man to take the Sun for a God, than to be continually taken up in seeking
after a God that is invisible; to solemnize Games and Festivals in honor of a
pretended Deity, than to renounce himself for the sake of a true one: It Is much
easier for him to fast, than to renounce his Vices; to sing spiritual Songs, or
bow to a Statue, than forgive his Enemies. It appears then, that the Christian
Religion bears a more excellent Character, in that it gives us for the Object
of our Worship, not a God under an human Shape, but a God that is a Spirit, in
that it teaches us to honor him, not with a carnal, but a Spiritual Worship.
And this Christ himself has very elegantly told us in these Words, God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth,
John 4. 24. Who could fill his Mind with such elevated Notions? And how comes
it that he so excellently sets down in that short Precept the Genius of true
Religion, of which Men before were wholly ignorant?

V. Christian Religion makes us glorify God by renouncing the World. Thus the
Heathens designing rather to please themselves than their Deities, introduced
into Religion whatever could any ways flatter and divert them. And the
Mahumatan Religion not being Encumbered with many Ceremonies, at least affixes
temporal Advantages to the Practice of its Worship; as if the Pleasures of the
World were to be the future Reward of Religion: But certainly both of them are
much mistaken; for the Heathens should have known that the Worship of God
consisted not in diverting and pleasing themselves; and the Mahumetans should
not have been ignorant, that since temporal and worldly Advantages were
insufficient in themselves to satisfy the boundless Desires of Man's Heart,
they could not come in Competition with those Benefits which true Religion had
peculiarly designed for him. But both these followed the Motions of Self-love,
which being naturally held in suspense between the World and Religion, imagins
that nothing can be more pleasant than to unite them both, thinking thereby to
reconcile its Inclination and Duty, consecrate it is Pleasures, and put no
difference between Conscience and Interest.

But the first Rule of true Religion teaches us, that that mutual Agreement is
impossible; or, to use it is own Words, that Christ and Belial are incompatible
one with the other; that we must either glorify God at the expense of worldly
Pleasures, or possess the Advantages of the World with the Loss of our
Religion: And this certainly shows the Christian Religion to have a Divine
Character.

VI. Christian Religion humbles Man, and exalts the Deity. The Egyptians, a
Nation that boasted so much of their Antiquity, made Monsters of their Deities;
and the Romans made Deities of their Emperors, who were rather Monsters than
Men* The most famous Philosophers were not ashamed to rank their Deities below
themselves, and themselves ever before Jupiter; but the Christian Religion
teaches us that we owe all to God, who owes nothing at all to us. It humbles us
by the Consideration of that infinite Distance there is between God and us; it
shows that we are miserable despicable Creatures in comparison of God who is a
Supreme* Being, and only worthy our Love and Adoration. Who then can choose but
admire so excellent a Religion?

VII. Paul reproaches them, and how basely superstitious were they, in that
they were not content to Deify themselves, but would also Deify their own Vices
and Imperfections? But the Christian Religion alone restores that equitable
Order which ought to be established in the World, by submitting every thing to
the Power of Man, that he might submit himself to the Will of his God. And what
can be the Duty of true Religion, but to restore such just and becoming Order
in the World?

VIII. Justice and Vprightness which God has imprinted on their Minds. But he
that shall truly consider the Christian Religion, will certainly find that it
tends to the rooting up those corrupt Desires out of our Hearts, and restoring
those bright Characters of Honesty and Justice imprinted on our Minds by the
hand of God. The Heathens flattered their Passions to that degree, as to erect
Altars in Honor of them; and Mahomet was so well pleased with temporal
Prosperity, that he made it the End and Reward of his Religion. The Gnostics
imagined, that when they had arrived to a certain degree of Knowledge, which
they called a State of Perfection, they might commit all sorts of Actions
without any Scruple of Conscience; and that Sin which polluted others would be
sanctified in them. But what Blindness! what Impiety was this! How admirable is
the Christian Religion, which alone among all others shows us our own
Wickedness and Corruption, and heals it with such Remedies as are as wholesome
to the Soul as unpleasing to the Body!

IX. Policy, either in favoring or restraining too much human Weakness and
Corruption, upon the Account of Policy: Whereas the Christian Religion
preserves it is Rights and Privileges inviolable, independent from either. The
Pagan Religion was against Policy in giving too much to human Weakness and
Corruption. It would have been much better for the Good and Welfare of the
State, if Men had framed to themselves a greater Idea of the Holiness of their
Gods; because they would have been less licentious, and more submissive to the
Civil Laws; whereas they were encouraged by the Example of their Deities to
violate the most sacred and inviolable Rights. Mahomet, desirous to avoid this
Irregularity, retained the Notion of a true God; but then being willing also to
flatter Men's Inclinations to draw them to his side, he confusedly mixed with
that Idea the carnal and gross Notions the Heathens had of Paradise, borrowing
from Christianity such Objects as must necessarily mortify our Passions, and
assuming those from Paganism which serve to flatter our bad Inclinations. But
the Christian Religion keeps no such Measures either with Policy or Corruption.
Policy complains that the Doctrine of Christ necessarily softens Men's Courage,
and that instead of encouraging them to list themselves Soldiers for the
welfare and preservation of the State, it rather makes them Lambs, who can
hardly be exasperated against their Enemies, whom they must continually pray
for, and are obliged to love as themselves. And as for human Frailty and
Corruption, it murmurs to see itself impugned by the Christian Religion, even
in the Dispositions and most secret Recesses of the Soul; and that the Veil of
Hypocrisy, and the pious Pretenses and Dissimulations of the Soul under which
it thought to lie secure, are ineffectual against it. Who then but God, can be
the Author of a Religion so equally contrary both to the covetous Desires of
the mean, and the Ambition of the great, and so equally averse both to Policy
and Corruption?

X. God should bear the Image of Man, and so necessarily represent the Deity as
weak, miserable, and infected with all manner of Vices, as Men are. Whereas the
Christian Religion teaches us that Man ought to bear the Image of God; which is
a Motive to induce us to become perfect as we conceive God himself to be holy
and perfect. That Religion then which restores God his Glory, and the Image of
God to Man, must necessarily be of Divine Authority.

XI. Christian Religion is a wonderful Composition, which seems wholly to
proceed from the most Simple and Ignorant sort of People. The Heathens have
often condemned the extravagant Notions the vulgar People had framed to
themselves of the Deity; they have blamed the barbarous Cruelty of those
Sacrifices which were offered to their Gods in so many places, and the impurity
of their Mysteries, the Falsehood of their Oracles, and the Vanity and
Childishness of their Ceremonies. Cicero says in some part of his Works, that
two Augurs could not look one another in the Face without Laughter. And nothing
can be more extravagant than the Divinity of the Gnostics, who held that there
are Invisible Eternal Spirits, who mixing one with the other produced others.
We all know that when Philosophers took upon them to treat of Religion, they
always exceeded one another in Extravagancies* and no one, I dare say, is still
to learn what are those Visions and fabulous Stories with which the Rabbis
filled their Traditions, the Catalogue of which would be very curious indeed,
were it not so extremely long. And tho we cannot disown but that the Heathens,
the Philosophers, etc. made several wonderful Discoveries in Arts and Sciences:
Yet it will appear that a long succession of very understanding Men among* them
were guilty of many repeated Extravagancies in this respect, and that by a
Prodigy not to be parallelled, did not the Christian Religion offer such
another, by showing us a Company of Wise and Learned Men in such Ignorant
Persons as the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

Certainly it is a strange thing to see the most understanding Men become the
most stupid, and the most ignorant prove the most understanding in matters of
Religion. It Is a true sign that God designed to confound the understanding of
the Wise, and a proof that their Religion was formed rather according to the
corrupt desires of their Hearts, than the dictates of their Understanding. For
had it been according to their Understanding, it would have been more
reasonable in proportion to the Wisdom and Knowledge of the Authors of it. But
because it was made to sooth their corrupt Desires and flatter their Passions,
it is as extravagant and irregular as those Passions.

And now let us put together all these Characters, and ask the Incredulous,
whether they can be so extravagant as to ascribe to an Impostor a Religion so
perfect in it is Original, that nothing could ever since be superadded to it,
but what necessarily lessens the Perfection of it; a Religion that proposes
it is Mysteries with such Authority and Boldness, that brings Men from Sensual
Objects to Spiritual ones, that extirpates Corruption, restores the Principles
of Righteousness and Vprightness that were imprinted on our Souls; that teaches
us to glorify God without any regard had to Self-love or Pleasure; to exalt God
and humble our selves; to submit our selves to his Will, who is above us all,
and to raise our selves above those Beings that he has put in subjection under
us; a Religion that is contrary to Policy, and yet more averse to Corruption;
that astonishes our Reason and yet gives us the peace of a good Conscience; and
in a word, is as delightful to the one, as it is comfortable to the other.

If the Christian Religion then has all these Qualifications, as it certainly
has, we cannot doubt but that it is directly as to these Qualifications
opposite to all other Religions. And if it be thus opposite to all other
Religions, it must necessarily have a Principle opposite to them: So that as
all other Religions peculiarly belong to the Flesh, the Christian wholly
appertains to the Spirit; and as the former are the Products of the corrupt
Desires and Imaginations of Men, so the latter must have for it is Principle the
God of Holiness and Purity.

III Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in it is Effects.
WE may distinguish Four several kinds of Societies in which the Efficacy of
Religion may be acknowledged, (viz.) a Natural, a Political, a Vicious, and a
Religious Society.

And first, the Society of Nature is innocent and equitable in it self; but it
cannot stand out a Trial with Men's irregular and disordered Passions. Men will
indeed be united among themselves as long as they are concerned only in
indifferent matters; but Covetousness soon disunites them: And therefore there
is something wanting to establish and confirm it. As for the Society of
Corruption and Vice, it is essentially sinful; and therefore Self-interest, and
Men's Desires and Passions that form it, are either to be removed or regulated.
A Political Society is soon violated by Lawsuits, Wars, and Dissentions; all
which are occasioned too by the Passions. To support therefore and maintain it,
such Principles of Fidelity are to be established, as shall remain inviolable:
All which is best done in a Society of Religion, the most perfect of them all,
and as it were a Prop to the rest: This Society must be firmly opposed to all
accidental Revolutions, must unite those Persons together, whom the distance of
Time and Place, and the disparity of Interest would otherwise have for ever
divided.

Now the Christian Religion restores the Society of Nature: For by uniting Men
so strictly in the Bond of Charity, it farther strengthens that natural Love
which we call Humanity. It destroys too the Societies of Interest and Ambition,
because it extirpates such inordinate Desires as are not true Principles of
Union and good Understanding one among another. It also strengthens Civil
Society, by commanding us to obey our Superiors, and teaching us to render
unto Caesar, the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods.
Lastly, it establishes such a Society, as restores the Equality of Nature among
us; and whereas there was in the World till the coming of Christ, a Society of
Men externally indeed united by the Bond of Civil Laws, Government, and the
Degrees of Proximity of Blood, but internally divided by their irregular
Passions, Christ shows us a Society of Men externally divided by the distance
of Time and Place, and the disparity of their Conditions, but internally united
by the Bonds of the same Faith the same Hope, and the same Charity.

Nor are these mere Ideas or Speculations; for besides that the Christian
Religion visibly relates wholly to the Design of making Men holy and pure, and
dedicating them to God; besides that the Apostles tell us, that it is the End
of their Preaching, directing themselves in their Epistles to those that are
called to be Saints, and to the Spiritual Israel, and declaring concerning
Apostates, that they went from them because they were not of them; besides,
that Jesus Christ on all occasions makes the very same Distinction, refusing to
own them for his Disciples that should be wholly taken up with the advantages
of the World, and giving this Mark and Character of those whom he owned for
his, My Sheep hear my Voice; and the World hates them, because they are not of
the World, Joh. 17. 14. I say, besides all this we have this Satisfaction, that
we can produce a Society of holy Men, that yielded not to any Powers of the
World, but withstood the most rigorous Trials of Persecutions, and renounced
the enticing Charms of the World, the better to adhere to the Cross of Christ;
A Society victorious in Temptations, that overcame Vices, and deluded the
indefatigable Endeavors of Tyrants; a Society composed of Mortal Men, yet not
to be exstinguished by Death; that was subject to the Laws of Nature, yet
encouraged with motives Supernatural; that conversed in the World, yet
despised it; that was dispersed in several different Times and Places, yet
always united in the same Thoughts and Opinions; that was continually attack't
by different Passions, yet constantly surmounted them: In a word, a Society
that still flourished in the midst of Persecution, increased the more, as often
as it was defeated, and raised it self out of it is own ruins. Certainly he must
have read but little of Ecclesiastical History, that is unacquainted with all
these Truths, and he must be wilfully blind, and purposely impose upon himself,
that acknowledges not the Efficacy of Religion in all those wonderful Effects.

And it is properly in that Society of holy Men, or in the Church it self, that
we ought to seek for the Fruits of Religion, for there we shall find the
Accomplishment of those ancient Prophecies, which promised to show us the Sheep
feeding with the Bear, and the Leopard with the Lamb, etc. And as the Ark of
God could not be left in the midst of it is Enemies without working several
Wonders among them, which even those Infidels were sensible of; so the
Christian Church cannot continue in the World, without producing such
remarkable Effects in it, which the most incredulous themselves cannot call in
question.

For let them tell us, if they can, how came the Oracles of the Heathens to be
immediately silenced when the Apostles first preached the Mysteries of
Christianity, and by what Power the Sound of those Men being gone to the end of
the World, made those Oracles eternally cease, which had so long foretold
things to come, and so forced the Heathenish Writers, as Plutarch and others,
to inquire into the Cause of that so sudden and so unexpected Silence? For to
object with Julian, that the Jewish and Christian Oracles have been also
silenced, concludes nothing; because the Apostles foretold that the Gift of
Prophecy should cease: But how appears it, that the Oracles among the Heathens
declared they should one day be silenced? The Accomplishment of our Prophecies,
being an everlasting Proof of the Truth of our Religion, serves us instead of
Perpetual Oracles: But what Accomplishment of Prophecies confirms the Pagan
Religion?

No less wonderful an Effect of our Religion, was the abundance of Revelation
which brought so many Superstitious and Idolatrous Nations to the Knowledge of
the true God. Hence came the World to be filled with Wisdom by the preaching of
ignorant Persons, and the meanest Servants to have more noble and rational
Ideas of the Deity, than the most quick Clear-sighted Philosophers, and that
too by the Proposal of such a Doctrine as seems indeed to the Flesh an Object of
Scandal and Horror.

We cannot deny but that the Christian Religion has the advantage of all others
for having utterly abolished all those Sacrifices wherein they offered the
Blood of Men: Neither can we doubt but that this cruel and bloody Superstition
was sufficiently advanced in the World, since we find that the Holy Scripture
reproaches the Jews, for having sacrificed their Children to Moloch; and that
Julius Caesar tells us in his Commentaries, that it was an ancient Custom among
the Gauls to offer Human Victims to their pretended Deities.

I confess indeed, the Romans had already renounced such a barbarous and cruel
Superstition; but then I question whether they did not still retain some Spice
of it in those Spectacles they exhibited to the People, wherein they were
extremely pleased to see the Blood of their Gladiatours run down, who killed
one another merely to make them Sport: A Sacrifice so much the more impious,
because dedicated rather to the unlawful pleasure of Men, than the Honor of
those Beings they looked upon as Gods. And what but the Christian Religion
could have abolished all those bloody Spectacles and horrid Divertisements?

We have just reason to be surprised to think how licentiously that abominable
Sin, usually punished by God and Man with Fire, reigned heretofore in the
World; and we cannot without horror and amazement reflect, how that the love of
both Sexes seemed equally grown common to Men; and that ancient Authors freely
speak of that kind of Debauchery which our own Writers dare not so much as
mention, lest they defile their Writings. Socrates is represented to us by some
of them as being deeply smitten with the Beauty of Alcibiades, and the Emperor
Trajan, (whose Panegyric well deserved thirty Years labor) strangely
blemished his Reputation by that monstrous Lechery: Which pretty well shows the
just Grounds for St. Paul's reproach to the Heathens, who says, that because
when they had known God, they glorified him not as God, therefore God also gave
them up unto vile Affections, Romans 1. 21. And indeed it was no inconsiderable
service the Christian Religion did Men, in partly abolishing and disgracing so
much that kind of detestable Debauchery, that we look upon those to be no less
than abominable Monsters, that seem any way inclinable to it.

Humility and Charity, those two Virtues so Essential and necessary to Men,
were so utterly unknown formerly, that their Names were scarce known in all the
Pagan World. To what then do we owe the knowledge and Esteem we have of those
two so excellent Virtues, but to the Religion we profess? Lastly, 'twas by the
means of this Religion that the Creature was again called a Creature, and God
again called by his own Name, Jehovah. 'Twas this Religion that took away from
Vice the name of Virtue, and reclaimed Virtue from the scandal of passing for
Vice; restored right Reason to it is former Privileges, enlightened the
Consciences of Men, mortified their irregular and disorderly Passions, and
confounded their Avarice. And surely by all these divine effects you must
necessarily perceive and acknowledge the Divinity of Christianity.

IV. Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as considered in the Purity of it is
End.
IF the Effects of the Christian Religion are truly answerable to the
Characters of it, we may also affirm that it is End is truly answerable to it is
Effects, it being manifest, there never was any so incorrupt, so pure, so
extraordinary, and so perfect.

For we cannot but acknowledge that it is the main End and Design of Christian
Religion to check and mortify Men's irregular Passions, and restore the
Principles of Righteousness and Uprightness in them, which their Corruption had
as it were Effaced.

And it cannot be supposed this was the intention of the Devil, whom we
conceive to be as a Spirit naturally averse to the Good of Mankind; nor that of
Flesh and Blood, that aim at nothing else but to satisfy their Lusts; nor that
of Nature, which is easily persuaded, being biased by the Pleasures which Vice
gives her a Prospect of; nor that of Policy, which tends only to the
restraining the Licentiousness of all external Crimes, in as much as they
violate and invert the Order of public Society, but looks indifferently upon
all Crimes that respect the Soul. Neither can it be the scope and design of
Reason, which is easily corrupted by Avarice; nor even that of Pride, which is
mortified much more than all the other Passions by this Doctrine, unknown to the
Flesh, and insufferable to Nature. Who then is it that concerns himself so much
with Pride as to take away it is Errors, it is Vainglory, it is chimerical
Perfections; Preferences, Hypocrisy and Affectations, and all this only by a
serious Consideration of the divine Nature? Who takes upon him to deprive
Self-love of it is Injustice, the Flesh of it is unlawful Pleasures, and in a
word, all human Passions of their Disorders and Irregularities? What can such a
Design mean? And how could this Thought of sanctifying Mankind enter of it self
into any Man's Mind?

We may justly therefore ascribe this End and Design to the Christian Religion:
For it is certain it contains neither Exhortation nor Precept, Promise nor
Threat, History nor Prophecy, but what directly aims at that very End. The Holy
Scripture is not of the Nature of those Books, that contain nothing but vain
Speculations, or curious Enquiries; all those of that kind were brought to the
Apostles to be burnt, who returned no other Answer to those that asked them,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? But this, Repent ye. They plainly declared
that the Design of the Gospel was to free Men from the Bondage of their Sins;
and their Example shows us as much. For what other Design could they have had
in renouncing every thing, and enduring all Persecutions, but to persuade other
Men they should renounce this present World? Besides, whether they speak, or
write, they don't run out into vain Contests and Disputes, the ordinary product
of the Vanity of Mankind; but come immediately to their purpose, and insist
only on what is material and essential to it. Every particular in their
Discourses and Writings is practical and relating to the Perfection of
Morality; so much they despise the Fineness of Eloquence, and Subtilty of Human
Philosophy, and propose only to themselves the edification of Men. These things
write I unto you, say they, that ye Sin not, 1 John. 2. 1. But supposing them
such Deceivers as the Incredulous imagine; what was it to them whether we
Sinned, or not? What injury would it have been to the Son of a Carpenter, tho
the Pharisees were dissembling Hypocrites, and dishonored the Deity by their
Traditions, and tho there had been Tables of Money Changers in the Court of the
Temple? What was it to him, whether Sinners repented of their Sins, or not?
Whether Men were Just and Merciful, or thought they could appease God only with
vain Offerings? Whether the City that killed the Prophets, knew the things that
belonged to her Peace, or not? What could move him to shed Tears in such
abundance at the thoughts of the approaching Destruction of Jerusalem? A
sensible and effectual Proof indeed of his being very much concerned for her
Salvation. What would it have signified to a few poor deluded Wretches, whether
the Gentiles had the Knowledge of the true God, or not? To a Company of false
Witnesses, whether Men were Cheats or Liars? To persons odious and had in
abomination every where, whether Men truly loved one another, or not? To the
Victims of public Hatred, whether Men were reconciled to God or not? To such
afflicted and disconsolate Wretches, whether other Men were truly made sensible
of a Divine Comfort, and of the Peace of God which passes all understanding?
Who can imagine that those Men designed to be wicked, only to make us become
honest? To deceive all Mankind on purpose to establish a sacred and inviolable
Law of Fidelity? To become the Enemies of their own Nation, to make us be in
Charity with all Mankind? In a word, to establish a Religion in the World that
tends wholly to the Sanctification of Mankind, by the most signal Imposture,
and most heinous Crime that Men could be guilty of?

'Twould be strange, if such wicked and deceitful Men, as the Incredulous
imagine the Apostles to have been, should have the least Thoughts of sanctifying
others: And 'twould be yet more surprising if that Thought should be so fixed
in their Minds, as to become a full and perfect design of venturing and losing
all, to compass it. Nay, 'twould be next to a Miracle, if that Design should be
put in execution; and yet more, 'twould be an unheard of Prodigy, if a
continual succession of People should adhere to the same Principles, and
continue in the same disposition of Mind against their own Interest, and in
spite of the severest Persecutions. Certainly we may confidently say, that
Imposture and Deceit never had such a design, or, the like success. For though
self-love may have hitherto made use of Deceit and Falsehood to effect its own
Desires, without any regard had to Justice and Charity, so indispensably due to
our Neighbor; it was yet never known, nor ever will be, that Charity made use
of Imposture and Deceit to bring about its Designs for the good of others,
without the least consideration of its own Interest and Desires. And to insist
further upon it, would be to endeavor to add Light to the Sun, and prove a
thing that is already as clear as Noonday.

V. Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is Considered in it is
Suitableness to the Necessities of Mankind.
WE cannot seriously reflect upon our selves, without immediately discovering
our own Weakness, Misery, and Corruption: Neither can we look upon the
Christian Religion, without acknowledging that it was peculiarly designed to
free us from those three Imperfections inherent in our Nature.

As to the Corruption of Man, it may be said that it was the only thing in the
World that Men most knew, and yet at the same time were most ignorant of: For
the effects of it were palpable and evident to the Senses. It was easily
believed, that Men were very wicked and corrupt, when it was so manifestly seen
that they committed so many enormous Crimes: But Men were still ignorant that
there was a general Depravation from Nature in the Heart of every Man, that
disposed him to the strangest Irregularities; and it has so happened that Men
have made no great Reflection upon the Nature of that Original Depravation so
incident to Mankind, that it continually attends them from the Cradle to the
Grave. They only concerned themselves about what was external, without
searching into the bottom of their Hearts and Consciences.

But the Christian Religion gives us in that respect all necessary light: It
teaches us that we are corrupt, and that that Corruption proceeds from our
selves: It shows us the extent of it, and confirms what the Old Testament
taught us, That all flesh had corrupted his way, Genesis 6. 12. It shows us that
that Corruption makes us subject to the Curse of God, and that we are by nature
the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. It assures us that that Original Corruption
has such power over Man's Heart, that it moves all the Faculties of his Soul,
so that every imagination of the heart of man is only evil continually, Genesis 6.
5. Lastly, It shows us how impossible it is for Man ever to recover himself of
that Malady so inveterate and deeply rooted within him; and that by
representing him to us as one that is lame, that has a Lethargy, that is dead
in respect of Life, Holiness, and Justice; all which Truths we know too well by
Reason and Experience.

How comes it then that the Christian Religion teaches us such things as were
so generally unknown to Mankind? Above all, how comes it to show us so
distinctly the true Principle of our own Corruption? Who taught the Son of Mary
that Self-love is the true Source and Original of all our Irregularities? And
why does he make Man to become an Enemy to himself?

Yet the Christian Religion not only teaches us to know Man, and thoroughly to
search into all his Frailties, but also that alone furnishes us with such
Remedies, as can cure all his Weaknesses and Imperfections.

For we cannot see that any thing else can do it. Not Education, which is as
often evil as good; not the Civil Laws, whose business is only to regulate
outward actions; Nor the Law in general, which instead of removing, rather
increases this Original Corruption, being in that respect like a Bank which
causes the Flood to swell; Not the Decorum observed among Men, which usually
varies according to the diversity of Countries; Nor the Respect we commonly
have for our selves, a thing too thin and metaphysical not to submit to the
Sense of Pleasure; Not Reason it self, which the Passions so easily corrupt;
Nor the Example of Men, who commonly lead a very irregular life; Not worldly
Honor, which regards only external Pomp and Grandeur; nor Lastly, Philosophy,
which wants motives sufficient to effect it: or if it has any, it derives them
all from our own Pride.

Must we then have recourse to the Virtues in fashion in the World? we may
easily perceive that they are only Pride and Interest differently managed
according to the various Turns and Affairs, since they have no other Motives
but what they have from the World.

The Falsehood of Human Virtues is a thing not to be disputed. We all know that
Self-denial is only a piece of nice delicate Interest; Liberality, a mere Trade
of Pride, which values no Gifts, provided it have the Glory of being liberal;
Modesty, the Art of concealing our Vanity; Civility, but an affected Preference
of other Men before our selves, to conceal how much we really value our selves
above all the world; Bashfulness, but an affected Silence in those things which
our Lusts make us think of with pleasure, the desire of obliging other Men, but
a secret desire of obliging our selves by getting them to befriend us another
time; just as Impatience to acquit our selves of an Obligation, is but a
Shamefacedness for having been too long beholding to others for some Favor
received. So that all these Virtues in general are so many Guards Self-love
makes use of to prevent our darling and secret Vices from appearing outwardly.
What Remedy then can be brought for the Irregularities of our corrupt Nature,
the pernicious Poison of which secretly insinuates it self even into our
Virtuousactions? And who can cure such a Distemper, when the Remedies applied
to it are rather a Disease than a Cure?

Experience shows us, that by effectually resisting one Vice, we often confirm
and establish another. Would you destroy Avarice? you must attack it by such
Arguments as necessarily flatter Pride. And is Pride to be overcome? it must be
impugn'd by such Motives as encourage Avarice. In vain shall you strip
Self-love of all it is pleasing Objects and Allurements; still it will endeavor
to secure it self either by contemning the Goods of Fortune, or by showing it is
Moderation in patiently enduring Disgraces. Self-love when seated on the
Throne, makes Tyrants; when reduced to Want and Poverty, it makes Philosophers,
who despise every thing they cannot enjoy. It often indeed changes it is Object,
but not it is Disposition. It Is Pride (as I may say) outlives its own Death, and
not being able to prevent it is perishing it would seem to look pleasantly upon
its Downfall, and as it were triumph in it is own Ruin. Who then can give this
Hydra it is Deaths wound, when the lopping off one Head, serves only to give
rise to another?

It is certain therefore that nothing can remedy this Corruption, unless it be
more constant than the Principles of Education, more infallible than the Rules
of Decency and Civility, more holy than the Civil Laws, which require only an
outward Purity, and consult the exterior Good of public Society? more powerful
than all worldly Honor which regards only Pomp and Renown; more Effectual than
all worldly Motives, which are unable to subvert those Passions, the Vanity of
which they flatter; more strong than a vain and fruitless Wisdom, which
pretends to free Man from his Misery by annihilating him, and has no other
Motives but what proceed from the greatest of our Imperfections, our Pride. The
Christian Religion alone has all these Advantages, and consequently is alone
suitable to the Necessities of Man.

It is that which purifies the very Bottom of our Consciences, by showing us
that it is to no purpose to cleanse the Outside of the Cup and the Platter. It
reforms our Principles, by making a Temporal Interest give place to an Eternal
one, and extinguishing the desire of an imaginary by the hopes of a real
Immortality. It proposes to us an unalterable Rule and a true Model of
Perfection to go by. It informs us that we have both a Judge and a Witness of
all our actions, who discovers us, though in the Dark, and covered as it were
with a Cloud; whose piercing Eye sees through all our Pretenses and Disguises,
who forces us to know our selves, to combat and mortify our Desires; and that,
whether we are seen or not seen, whether the World approves or condemns our
Actions; God being Essentially independent from all outward Objects, and not
limited by any exterior Circumstances.

And indeed what but such an infinite Deity could have supplied us with such a
Remedy, so effectual, and so suitable to all our Wants and Necessities? For
Misery and Wretchedness are the portion of our Corruption; and he that cannot
shake off the latter, will certainly always be subject to the two former.

Nor is it sufficient to say that Man is miserable* We may add that he is in
some measure the very Center of Misery. We see that whilst all other Animals
peaceably enjoy those good things Nature has allotted them, Men seem to be in
some respect marked out for Misery by the hand of Divine Justice; they are
equally dissatisfied as well with what they possess, as what they possess not:
They are terrified with the Idea they have of Death; tormented with the
consideration of Futurity; afflicted that they are unable to fix Time, which
bears them away with it as it rolls on; Miserable for what they know, or rather
for not knowing more; mortified and disappointed in their Desires, tormented
with Remorses, affronted and injured by their Fellow Creatures, and harrass'd
by the continual Inquietudes of their Heart: In a word, they enjoy Peace and
Tranquillity no longer than they can deceive themselves with a Scene of
imaginary Bliss, and frame to themselves false Ideas of their present Condition.

And this desire of imposing thus upon our selves, in fancying our Happiness
greater than it is, makes us vainly imagine we should be less miserable, if we
were in the condition of those that are far above us. But Experience soon
undeceives us, and shows that the distant Prospect of Honor and Riches gives
more pleasure and delight than a nearer possession of them; and that the Hope
of enjoying them makes us more truly happy, than their Fruition; which
excellently shows us the Emptiness and Insufficiency of all such temporal
Advantages.

Nor do we think it enough to deceive our selves in respect of our Condition,
but endeavor also to deceive others by making them entertain a vast Idea of
our Merit, or our Happiness; and through a certain Weakness to be pitied, we
afterward make use of that Esteem and Respect we have accidentally and
unawares extorted from others, to impose more effectually upon our selves, and
enlarge that Chimerical Idea of our own Perfection, which Self-love entertains
in our Breasts with so much complacency and satisfaction. Who then can direct
our Minds, or clear our Undestanding in this inextricable and continued Maze of
Illusions and Errors, the false Principles of a false Satisfaction? And who can
find Remedy for so great a Misery? Since barely to bring us acquainted with it,
would serve only to increase it.

The Christian Religion then having the Character of performing all this, is
certainly a Religion truly Divine; and is it not strange that it should make
Man happy by teaching him how to know Himself, and to remove his Misery by
shaking off his Ignorance, especially when that Ignorance is the cause of his
Tranquillity and Satisfaction? Yet we ought not to wonder at it, since Religion
gives us a new Prospect of things, and much different from what we ever had
before. It makes us patiently endure Diseases, by discovering to us the Cause
and Design of them. It comforts us in all our sudden and unexpected Disgraces,
by assuring us that nothing can come to pass without the Dispensation of God's
Providence, who turns all things to our advantage: It humbles us in Prosperity,
and supports us in Afflictions: It eases the Troubles of our Heart, by calming
our Passions: It strengthens us against the Fear of Death, by teaching us to
consider it as a Passage to a far better Life: It comforts our Consciences by
it is Promises: It continually attends us in all Times, in all Places; and in
all Dangers, strengthens us; in our Solitude hinders us from falling into deep
Melancholy and Sorrow, when we consider our selves, and what shall be our
future State; and Lastly, comforts and chears us upon our Deathbed, where
alone it serves us indeed instead of all things, when the Charms of Self-love
are at an end, and the Scene of the World begins for ever to vanish out of our
sight. And truly we must be wilfully blind, if we perceive not the Divine
Author of that Religion, which at once shows us so well our own Misery, and
gives us such excellent Remedies for all the Imperfections of our Nature.

Nor does it less enlighten our Understanding in respect of our Wretchedness,
another Consequence of our Corruption. For is not Man strangely wretched and
contemptible, when in his own natural State, he neither knows what he himself
is, nor what he should be, but is continually taken up with Concerns unworthy
his Nature; full of Projects and Notions but of a Moment's concern; unable to
bear long the consideration of himself, and incapable of living without the
help of Others?

Yet to speak the Truth, it must be confessed that there are such Sentiments
implanted in Man that plainly discover some Greatness in him, even through his
Weakness and Unworthiness. His Mind indeed is often taken up with the meanest
Objects; yet cannot be satisfied with the consideration of the greatest: He
cannot subsist without other Men's help; yet endeavors to be esteemed by all,
desiring to diffuse himself every where by a sort of Immensity, which he
derives only from the Author of his Being. He is buried as it were in the Cares
of this Life; yet since he finds every thing in it disproportionable to his
Nature, his Thoughts aspire to Eternity; and tho perhaps he is ignorant of any
true and real one, he frames at least an imaginary one to himself, and would
feign outlive his Days in spite of Death, by immortalizing himself in the
remembrance of Men. Who then can reconcile Man to Himself? How come such lofty
Sentiments to be joined with so much Wretchedness and Misery? Or why should a
Being so mean and humble, have such great and elevated Notions?

If we consult the Christian Religion we shall soon be satisfied in this Point.
For the first Rudiments of it will solve all the seeming Riddles. It will teach
us that Man consists of two Parts, Body and Soul, whose qualities and parts are
very different: The Body makes him a Member of the Material World, from whence
he derives his Wretchedness and Misery: In his Soul he bears the Image of God,
which is the Foundation of his real Goodness.

If the Mind be subject to Matter, we see only his Imperfections, and find
nothing but a Sensitive Man in him; but if the Body be wholly subject to the
Soul, then only the Greatness and Glory of the Soul appears; and we find a
Spiritual Man in him. Whatever therefore may be said concerning the Greatness
of Man, becomes an incredible Paradox if applied to his outward and carnal
part: And whatever may be said concerning his Imperfection and Unworthiness,
will be utterly false if applied to him as a Being glorious and purely
Spiritual.

But in our present State the Soul and Body are in a continual War: Sometimes
the Excellence and Greatness of Man's Nature, and sometimes the Weakness and
Unworthiness of it appears, according as the Flesh or Spirit are predominant
and this serves for a certain Rule to judge of Man's Perfection or Imperfection,
that every thing is great and noble in him, that brings the Flesh in subjection
to the Spirit; and every thing seems vile and contemptible, that basely brings
the Spirit in subjection to the Flesh.

For what sort of Greatness can we find in the latter? and wherein consists the
Excellence of his outward qualifications, by which alone he endeavors to
procure the Esteem of other Men? Not in the Antiquity of his Original, for that
brings him but the nearer to his primitive Nothing, or to the Clay out of which
he was first formed. He betrays his weak Judgment in esteeming so much the
Original of his Body, and not regarding that of his Soul. As for the Goods of
Fortune, they swell his Heart with Pride, and therefore he values himself more
for what he enjoys, than for what he really is. Suppose him a Conqueror, or if
you please, Lord of the Universe; But alas that can be of no great continuance.
His Reason indeed exalts him far above all other Creatures; but even that
Reason is a Slave to his Scnses; his Passions deject rather than elevate him:
Ambition is a Weakness which makes him unable to rule his Desires; Pride an
Imperfection, which so possesses his Mind that he cannot pass by the least
Affront to his Reputation; Avarice a base fear of future want, a limited
Consideration of Self-love, that forgets it self, to think better upon what is
least valuable in its condition; The Punctilios of Honor, a vain Imperfection,
that makes an Idol of it self; That Valor which affronts Death, nothing but a
Man's strangely forgetting himself, and being insensible of the Dangers that
surround him: And Lastly, all the Passions but so many Deviations from the End
we ought to pursue; so many Disorders and Irregularities of the Soul, as
appears fully by what we have said elsewhere concerning the End for which Man
was orginally designed.

And though these be all Moral Truths, they are not the less certain. Experience
confirms them, and ^he free confession of the Incredulous, who are glad of any
Opportunity of making us observe all these signs and characters of our
Wretchedness and Misery, thinking thereby to persuade us that so miserable a
Creature was not designed for such a glorious End as we imagine.

But let them only consider how truly great Man is, when he submits the Lusts
of the Flesh to the Rule of the Spirit, and they will be ashamed of their false
Opinions: They Will find him indeed a Being that had a Beginning, but yet one
that glories in God as the Author of it: They Will find him an Atom that raises
it is self above all other Creatures, by running back to it is first Author, and
paying him Homage for it is Unworthiness: A Worm that has the Honor of
referring it is self to the Glory of God, to which also all other Beings are
referred, but without knowing it. They Will find him a Being that is indeed
Mortal, carries it is Hopes beyond Death: A Being that is finite; yet it is
Desires and Intentions are unlimited: A small quantity of Earth will cover his
Body, yet nothing but Immensity will satisfy his Soul: He possesses all things,
for he calls himself the Son of him that created all things: He is not to be
ranked among those Creatures which grow proud by promotion, or cannot be humble
without debasing themselves. He is great, but not proud, because he knows his
Natural Vileness; and he is humble, but not base, because he is sensible of his
true Greatness and Worth. He has made such a Covenant with his God, as the
Destruction of the Body is not able to dissolve. Though he conqers not Kingdoms,
nor razes Cities, yet he is able to overcome those Passions which have produced
the like effects. He sacrifices to God those very Passions to which Men
heretofore sacrificed all their Possessions: He esteems not a Crown, and the
highest Dignities are of no Value in his Thoughts: He quits a Throne to equal
himself to Shepherds, and though but a Shepherd he thinks himself as great as the
most powerful Monarch. What the World admires, is but a Dream to him. Tho he
enjoys the greatest Titles, yet has he the same humble Thoughts of himself.
Should the World afflict him on every side, it cannot lessen his Opinion of
himself. He raises himself above what he sees to humble himself in the sight of
God, who is invisible: He possesses Eternity, tho he exists in Time: He is a
Child of God, tho he lives amongst Men: He is sensible of his Exaltation above
all other Beings, but he is truly Great in his own Humility. Thus the Christian
Religion not only shows us Man's Excellence, but is also the Cause of it, by
making the meanest part of our Nature subservient to the nobler. He therefore
that utterly renounces all Religion, loses the perfection of his Nature; and
the less he believes, the more he debases himself below other Creatures.

It Is therefore the Christian Religion alone that shows us the Cure as well as
the Disease; that produces our hidden Virtues and unmasks our Vices; that
discovers to us our Misery, and frees us from it; that puts an end to all the
Wretchedness of our Nature, by making us truly sensible of it; that makes us
great by making us humble; that fits it self to all the Conditions of Life, and
satisfies all the Desires of our Hearts. In a word, it is the Christian
Religion that sanctifies us, exalts us, and compleats all our Wishes; and tho
Men and Angels should jointly endeavor to contrive a more excellent one, and
more suitable to our Wants and Necessities than this, it is certain they could
never accomplish their Design.

VI Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in the Relation
it bears to the Glory of God.
IT is with the Deity as with the Sun, which being bright in it self, diffuses
abroad it is Glory by it is Beams, and imprints upon the Clouds, or Waters, an
imperfect Image of it self; which Image tho it wants the full Splendour of it is
Original, is yet pure, agreeable, and adorned with sufficient Brightness and
Majesty.

The Deity has an essential Glory, consisting in it is supereminent Virtues and
infinite Perfections, to which nothing can be superadded; and the Brightness of
it is more than Man can bear. This Glory streaming from the eternal Author of
All things, diffuses it self abroad in all his Works, and forms out of the
bright Efflux of those Beams which strike by reflection upon us, and are united
into the Heart of Man, an Image of that refulgent and immortal Sun; which Image
tho it has not all it is full, perfect, and dazzling Splendour, is yet pure,
bright, lively and transcendent. And this Glory is what we call the Christian
Religion; easily proved to be so, in that it refers it self solely to the Glory
of God, and is as it were a lively Image and Transcript of His Perfection, and
Our Duty.

This Religion is alone capable of undeceiving Man, by removing those false
Notions, they had so long entertained of the Deity. This alone discovers the
true Nature of God, removes all Symbols, Types, Shadows, material and sensible
Appearances, under which he was Worshipped; all which were more proper to
disguise, than discover the true Nature of the Deity. It gives us some insight
into that Nature, by assuring us that God is invisible; and removes him from
our Senses, to make him the Object of our Understanding.

It Is this Religion alone that discovers that Eternal Counsel of God, so full
of Mercy and Consolation to us, that he sent his Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. It Is
this alone that glorifies God in his Attributes, and shows distinctly their
infinite Perfection. By this alone we are taught that God governs all things by
his Providence; that he makes Evil it self instr^mental to our Good; that by
his Goodness he supplies all our Necessities; that our Sins being inconsistent
with his Truth and Justice, he cannot consequently bear with them, and yet that
his Mercy and Compassion is without Bounds.

It teaches, us not only that we are bound to Worship God and serve him, but
assures us also that this was the End of our Creation. It teaches us to ask of
him, above all things, the advancement of his own Glory, and to begin our
Petitions with this Form, Hallowed be thy Name; Thy Kingdom come; Thy Will be
done. It requires of us that we should glorify him, not only with our Lips, or
barely by our spiritual Songs, but with all our Thoughts, Words, and Works. It
shows us, that there is no Creature but what is under his Providence; no Sin
but what may fall under his Justice; no Sinner but what may experience his
Mercy; no motion or inclination to ^^^ty, but what ought to be attributed to
the Efficacy of his Grace; nor no unlawful Action but what will one day fall
under his Judgment.

It discovers to us such Miracles as glorify his infinite Power, such Events as
clearly manifest the Wonders of his Providence, such Benefits as evince his
Goodness and Mercy; and it allows all his Divine Attributes (a thing before
unknown to Man) their just Extent, that is, an Extent without Limits. Now from
whence can proceed those Ideas we have of the Eternity of God, of his
Immensity, Omnipotence, his infinite Knowledge, and Immutability, etc. but from
this Divine Religion?

No other Religion could at once elevate both God and Man. It shows us how
admirably Man is united to God, and God to Man. It alone induces us to submit
our Will to God, to acquiesce without any murmuring to the Decrees of his
Providence, and to direct all our Desires and Affections to him as our supreme
Good. Men indeed heretofore endeavored to honor their Deities by Offering
Beasts as a Sacrifice: But was it ever known before, that they were to glorify
God by the Sacrifice of themselves? And what other Religion but this, could
incite Men to Offer such a Sacrifice, in which there seems to be so much Pain
and Reluctance?

Certainly, unless we wilfully blind our Selves, it is a thing incredible that
we should not perceive; that the Christian Religion is as it were a pure and
spiritual Communion between the Perfections and Attributes of God, which make
Man sensible of their effects; and the inward sense of Man's Heart, which
glorifies God. Neither Flesh and Blood; Neither the World, Nature, or
Education, were forcible enough to produce so great and sublime an Effect; and
this can be the Work of none but him, who perfectly knew the agreement of all
things, and was certain that our Hearts were wholly made for the Glory of God,
and that the Sentiments of his Glory were to be imprinted in our Hearts only by
the help of Religion.

VII Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in its Morality.
WEre we never so little acquainted with what passes within us, we should not
only find that the two principal Faculties of our Soul, the Sensitive, and
Intellectual Apetite by consent alternately deceive one another; but we should
also perceive that it is almost impossible to undertake to rectify the one,
without increasing the Disorders of the other.

If by the Knowledge of those things we were before ignorant of, we remove the
Darkness of our Understanding, we usually then grow proud of our Learning: And
if we satisfy our Desires by soothing our Passions, we often cherish the most
dangerous Principles of Error and Prejudice that obscure the Light of the
Understanding. And it is a Truth but too well experienced, that the Knowledge
which enlightens the Understanding, often corrupts the Heart; and a Sin
indulged in, which satisfies the Heart corrupts the Understanding.

And this is the cause of the ill Success those Men have met with, who
endeavored to regulate the Desires of Man. For some observed not the Dictates
of Right Reason, in being too indulgent to their Passions, as the Epicureans,
who making Pleasure the only End of Man, debase him to a Brute to render him
more happy. Others were puffed up with a kind of Spiritual Pride in ascribing
the knowledge of too many things to their Reason; such were the Stoics, who
forgot that they were Men, because they had such a deep penetration of Mind,
and attempted to exalt Man above himself, by infatuating him with the Conceits
of his own Wisdom.

But God, who knows best what Remedies are most proper for us, has given us a
Religion which satisfies the Heart, without corrupting the Understanding, and
enlarges the Understanding without corrupting the Heart; and that because it
satisfies, and yet mortifies; it enlightens, and yet confounds the
Understanding. If to the Understanding several great and sublime Truths are
revealed, it has not therefore any pretense to exalt it self; because it knows
that Knowledge to be above its Capacity, and ows it only to Revelation. If the
Heart finds the Objects of Religion answerable to it is infinite Desires, it has
no reason to be puffed up by them; because those Objects destroy its darling
Passions and vicious Inclinations. So that the only means to enlighten, and at
the same time humble our Understanding, was to intermix some Obscurity with the
Light of Revelation; and the only way to satisfy the Heart, and prevent its
being puffed up, was to qualify some sorrowful and mortifying Duties with the
extraordinary Promises of the Gospel. Thus the Severity of Christian Morality,
and the Obscurity of its Mysteries are two different means which God has made
use of to enlighten the Understanding, without puffing up the Heart, and to
satisfy the Desires of the Heart without flatering those Passions which corrupt
the Understanding. Which manifestly shows, that the Christian Religion has not
only the Divine Stamp upon it, since it contains the true manner of reforming
and regulating the Desires of Man's Heart; but also that the Severity of the
Christian Morality, and the Difficulty of its Mysteries, which shock the
Incredulous most in the Principles of Christianity, were purposely made use of
by God in his eternal Wisdom, as the most proper Means to sanctify Mankind,
which is the grand Design of the Christian Religion.

We have then here the Two most essential and most important parts of our
Religion, Its Morality, and Mysteries: The latter are necessary in respect of
Faith, and the former is the Rule of those Duties which God is pleased we shall
perform, as a Means to attain Everlasting Life. It would be superfluous to lay
down here at large, what Doctrine or Precepts are contained in the Gospel,
because it has pleased God that we cannot pretend any Ignorance of them; and
besides, it is the Truth of Religion in general we are now treating of; we are
obliged to speak here only of Christian Morality, and the Doctrine of Faith in
general.

As for the Morality of Christ, it has so many remarkable Characters, that it
is impossible to reflect upon any of them, without immediately acknowledging its
Divinity.

For, I. It Is it seems a Paradox to the Senses, to the Heart, to the Mind, and
Nature of Man. It was never before heard of or known, that a Man must take up
his Cross, and think those Blessed that are poor in Spirit; that mourn, and are
persecuted for Righteousness sake; that we must love our Enemies, and pray for
them that shall revile and persecute us; that we must not only comfort our
selves in the midst of our Afflictions and Crosses, but also rejoice for being
thus afflicted, and esteem our Happiness and Glory the greater, as our
Sufferings are increased. Men, I say, had never such Thoughts before; and the
Puradoxes of the Stoics are nothing to these; for here we find, to our great
surprise, that a few poor Fishermen, rustic in their Speech, preach such
Maxims abroad as are as far above the ordinary Capacity of the Understanding,
as they are contrary to the Affections and Inclinations of the Heart.

II. It Is observable, that Christian Morality seems to be a very sad and
mortifying thing. For it curbs and restrains all our Passions: Self-love
repines at it: Voluptuousness cannot endure it. Pride is wholly humbled and
mortified by it; and those who seem to allow of it most, cannot but privately
hate it, when ever their Hearts are engaged in any Passion. It has been often
observed, that there have been Christians in all Ages, who attempted to pervert
the sense of it, by putting such Glosses and Interpretations upon it as were
more conformable to their Inclinations, than to the Truth it self; and by
endeavoring to extirpate it at least indirectly, when they durst not attempt
it in a more open manner. But let no man imagine that this Morality was offered
to the World under any Disguise. Christ, who among so many other wonderful
Characters of his Calling, has a very remarkable one, and that is, never to
flatter the loose Inclinations of Men, plainly declares, that whosoever will be
thought his Disciple, must pluck out his Eyes, and cut off his Hands; must hate
himself, deny himself, nay even hate his own Soul, etc. Expressions which
explain one another, and certify us that the Pains and Torments the observers
of his Morality must undergo, are like unto those which Men endure when they
cut off their Arms, or pluck out their Eyes, or are in a manner separated from
Themselves. There is nothing in all this, like the cunning Address and subtle
Management of Men in the World, when they endeavor to establish new Doctrins;
and it evidently appears that Christ alone is a Teacher come from God.

III. The better to comprehend this, it is observable, that all the Principles
of Christian Religion depend upon Humility as their chief Foundation. For if we
pretend to the qualification of Christ's Disciples, we must be meek, single in
heart, poor in Spirit, weary and heavy laden, little in our own Conceits,
Lambs, little Children in Innocence and want of Malice, and Servants of other
Men. Christ has united two different qualities, before not easily reconcilable,
the Humility of the Heart, and the Light of the Understanding, charging us to
be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. It Is manifest this Union was
necessary for the true Sanctification of Mankind, a Secret indeed Men had not
yet been able to find out. There have been some who have forsaken their
Interest, and have been either burnt, or had their Arms and Hands cut off, who
durst encounter Death it self supported by Pride and a vain hope of Glory,
which they preferred before all things: But it was never known that Men had so
little Self-love, as to sacrifice their Lives, unless at the same time they
could make their Name immortal: Such a Miracle is only to be produced by the
Christian Morality.

IV. After what has been said, we shall have less Reason to wonder that this
Morality roots up every Vice, since all Vices proceed either from Pride or
Voluptuousness. This Morality then, which subverts the former by the severe
Mortifications of Repentance, and destroys the latter by the Ideas it gives us
of the Greatness and Perfection of God, as opposed to our Wretchedness and
Misery; I say this Morality contains every thing absolutely necessary to
extirpate our Vices in their first Rise, and stifle them even in their Birth.
We may also affirm, that it comprehends all in one word; and that our Savior
by giving this Command, thou shall not Covet, its full extent, and so carefully
enjoining the Purity of the Heart and Conscience, in opposition to the false
Gloss and Interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees, who neglected the
Inside, and took care only to keep the Outside clean; has established the true
Principle of our Sanctification, which few People were before acquainted with,
and none put themselves to any great trouble or enquiry to find out.

V. And this is another divine Character of the Christian Morality, that in two
words it establishes the Principle of all Christian Virtues. A little knowledge
of Man's Heart will teach us that Self-love ascribes every thing to it self, and
prefers us before God, to whose Glory all our Actions should tend as to their
common Center. It sacrifices every thing to it self: It desires every thing,
and blindly led astray by its own Inclinations seeks even those things that are
contrary to its own good: All its Motions are but so many Mediums to this End;
so many eager Wishes for what is not its own; so many Transports for Glory, or
Pleasure, its greatest Object; so many secret Steps to attain them, or so many
Hypocritical Self-denials, whose chief End is to carry that by surprise which
they seemingly refuse. Whether the Body wallows in voluptuousness, or whether
there is such a false pleasure in Pride, as obscures the Light of the
Understanding, and casts a Mist before the Soul; whether Interest makes us
steal, or Hipocrisy teaches us to over reach People, or Ambition makes us
attempt to gain what is not our own; Give things what Name you please, both
Virtues and Vices in the Hearts of Worldly-minded Men, are but so many Means
which Self-love makes them interchangably use to carry on their Interest. What
then is to be done to reform these Irregularities, and establish a Principle of
Virtue as true and equitable as Self-love, the Spring of them, is impure and
corrupt? Oblige Men only to love God above all things.

For as the Preference of our Selves before God is as it were the Source and
Spring of all Vices; so without doubt the Preference of God before our Selves
will give life and rise to all other Virtues. The Love of God will reform all
the Irregularities of Self-love, which will be no more culpable in ascribing
every thing to it self, when we shall dedicate and give up our Selves, our
Thoughts and Actions to God. Self-love will no longer be blindly ignorant of
its true Interest, which consists in carefully pleasing him, from whom we have
received all things. A Man cannot love God, without delighting to reflect upon
him, nor reflect upon him, without humbling himself before him. He that loves
God, will certainly raise himself above his Passions, disdain to indulge every
vicious Inclination of his Heart, and by living conformably to the Divine Will
in all Justice and Temperance, endeavor to be like that perfect Deity, whose
bright Image he bears. Thus we see what solid Virtues proceed from the love of
God. But how comes it that Christ made so happy a Choice, and had so good
Success, in establishing the Foundation of his Morality?

VI. To be satified in this, and be assured of his Success, we need only follow
the Notions his Morality gives us of Virtue, to attain to the true Principle of
Happiness. Men had too long in vain expected the happy conjunction of two
things, which Nature and Reason tell us ought to have been joined together: And
because they had no solid Virtue, therefore had they no real Felicity. Their
Happiness was answerable to their imaginary Virtues; and as those Virtues were
but a Compound of Pride, so their Felicity was but a false vain Joy, pleasing
yet empty, overcoming and deluding the Senses, but not satisfying the Mind. And
this Brutus himself freely owned at his Death. But the Satisfaction we reap
from the Christian Morality is excellently suited to the Solidity of those
Virtues it prescribes, and the Spirit of Holiness is the Essential Principle of
our Felicity. In following the way to Virtue, which Christ has set down, we
follow also that which leads us to Happiness. If we take away Concupiscence, we
cut off a fruitful Source of Misery, and remove an infinite number of Cares and
Troubles which tend to that as to their Center. If we love God as we ought, we
shall take as much pleasure in the Advancement of his Glory, in the
Contemplation of his infinite Perfections and Felicity, as if we possessed them
all our selves. We shall delight as much in the Contemplation of the Beauty and
Magnificence of the World, as a Son in the sight of the Greatness and noble
Magnificence of his Father's Possessions. The Glory of God will then be our
Glory; his Advantages will seem to be ours; and by making him the fool Object
of our Love, we shall at last be made partakers of his infinite Felicity.
Reason and Experience teach us that these are most undeniable Truths.

For since Experience assures us, that he who loves any Object, derives his
Satisfaction from the knowledge of it; a Man must doubtless necessarily be
happy in loving God, since he finds in that single Object every thing that is
capable of supplying his Necessities. He lives securely, because he relies upon
God: He fears not the loss of any thing, knowing that every thing passes away;
but that God alone remains always the same. The consideration of futurity
disturbs him not in the least, because God abides for ever. He delights in
Solitariness, because he has thereby the greater opportunity to entertain
himself with God. He is not dejected with Fear or Despair at any Afflictions,
looking upon them as so many fatherly Chastisements, or Trials of his Patience,
which all conduce to his Welfare and Preservation: He is certain that he shall
possess Joy and Immortality, because he knows that all those things are
eminently in God. Turn the Matter which way you please, it is impossible for us
to love God, without being entirely pleased and thus delighted with him; which
we cannot be, without a full and entire Satisfaction, such a one as those Men
have, who think they want for nothing, and that they have found comprehended in
one Object whatever they could desire.

It is therefore certain, that the Idea of our Duty leads us to the very
Principle of Happiness; a clear Demonstration of the Justness of that Duty, and
an undeniable Proof that the Morality which so recommends it to our practice
and observance, must necessarily be pure, sound and true.

VII. But it is not sufficient that the Measure of Virtue, which Christ
prescribes us as the Foundation of the Law and the Gospel, should be the
Measure of the particular Happiness of every individual Person; it farther
establishes the Prosperity and Welfare of public Society; and by a happy
Privilege it has above all other Virtues, it causes the public Good to concur
with the Advancement of the Private, and the private with that of the public.
For instance, what will follow from the practice of Charity, which enjoins us
to love God with all our Heart, and with all our Mind, and our Neighbor as our
Selves? The Result of it will be, that every Man's Interest shall be the same;
that there shall reign no Hatred or Animosities, no Jealousy or Competition
amongst them; that every Man will thank God for the Blessings that others have
received at his hands; that Charity will make every thing our own; that we
shall be happy in other Men's Advantages, as a Son in the Prosperity of his
Father, and a Father in that of his Son; that a public Society will make but
one Family more closely united, since Charity can make those things equal that
humane Passions had before distinguished, and much the happier, since the
Happiness of one single Person shall be enjoyed by all, and the Happiness of
all by each single Person.

It Is easy to foresee what Objections our Incredulous Adversaries will make.
They will say, that Christian Morality is undoubtedly a very fine Idea of true
Perfection; but very unprofitable; since it is so far raised above our ordinary
Strength and Capacity. The Answer to this Objection depends upon those
Reflections we shall continue to make upon the Characters of this Morality.

VIII. We therefore assert, that although by reason of the continual Warfare
betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, we cannot observe this Christian Morality in
its full Perfection, and consequently cannot be sensible of the advantages
which accrue to us from it in their utmost extent, it is enough if by observing
it according to our present condition, it procures us a thousand advantageous
Effects, which clearly demonstrate, that it is not a mere Idea: And this is
such an undeniable Truth as is daily confirmed by Experience; so true it is
that the strict observance of this Divine Morality tends to our Profit and
Welfare, that Parents themselves wish it to their Children; Husbands to their
Wives, and Wives to their Husbands; Servants to their Masters, and Masters to
their Servants; Princes to their Subjects, and Subjects to their Princes;
Creditors to their Debtors, and Debtors to their Creditors, as the Principle of
Fidelity, Love, Union, Virtue, and even of Joy and Satisfaction.

Self-love indeed looks upon it as a mere Idea, especially when it commands it
to shake off its evil Inclinations, and thinks it self not able to observe it
strictly; but still it thinks it very just, reasonable and perfect, when there
is occasion to reform other men's Imperfections and Vices; and it is well
pleased to see (if it be not extremely degenerated into the worst
Irregularities) that that Bridle sufficiently curbs, at least in other Men,
their Concupiscence and unruly Passions, whose End is only to confound, ruin
and violate all things.

IX. But that which wholly secures Christian Morality from the Reproach it
might be charged with in this respect, is that it is it self either endowed
with such Strength as must necessarily exalt the Souls of Men, or contains such
Objects, which together with the efficacy of that Spirit which continually
attends them, outweigh the most sensible Objects, and that passionate
Inclination we all have for the World. Philosophers indeed may be very justly
charged with this Reproach, namely, that their Morality is mere Speculation,
because their excellent Maxims have no Motives powerful enough to support them.
They tell us, it is true, that we must overcome our Selves, and renounce our
evil Desires; but if once they are asked the reason of it, they are much
perplexed how to solve the Query. It cannot be denied, but that their Morality
is very Excellent; but the Motives that induce Men to observe it, are weak; and
a little Renown acquired in practicing that Virtue they so strictly recommend,
as also the Title of Wisemen, and that abundance of Vanity always concomitant
with it, are very weak Inducements to constrain the Heart of Man to deprive it
self of its darling beloved Passions.

But it is not so with the Morality of Christ, which is wonderfully supported
by the Motives it lays before us. Every thing is coherent in it, and all the
Parts proportionable. It requires our Observance of many hard and mortifying
Duties. It curbs the Affections of the Heart, and mortifies the Flesh. But
since that cannot be done without great Difficulty and more than ordinary
Endeavors, it promises us a magnificent and glorious Reward. The Greatness of
the Promise is supported by many terrible Threatenings, and both these Objects
are confirmed by such Favors, as are very proper to gain our Affections.

The Blessings are a sure Token of the Truth of the Promises; and the Truth of
these makes us believe that of the Threatenings. I grant, the Promises of a
blessed Life and Immortality, which we find in the Gospel, are very great and
glorious; but still not greater than that which Jesus made to Two of his
Disciples, when he called them unto him, saying, Come after me, and I will make
you Fishers of Men. There was less probability that a few poor ignorant
Fishermen should have been able to catch in their Nets, the Doctrine, Authority,
Wit and Eloquence of Men, than that we should see God after Death.

The Truth of his Promises cannot subsist without that of his Threatenings; and
it is evident, when he promises that the pure in Heart shall see him, he
threatens also to exclude those that are not so, from the beatific Vision.

Let not Men therefore slatter themselves; let them shake off their Unbelief of
the severe Punishments that attend the wicked after this Life. Their Reason
will tell them, that God can do no less than banish those his Presence, who
have persisted in a wilful design of offending him by their Sins, and that such
a Banishment is attended with the greatest of all Miseries, and that is,
eternal Death. The Stings of Conscience convince us of this, and the Promises
of God inform us of it. His Justice points it out to us: His Law teaches it,
and the Gospel confirms it. The very Nature of things will not suffer us to
doubt it, since God cannot direct Man to the true end of his Creation, without
revealing himself to him; and he cannot reveal himself to him, without making
his Will known to him according as he pleases; nor can he make his Will known
to him, without giving him a Law; nor give him a Law, without annexing to it
such Motives as must be either Promises, or Threatenings deeply engraven'd in
the Conscience, if they accompany the Law of Nature; but delivered in writing
if they follow the written Law; nor can he make such Promises or Threatenings
unto Men, without being punctual in the accomplishment of them. And can we have
any greater Certainty than that which is so visibly founded upon the Veracity
of God, and the Nature of things themselves?

There is nothing therefore capable to free Man from this Necessity, and it is
to no purpose to allege his Meanness and Wretchedness; for that Circumstance
rather aggravates the Crime, than excuses it, it being impudent beyond all
pardon for a Traitor to plead Innocence, because he is a Peasant and not a
Lord. It will be also in vain to lay the Fault upon the evil Temperament of
Body and Mind. For if either submits to those Reasons which you have for
committing no indecent action before a Sovereign, and if that and all its
Passions are calm, when you fall into any Danger, or expect Sentence of Death;
there is the same Reason that the Presence, the Will, and Judgments of God
should have the same effect upon it. Nor will Ignorance be any Excuse. It would
indeed justify you (if it were not only a bare pretense) as it does Brutes,
Children and Idiots. But what Man knows not his Duty? It Is also in vain to rely
on the Mercy of God; for that extends not to impenitent Sinners; and the
Almighty saves only those that desire and endeavor to be saved. Lastly, It Is
mere folly to assert that eternal Punishments are disproportionable to the
weakness of our Nature. For is not God himself eternal, whom you have offended?
And is not your Soul also eternal that has Sinned against him? Self-love
however blinded thinks not life eternal a thing disagreeable, and imagins
nothing in it disproportionable to our Condition. But it is shocked at the
Thoughts of everlasting Pains, and therefore willing to believe them improbable
Dreams and Whimsies. But why it does so, is hard to be imagined, unless we
suppose its design to be at any rate to impose upon it self.

In the mean while since you can neither destroy the Eternity of God, or the
Soul, which Reason it self forces you to acknowledge, you must either suppose
that the Soul is to dwell eternally with God, or that it must be eternally
banished from his Presence; that is, that it must live, or die eternally. For
to live with God is to enjoy the greatest Perfection of Happiness, and to be
banished his Presence, is certainly the greatest Misery that can be thought of.
As soon as we know the Existence of God, that the Soul has no Parts, and that
it is incapable of any Dissolution; that its Nature, altogether distinct from
that of Matter, cannot be buried under the Ruins of the Body, it is then very
hard for us to oppose the Doctrine, which the Gospel teaches us concerning the
State of the Soul after Death. Nay, we are so far from impugning of it, that
there is even a Necessity incumbent upon us readily to embrace the same. For if
the Souls of the Wicked, together with those of the Good, are equally to be
banished the Presence of God, then Reason, Nature, and all our other Knowledge
impose upon us, in giving us Hope of a future Reward. And if the Souls both of
the Wicked and the Good are to enjoy alike the Presence of Almighty God, then
too those very Principles delude us, in making us dread his pretended
Judgments; and so Gods Justice and Veracity, together with all our other
Knowledge, are at an end. To avoid therefore falling into such an impious
Assertion, we must own, that the Souls of the Good are to dwell for ever with
God; but that contrariwise, those of the Wicked are to be banished his
Presence, and in owning this we affirmthe only thing in the World that is most
agreeable to all our Knowledge, and most visibly flows from the nature of
things themselves.

The Blessings of God excellently answer his liberal Promises, and the
formidable Severity of his Punishments. All the Creatures of this visible World
conspire together to do us good: And besides all the temporal Blessings daily
conferred upon us, besides the whole Earths being replenished with the
Knowledge of the true God; the Hearts of Men are sanctified, their Souls
comforted, the Gospel preached throughout the whole World, the Son of God died
for our Offenses, and was raised for our Justification; our crucified Savior
came out of the Grave to bring us Peace from God, and seal the Truth of his
Gospel by his frequent Apparitions after his Death; there was a visible and
frequent Effusion of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost upon Men, a multitude of
Martyrs sent from God to reclaim the World by their Examples and Conversation,
from Vice and Idolatrous Superstition; all these things, I say, are such
Blessings as are wonderfully suitable to the Promises and Threatenings of God,
and fully convince us that the Christian Morality has as many Objects to exalt
and comfort Men's Souls, as it has to excite and terrify their Minds to the
performance of their Duty.

X. But to prove that this Morality is not a mere Idea of Perfection, God in is
Wisdom was pleased not only to have it set down in the Book of the New
Testament; but also to have it lively Painted first in the Life of Christ, and
afterward in the daily practice of the Primitive Christians. These Men are not
such Teachers, as might deservedly be accused of speaking well but doing ill,
as it was objected formerly to Seneca, who composed very excellent Discourses
concerning Poverty, and the contempt of the Goods of Fortune, when he himself
was richer than the wealthiest Citizen of Rome. These on the contrary confirmed
by their practice what they taught. And by extirpating their evil Desires,
formed such a Society as is conformable to that we have had above but a faint
Prospect of, when we laid down the Idea of Man's Duty. They utterly renounced
those Passions which put a Distinction betwixt them and other Men. They forgot
their Quality and Condition, the better to use one another like Brethren. The
same Interests were common to them all. They sold their Possessions to ease the
Wants and Necessities of those that suffered Adversity: They rejoiced for
having been thought worthy to suffer for the Name of God: Every thing conduced
to their Happiness, even Afflictions themselves: They prayed for those that
despitefully used them; and as Charity, and not Selflove, was the Rule of their
Affections, so all the Motions of their Heart tended to one, as to the same
Center, to the Glory of God, and the good of their Neighbors; which gave the
Scripture occasion to say, that they were but one Heart and one Soul.

I confess that State could not always continue in the Church; but the Wisdom
of God permitted it should last for some time, to give us a lively Image and
Idea of Heaven here on Earth, and so to confirm by the excellence of such an
Example, a Morality already supported by so many great and powerful Motives.

VIII. Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in its
Mysteries.
THe Mysteries God has revealed unto us in his Word, are like the cloudy Pillar
which led the Children of Israel through the Wilderness. For like that, they
are clear on one side, but dark and obscure on the other.

If we contemplate them on the brighter side, they appear great, sublime, and
conformable to the Nature of things, worthy of God, and closely united to the
most inviolable Principles both of our Heart and Understanding.

Their Greatness and Sublimity caused such an Admiration in those Persons, who
had the Honor to divulge them to the World, as they could not possibly
conceal. For sometimes they are forced to declare that they are things which
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, 1
Cor. 2. 9. An Expression which is as natural as full of Energy, and clearly
demonstrates what great Ideas they had of them. Another while they express
themselves after this manner, and without controversy, great is the Mystery of
Godliness: God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. 1 Timothy
3. 16. And again, Colos. 2. 3. they call them the Treasures of Wisdom, and seem
to be continually at a loss to find out Expressions worthy the Majesty of them.

And these Objects are infinitely raised above our Senses, scarce seem to have
any probability, are altogether repugnant to the Ideas of the Heathens, and
carnal Notions of the Jews; are above any Conjecture of Men, and consequently
Objects worthy of God himself. For they glorify him after an excellent manner;
and clearly reveal unto us his Greatness and Majesty, either in the Gifts he
confers upon Men, or the Sublimity of those Duties he prescribes them to
follow, or the Excellency of the Reward he proposes to them, or the use of
those means whereby he leads them to it. Compare the Notions of Christianity
with those of other Religions, and you will be convinced of this Truth. But it is
not sufficient that those Mysteries seem to us far above the Capacity of Men,
who could never have invented them, and worthy the Majesty of God, who alone
was able to reveal them to us. We may also further add, that the Principles of
Reason and Natural Religion exactly fall in with them.

For they are not like the idle Tales and Fictions of the Poets, which the
Heart of Man formerly so eagerly embraced, when at the same time their Reason
condemned them for it. The Creation of Heaven and Earth by an Almighty Being,
the Redemption of the World by a Mediator, the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ,
the Communion of Saints, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Remission of Sins
and life Everlasting, are all Objects equally reasonable, sublime and full of
Majesty, and the Denial of them will take away the improvement of the Light of
Reason by the clearest Revelation, and destroy the very Nature of the Supreme
Being.

What would become then of the Wisdom of God? Would it suffer Men to be wholly
taken up by such ends as are contrary to the design of their Creation? Would
God permit Irregularities and Confusions to reign in public Societies, and
never compose them; whilst at the same time he establishes a firm Union, and as
it were a Society amongst irrational Creatures? If so, what would then signify
those Principles of Morality, and that natural Law which he has written in our
Hearts? Wherefore should he make so many things for the good and preservation
of Man, that were not the End he was designed for? What would become of the
Justice of God? And what would be the Truth of the inward sense of Conscience?
What would be the Punishment reserved for the Wicked, and the Reward which
attends the Just? What would become of our Soul, since Reason has taught us,
that the thinking Principle within us, is distinct from Matter, and that the
Soul depends not upon any Dissolution of the Parts of Matter? Whence is it that
this Soul has Notions of its Immortality? What use would there be of Equity and
Justice? Why might not Men rather give themselves up to Vice, which would then
be wholly preferrable before Virtue?

Who then will refuse to acknowledge such Principles to be in themselves lawful
and reasonable, without which there is nothing but Confusion and Disorder in
public Society, Darkness and Incertainty in the Mind; nothing but Error and
Illusion in the Conscience and natural Law of Reason; nothing but Prejudice and
Misery in the practice of Virtue; and if things are so, then also the Goodness,
Wisdom, and Justice of God are at an end, those excellent Attributes which had
so clearly proved to us the Truth of his Existence.

These are not the Speculations of contemplative Men, or the Niceties of
Schoolmen; but certain Truths that slow from the nature of things, and in an
excellent manner agree with the ultimate End of Man. But how clear soever the
one side of these Mysteries may be, they are very obscure on the other; not
that they have, or can contain any thing that is repugnant to sound and
unprejudiced Reason; but it is because they cannot be fathomed by our shallow
Understanding, and that it is neither secure nor allowable, or even possible for
any man to search into the Depth of them.

Now, though it be not absolutely necessary for us to enquire, why God was
pleased not to explicate all Difficulties in his Mysteries, and though it be
sufficient only to allege that such was his Will and the Decrees of his
Wisdom, yet we must not neglect to illustrate and interpret them as far as
Scripture and Reason will permit.

Every body knows the Difference between Sight and Faith. Sight admits of no
Difficulty; but Faith is intermixed both with Light and Darkness; both their
Objects being very different from one another. For we do not see what we
believe, and properly speaking, we do not believe that which we see.

To see, is to perceive by ones self; but to believe is to perceive by another
Man's Eyes. Sight is twofold, that of the Sense, which perceives those Objects
only that are suitable to its nature; and that of the Understanding, when it
judges of the nature of things by its own proper Light. Faith also is twofold,
Humane and Divine. The first, is that Persuasion we have of sacred Mysteries,
grounded upon the Testimony of Men; and the other, that which is established
upon the Testimony of God. So that after what has been thus premised, it is an
easy matter to understand the meaning of the Apostle, who tells us, that the
Will of God is that we should walk by faith and not by sight, that is, we must
lay aside our Reason, and follow only the Light of Revelation, and receive
those Truths which promise us Salvation on the Testimony of God alone.

Nevertheless, it is easy to perceive how great a Repugnance we have to it, in
as much as the Pleasure of God in not giving us Mysteries without Difficulties,
restrains the roving Speculations of our Minds. It humbles the proud Reason of
Man, and robs him of the Privilege of a full Insight into matters, which yet
infinitely concern him. When we should renounce the World, which is present to
our Eyes, we would fain see those Objects Religion has put in the other Scale
to overbalance it; but it is not the Pleasure of God we should, and we must rest
content to believe those Objects which make us thus renounce that which we
actually see. And should they be never so agreeable to the Principles of Common
Sense, yet Faith, and not Reason ought chiefly to induce us to receive them.
Now the same Principle that sets the Heart at variance with the Law that
imposes on it the necessity of acting after that manner, the same Principle, I
say, makes Reason oppose Revelation, which lays upon it an invincible Necessity
of believing what it cannot comprehend.

It Is certain however, that this Command of God is very conformable to the
nature of things, very suitable to our present Condition, necessary to our
Sanctification, and useful for the advancement of Gods Glory. We must not think
it strange that the Dispensation of Faith should preceed that of Sight, since
we daily observe Darkness to preceed Light, by a natural Order, and that we are
Children before we come to be Men. Both Experience and Reason tell us, that our
Knowledge is very imperfect in this Life, wherein the Soul is as it were
pressed down by the Clog of the Body, that we may walk more secure by the help
of the Light of Nature. And those Heathens who attempted to go beyoud it,
wandered blindly about, and lost their Way.

There are two sorts of Irregularities in Man, which produce all his other
Disorders, Pride, and Voluptuousness. The latter of which springs up in the
most inferior part of the Soul, and is chiefly produced by the Senses: But
Pride is properly a Defect of the Mind. As therefore there has not been found
hitherto a better Remedy against Voluptuousness, than that of afflicting the
Senses, by denying them those Pleasures they so earnestly thirst after; so it
does not appear there has been as yet a better means thought of, to remove the
Pride of the Mind, than to humble it, by restraining those Speculations of
Knowledge, which puff it up beyond measure, and mortify it by requiring it to
sacrifice all its weak Conjectures and vain Reasonings to Faith.

And indeed this Sacrifice of our selves is deservedly owing to God, since
there is as much Reason for submitting our Willby our Obedience to his Laws, as
there is for subjecting our Mind to him by Faith. For by the former of these
acts, we own him for our Lord that has a Right to command us; and by the
latter, we readily confess his Veracity, and that we need not fear being
imposed upon, when we receive those things he commands us to observe.

Thus Man, who had lost himself in his Desire of infinite Knowledge, is bound
in some measure to expiate his Crime in not desiring to know any thing by
himself. He had attempted to get as clear a Knowledge of all things as God
himself; But now he refuses to know any thing but from God.

He was blind whilst he walked in the Light of Nature, but now he must see
clear in the Darkness of the Dispensation of Faith. For after that, in the
Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21.

It Is certain, should God familiarly and frequently Reveal himself unto Men by
sensible and continued Miracles, we should then walk by Sight and not by Faith;
and it is true also, that if the Objects of Revelation were not in some sort
obscure, there would be no Endeavors, no Difficulty, no Sacrifice of Reason
made to believe them.

The Difficulties that Mysteries are attended with, have almost the same
Influence over our Understanding, as Afflictions have upon our Heart: For as
these bring the latter in subjection, so the others serve to try the Constancy
of the former. And since God Almighty was pleased to increase our Patience by
two different sorts of Sufferings, the one, which he himself inflicts
immediately upon us; and the other he permits worldly minded and sinful Men to
inflict upon us; so in like manner he was pleased to exercise our Faith by two
different sorts of Difficulties, some whereof spring immediately from God
himself, and others proceed from the very Heart and Understanding of Men.

For we must distinguish betwixt that Obscurity with respect to the Mysteries
which proceed from God, and that which proceeds from the Understanding of Men.
The first is either necessary, as all those Difficulties which arise from the
essential Disproportion between infinite Objects, such as those of Revelation,
and a finite Understanding, like ours; or else voluntary, and so enter into the
very Plan and Design of Religion it self.

And these again may be distinguished according to that Diversity which in our
manner of conceiving things, we are obliged to suppose in the Perfections of
God himself; There being some which proceed from the Council of his Wisdom;
others from that of his Justice; others from that of his Majesty; and lastly,
from that of his Goodness and Mercy.

Thus Divine Wisdom was pleased to intermix some sort of Darkness amidst the
most express Prophecies we have, lest that too clear an Evidence of them,
should destroy their Event. To this Principle also must we refer all those
Shadows, Types, Parabolical Representations, that mixture of sensible Objects
with spiritual Benefits, that of the State of the Church with the State of
Israel according to the flesh; and generally all those other means, which the
Holy Ghost made use of, partly to cover those Events he has declared to Men
many Ages before their Completion.

God drew a Veil over the most essential Truths of the Old Testament, such as
the Immortality of the Soul, the Trinity, the Redemption of Mankind, etc. that
a distinct Revelation from all these Objects, might be an undeniable Character
of the Messiah; and that his Disciples might boldly affirm, that Life was
manifested in Jesus Christ, that Grace had appeared unto all Men. For no Man
has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, John 1. 18. To this Wisdom of God also must be
referred that Conduct of the Holy Ghost, in inspiring the Patriarchs, thereby
to reveal a better life to them, and make them cry out upon their Deathbeds,
Lord I have waited for thy Salvation; but withal giving them but a faint
Prospect of that Object, by such obscure Thoughts and dark Notions as they were
not able of themselves to solve; deferring to give a more perfect Knowledge of
his Mysteries till that Time which he had set apart for the fulfilling of his
Oracles, and the Manifestation of him, that was to be the Author and End of
Christian Religion. For this cause therefore there is hardly mention made of
any thing else in the Writings of Moses, but of temporal Promises and
Threatenings; and hence it was that Jesus Christ himself, when disputing against
the Sadducees, proved the Resurrection of the dead but by Consequence only.

Divine Wisdom was also pleased that Jesus Christ should be born in Obscurity
and Humiliation, that those mean outward Appearances being offensive to the
prejudice of carnal and worldly minded Jews, they might as it were by chance
give occasion to the execution of those things, which the Council of God had
determined. And this is one of the principal causes of his Poverty and
Humiliation; of the Meanness of his Birth, and the Unworthiness of his first
Profession; the choice of his Disciples, etc.

The Justice of God acting in concert with his Wisdom, obliges him to speak to
all profane Contemners of his Mysteries in an obscure Language, and so as it
were to conceal those Pearls from them, lest like unclean Beasts they should
trample them under their Feet. And this may very well serve for a Reason of the
denial which Christ formerly made to the Unbelievers of those Times, of
signalizing his Power among them, and of the great care he often took to
conceal his Miracles from them. For this cause therefore spoke he sometimes in
Parables to Strangers; but he always very clearly expressed himself to his
Disciples, giving them to understand the meaning of those Parables, and telling
them, that as for them they had the Privilege of seeing all things openly.

Neither does his Majesty suffer him to reveal himself as familiarly to the
sinful Man, as he would to the innocent. This we ought not to wonder at, since
Men themselves are wont so to deal with one another. There is nothing more
common than for Great Men to banish their Presence those who have incurred
their Displeasure. To think it then strange if God conceals himself from a
Sinner, would be to entertain a more unworthy Idea of his Majesty, than that of
an Earthly Monarch. This was the Reason why God took such care to conceal
himself, even when he designed to manifest his Glory. And for this Cause he
showed himself only in Visions and Dreams, or when hidden in the Cloud and Ark,
or covered with some other Veil. On this account also he was wont to banish
from his Presence all those as were defiled in their Bodies, and order the
Priests of the Sanctuary to purify themselves. He commanded too the People to
wash their Garments, when he gave them notice, that within three Days he would
come down to them; nothing but an external and corporeal Purity being
sufficient to qualify those that were to approach the Deity manifested under
corporeal Symbols. But Christ fulfilling in the Spirit every thing hidden in
the Letter of the Law, teaches us that those only shall see God, who shall be
found pure in Heart; so that we have no reason to wonder, if when Man, by
reason of his Guilt hides himself from God, the Almighty withdraws the
Influence of his Glorious Majesty from Man.

Lastly, The Goodness and Mercy of God overshadows Revelation with some sort of
Darkness, to exercise our Faith and keep up our Minds in Vigor, which also
would grow sluggish, if not stirred up by such Difficulties as are proper to
Mysteries; as also to humble our proud and haughty Reason, which is immediately
puffed up with its own Knowledge; to make us submit our Understandings to him,
since we ought to believe any Truths, tho incredible, if he reveals them; as
also to sway our Hearts and Affections, which ought readily to embrace any
sorrowful and mortifying Objects that he is pleased to offer them; to strip our
Pride of all its Pretenses, and to dispose our Minds that we must necessarily
acknowledge every Benefit we enjoy, springs from him; and that too so much the
more, because we thereby attain to life Eternal by such means and objects as
are above our Capacity to comprehend: So necessary is it that it should appear
that our Sufficiency is of God, and that the Gospel is the Power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. To this Principle we owe the
choice of those persons which God has made use of to preach the Gospel; the
nature of those seeming Paradoxes he commanded them to publish, so contrary to
the Light of Nature and Reason; the Silence of the Holy Ghost in those things
which a few Words from him would have rendered plain, and easy to our
Understandings.

But God is not content to exercise our Faith by those Obscurities we find
dispersed throughout the Divine Revelations; he further permits, Heresies,
Schisms, and Errors, nay Superstition it self to reign among us, that those
who are approved may be made manifest. Thus we may say he suffers all Egypt to
be covered with Darkness, the more eminently to discover his wonderful
Protection, in blessing at the same time the Land of Goshen with the Light of
his Truth; that is, by giving us a Religion accompanied with so bright an
Evidence, as carnal and worldly minded Men can never comprehend, because their
Reason is eclipsed by Sensuality, and the Corruption of their Hearts produces
those thick Clouds that hide the Truth from their sight. God, it is true,
enlightens the Minds of Men; but Men wilfully blind themselves. He permits it
should be so to confound their Ignorance, and demonstrate to us that he is the
Father of Light. But let us now enquire into the Principles of that Obscurity
which solely springs from Men.

And I. So gross are all the Prejudices of the Senses, that there is no body so
void of shame as to follow them openly. Yet it is certain, they are very
prevalent in the Hearts of most Men, who stick not to say, I never saw the
like; I could willingly believe it, if I should but see it. Who ever saw dead
Men rise again from their graves? And who ever ascended into Heaven, or went
down into the Pit? All which Reasonings are manifestly absurd. For can there be
any greater Folly in a Man, than to refuse to believe that which he does not
see, when these Objects of his Faith could have no Existence, were they not
invisible? Did any one ever see the Time past long before he lived, or the
future long after his Death? Did he ever see his own Soul, the Deity, etc. For
it is nothing else but the Time past and the future, the Objects and Interests
of the Soul, together with the Benefits of God, which Faith offers to our
Consideration.

II. We are accustomed by Education not to believe any thing that happens not
in the ordinary course of Nature. We confine our selves as it were to a Circle
of Objects, which we willingly admit of, because they contain nothing that is
repugnant to Experience or Probability: So that the Custom we have of refusing
to give our Assent to all other things, reaching even unto matters of Religion,
inevitably casts us into Skepticism and Incredulity. Yet should we but
thoroughly consider those Objects which fall under common Experience, they would
certainly appear as surprising and incomprehensible as those of Religion. If
you think it strange that the Soul should outlive the Ruins of the Body, you
must be much more surprised to see it so closely united to a subject so
different from its Perfection. It Is the Union of the Soul with the Body, and
not its Dissolution we ought to admire. Endeavor to comprehend if you can the
strict Alliance there is between a thing that is extended, that takes up Space,
that is confined to certain Limits, that acts upon Subjects present only and
nearest to it; and a thing that has neither figure nor extension, color,
fluidity, or solidity, which in some sense is every where, and yet has no Parts
to take up any Space; which reflects upon the Time past, and the future; upon
it self, and its manner of acting in such a wonderful way, as must necessarily
persuade us maugre all our Reluctancies and Doubts, that we have a Spiritual
and Immaterial Substance within us.

If you are amazed when you are taught that there is a Maker and Preserver of
all things; you ought rather to be surprised to think you have lived so long in
the World, without putting these Questions to your self, To what End was I
made? Whence have I my Being? What will at last become of me? And who was the
Author of all that I behold?

The Thoughts of a future Judgment, whatsoever notion you may have of its
Accomplishment, ought not in the least to startle you, who ought rather to
wonder at the long Forbearance of God, who permits all things, that he may one
day judge all things. That Confusion and Disorder that appears in public
Society, might raise Scruples in you, were it not bounded by such an Event, as
will clearly justify the Justice and Wisdom of God. To follow the Opinion of
Incredulous Men, one would say that there is nothing extraordinary o^
surprising in the World; whereas we cannot behold any thing that is not so.

III. But all our Incredulity arises principally from our Passions, and it is
their greatest Interest to create in us an Aversion for Religion, and in order
to that make us inclinable to receive those Doubts which favor their Pretenses.

And this is that which gives rise to all sorts of Difficulties. Men are
incredulous, merely because they will be so; and they will be so, because it
concerns their Passions to have it so. Hence it is that every thing concurrs by
accident toward the producing so miserable an End; so Sciences, Eloquence,
Policy, etc. create Doubts and Difficulties in us, not of themselves, but
through our ill management of them.

IV. Pride, of all the Passions the most dangerous and most inveterate, suffers
us not to remain in such a due disposition of Mind as God requires we should
have, in order to receive his Revelation. Now this Disposition is twofold. 1
st. It consists in our readily receiving all revealed Truths; and 2 ly, in
receiving them although they are far above our Capacity to comprehend, without
endeavoring to dive too far into the Depth of the Council of God.

To have then a right Belief, we must not only be persuaded of the Certainty of
all revealed Truths; we must also learn how to be satisfied with the Ignorance
of those things it has pleased God to conceal from us. We must be always ready
to acknowledge our Ignorance, and that we do not clearly understand, what yet
we sincerely believe. We must humbly close our Eyes before the dark side of
Mysteries, as well as gladly open them to behold the bright one. It Is our
Incredulity which makes us reject those Truths we ought to acknowledge at first
sight, and the irregular Curiosity of the Mind prevents our paying our profound
Reverence, to those sacred Obscurities wherein they are involved.

Now from this Principle we may very reasonably conclude, 1 st. That nothing
could argue more Extravagance and Impiety, than the project of several Doctors,
who tho famous upon other Accounts for their Learning and great Insight into
things, yet have endeavored to make as it were a New System of Religion, by
removing all the Difficulties of it, and oftentimes cutting those Knots
asunder, which they were not able to untie. And this shows, that they were
ignorant, how that the dark Mysteries of Religion, either follow the Nature of
things, or else proceed from the external Wisdom and Council of God, in
designing to give us such a Religion as should not be free from such dark
Mysteries, as the Apostles themselves give us to understand, when they tell us
that the Will of God was to bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent;
and when they cry out, O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out! Romans 11. 33. Secondly, We may infer from thence, That humane Curiosity
that has so much increased the number of Theological Questions, is one of the
greatest Obstacles which Faith is with much struggling to overcome.

For we are not content to have a bare Knowledge of things; we yet endeavor to
search into the Manner how things are done; whereas it is the Manner how they
are done which God is pleased to conceal from us; and it is the dark side we
ought to look upon with profound Reverence.

It was sufficient for us to know that we were very corrupt from our Cradles,
and that nothing but the Grace of God is capable to deliver us from that
wretched State we are in. But we were not wife enough to fix our Enquiries
there: We further had a mind to know how Sin entered into the World; what
Springs of our Soul were first of all put out of order by it, and how it was
transmitted to Posterity. The Holy Ghost is as the Wind, the Sound whereof we
hear, but cannot tell whence it comes, and whither it goes. Nevertheless, so
impertinent is the Curiosity of Men, as to attempt diving into his manner of
acting. They pretend by such and such Decisions to limit the Degrees of his
operation and retrench whatsoever they please. They continually use such
Distinctions as are altogether obscure and barbarous in comparison of the
Scripture, as Antecedent Grace, Consequent, Sufficient, Efficacious, Universal,
Particular, mediate, and immediate* Grace; all which Distinctions they seem
indeed to have contrived, as so many deviations and shifts on purpose to be
exempted from owning, that notwithstanding all our Endeavors, it is God which
works in us both to will and to do of his good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And tho
it is certain we are altogether ignorant of the manner of his Operation, yet can
any thing be more just and reasonable than such a free and ingenuous
Confession? And does it not very far exceed all the Speculations of Schoolmen,
who are themselves confounded, and fall from one Depth into another, whilst
they pretend to search into those Mysteries God has concealed from them?

But the Misfortune which results from all this, is, that the Christians having
prodigiously swelled up their System of Divinity by these and other like
Speculations (whose End is to dive into the Manner how those things are done
which God has revealed to us,) thereby give Rise to the most considerable
Difficulties of our Incredulous Adversaries, who heap up all those humane
Speculations together, the better to impugn the Foundations of Religion it
self, or else rashly conclude from those vain Disputes of humane Curiosity,
that Religion has nothing of Certainty or Solidity in it. But we shall easily
confute both the Error and Injustice of those Un believers.

Faith is assaulted by two sorts of Enemies. 1 st. The Incredulous, who impugn
it on that side on which it is most clear and evident; and 2 ly. The
Inconsiderate and Curious, who have no regard to its sacred Obscurity; so that
we have here those who deny all things, and those who will know all things. You
will do well to show those curious inconsiderate Men that they are mistaken;
and think not that their being convinced of the Uselessness of their nice
Distinctions can do any prejudice at all to Religion; because an unseasonable
Curiosity is no less contrary to the Genius of Religion and the Nature of
Faith, than Skepticism and Incredulity.

V. This Curiosity is inseparably attended with Rashness; and it is impossible
to express into what strange Excesses both of them have insensibly brought Men.
To confirm this, we shall only set down one necessary Example, and that is, of
the Trinity, and Incarnation, one of the most profound and unsearchable
Mysteries of our Religion. In this, Curiosity has induced Men to exceed the
Bounds of Revelation, and Rashness has obliged them not to believe it.

The Scripture teaches us, that there is but one God, and one Mediator. It
assures us also, that Jesus Christ is God, that he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; that he made the World, Time, and all things therein. It
ascribes to him all the Attributes, the Works and the Names of the Deity, his
Power, his Wisdom, his Eternity, Immensity, etc. It further assures us, that
the Holy Ghost is God. It asserts that those Three are One. It commands Baptism
in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. It speaks of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost as of Three Persons. And why should we not rest satisfied with
this?

It Is because the Pride of Men thinks fit it should be otherwise. I do not
know, or I do not understand are Confessions so terrible to them, that there is
nothing they will not invent to avoid them. They are desirous to know how three
Persons can subsist in one and the same Essence. They tell us of Modes, and
Relations, of modal and formal Distinctions, of absolute and relative Entities,
etc. They assert that the divine Intellect produced the Word, and that the Holy
Ghost is the uncreated production of the Divine Will, and a thousand other
things of this kind, which if certain, at least are not revealed. And why all
these Distinctions and Subtilties? Unless they would make us comprehend a
Mystery God is resolved shall remain the incomprehensible Object of our Faith.

Others, displeased with those Scholastic Speculations, are so impious as to
attempt to destroy that Mystery which they cannot conceive, either by utterly
rejecting those places of Scripture which mention it; or if they receive them,
by putting such a forced Interpretation upon them, that the Holy Ghost must
needs have had a design to deceive us, if he meant what such Teachers would
have him. Thus for instance, this place of Scriptnre, Before Abraham was I am,
signifies, according to the Socinians, before the Prophecy contained in the
Name of Abraham was fulfilled, and before he became the Father of all Nations,
I am. So they say this Text, Glorify me with the Glory which I had with thee
before the World was, John 17. 5. imports as much as, Glorify me with the Glory
thou had resolved to honor me with. And this other; The same was in the
beginnning and all things were made by him, that is (as they interpret it) he
was before the time of John the Baptist, and by him all things were done in the
Church.

But to what end do they invent those Niceties so contrary to the Gospel
Simplicity and Truth? It Is doubtless on purpose to make void the effect of
those sacred Obscurities, which God has dispersed throughout his Mysteries, and
to save those by Humane Wisdom, whom God designed to bless with Life eternal
through the Foolishness of preaching, as Men first called it.

VI. We may add Superstition to this irregular Curiosity and rashness of the
Mind, which arises by little and little from the Passions, endeavoring to hide
themselves, or avoid by vain Pretexts the Mortification of Repentance, and
shift off the severe Injunctions of Christian Morality; and to that end they
employ Man in some unprofitable bodily Exercises, or else wholly fix his Mind
upon some carnal Worship. Superstition is no sooner thus insensibly formed, but
it thrusts it self into Credit, and as it were claims a privilege of Freedom in
Religion; So that the most prodigious Whymsies and Imaginations of the former,
are confusedly hudled together with the most sacred Mysteries of the latter;
and then there are no Absurdities so extravagant that human Passions suggest,
but what the Incredulous immediately take hold on as Instruments wherewith they
attack the Foundations of Religion, which is in some respect as it were
infected with them. And such is the Folly of Men, that they will needs save
all, or lose all. For if you go about to destroy Superstition, you are then
immediately condemned for being an Enemy to Christianity: And if you endeavor
to maintain the Glory and Holiness of Christianity, Men expect you should too
in some manner defend the absurd Extravagances of Superstition.

But our Design of writing in behalf of the Christians in general, suffers us
not to make any Application of this at present. It is enough if the Position we
advance be certainly true, as will fully appear by the Examples as may be
sought of it elsewhere, and which it is no difficult matter for any Man to find
out.

We shall therefore rest contented to assert in that respect, that the
Multiplicity of Sects which so miserably divide the Christian Church amongst
Men, and on whose Account the Name of our common Lord and Master is so
frequently Blasphemed among Infidels, solely springs from these Three
Principles, viz. An irregular Curiosity, a Rashness of the Mind, and
Superstition; and these Three Principles themselves proceed from a more ancient
Original, which is the Disorder and Irregularity of our Passions.

Now to demand why God permits such a multitude of Sects and different
Religions to reign amongst Men, is just as if one should ask, why God suffers
Wicked Men to live in the World? For he that permits the Licentiousness of the
Passions, necessarily suffers the natural Effects and infallible Consequences
of them.

VII. This being granted, we cannot doubt but that Philosophy it self is
another Source of inevitable Difficulties, when joined to Religion. Their Ends
are so different, that they may justly be allowed to be opposite. For 1. The
main Design of Philosophy is to gratify the vain Curiosity of Men; whereas
Religion designs only to mortify it. 2. The one endeavors to find out the
Nature of things, the other professes an utter Ignorance of them. 3. That
swells up the Heart of Man, by increasing his Knowledge; This humbles it, by
requiring him to submit his Reason to his Faith. Lastly, Philosophy endeavors
to comprehend all things; whereas one of the most essential parts of Religion
consists in hmbly acknowledging that we comprehend nothing at all of the hidden
Mysteries of Nature, much less of those of Religion.

And therefore hence it is that Philosophy seldom agrees with Religion, nor
Religion with Philosophy. Thus Copernicus and Descartes doubtless were not well
pleased with the Descriptions the Author of Genesis gives us of the Creation of
the World; of the Two great Luminaries of Heaven; of the Miracle of Joshuah,
who stopped the Course of the Sun, of the third Heaven which St. Paul speaks of;
of the New Heavens and the New Earth, which sacred Authors make us expect; of
the Conflagration of the Heavens, the Dissolution of the Elements, and the
putting out the Light of the Stars; all which Signs are to preceed the great
and wonderful Day of Judgment; I say such Philosophers as these would perhaps
cry out, that these Objects had no relation to their Ideas of Astronomy.

But certainly there is no reason to wonder at it. For those Holy Writers
intended to speak in the Language of the People, and not in that of the
Philosophers. They had a mind to sanctify Mankind, and not to explain the
Mysteries of Nature; and therefore it was highly necessary they should
accommodate their Expressions to the Vulgar Notions. Nay, the Holy Ghost was
pleased they should use no other, that so his Mysteries being represented under
those Vulgar Ideas, might be suitable to every ones Capacity, at least in the
manner of their Revelation, since they could not be so in their own Nature.

Nor ought we to think this Conduct of his, extraordinary or unusual. For thus
the Wisdom of God acted when it was to represent to the Ancient Israelites the
Wonders of the Gospel Dispensation. And it made use of Expressions borrowed
from Customs and Practices generally received amongst Men. It says, that all
Nations shall go up to Mount Sion; that there shall be an Altar in the midst of
the Land of Egypt; that in every place Incense shall be offered unto God, and a
pure Offering; that the Tabernacle of God shall be with the Gentiles, etc. But
if it be asked then, why the Prophets foretold the Calling of the Gentiles in
this familiar way? 'Twas because those were the Notions of the People, and that
it was necessary they should use only Expressions known and familiar to the
Vulgar, since Revelation it self would have become unintelligible without that
condescending Goodness of God, who is wont to accomodate himself to the
Capacity of every Man, without Exception.

For supposing that God had deferred his Revealing to us the Truth of the
Creation of the World, the Miracle of Joshua, the Glory which the blessed enjoy
in the other World, the Judgment to come, etc. till all Men had been made to
understand by the Principles of Philosophy, that the Stars are bigger than the
Moon; that it is the Earth, and not the Sun which moves; that the Heavens are
nothing but liquid Spaces of an Infinite Extension; that the Sun is so
essentially bright, that he cannot lose his Brightness without an immediate
Annihilation of his Essence, etc. Heavens! where should we be, and what would
become of us, if all Men must necessarily first become Philosophers, before
they can learn to fear God?

But the Wisdom of God is so wonderful, in that he not only accomodates Himself
to the Notions of every Man that he may render Himself intelligible to all; but
also in that he has at the same time taken care we should not be deceived, in
urging too far the literal Sense of all those vulgar Expressions.

Thus for instance, nothing can be more insipid than the ridiculous Jests of
our Incredulous Adversaries touching those Descriptions which the Scripture
gives us of Hellfire. And certainly, they do but Expose themselves as often as
they pretend to mock and despise Religion. For he that will truly consider what
Holy Writ tells us in that respect, will certainly find that it puts several
different Images together, to represent to us by known and familiar Ideas an
Object altogether unknown, and set before us by all those different Images,
such Notions as one single Idea was wholly unable to represent. Thus for that
end it borrows the Notions of the Fire and Brimstone of Sodom, the sore
Affliction of the Days of Noah, the Judgments which God himself displayed over
the Nations in the Valley of Josaphat, the terrible Darkness spread over all
the Land of Egypt, whilst at the same time the People of Israel freely enjoyed
the the Light of God in the Land of Goshen; the unquenchable Fire and the Worm
of the Valley of the Children of Hinnon, which dies not, etc. the weeping and
gnashing of Teeth of those Children sacrificed to Moloch, who for that End were
thrown alive into the Arms of that burning Statue.

Now 'twould be full as reasonable to carry on the sense of some of these Ideas
too far, as to raise any Difficulties upon the Notions of Paradise, the Bosom
of Abraham, the Celestial Canaan, the Heavenly Jerusalem, etc. all which
Notions are particularly designed to represent to us the Bliss that attends the
Faithful. And these Ideas would be absolutely false and contradictory, if
understood in a literal Sense; because it is certain that Paradise can never be
taken for the Land of Canaan, or Jerusalem for the Bosom of Abraham.

Hence therefore it plainly appears by the Variety of all those Images, that
they can never be taken in a strict and literal Sense; and that the Nature of
the Object represented to us after so many different ways, was too great and
sublime to be described unto Men by any one single Idea of this Kind.

And indeed according to this Notion it is an easy matter to answer a certain
Objection raised about a future Judgment, which at first may seem somewhat
considerable, and to carry in it some intricate Difficulty. Some hold, that the
Description which Holy Writ gives us of the Day of Judgment, when it tells us
that the Son of God is to be preceeded by his Holy Angels; that he will place
Men, some on his right Hand, and others on his left, etc. I say, they affirm
that this Description neither agrees with the Idea which we already have of the
Nature of Spirits, nor with that we should entertain of so great and signal an
Event.

To answer this Objection, we are only to distinguish the Object from the
manner after which it is represented to us. The first indeed is very
reasonable, great, and sublime, worthy to take up our Thoughts, and able to
move our Hearts. And we have already sufficiently evinced its Conformity to our
Reason in showing that we either must deny any Evidence to be in the light of
Reason, and Nature of things themselves, or else acknowledge a future Judgment.
And what can be greater than an Object which justifies the Wisdom of God, his
Justice, and all his other Attributes, and brings all Men under his strict
Examination, all their Actions, all the Thoughts of the Understanding, and all
the Motions of the Heart? And this Object is that alone as is real and
immutable.

As for the manner that is proposed to us of its Accomplishment, 'twould never
suit with our weak Knowledge, were it altogether as sublime as the Object it
self; and we should be so far from comprehending any thing in the nature of it,
that it would certainly dazzle our shallow Reason, if God did exactly represent
it to us as it is in it self.

But Christ has sufficiently showed us we must not push too far the
signification of any of those expressive Images, in that he uses such a
multitude and variety of others to represent that Judgment to us. For sometimes
he describes it by the Parable of the groom and the Virgins; then again by the
just Judgment a Lord past upon all his Servants, whom he had in his absence
entrusted with his Talents. One while he represents the Judge of all the World
as a Shepherd selecting his Sheep from the He-goats, another time he describes
him under the Image of an Householder, plucking up the Tares and dividing it
from the Wheat, that he might burn the former, but gather the latter into his
Barn. In a word, he compares him to a glorious and triumphant Monarch, who is
preceeded by several Legions of Angels, or Messengers, sounding the Trumpet
before him. Now all these Descriptions would certainly be of no use, were they
to be taken in a strict and literal Sense.

The same Judgment must necessarily be made of the History of Dives and
Lazarus, which tho it appears never so reasonable and circumstantially told,
yet for all that is but a Parable in the Opinion of all the sensible part of
the World, and would seem absurd if it were understood in a literal Sense.

Let not then Philosophy any longer be offended at any of the Scripture
Phrases, or its figurative Expressions: Let it not object, that a material Fire
properly so called cannot burn up our Souls; that Angels have no Mouths to
sound Trumpets; that the Valley of Josaphat is too little to contain all
Mankind, etc. These are such trivial Difficulties as cannot puzzle those who are
never so little acquainted with the Language of Canaan.

Besides, it is certain that the Mixture Men have made of Philosophy and
Religion, has been considerably prejudicial to our Faith. For first, Philosophy
as it were heaping up one Speculation upon another, tells us, that there is an
infinite Extension of Matter; that there are other Globes inhabited and
peopled, other Worlds framed of the Concourse of Atoms; that there are certain
invio Iable Laws of Nature; that there is an Eternity of Matter, and several
other Imaginations of this kind, as have not the least relation with the
Principles of Religion. And thereupon the Passions which are upon the watch to
catch and embrace every thing that favors their several pretenses in resisting
Faith, authorize the smallest Conjectures, and give such weight and credit to
those things, which otherwise would certainly pass for mere Extravagancies. And
thus it happens, that the Scruples of Philosophy are changed into Certainties,
through our unreasonable desire of changing Certainties of Religion into Doubts.

Secondly, Philosophy creates in us an Habit of endeavoring to judge of every
thing by our selves only; a Disposition indeed absolutely contrary to the
Nature of Faith, which requires of us a Belief purely grounded on the Testimony
of God. But Men are so far from relying upon it, that they are continually
asking Demonstrations of us, and those too they would have to be Geometrical
ones, that is, so clear and evident, as to be free from all perplexing
Obscurity. These Men make large Pretensions and Demands; and sure it is that we
have sufficient Demonstrations, but they are all Demonstrations of Faith, and
there can be no Faith but what has some Obscurity as well as Light.

Thirdly, Another very dangerous Effect of Philosophy, is that it changes
Religion from Practice into Speculation. For the nicer and sublimer our
Inquiries are into the Nature of Mysteries, the more we neglect the Body of
Religion, which is essentially practical. Religion appears not then to us in
its usual Brightness and Majesty. And the more we pursue it by nice
Speculations, the farther it gets out of our reach. Experience teaches us, that
the Progress we make in reasoning, sets us at a greater Distance from the true
Center of Religion, which is Piety; and that the more Metaphysical it is, the
less able it is to satisfy our Mind, but rather raises Scruples in the
Understanding. Whereas on the contrary the more we practice Religion, the
better we are acquainted with it, because we grow then sensible of its divine
Efficacy by our own Experience, and are made to believe the true value of it by
the Impressions it leaves in our Hearts. Had Religion indeed been purely
designed to teach us how to Philosophize and argue about the Nature of things,
it would have been sufficient to take the Measure of it from a Speculative
Knowledge of the Understanding. But since it was given us to sanctify our
Hearts, it is but reasonable that Contemplation should yield to Practice, and
the inward sense we have of its Divine Efficacy.

VIII. Policy is yet a far greater Enemy to Religion than Philosophy. Not but
that it often happily makes use of Religion to keep Men within the Bounds of
their Duty; but it pretends to have a Right of Superiority over it. It would
have Religion submit to its Orders, whereas Religion submits only to the Orders
of God. Policy generally looks upon the greatest part of Men as no better than
Slaves to those that are in power; but Religion in spite of Policy makes all
Men equal, and effectually removes all those Distinctions which humane Passions
had put between them. Policy according to the Prejudices of Pride and Ambition,
acts as if the Lives of the meaner sort of People, were of no more value than
those of Brutes. But Religion assures us, that the Soul of a Peasant is as dear
and precious to God as that of a Monarch. What! Says the Ambitious Man, must
all People become my Equals and Companions? Yes certainly, replies Religion,
and far happier than thou art like to be, unless thou repentest. A great and
mighty Character indeed, which truly convinces us that it solely springs from
God, who is no respecter of Persons; and not from Men, who give and receive
Praise and Honor from one another.

But Politicians usually argue thus. Religion, say they, is very useful to us
to keep Men within the Bounds of their Duty, and bring them under Subjection to
the Sovereign and the Laws of the State. It follows therefore, that Religion
was designed for no other End. But this does not follow.

And to comprehend that Religion was designed for a sublimer and nobler End,
they ought chiefly to consider, that it is no less repugnant to the Ambition of
Princes, than the Rebellion of their People; that it relates not to the Welfare
of any private State; but essentially tends to promote Peace amongst Nations
and Kingdoms, and perfect that Union and Society which ought to reign amongst
Men; that it despises all Prohibitions, Politic Laws, and even the secular
Power when it endeavors to constrain it; that all the Roman Policy though armed
with the severest and most cruel Punishments that could be thought of, was not
powerful enough to stop its wonderful Effects; that by teaching Men to despise
Death, and hope for a better Life after this, it puts them above the reach as
well of the Promises as Threats of Policy; and that by sanctifying both their
Hearts and Consciences, it produces that Effect in them, which Policy never
durst so much as attempt.

IX. In like manner, Rhetoric has been prejudicial to Religion, through the
ill use Men have made of it. The Objects of the Gospel, as they were at first
offered to Men, without any Ostentation of Wit and Learning, struck their Minds
with such Surprise and Admiration, as moved their Hearts, and made them wholly
renounce their dearest Pleasures and darling Sins. This was the only Eloquence
used in the Primitive times. But the Church afterward unfortunately taking in
the filly Vanities of the Greeks and Romans, the Mysteries of the Gospel became
then either Matters of Philosophical Disputes, or subjects of Eloquence; and
because this last derives its Original from Poetry, whose grand Commendation
solely consists in Fiction, things came to be either disguised and varnished,
or heightened and exaggerated; and from thence proceed all your Panegyricks,
Funeral Orations, etc. and all those Paradoxes and false Tenets set off with
glittering Reasons and pompous Language, which in time produced so many
monstrous Opinions. But this we ought the less to wonder at, since Eloquence,
and all the charming Expressions of humane Invention, are no less repugnant to
Religion than we have showed Philosophy to be. For if it becomes not Men to
endeavor to comprehend by the help of Philosophy those Mysteries which God
himself is pleased should remain incomprehensible, it certainly as ill becomes
them to attempt to set off with false Ornaments of humane Eloquence, those
Objects which the Wisdom of God designed should be adapted to every Man's
Capacity, by the simple manner after which he was pleased to propose them.

X. Lastly, Even Grammar, when differently managed according to the Passions
and evil Designs of Men, mav serve to darken and perplex Religion. This gives
occasion to some Men's Complaints, that the Jewish Grammar is uncertain; that
the pointing of it is dubious; that there are several various Readings both in
the Old and New Testament; that we are ignorant who it was that collected the
Books of Scripture, and composed the Catalogue of those Books which are to be
held Canonical; that the Apostles, when quoting the Prophecies in their
Epistles, altogether make use of the Greek Translation of the Septuagint, and
are not very exact in reciting all the Words of those Texts they mention; that
there are many obscure and imperfect places in them for want of Expressions to
fill up the Sense, etc.

But it is certain, that this grammatical Exactness, or rather Superstition, is
not very agreeable to our Faith. This a certain Author has very well hinted at,
when he says, Scriptura non amat nimium diligentes. And the Reasons that may be
alleged for it are, 1. Because the Objects of the Gospel are of too great and
important concern for the Wisdom of God to suffer them to depend upon the
insignificant Niceties of Grammar. If Men don't usually enquire whether a King's
Laws are set forth in such words as are altogether in use, or whether there be
any Transpositions and Parentheses, in them; whether the Rules of Grammar are
duly observed, or who it was that drew them up; if it be enough that we know
them to be really the Laws of such a Prince, and that they are clear enough to
be understood by all; I say, if those considerations are sufficient to incline
us to a due Observance of them, I do not see how any one can reasonably raise
all these Difficulties, against the Books of Scripture, which have that
peculiar Advantage over the Ordinances of Princes, that the very same things
are often and often repeated in them, and consequently need no Grammatical
alteration.

Besides, if the Essentials and Substance of Religigion depended upon any such
external Alterations, it would follow from thence, that no Man could be a
Christian, without being first a Critic; and that he must be a perfect Master
of Languages, before he could be allowed to study the Means of Salvation; and
consequently, that we could make no further Progress in Religion, than we had
well employed our Time in the University, which certainly is a thing contrary
to the Design of God, who is pleased to call all sorts of Men to the Knowledge
of himself.

To this we might also add, that if Men's Salvation was affixed purely to the
Order and Disposition of Words and Syllables, they would pay a Reverence to
Words and Syllables instead of Mysteries; and thus we should inevitably fall
into all the Extravagances of the superstitious Cabbalists,

Suppose you had lived in the Time of the Apostles, and had distinctly heard
them one after another preaching the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, though
each of them expressing himself after his particular way, it is certain you
would never have made your Salvation depend upon their different manner of
expressing their Thoughts, but upon those Objects they would have unanimously
laid before you; and had you been never so little moved at those excellent
things which they preached and repeated several ways, it may well be presumed
you would not have cavilled about a few equivocal Words as perhaps escaped
them, or the Method and Order of their Discourse, or any other insignificant
Trifles of this Kind. Now the written Word is of the very same Nature with that
which they preached, and consequently we cannot choose but pass the same
Judgment upon it. For those good and holy Men who spoke as the Spirit gave them
utterance, that is, with all Simplicity as was necessary for the Accomplishment
of the Design of God, imagined not in the least that those who were to come
after them would be so nice in their Judgments, or raise any such Scruples
against their so very simple and natural Expressions.

It is our chiefest Concern to regard the Substance and Essential part of their
preaching, and that is God's Design, to save Mankind by the Death of his Son.
To this every thing relates, and it is supported by Three other very great and
important Objects, the Resurrection of Christ attested by the Apostles
themselves; the Completion of all the Prophecies contained in the Old
Testament; and the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost; all which things the
Apostles saw, and clearly and distinctly taught Men, and at last digested in
Writing, directed by the Wisdom of God, when the whole Earth seemed full of
Astonishment at the sight of the Extraordinary Gifts God poured down upon Men,
at the accomplishment of so many Prophecies in the Person of Christ, and at the
sufferings and Trials of the Witnesses of God.

And this is the main Substance of the Writings of the Apostles, as well as of
their Preaching. And Divine Providence was pleased that all those things should
be digested in Writing, in a time when they could not possibly be forged or
altered; that they should be received and approved of in all Christian
Societies of the World; that they should be first dispersed every where by an
infinite number of Copies and Translations of them, then afterward quoted by
almost an infinite number of Doctors, carefully preserved almost every where,
and carried generally into those places whence Persecution had banished and
removed the Christians. Nay, God has pleased that those Writers should all
conspire to teach us the same things, tho each expressed himself after his own
particular way; that the manner of their Compositions should be the same with
that of their Speaking; that they should exactly follow in all their Quotations
the Greek Translation which was known of the People, and not puzzle the Faith
of the simple and ignorant by any critical Remarks, which were things beneath
those Men who had both seen and handled the Word of Life, had declared the
wonderful Works of God, and received the Gift of Tongues, that they might be
clearly understood by all Men. It was also necessary, that those wonderful
Writers should insist rather upon the things themselves, that they delivered,
than the ordering of their Words, that so they might keep up the great
Character of their Office, and we might learn from thence to regard rather the
Sense of what they have written, than the accuracy of their Expressions. They
have sufficiently expounded all the fundamental Truths of Religion, which tho
not very many, are yet repeated almost in every Page of their Writings. They
left to their Disciples the Care of collecting their Writings, and setting
together those Canonical Books, which contain all things necessary for
Salvation: Not that that Collection has all the Writings of the Apostles, but
it contains certain Truths often and often repeated by them sufficient to
promote the Sanctification of Mankind. As for the various Readings, they are so
few and so inconsiderable in themselves, that they alter not in the least the
Sense of these Books, so far are they from changing the unalterable Substance
of Religion, in as much as there is no part of the Apostles Writings to which
it is not inseparably united, and almost every where repeated.

And as for the Objections about the Hebrew Grammar, and Authority of the Books
of the Old Testament, were all true as is objected, which yet is dubious, it
ought not to disturb us, since Christ and the rest of his Apostles have so
fully confirmed those Books. Those little and inconsiderable Difficulties are
far from being prejudicial to our Faith, since it is enough to know that the
Scripture is the Word of God, as we perceive by the Marks and Characters of it.
It Is enough to be certain that it is impossible that either through the Faults
of the Transcribers, or Negligence of Men, or the want of Exactness found in
the Translations; or lastly, through the Multitude of equivocal Terms, it
should ever want those important Precepts and evident Truths which are
necessary for our Salvation and Sanctification, and of which it is as it were a
constant Repetition: For otherwise God must either have deceived us, or his
Wisdom have been deceived, in being wanting in the preservation of such Means,
as it purely designed to maintain and keep up the Faith of Mankind.

However it be, it is not our present Design to blame in the least, either the
Care which some take to instruct themselves in the Criticisms of the Holy
Scripture, or the Respect they have for its Expressions, which are indeed
worthy to be preferred before all others. God forbid we should ever entertain
any such impious and foolish Thoughts: We therefore here intend only to assert
Two things; 1 st. that all those small Difficulties the Critics raise against
them, ought not to be looked upon as any way sufficient to shake the
Foundations of our Faith, the Wisdom of God having wonderfully provided, that
our Faith should be established without Respect had to those Difficulties. The
second is, that those very Difficulties are not only of excellent use to humble
our Minds, but also necessary to keep us from the Superstition of insisting
only upon a literal Signification, and from that Folly which we may call the
Adoration of Words.

We must therefore grant, that all things, our Senses, Education, the Curiosity
of the Mind, Superstition, Philosophy, Policy, Humane Eloquence, and Grammar,
are as so many Instruments which our Passions employ to make void that
Submission which our Faith owes to God; that through the ill use we put them
to, they are converted into so many different ways of shaking off that Divine
Obedience; and that the Speculations which spring from all these Principles,
aim at nothing else but the weakening our Faith, just as the loose and remiss
Maxims of some Casuists tend to the Destruction of Morality; it being as
difficult for the Understanding to believe, as for our Heart to mortify it
self.

Nevertheless, it may reasonably be affirmed; 1 st. That this Submission of our
selves to God, is absolutely necessary; and that unless we pay it him by
readily receiving the Principles of his Religion, we must inevitably yield it
up to Matter, and so give up our selves to the most wretched and impious
Ignorance, and horrid Darkness of Understanding; it being most certain, that we
shall no better comprehend, what Eternity, Infinity, Extension, the manner and
necessity of the Existence of Matter is, than we already know what passes
within God. 2 ly. That our Heart is disposed to such a submission of Mind in
those things which relate to our civil and natural Concern. And if it be
certain that we do not defer to receive Nourishment, till we are fully
instructed after what manner Nutrition is made within us, and if we are easily
induced to believe the Attraction of the Magnetic Stone, tho we are ignorant
of the manner of that Operation, why should we not in like manner as easily
believe Mysteries, tho we are not able to dive into the manner of them? 3 dly.
This Submission to God is so very reasonable, that none but a Man utterly void
of Sense, can be so stupid as not to perceive it. For till we are endowed with
an infinite Understanding, we shall never be able to know but one side of
things, and consequently we must necessarily be for ever ignorant of the other.
4 thly. It is very just and equitable, if ever any thing was so; and it aims at
nothing but showing us our Ignorance, and representing to us that being liable
to be deceived, we ought carefully to follow Revelation as a true and faithful
Guide. We should certainly be extravagant, proudly to deny our own Ignorance,
or impiously suspect that God could deceive us, when his Design is to reveal
his Majesty to us.

V. But what is chiefly to be observed for the Honor of our Religion, what
shows the Characters of its Divinity, and forces us to acknowledge them, is
that it teaches us that to see clear into matters of Religion; we ought not to
rely upon the Light of our Understanding, and that we must lay aside the
Evidence of Reason, if we would be free from Errors in point of Faith.

It Is a wonderful Effect of the Christian Religion, that it renders us happy,
by inducing us to renounce our selves; and no less admirable that it enlightens
our Minds by obliging us to renounce our Reason.

To look boldly and steadfastly upon Mysteries is the way to be blind; whereas
we shall easily perceive the Light of God shining about us, if we do but humbly
cast down our Eyes. We shall be sufficiently learned if we rest satisfied with
the Knowledge of what God has been pleased to reveal unto us: And nothing more
betrays an Universal Ignorance than an insignificant Desire to be ignorant of
nothing. In other Sciences a Man's Skill is measured by his Knowledge; but in
that of Salvation, he is best instructed who is most humble; he who has the
least Pride has the most understanding. And the proof of it is easy. We have
already seen that the nice Speculations of Reason about Mysteries do but more
perplex and darken what was before obscure. Let us now see how much the
submitting our Reason to Faith makes us have a clearer Insight into those
Mysteries, or at least how much it hinders our being confounded by them.

It Is certain, that by continuing in such a state of Humility, whatsoever
Difficulties may arise, they will not have force enough to discompose our
Minds. We shall not be surprised that we are not able to comprehend the Nature
of God, or his manner of Knowing, loving and acting; or his Eternity,
Immensity, etc. but we shall rather be ravished with Admiration to think that
we that are no better than Worms or Atoms, are yet thought worthy to know him,
and raised to that pitch of Glory, as to have some Prospect, tho but a faint
one of his wondrous Works and infinite Perfections.

Neither shall we have any reason to be offended because, God formerly
abandoned the Gentiles, and casts away other Nations which still abide in
profound Ignorance and Darkness; tho perhaps there is nothing in Nature so
difficult, or incomprehensible as the Conduct of God. But we shall rather
reflect upon our Selves, and endeavor to search into the Knowledge of our own
Nature. And upon such a consideration we shall find our selves buried and
swallowed up, if I may so speak, in some Corner of this vast Universe, and that
too in such a Time or conjuncture as is a mere Point, in comparison of that
almost infinite Duration of Time which has elapsed, and that Eternity which is
still to pass away. We shall only perceive a few Years and a few Nations, which
we ascribe to Providence as its Object; as if that which presides over the
whole Creation were to be bounded by a few Ages or Nations. But weak and
foolish Creatures that we are, we perceive not that infinite Succession of
Objects which take their Turn, and move on according to the Decree of eternal
Wisdom; we perceive not the strict union of this World with that which is to
come, or the share those Nations (whose Ignorance we so much deplore) have in
that continued Chain of Events; nor the Rights which Divine Justice has over
them, or at least we have but a faint and imperfect Knowledge of them: We
consider not that a thousand Years are as one Day, and one Day as a thousand
Years; one Nation as an hundred Nations, and an hundred Nations as one Nation
in his sight, who is able to create an infinite number of them out of Nothing,
as he did us. And in this we may be compared to those, who lying in the bottom
of a Well, would fain see the whole Extent of the Heavens.

Were we truly sensible of our wretched Nature, we should not be so curious or
inconsiderate, but rather dread the Fate of those Men who were smitten from
above, for having looked into the Ark of God. We should find out the Falsity of
those Opinions which are the products of a rash Curiosity; and whilst we
limited our Enquiries by Revelation, we should easily discern those that went
beyond it. We should distinguish Religion which mortisies us, from Superstition
which flatters and agreeably deludes us; and however Policy in the height of
its Pride might rank us among Creatures not much superior to Brutes, we should
not cease to think our selves the Children of God. No Charms of Eloquence
should impose upon our Belief; no idle Niceties of Grammar perplex that Faith
which depends upon the Objects of the Gospel, which are indeed too manifest in
their Nature, too often repeated, and closely united to the Principles of
Common Sense; too well confirmed and attested by their Events; too worthy of
God himself, and conduce too much to our Sanctification to be ever called in
question. In a word, we should then shake off our Incredulity, when we removed
that which excited within us a secret Propension to it.

It is therefore certain, that God has covered the Mysteries of Religion with a
sacred Darkness, and has even permitted Men to make them yet more obscure by
their vain Speculations. But what at once gives us Wonder and Consolation, is
that the deepest Philosophers and most curious Enquirers see not always
clearest into the matters of Religion; but those only who make least use of the
force of their Reason, and forbear to enquire nicely into those things which it
becomes them humbly to believe. This seems to be the Opinion of Christ himself,
who said to his Father, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed
them unto Babes, Mat. 5. 11.

And here indeed we cannot but tremble with Reverence and Admiration, when we
join this Character of the Divinity of our Religion to the rest. Hence it is
that we must renounce our selves, and beg of Almighty God that he would
enlighten our Understanding, when we perceive that such a sublime and elevated
Science, which offers such noble and magnificent Objects to our Consideration,
is yet conceived by those only that are pure in Heart. Here then ought we to
cry out, what a Divine Religion is this! Which at once enlightens and humbles
us, which amazes, and yet clears our Understanding; which leads us to saving
Knowledge by the free and ready confession of our own Ignorance; and takes away
all the Imperfections of our Understanding by making it submit to Faith. Where
is the Wise? Where is the Disputer of this World?

IX Portraiture of the Christian Religion; or, the Conformity of its Mysteries
to the Lights of Reason.
HAving looked into the Original of all our false Prejudices, it is now no
difficult matter to distinguish Religion from Superstition, and Divinity from
Philosophy. Without such a Distinction we must inevitably fall into the
greatest Difficulties; and by it it is easy to demonstrate, that Religion
contains no greater Difficulties than even Nature it self.

Thus the Doctrine of Predestination, of Grace and Original Sin, are such
unfathomable Depths as terrify at first view the Mind of him that endeavors to
reconcile them to the Light of Nature, and methinks I already hear a Multitude
of Doctors crying out against me, that I ought not to presume to dive into
thebottom of those profound Mysteries, which confound their Reason, the more
attentively they consider and reflect upon them.

But I beg leave of those worthy Men, to tell them, that all those matters
would seem to them less difficult than they do, were they less Philosophers
than they are. And I would have them always remember, that Faith and Reason,
Divinity and Philosophy are essentially distinct one from the other, in as much
as the former barely perceives the Object it self, without endeavoring to
search into the manner of it, and consists in that Submission which prevents
its further Enquiries, Pride and Rashness being contrary to it; whereas the
latter continually endeavors to know both the things and the manner of them,
together with the Physical Causes of them, having no greater Enemy than
Ignorance, to oppose its Progress.

Accordingly a Divine ought only to enquire whether there be any such thing as
Grace, Predestination, Original Sin, etc. But a Philosopher not satisfied-with
a bare Knowledge of it, will yet further enquire, what is the order of the
immutable Decrees of God, after what manner Grace determines our Free Will, and
by what means Original Sin was transmitted from the first Man to his Posterity.

The Apostles, who were the truest, and indeed only Divines, that confined
themselves within the due Limits of Divinity, have very largely instructed us
in all those Objects, by fully demonstrating the truth and necessity of them;
yet have not let fall the least Word that could give us an Insight into the
manner of them. But the succeeding Christians applying themselves to the study
of the Platonic and Aristotelian Philosophy, really thought the knowledge of
Salvation a Science as well as the rest, and thereupon framed to themselves
many fruitless and unprofitable Speculative Systems, which in many places were
repugnant to Piety, and perplexed our Divine Religion with several humane
Difficulties.

It would be injurious to imagine, that St. Paul in his large Discourse about
the Doctrine of Predestination, aimed at nothing else but to gratify the vain
Curiosity of those he addressed himself to. All that he there says, though
seemingly Speculative, is in reality Practical. The Question was, Whether the
Distinction that was between the Jews and Gtntiles was not wholly taken away;
and if so, whether the Gentiles were not to make up one and the same Body with
the beliving Jews? Those of the Circumcision being accustomed to look upon the
Heathens as a People that were cursed, could not easily imagine that they should
ever enjoy the same Privileges with them. But St. Paul, the Apostle of the
Gentiles, endeavors to confute this Prejudice of theirs; and to that purpose
he shows them, that God is the God of all Men; that he suffered that all Men
should Sin, that he might thereby extend his Grace to all; that the Choice he
made of the Jews for his peculiar People was a free and liberal Election; that
'twas by by Faith alone, and not by Works that the Patriarchs were acceptable
to him; that his Mercies were not entailed upon the Posterity of the
Patriarchs; that the Circumcision of the Flesh was not the reason of their
Acceptance with God; that the Law of it self could not have that effect; that
it was not for the Good Works of Jacob that his Posterity was preferred before
that of Esau; for whilst the Children were yet in their Mothers Womb, and had
done neither Good nor Evil, it was told Rebekah, consulting the Divine Oracle
about them, that the Elder should serve the Younger.

Now the Reflections to be made upon this Doctrine of St. Paul, are these, 1.
That the absolute Necessity there was then to treat of those matters, and the
urgent occasion that obliged the Apostles to speak of them is now wholly at an
end; for there is none among the Christians, that either calls or ought to call
in Question the Election of those Gentiles who sincerely believed the Gospel:
So that if we happen now adays to be engaged in any eager Disputes about those
matters, it is merely out of a Principle of Vanity, or Obstinacy, or a rash and
impious Curiosity. Every thing was practical in St Paul's Discourse of
Predestination, whereas those are wholly Speculative that are in these latter
Days composed about it. St. Paul had no other Design but to create Peace and
Charity between the Jews and Gentiles, by showing them that they were both the
Object of the Divine Election: But now this Doctrine is changed into Speculation
and Philosophy, and has no other use but to create Scandalous Divisions in
Christian Societies.

2. The best and surest Method in this Case is to imitate the Modesty of St.
Paul, who barely asserted the thing, taking great care not to search into the
manner of it. He only spoke of Election in general. And when his curious and
impertinent Reason went about to examine the performance of it, he only cried
out; O the Depth of the Riches! etc. It must be confessed St. Paul had as much
Wit as any modern Divines can pretend to, and so could have framed as probable
Systems of the Consent and Harmony of the Decrees of God, or have found out
either in the ill use we make of our Free Will; or in the Springs of our Soul,
wherewith to solve these Difficulties. Yet he never attempted it. And the
reason was, he was a true Divine, and not a mere Philosopher, and knew very
well that the most essential part of Faith consists in humbly casting down our
Eyes before the dark side of the Mystery.

3. But because we are allowed to conceive divine matters after our own way,
and that it would otherwise be utterly impossible for us to speak of them, so
may we also distinguish the several Decrees of God; We may conceive them
depending upon, and subordinate one to another; but still remembering the Truth
of this Principle, Deus non vult hoc propter hoc, sed vult hoc esse propter
hoc, yet we should appear no more reasonable for urging against Religion the
Difficulties which arise from this Order of the Decrees of God, than if a Man
should pretend to raise very serious Objections against the Distinction we
conceive between the Hands and Feet and Eyes of God. For as we should readily
answer the the latter, that he did not do well in urging too far those
figurative and humane ways of speaking; so should we tell the former, that
there being no real dependence or distinction in the Decrees of God, he need
not be perplexed at those Difficulties that seem to take their rise from it.

4. In the mean while I grant it ought to be our chiefest Concern to range
those Decrees in an order most conformable to our own Reason, and most worthy
the Majesty of God. Being therefore obliged to conceive God under the notion of
a Man, it is but reasonable we should conceive him under the notion of a Wise
and Prudent one. It must be confessed that there can be no greater Extravagance
than that of those Philosophical Divines, who maintain so fierce a War about
the manner of conceiving the Order of the Decrees of God. The Apostles
themselves never argued about them. They were neither Supralapsarians, nor
Vniversalists, nor Particularists, for they desired not to frame Systems of
their own, nor did they design to prefer Speculation before Practice. What was
then the Doctrine of the blessed Apostles? The same that is common to all those
several sorts of Divines; that which is contained in our Catechisms; which does
not require we should go through a Course of Philosophy, before we can
understand its Precepts; that which teaches us purely the Thing it self, and
not the Manner after which it is brought to pass; that, in short, which
procures Peace and good Understanding among Christians, and not that which is
the universal Cause of all their Dissentions.

5. There are Two things to be considered in the Doctrine of Predestination, as
it is offered to us by St. Paul; The Expression, and the Thing it self. The
Expression indeed may sometimes seem to us strange and unusual, because we are
not very well acquainted with the Hebraisms the Apostles were often wont to use
in their Discourses. Thus for instance, this Expression God hardens, which
seems to denote a positive act unworthy of God, signifies only, that God does
not use to take away the hardness of Heart. As for the Thing it self, there are
two several Elections, a general, and a particular Election, both which may
well be supposed to be spoken of in the 9 th. Chap. of the Epistle to the
Romans.

As for the general Election of the Jewish Nation St. Paul undertakes to show
that it did not depend upon any external Causes, but that it proceeded from the
sole Will and good Pleasure of God. He tells us, it was not on the account of
the Righteousness of Jacob, (as the Jews imagined) that Israel had been
preferred before the Posterity of Edom, since long before the Children had done
either Good or Evil. Rebekah was told that she carried two great Nations in her
Womb, meaning her two Sons, and that the Elder should serve the Younger. And
that the Apostle speaks in this place of a general Election of the People of
the Jews, is easy to perceive from this Text of Malachi, Chap. 1. v. 2, 3.
which he quotes as follows, I have loved you, says the Lord; yet ye say,
wherein have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? says the Lord: Yet I
loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, and laid his Mountains and his Heritage Waste,
for the Dragons of the Wilderness. Whereas Edom says, we are impoverished, but
we will return, etc. It Is past all dispute that Malachi speaks here of the two
Nations, from whence we cannot but conclude, that it is also the intent of St.
Paul to speak of their Election in the 9 th. of the Romans, which exactly
agrees with the precedent and following Words. For in the foregoing Verses he
shows us, that in order to be admitted into the Covenant, it is not sufficient
to be of the Posterity of Abraham according to the Flesh, but it is further
requisite we should be so by Faith, beca^se it was said, in Isaac shall thy
seed be called; and that Isaac was the Son of the Promise. And in the following
Verses, the Apostle introduces Hosea speaking after this manner, I will call
them my people which were not my people; and her beloved which was not beloved.

It cannot be supposed but that St. Paul speaks also of the Election of private
persons, and makes mention of it in those excellent words of the foregoing
Chapter, where he says, whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed, etc. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified, etc. and a little further he adds, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect, etc. Now it is observable, that this continued Chain of
Benefits does not make make any Order in the Decree it self, but in its
execution. So that the Sum of all that may be gathered from these Words, is to
this effect, that God predestinates us, and that having predestined us, he
calls us, he justifies us, and he glorifies us; all which thus far admits of no
considerable Difficulty.

Let us not then carry our Enquiries higher than that Apostle did his; and
since he never argued Philosophically concerning the Order of the Decrees of
God, let us lay aside all those unprofitable Speculations, which will vanish of
themselves, when we have supposed the Simplicity of the Divine Nature; or if we
must needs Philosophize upon it, let us at least separate our Philosophy from
our Faith, and make a Difference betwixt our own Reasoning, and the Notions of
the Holy Ghost; let us not vainly contend barely about the manner of conceiving
the nature of things.

Were there are a right understanding amongst Christians, to make that happy
Distinction between Philosophy and Divinity, which we require of them, by
keeping themselves within the Bounds of Revelation, which barely informs us of
the nature of the thing, and rejecting in matters of Religion all Philosophy
which endeavors to dive into the manner of it, it would be the surest method
to extinguish all those Sects which rage among us, and restore all things to
the primitive Unity and Simplicity of the Apostolical Religion.

The Doctrine of Predestination would then be no longer a confused Heap* of
Darkness, Contradictions, and endless Difficulties, as it is now adays, through
the fault and neglect of Men; 'Twould then appear to us more conformable to
Reason to hold Predestination than otherwise. For if there be a God, he cannot
but foresee what will become of Men, and that they will fall into Misery and
Sin. And if some of them be saved, 'twould be very absurd to think that God
designed them not unto Salvation.

And this Doctrine of Predestination, when distinguished from the Speculations
of Schoolmen, and vain inquiries of humane Curiosity, is wholly comprised in
these two Propositions; God foresees the Sin and Misery of Mankind, and some
part of them he designed to Save, according to that of the Apostle, those whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, etc. Now can any thing be more
reasonable than these two Principles are?

For if a wise Man can be said to foresee the Time to come by the Rules of his
Prudence and Conduct, would it not be below the Majesty of God, to suppose him
ignorant of Futurity, who was the Author of Time? Is it possible he would not
as yet be concerned in the Salvation of Mankind? And can it be supposed that
Man should be saved as it were by an unforeseen Chance, against his Will? What
would become of his Mercy, if what he did, proceeded not from the Design he had
to save us? Could he have sent his Son into the World, and yet deny Salvation
to those who were to be born after the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ?

There occurs in all this but one Difficulty, which is the same that St. Paul
urged to himself, when he said, Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet
find fault? For who has resisted his Will? Are we guilty then, will the
Gentiles say, because we were not sooner partakers of his Light? Or how can I
be saved, the Reprobate will cry out, since God did not predestinate me to
Salvation? To this we reply, We must not call in Philosophy to our assistance
to avoid this Difficulty, which is common to all Systems, and in some becomes
greater. St. Paul went no further than this; let us in imitation of him stop
there also: Let the Bounds of Revelation, be those also of our vain Curiosity.
The greater skill Philosophy affords us to solve this Objection, the further it
removes us from the Truth, which seemed wholly impenetrable to a Writer far
more learned than us, and who was forced to cry out when he reflected upon it,
O the Depth, etc.

It Is easy to show that this is a common Difficulty. We cannot own the
Existence of God, without ascribing to him a Foreknowledge of the Time to
come; and it is certainly true, that to explicate the Divine Prescience, will
produce in us the same intricate Doubts, as Predestination; so that both of
them being infallibly true, it is utterly impossible to go against either of
them.

It Is further evident, that this Difficulty is no less considerable in natural
things, than it is in those that concern Religion. For if God can foresee the
Time to come, he must of necessity have foreseen and set Bounds to our Lives;
which if true, we may eat, or not eat, we may preserve, or not preserve our
Selves, it being all one; since we cannot exceed, or come short of those Limits
which the Almighty has prescribed us.

Whence I conclude, That the Doctrine of Predestination contains two sorts of
Difficulties; the first, which spring from the too refined Notions of
Philosophy, which ought not to perplex our Minds; for we are not obliged to
answer them: The second, which are natural, and common to all the Affairs of
Life, so soon as you have laid down this Principle, That there is a God who
made us, and that he can foresee that which will certainly come to pass. For if
we are taught both by Experience and Reason that God has a knowledge of
Futurity, and that he has foreseen and foretold it upon many Occasions, as it
appears by the fulfilling of Prophecies, it is evident from thence, that both
Experience and Reason persuade us to receive the most difficult things, or
rather the only Difficulty that is implied in the Doctrine of Predestination.

The same might easily be proved in Original Sin, and the Efficacy of Grace, if
we distinguish between the manner and the thing it self: It is true, we are
Originally defiled with Sin, having been shapen in iniquity, and conceived in
Sin, and being by nature Children of Wrath. The Holy Scripture informs us of
the thing it self, because absolutely necessary to our Humility and
Sanctification. 'Twas unnecessary to know the manner of it, since it is to no
purpose for a Man to know how he fell into a Pit; his business then being to
find the means how to get out of it. And therefore the Holy Scripture is silent
as to the manner in which Original Sin was transmitted to us, that is, as to
the Physical manner of its infecting the whole Race of Mankind. All the
Questions which Divines generally Start, are merely Philosophical, containing
such Difficulties as we are not obliged to answer. If we distinctly understood
the union of our Soul and Body, we might very clearly explain that
incomprehensible Transmission of Original Sin; but since our Learning can never
arrive to that Height, we have great Reason to distrust our Philosophy; but be
it as it well, the Difficulties proceeding from our vain Curiosity ought not to
be taken for the Effects of Faith.

Faith and Reason are here in a perfect union, by keeping themselves within
their due Bounds. Faith teaches us the thing it self, and Reason assents to it.
Reason comprehends not the manner of it, and Faith supposes it incomprehensible.

If Reason could deny that Men were from their Cradles inclinable to Evil, it
would be contrary to Faith, which teaches us that Principle. And if Faith
should flatter us with the hopes of freeing that Object from all the
Difficulties occuring to those who endeavor to search into the bottom and
manner of it, it would be also contrary to Reason, which knows Faith wholly
incapable of such an attempt. But since it is not so, nothing hinders but that
we acknowledge the agreement between Faith and Reason.

The same proportion there is between Reason and Faith, is also betwixt Reason
and Sense: And as Faith is above Reason, so is Reason above Sense. It Is an
undeniable Truth, that Reason and Sense never oppose one another, although one of
these Faculties cannot comprehend the manner of those things which the other
does. Thus for instance, Sense testifies that there is an ebbing and flowing of
the Sea; and Reason which is truly convinced by this Testimony, together with
the unanimous Consent of Men, agrees to the Truth of it, tho wholly ignorant of
its Physical Cause: If Sense could certify that this Phenomenon could be
perfectly known, it would be contrary to Reason, which scarce understands it at
all; and if Reason absolutely denied there were any such Phenomenon, it would
be also contrary to Sense, since all unanimously testify there is such a thing.
But Sense certifies the Existence of that Phenomenon, and Reason is truly
persuaded that it is so. Reason thinks it a very hard matter to understand, and
Sense affirms not the contrary; Reason therefore and Sense perfectly well agree
together, and such is likewise the joint Agreement of Faith and Reason in the
greatest Mysteries of Religion.

Those are Difficulties indeed worthy to be admired, which Philosophy so
confidently starts up in matters of Divinity. There are many things in Nature,
whose Existence we readily own, but nothing, tho inconsiderable in it self, the
manner of which we can comprehend; and yet it never came into any Man's Mind,
that had but common Sense, to call them in question. If then we show our selves
so very reasonable in Natural things, why should we prove so senseless in
matters of Religion? In common things our Understanding acts naturally, but in
Religion it is deluded by the Passions which continually seek how to suggest to
it new occasions of Doubting.

We may pass the same Judgment upon matters of Grace. Do but distinguish
Philosophy from Divinity, and you will avoid thereby an infinite number of
Difficulties; it being certain that for the most part they proceed, either from
the eager desire we have to understand what is altogether incomprehensible, or
from the Speculations we have already made upon that we could not comprehend.
Now to know the Injustice of Men in this, we need but observe that most of them
being fully persuaded, that God preserves us, nourishes, and supports us by his
perpetual Concurrence, without which the Meat we eat, and the Care we have of
our Preservation would stand us in no stead, and by which we immediately
Subsist; yet we never heard that any one did seriously conclude from thence,
that we ought wholly to lay aside the Care of our own Preservation, and solely
rely on the Concurrence of God. We never saw any one so senseless as to perplex
himself with these sorts of needless Questions; If it can be said, that I
nourish my self by taking those Aliments as are absolutely requisite for my
Preservation, how can it be reasonably affirmed that God nourishes, or
preserves me? Or if it be God as nourishes me, how do I lie under an Obligation
of doing it my self? I say, we never heard any of those Difficulties objected
against Natural things; whereas it appears they are continually started in
matters of Religion. However, there are as good Grounds for them in the one as
the other; because they consist in the Dependence we have upon the Deity,
either in our being Creatures already, or being born again, or becoming new
Creatures.

In Nature, we all know we subsist only by the Concurrence of God, without
inquiring into the manner of it. But in Religion we are not content to know
that we are Regenerated by Grace; we further desire to search into the manner
of that Operation, and our principal care is how to find it out; so that those
very Difficulties which could not perplex Men in matters of Eating and
Drinking, seem terrible and frightful to them, when it is requisite they should
lead a good Life. If you would know the reason of it, you must consult the
Heart of Man. 'Twill be sufficient for us if we Act with as much reason in
Religion as we do in civil Life.

If we consult the purest Lights of Reason, it will inform us that it is as
necessary the New Creature should have its Dependence upon God, as that the
Creature should depend upon him; because God himself is as well the Author of
the one as of the other; and as our Bodies have neither Life, Motion nor Being
but from him, so our Souls have no Faculties, Knowledge, or Affections, but
what they derive from thence. Every Being comes from him, and nothing but what
is defective can have any other Principle.

The thing it self then is very certain, I mean that there is such a Grace to
which we must necessarily refer all the good that is within us, and that
belongs to Divinity. But the manner of its operation, that is, the degree of
virtue it displays over us, the manner in which it determines our Free Will,
its minutest Conjunctures, etc. may be hidden Mysteries belonging to the
consideration of Philosophy, but not in the least prejudicial to our Faith,
which consists in an humble Submission, as well as in Knowledge, and can as
readily profess its utter Ignorance of a hidden Mystery, as it gladly perceives
it when revealed.

I question, whether Divines have observed, that when the Apostles are pleased
to point out to us what is most eminent in Mysteries, they neither examine the
Order of the Decrees of God, nor the inconceivable Transmission of Original
Sin, whereby the Wickedness of the First Man was conveyed down to us; nor why
Grace seems incompatible with Free Will: Whence proceeds this, if not from
their Ignorance of Philosophy and want of vain Curiosity, which by their own
Example they designed to teach us to avoid?

What is then, according to them, the great Mystery of Godliness? This is it,
God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
believed on in the World, preached unto the Gentiles, received up into Glory,
Tim. 3. 16.

The Incarnation which is expressed in these Words, God was manifest in the
Flesh, is a great and sublime Mystery; but if we lay aside our Prejudices, we
shall find it conformable to our Reason.

1. For it must be first of all granted, that in this Covenant, the Almighty
debases not himself in favor of those with whom he makes it, as we see in
dishonorable Treaties, where a King is upon equal terms with his Subjects.
This is a Covenant wherein God unites himself to the Creature, without
diminishing his Greatness and Glory, and where the Creature unites it self to
God without losing its due sense of Humility. The Sun unites himself with the
Cloud where it imprints its Brightness, without an Eclipse; and why should not
God unite himself with an innocent Nature, without lessening his real Worth and
Dignity?

2. We have an excellent Representation of this Truth, in the Union of our Soul
and Body, where two Substances distinct in the highest degree are united
together, without having any natural proportion betwixt them. What has the Soul
to do with the Body? And how can there be any Affinity betwixt things of so
different a Nature? It may perhaps be answered, that there is a greater
Disparity betwixt the Humane and Divine Nature, than the Soul and the Body. I
agree, that the Disparity is infinitely greater; but the Diversity is still the
same; and there is a great deal of difference betwixt an Union which carries a
mutual dependence along with it, such as that of our Soul and Body, and an
Union, which contains the dependence only on the one part, such as that which
is betwixt the Divine and Humane Nature. And what is most surprising, in the
former of those two Unions, is to see that the Soul, which is so noble a Being,
should be so closely fastened and united to Matter, and even depend upon it in
all its Operations. Now it is not so with the Incarnation of Christ: And it can
never be said, that the Divine Nature depends on the Humane; but contrariwise,
it is the Humane Nature which depends on the Divine. In this Union God remains
the same as before, All-perfect, All-mighty, All-full, Eternal and Immutable;
but Man is changed, and sanctified, and exalted by it. What Inconveniency then
can there result from it? As it is surprising to see a most noble Being subject
to a less perfect Being; so it is natural for a less perfect Being to be
subject to one more Noble. Now the latter of these the Mystery of the
Incarnation evidently demonstrates; and the Union of the Soul with the Body
discovers the former. It follows hence therefore, that the Union of the Soul
with the Body is in some sense very extraordinary, and far more surprising than
the Mystery of the Incarnation.

3. If still you require another Representation of this Object, that might
further give you a clearer Notion of the same, Conceive a false Sun, composed
of two different things, so closely united together, that they seem as it were
confounded together, viz. A Cloud, and the Light of the Sun. The Cloud is not
the Sun, nor is the Sun the Cloud; And thus the Humane Nature of Christ is not
the Divine Nature the same with the Humane. This false Sun, is a Sun, and yet a
Cloud; so likewise Christ is God, and Christ is Man. This false Sun is formed
of the Substance of the Earth, because it is composed of a Cloud, which is
nothing else but the Vapors of it; and of the Sun himself, being formed out of
those Beams in which the Body of that Planet consists; so in likemanner Christ
is taken from the Earth and is a part of the common Lump of Mankind, because he
is Man, which does not hinder him from being the Substance of the Father, since
he is the Brightness of his Glory. This is a very just Representation of that
great Mystery, but not perfect. But we hope every just and equitable Reader
will easily forgive the Defects of this Comparison in a Subject that is so far
exalted above our weak Imagination.

4. Moreover of all those who pretended to treat of the Nature of the Deity,
none but the Epicureans, who thought it was idle and lazy, divided it entirely
from its Creatures; and all other Men besides, looked upon it as united to its
Works. The Heathens, for instance, imagined it was affixed to their Temples and
Statues, to which they supposed it constantly united. But the Jews more
properly looked upon God as being united in a more partilar manner to a Bush,
or a Cloud, or the Ark. And several of the Incredulous now adays represent the
Deity to themselves as an Universal Soul affixed to universal Matter, just as
our Soul is united to our Body. If then it be so common to Men to conceive God
as being united to his Works, why should it seem so strange to them to
represent him as closely united to the Humane Nature of Christ, and that too in
a more particular manner than to any of his other Creatures? For if there be
any Creature which the Deity may be united to, it must necessarily be such an
holy and innocent Creature as that is. And if it be possible for God to unite
himself to any living Body, it is much more likely he should impart himself to
the Soul of Jesus Christ. If an Ark was capable to be filled with the Presence
of God, there is not the least Difficulty in conceiving that Humane Nature
being pure and holy, and far perfecter than all the Arks in the World, should
have been thus honored in a more particular manner. And if Men, in short,
stick not to make the Universal Soul as it were depending upon Matter by its
Union to it, why should we refuse to admit of an Union which leaves to God his
entire Independence and Liberty, and aims at nothing else but the bringing the
Body and Soul of Christ in a greater subjection to Him?

We no sooner embrace the Mystery of the Incarnation, but every thing that
seems offensive in the Doctrine of Christian Religion, will presently vanish. We
shall then easily comprehend that 'twas possible for Christ to die, since he
was Man; and that his Death is infinitely valuable, since he was God. And so
great is the Dignity which proceeds from the Union of those two Natures, that
it makes the Death of Christ equivalent to the Punishments our Sins had so
justly deserved.

We shall not then think it difficult to be fully convinced of the Truth of the
Resurrection of our Lord; for it would be unreasonable to suppose, that a
Nature as had been honored with so particular an Union to the Deity, should
yet have been for ever dissolved, and remained to all Eternity under the Power
of Death: But we shall think it very reasonable to imagine that it could not but
have risen from the Grave, into which it had been pleased to descend. If then
Christ be truly risen from the Dead, can our Incredulous Reason still refuse to
believe that we shall also rise again?

But how can that Reason contradict a Truth which the Disciples saw? They
beheld the Glory of Christ, both in the Miracles which he performed, and in his
Holiness of life: They saw God manifested in the Flesh, and were Witnesses of
the Resurrection of our Lord: They perceived Angels coming down toward him:
The Gospel was preached to the Gentiles by their Ministry: The World believed
on their Preaching; and Lastly, they saw Christ ascending into Heaven, all
which were very sensible and evident matters of Fact.

The Mystery then of the Incarnation, tho the hardest to comprehend of all
those of Christian Religion, implies however nothing contrary to Reason. But we
must except the most Holy and everblessed Trinity, another Mystery, which being
infinitely exalted above the reach of our shallow Capacity, is not easily
reconcilable to it. Nevertheless it is most certain, that the Sublimity of its
Nature renders it not any ways repugnant to Reason. 1 st. Because the word
Person is not to be taken in the same sense with that of Essence. I grant that
three Persons and one Person, one Essence and three Essences implie a
Contradiction; but the Notion of one Essence and three Persons is not liable to
any, after you know the Signification of those two Terms* 2 ly. Because the
Deity is so great and so sublime a Subject, that we ought not to wonder if we
cannot reach to the Greatness of it by our weak Imagination. 3 dly. Because for
ought we know, the most considerable Difficulties of this Mystery proceed from
a Defect of Revelation; or the silence which holy Writ observes on that
account. Perhaps we should not think it at all hard to conceive, if the Holy
Ghost had been pleased to reveal its Nature a little more clearly to us* But
such is the wonderful Conduct of God, who is resolved to humble us, and not to
satisfy our vain Curiosity nor indulge the Pride of our Understanding, which is
too greedy of Knowledge. 4 thly. Because we are not wholly destitute of Images,
there being several capable to illustrate that Object, tho never so
incomprehensible in it self. Thus for instance, the same Soul is an
Understanding, as it perceives; a Will, as it has a desire; and a Memory, as it
recalls the things past to the Mind; all which three Faculties are comprehended
in one and the same Understanding. In like manner also the same Light is in the
Heavens a Sun; in the Air, Brightness; and in the Cloud, a false Sun. 5 thly.
To all this we may yet further add, that the greatest Difficulties of this
Mystery proceed from those Speculations in which School Divinity has involved
it, to the great Scandal of our Faith, and eternal Confusion of our Reason.

For who can endure the Liberty those Metaphysical Divines have taken, in
pretending to form and decide ridiculous, rash, and impious Questions
concerning that greatest Mystery of our Religion? Can we think any reasonable
Man could read all their impertinent Questions without Indignation? As, whether
several Divine Persons could take but one and the same Person? Whether the Word
could have taken upon him in an Hypostatical Union the Form of an Angel, of a
Beast, of a Woman, of an insensible Being, of an Accident, of an Act of Sin, of
a Devil; so that if these Propositions were true, God is a Sin, a, etc. Whether
the Word has taken the Soul in an Hypostatical Union rather than the Body, or
the Body rather than the Soul? Whether, if Man had not Sinned, the Word would
not have taken our Flesh upon him? Whether Humane Nature was first united to
the Essence, or the Person? Whether the Humane Nature was united to the Divine
by several Unions? Whether a Divine Person may take upon it self the Form of a
created Person? Whether Humanity was united to the Person of Christ by way of
Accident, or of Substance? Whether the Humane and the Divine Nature are a part
of Christ, and whether Christ be two several things? Whether Christ be of a
create or uncreate Unity? How it came to pass he did not take upon him the very
individual Nature of Adam? Whether this Proposition, Christ is Man, was true
during those three Days he remained in the Grave? Lastly, Whether Christ should
have died of old Age, had he not been crucified in his Youth, etc.

These are the only Difficulties that occur in the Christian Religion. As for
the rest it is so essentially, so visibly, and so necessarily agreeable to
Reason, that we cannot but wonder that our Incredulous Adversaries have not yet
perceived it. This we have already sufficiently proved in several places of
this Work, and we cannot well insist further upon it, without repeating again
what has been already said.

It is sufficient therefore to observe, that Christ is as it were the Reason of
Nature, Society and Religion. He is the Light enlightening every thing, without
which we should fall into infinite Troubles and Perplexities. Christ is the
Center of all Events, which seemingly relate to his coming; he is the Center of
Truths, which are the more clearly revealed the nearer we approach him; the
Center of all the Mosaical Ceremonies, which are mere Extravagance in
themselves if they relate not to him; the Center of all Virtues, which have no
sufficient Force or Motives able to induce us to practice them, but by the
consideration of Life and Immortality revealed to us in Christ; the Center and
Foundation of the inviolable Rule of Conscience, which would be nothing else
but Error and Illusion, if the Christian Faith were a Fable. The Center of all
those Characters of Wisdom visibly diplay'd in all the Works of God, since
nothing but the Christian Religion can lead Man to the true End of his
Creation; none but that can justify the Wisdom of God; the Center of all the
Hopes of Man; for what is there that he could hope for, if Christianity were a
Lie? The Center of all the Evidence and Certainty that is in our Knowledge; for
what is there that we could be certain of, if our Soul were only a Disposition
of Atoms, and had no such Spirituality and Immortality as that imputed to it by
the Christian Religion? There need have been only a different Configuration of
Parts to form first Notions quite contrary to those we now have. Let any one
therefore closely consider the Matter, and it will appear to him, that if we
deny Christ, who teaches to know our own selves in revealing to us Life and
Immortality, no Salvation can be expected either for Reason or Conscience.

X Portraiture of the Christian Religion; Or, the Proportion it bears to the
Jewish Religion.
THere is nothing truer than that the Jewish Religion is great, noble and
divine; and we cannot reflect on the Greatness of its Miracles, the Sublimity
of its Morality, the Purity of its Doctrine, the Holiness of its Precepts, and
the Completion of its Prophecies, without immediately acknowledging it to be
stamped with Divine Characters. But yet we shall find it altogether defective,
if we separate it from Christianity, since its Essence consists in its relation
to that.

We cannot conceive without it, how God can be the God of one Nation, and yet
not be that too of other Nations also; that the Deity should be contained in a
material Ark, and being the Father of Spirits should so carefully seek after an
external and corporeal Purity; that unwilling to satisfy his Justice, he should
require Sacrifices of Men; or if willing to be appeased by Offerings and
Oblations, he should demand such mean ones of them, which were unworthy the
Majesty of his Godhead; that God who made Heaven and Earth, should dwell in a
Temple made with Hands; or that he who created all things visible and
invisible, should take pleasure in an external Pomp; that he who made the
Smelling, which he wants not himself, should delight in the smell of Incense;
or that his Voice, properly so called, should be heard, to which Thunder it
self scarce bears the Resemblance of an Echo: I say, we can never conceive any
of these things, without the help of Christian Religion.

For who can reconcile the Wisdom seen in the Religion of Moses, with the
Imperfections discoverable in it? How could that Lawgiver prove so contrary to
himself? And how could so many Characters of Divinity be attended with so many
seemingly superstitious Customs and trivial Ceremonies? Consult but the
Christian Religion, and you will then no longer wonder at it; there you will find
both the Reason and Wisdom of every thing that surprised you in the Old
Covenant.

All the Customs contained in the Books of the Old Testament are partly
reducible to Three Heads. 1 st. To a general Preparation of all things for the
reception of the Messiah who was to come. 2 ly. To the Representation of his
Office and Economy, by a Type or Shadow. 3 dly. To the describing of him after
such a manner, as to render it altogether impossible for the Elect Souls not to
know him when he came. Whosoever shall consider the Books of the Old Testament
under these Three Notions, will certainly discover nothing in them that can
perplex his Faith; but he will find that every thing therein serves to increase
his Knowledge, by discovering to him as it were the Scheme of God's Councels,
and his great Plan and Design of Religion.

But since it is not our present Design to dive into the unfathomable Abyss of
the Justice, Wisdom and Mercy of God, so neither shall we enquire into the
Reasons which induced him to permit Men to sin; or why he was pleased to save
some rather than others; or upon what account he made use of the Intervention
of a Mediator, rather than of any other Means; or whether there were any other
way to expiate the sins of Mankind, but the Death of Christ? I say we shall not
trouble our selves about any of these vain and fruitless Enquiries: And since
it is but just we should freely own our Ignorance, I think we can never find a
better opportunity to acknowledge it than when we are talking about the secret
Methods and Councels of God, because we can never discover the bottom of them,
unless we cease to be what we are, or he to be what he is.

Without attempting then to search into the manner of these things, which is
altogether incomprehensible to us, and of which we are not able to speak but
imperfectly, we freely suppose the Truth of them. We do not in the least
question but God permits Sin, because we are all Sinners. We know that a small
Number of Men are sanctified, to whom the Scripture makes several great and
sublime Promises. And we are also taught, that they are delivered from their
Sins by the intervention of a Mediator, and that God had resolved to bring it
to pass by such means even before the Foundation of the World. But let us now
consider how the Wisdom of God prepared and disposed Men for it.

These Preparations related in the Old Testament are manifold. For there are
Preparations of Events, Preparations of Ceremonies, Preparations of Prophecies,
Preparations of Precepts, and Preparations of Tenets.

As for the Events, they all relate to this great Center of Religion. Had
Abraham always lived in Vr of the Chaldees, he must necessarily have fallen
into Idolatry as well as the rest of his Kindred, or he could never have
preserved to his Posterity the Knowledge and Worship, of the true God; and his
Seed consequently could not have been a Seed of Blessing for all the Nations to
come. It was then absolutely requisite he should forsake his Country, as well
as his Kindred. And had Jacob always lived with his Father Laban, the Posterity
of the latter would have corrupted that of the former; so that Esau having
already mixed himself with Strangers, the holy Race could by no means avoid
being confounded with the profane, and so the Promise of the Messiah would not
have been entailed upon any particular Family or Nation, because in Succession
of Time it would have been altogether impossible to distinguish it from the
rest. It was then necessary, that Jacob should forsake his Father-in-Laws
House, and consequently live apart from all other Nations. And had it not been
for the protecting Providence of God, this People, who was honored with his
Covenants and entrusted with his Oracles, would have absolutely perished in
Egypt, and together with them the Hopes of a promised Redeemer. To preserve
therefore such comfortable hopes, they were necessarily separated from all
other Nations; and the better to keep themselves in that State, though they
differed from them all in matters of Policy, Manners, Inclinations, and
Religion, yet it was necessary they had God for their supreme Magistrate, who
gave them all those wonderful Marks of his Protection we read of in the Old
Testament. Though thev were carried away captives into Babylon for their Sins
they were necessarily gathered together again from that Dispersion Seventy
years after, lest a longer Bondage should have made them for ever lose the
Marks of their Election.

It Is no difficult matter to perceive that it was in behalf of the Messiah only
that God was pleased to make so many Distinctions: And the Promise of his
coming could not be entailed upon every Nation of the World. He set apart one
single Nation from the rest, purposely to entrust them with so great a
Salvation. And because 'twas absolutely requisite this Distinction should
remain till the Birth of that Redeemer, so for that End he appointed five very
remarkable Principles of that Separation. The first whereof was, the Knowledge
of the true God, a divine Character of the Election of that People, and a
Privilege they could not choose but be infinitely jealous of, especially when
they considered, what profound Darkness, Ignorance and Superstition was then
dispersed in the World. The second was, the Circumcision, that sign of his
Covenant, which God was pleased the Israelites should bear in their Flesh, to
distinguish them the more effectually from all other Nations. For it was not by
mere Chance, or out of any fantastical Humor that this Custom was first
settled among the Jews. It Is not to be supposed they could have received,
without very powerful Motives to it, so painful and difficult a Custom, so
contrary to the natural Affection of Mothers, as appears by the Example of
Zeporah; nay, which even seems at first view somewhat shameful and obscene. As
for Philo's and other Men's Reflections on the Customs of the Circumcision, they
are very pitiful. The third Principle of that Distinction was the Land of
Canaan, which God gave to the Patriarchs and their Posterity after them, though
he did not give them immediately an actual possession of it. He fixed the Hearts
of that People upon that particular Land, lest they should have been insensibly
dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth. And the Patriarchs upon their
Deathbeds strictly recommended the carrying of their Bones into it, the better
to fix the Hopes and Affections of the whole Nation upon it. But lest it should
have happened, that the Canaanites, the Perisites, the Jebusites, etc. who were
before in possession of that Land, should have intermixed themselves with the
holy Generation, and consequently corrupted them by their Superstition; God
himself consented that those Nations should in this Life undergo an exemplary
Punishment for their Sins which had been carried on to the utmost pitch of
Excess, and for that end his Vengeance made use of Josuah and his Armies as
Instruments to destroy them utterly. The fourth was the Tabernacle, and
afterward the Temple, which God resolved should be the Center of the
ceremonial Worship, he having solemnly declared that no Sacrifices, or any
other material Oblations whatsoever could be acceptable to him, but what were
offered in them, intending to prevent by that means the Israelites wandering
from that place, which was to be as it were the Center of their Religion, and
by consequence to establish their Separation from all other Nations upon a
surer and stronger Foundation, which too was necessary to make one day their
Messiah known. Lastly, the fifth Principle of that Distinction was the Worship
of the Law it self, which was of such a Nature, that the observance of its
Ordinances indispensably obliged the Jews to abominate and detest all Commerce
with other strange Nations, or induced all other Nations to look upon the Jews
with Horror and Indignation. For it enjoined the Jews to sacrifice the
Creatures other Nations worshipped as Deities, and the latter scrupled not to
feed upon the Flesh of those Animals, which the Jews had in Execration, etc. In
a word, the external and corporeal Purity the Law so carefully prescribed them,
prohibited the Jews all manner of Commerce with those profane and polluted
Nations.

But God thought it not sufficient to set apart unto himself one particular
Nation from the rest; he was further pleased to separate also in that Nation
one Tribe from all the rest; viz. the Tribe of Judah, in particularly assigning
to it those Promises of the Messiah which are contained in that excellent
Prophecy uttered by the Mouth of an expiring Patriarch; The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come;
and unto him shall the gathering of the People be, Genesis 49. 10. God was also
pleased to choose one single Family in that Tribe, to ascribe principally to it
the Promise of the Messiah: And that was the Family of David, to whom he
promised that he would make his seed sit upon the Throne as long as the Sun and
Moon endures; which Promise would have been manifestly false and absurd, were
it not exactly fulfilled in the person of the Messiah. Lastly, he chose such a
Branch of the Family of David, as shot forth as it were out of a dry ground,
and out of the root of Jesse, that is, a Branch of it that was fallen in a very
mean and wretched Condition. All which Distinctions were designed only to make
Men discern and know the true Messiah, and to prevent the loss of that
Knowledge so necessary to their Salvation, in the Confusion of Nations, Tribes,
Families, and Generations.

But it was not only by mere Events that God disposed the Hearts of the
Israelites to receive the Messiah; he imposed upon them also an infinite number
of Ceremonies to inspire a more fervent Desire in them of being freed from the
Burden of those Rites. He revealed to them but in part many sublime and
important Tenets, that they might earnestly desire a clearer and fuller
Revelation of them. He gave them a Law too, which wholly consisted in carnal
Motives and Rewards, and was attended only with temporal Blessings and
Threatenings, which Law was to dispose them by its Insufficiency to receive a
better Covenant. The Law intervened, that Sin might abound; and God suffered it
to abound by way of prevention, that Men at length being made sensible of their
Guilt, might have recourse to his Mercy, which was ready to be revealed unto
them in Jesus Christ. Thus it appears all things as it were prepared the Jews
to a new Economy and Dispensation.

We may also add, that there was nothing but what represented it. The Lawgiver
and People, the Covenant it self, the Mediator, the Worship and State of the
Faithful; in a word, every thing was shadowed in the Old Testament, as in a
great and magnificent Picture, drawn by the hand of God himself, and exposed to
the public view of Men in all Ages to come.

Therein the Deity is represented under an humane Shape, to give us a Type of
God manifested in the Flesh. He is said to have wrestled with Jacob, as an
Admonition to us, that Prayer is a sort of Wrestling wherewith God is well
pleased. He charged Moses not to come near the fiery Bush where he manifested
himself, till he had first put off his Shoes from his Feet, the better to make
us understand, that without Holiness we neither ought, or can approach unto
God. He showed his Back-parts only to his Servant Moses, to inform us, that the
advantage of seeing him Face to Face, that is, of perfectly knowing his Will
and his Councels, particularly belonged to a far greater Prophet than Moses.

The Two Covenants are likewise represented to us by Abraham's Two Wives. The
Covenant of the Gospel by Sarah, the Mother of the free Children; and the
Covenant of the Law, by Agar, the Mother of the Bondmen.

The faithful People, that is, the Church or the Congregation of those Men who
are chosen for eternal Life, are farther represented to us sometimes by the
People of Israel, sometimes by the Assembly of the firstborn, and sometimes by
the Multitude of the Levites and Priests. And the Conformity betwixt the People
of Israel and the Christian Church is very remarkable. The People of Israel
were set apart from all other Nations, and so are the faithful from the rest of
Mankind. God was the Protector of Israel only, when at the same time he forsook
all other People. In like manner none but that Holy Congregation of People we
call the Church, however dispersed in all Times and in all Places of the World,
can justly boast of its being immediately protected by the Almighty. The People
of Israel were abhorred and had in execration by all other Nations, and so is
the Church hated by all the World. The People of Israel cried unto God for help
in the midst of their Oppression, and their Cry came unto him; and just so has
the Church had its Martyrs and afflicted Sufferers, continually crying out
night and day, How long, Lord, etc. The People of Israel, had no other Guide
but God; no other Light but his; no other Support to defend them but his
Providence: They were fed for a long time with nothing but that Bread he
miraculously gave them from Heaven for their Sustenance, etc. The Church in
like manner has no other Lights but what proceed from God; no other means of
preservation but his Providence; no other Support but his Strength, etc. God
dwelt in Israel, and being willing to conform himself as it were to the
Israelites, would have a Tabernacle erected him, when they themselves dwelt in
Tabernacles, and a House when they also made their Abode in Houses. So God is
now in the midst of his Church, and the Faithful themselves are his Temple and
his Sanctuary.

Further, the Divine Worship paid to God in Israel, was an excellent Figure and
Type of that spiritual Worship that we Christians are bound to give him. To the
Temple that was divided into the Porch, the Holy Place, and the Holy of Holies,
is answerable the World, the Church and the Heavens, the eternal Sanctuary of
God; To the Levites, all the Faithful without Exception that are designed to
serve God; to the White Cloathings of the Ministers of the Tabernacle, the
Innocence and Holiness of all those who design to approach unto him; to the
Purity of the Body, the Purity both of the Heart and Conscience; to the Blood
of Goats and of Lambs, which was a Confirmation of the Old Covenant, the Blood
of Jesus Christ which confirms the New Testament; to the Entrance of the High
Priest into the Holy of Holies, wearing the Names of the Twelve Tribes written
upon his Breast, and presenting to God the Blood that was shed in the Porch,
corresponds the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, where he continually presents
us to God his Father, and intercedes for us by virtue of that Blood which he
shed for the Expiation of our Sins; to the purifying Waters which washed away
all the Pollutions of the Body, the Waters of Grace which sanctify the Spirit;
To Mount Sinai, Mount Zion, to the sound of the Trumpet of Rams Horns, the
Voice of the Gospel; to Moses himself the Mediator of the Law, Jesus Christ,
the Mediator of the New Covenant.

The different state and condition of the Church is is also further represented
to us by the various condition of the People of Israel. Our spiritual Bondage
is marked out by their temporal Slavery, our Deliverances by their
Deliverances, our Enemies by their Enemies; and so just and reasonable is the
Conformity there is betwixt those Images and their Original, that the Holy
Scripture often makes little distinction betwixt them, and intermixes in one
and the same Chapter that which concerns the temporal State of the Israelites,
and that which concerns the Spiritual condition of the Faithful, as also the
Events that attended the Jewish Economy, and the Wonders of the New Covenant.
These things are worth our Observation, and he that does not duly consider
them, will never be able to understand any thing in the Prophecies contained in
the Books of the Old Testament.

Lastly, The Wisdom of God was resolved we should not want a competent number
of Types that might sufficiently represent to us the Excellence, Offices, and
Ministry of our Mediator. Thus Isaac conceived in the Womb of a barren Woman
the Delight of his Father, the Foundation of all the Promises of God, offered
up for a Sacrifice upon a Mount by the very hand of his Father, rising as it
were from the Dead, by being delivered from the Knife he had already lifted up
against him, and having afterward a Seed as numerous as the Stars of Heaven
and the Sand of the Sea; this Isaac, I say, was a lively Image of Jesus Christ,
who was conceived in the Virgins Womb, the Darling of his Father, in whom he
was well-pleased, the Foundation of all his Promises, the Source of his
Blessings, dying upon Mount Calvary, rising again in a wonderful manner after
his Death, and seeing his Seed after him when he had made his Soul an Offering
for Sin. Thus again, Joseph sold by his Brethren, betrayed out of Envy, accused
though Innocent, condemned because he would not submit to the immodest Desires of
a lascivious Woman, delivered out of Prison, appearing before Pharaoh, clothed
in Garments suitable to that Honor, and then sitting at his Right Hand, was a
wonderful Representation of Jesus Christ betrayed out of Envy, sold by the Jews
themselves, who were his Brethren, condemned for refusing to comply with the
Synagogue, cast down into the Darkness of Death, endued with heavenly Gifts,
raised again to Heaven, and sitting at length* at the Right Hand of God. Moses
defigned to be the Mediator of the Legal Covenant, rescued at his Nativity
from a Deluge of Blood, exposed to the Riverside, and as it were given up to a
sure and infallible Death; but afterward delivered by a kind of Miracle from
the Fury of the Waters, and also delivering not long after his own Nation
himself by a lucky Turn, when he seemed to be cast away, was an exact
Representation of Jesus Christ, who came into the World to be the Mediator of
the New Covenant, was delivered at his Birth from the Murder of Herod, and
saved Men after his having suffered Death. Jonas who was cast into the Sea to
appease the Tempest, and swallowed by a Whale, which three Days after cast him
again on the Shore, sufficiently gives us to understand, who it was that calmed
by his Death that Storm our Sins had raised, that went down into the Grave, and
afterward rose again the third Day. Lastly, David being raised from the State
of a Shepherd to that of a Monarch, was an excellent Type of Christ, who after
his Humiliation inherited a Name that is above every Name.

And as for those Prophecies which have described to us by such notable
Epochaes and signal Characters, both the Person, Coming, and the Time of the
Coming of the Messiah, we have already very largely spoke of them; so that what
we have said in that respect, is more than sufficient to make us admire the
exact Proportion there is betwixt the first and second Covenant, as well as
betwixt the Jewish and Christian Religion. Moses Illustrates Christ as we have
proved in our first Part of this Treatise; and Christ again Illustrates Moses
as appears plainly by the Comparison we just now made of them.

XI Portraiture of the Christian Religion, as it is considered in the
Proportion it bears to natural Religion.
WE have already described the Christian Religion as it is thus considered, in
having fully proved in several places of this Work that it takes away the
Corruption which had disordered Nature; that it subverts Paganism, which was
the Corruption of natural Religion; that it is the perfect Restoration of the
latter; that it reestablishes the Principles of Justice and Equity, which God
had imprinted in our Hearts; that it produces the most perfect Union of Society
by Love and Charity; that Humility, Temperance, Wisdom, and all other kind of
Virtues which support natural Religion, derive the Force of their Motives from
the Christian Religion, they alone being equivalent to all sensible Objects;
and lastly, that it makes us answer the End of our Creation.

It Is a wonderful Comfort and Satisfaction to our Minds, and at the same time
exalts our Nature to reflect that the End for which Man was designed, is the
same with that of Christian Religion; and the End of Christian Religion the
same with the true End of Man's Creation. Every thing that goes to the
Constitution of Man's Nature does in a manner seek after God. The infinite
Curiosity of our Minds incessantly thirsting after the Knowledge of New
Objects, seeks after that Deity which the Christian Religion discovers to us,
because that Deity contains all things in the Excellence of its own Nature. The
greedy and hasty Desires of our Hearts, which can never be truly satisfied with
any Object we see, seek after God as a Supreme Good, which contains in it all
other Advantages.

It was a thing before unheard of, that a Man must satisfy the Desires of his
Heart by glorifying God. To give our selves up to Godby renouncing our selves,
and to renounce our selves to dedicate our selves wholly to God, are mere
Paradoxes; yet such the Christian Religion plainly demonstrates to be true, by
supplying the Defects of Mankind, and restoring natural Religion.

And now reflect upon those Eleven different Portraitures or Characters which
we have thus offered to your Consideration. Observe that our own Imagination
had no share in the Product of natural Religion, of the Revelation of Moses, of
the Heart of Man, of the Morality of Christ, of its Doctrine, its End, and the
Effects of it; of the Testimonies given in favor of it; of its relation to the
great End of Man's Creation, the Glory of God. Consider, that all those
Representations depend not upon any of our foolish Fancies, or fantastical
Whimsies of the Incredulous; and that although we should not understand the
Original of the Christian Religion, yet we ought to refer it to a Celestial
Principle, since we have discovered that it is qualified and adorned with so
many Characters of Divinity.

What then shall we say, when we reflect that we have it by a voice from
Heaven; that an infinite number of Martyrs suffered Death to confirm it, that
the Events and Miracles performed in the World taught it us; that many
undeniable matters of Fact convince us of it; that the Prophets declare it, and
the Devils themselves silently own it? What can we say now that we are
surrounded on all sides with Light, with the Light of the Senses, the Light of
Reason, the Light of Prophecy, and the Evidence of their accomplishment, the
Light of Knowledge, the Light of inward Sense, the Light of Experience, the
Light of Testimony, the Light of matter of Fact, the Light of Doctrine, the
Light of the Heart, and the Light of the Understanding? We shall certainly own
that it is the Work of God, and earnestly beseech him who granted us the
Knowledge of his holy Religion, that he would be pleased both to defend it
against the false Subtilties of its secret and open Enemies, and deeply imprint
it in our Hearts for the sake of his Glory, and the Salvation of our own Souls,

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA
Occasioned by the Translator's Absence from the Press.
PAge 15. l. 36. r. Ministry: p. 39. l. 6. r. not now: p. 44. l. 23. r.
Epistles, p. 71. l. 6. r. of the, p. 81. l. 32. r. throughout the, p. 90. l. 3.
r. series, p. 93 l. 23. for the, r. he, p. 116. l. 28. r. any one, p. 130. l.
14. for Writings, r. Witnesses, p. 139. l. 7. r. ascending, p. 137. l. 6. r.
contemned, p. 162. l. 28. r. implied, p. 202. l. 19. r. State, p. 307. l. 22.
for do r. to, p. 312. l. 28. r. far from, p 315. l. 9. r. even, p. 339. l. 15.
r. Mortal but, p. 391. l. 31. for has r. was p. 405. l. 33. del^ are.


