THE Wandering Beauty. A NOVEL.

By Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, in Charles Street, Covent Garden, School.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD, Earl of Darwentwater.
My Lord,
BEing to Publish these last remains of the Celebrated Mrs. Behn, I could not
lose so proper an occasion of showing the Respect and Value I have for your
Lordship. The humor of Novels is so sunk for some Years, that it shows an
extraordinary desert in Mrs. Behn, that they are still in general esteem.
Others have sought after extraordinary and scarce possible Adventures, she
happily consulted Nature, which will always prevail; so that I may call her the
Otway of this kind of Writing; whose Natural Scen's live and increase every day
in esteem with the Ingenious, while the fantastic Rants of some of her
Cotemporaries dye even before their Authors, tho so Celebrated, and followed in
their first representation.

I know it is the custom of Authors to fill their Dedications with fulsome
flatteries, but as I am no Author so I shall avoid their faults, and only
profess a sincere veneration for those many Noble Qualifications which render
you the Darling of the Witty, and beg leave to subscribe my self,

Your Lordship's most Obedient, Humble Servant, SAM. BRISCOE.
Next after the Wandering Beauty.

THE Wandering Beauty.
I Was not above Twelve Years old, as near as I can remember, when a Lady of my
Acquaintance, who was particularly concerned in many of the Passages, very
pleasantly Entertained me with the Relation of the Young Lady Arabella's
Adventures, who was Eldest Daughter to Sir Francis Fairname, a Gentleman of a
Noble Family, and of a very large Estate in the West of England, a True
Churchman, a great Loyalist, and a most discreetly Indulgent Parent: nor was
his Lady any way Inferiourr to him in every Circumstance of Virtue. They had
only Two Children more, and those were of the soft, unhappy Sex too; all very
Beautiful, especially Arabella, and all very much alike; Piously Educated, and
Courtly too, of Naturally Virtuous Principles and Inclinations.

'Twas about the Sixteenth Year of her Age that Sir Robert Richland, her
Father's great Friend, and inseparable Companion, but Superior to him in
Estate, as well as Years, felt the Resistless Beauty of this young Lady Raging
and Burning in his Aged Veins, which had like to have been as Fatal to him, as
a Consumption, or his Climacterical Year of Sixty Three, in which he died, as I
am told, though he was then hardly Sixty. However, the Winter Medlar would fain
have been Inoculated in the Summer's Nacturine. His unseasonable Appetite grew
so strong and inordinate, that he was obliged to discover it to Sir Francis;
who, though he loved him very sincerely, had yet a Regard to his Daughter's
Youth, and Satisfaction in the Choice of a Husband; especially when he
considered the great disproportion in their Age, which he rightly imagined
would be very disagreeable to Arabella's Inclinations: This made him at first
use all the most powerful and persuading Arguments in his Capacity, to Convince
Sir Robert of the Inequality of such a Match, but all to no purpose; for his
Passion increasing each Day more violently, the more assiduously, and with the
greater vehemence he pressed his Friends to use his Interest and Authority with
his Lady and Daughter, to consent to his almost unnatural Proposition; offering
this as the most weighty and prevailing Argument, which undoubtedly it was,
That since he was a Bachelor, he would settle his whole Estate upon her, if
she survived him, on the Day of Marriage, not desiring one Penny as a Portion
with her. This Discourse wrought so powerfully with her Mother, that she
promised the old Lover all the Assistance he could Hope or Expect from her: In
order to which, the next Day she Acquainted her fair Daughter with the Golden
Advantage she was like to have, if she would but consent To lie by the
Parchment that conveyed 'em to her. The Dear, Fair Creature, was so surpised
at this Overture made by her Mother, that her Roses turned all into Lilies, and
she had like to have Swoon'd away, but having a greater Command of her Passions
than usually our Sex have, and chiefly Persons of her Age, she, after some
little disorder, which by no means she could dissemble, she made as Dutiful a
Return to her Mother's Proposition, as her Aversion to it would permit, and for
that time got liberty to retreat, and lament in Private the Misfortune which
she partly foresaw was Impending. But her Grief (alas!) was no Cure of her
Malady; for the next Day she was again doubly Attacked by her Father and
Mother, with all the Reasons that Interest and Duty could urge, which she
endeavored to Obviate by all the Arguments that Nature and Inclination could
offer, but she found 'em all in vain, since they continued their ungrateful
Solicitations for several Days together, at the end of which they both
absolutely Commanded her to prepare her self for her Nuptials with Sir Robert,
so that, finding herself under a necessity of Complying, or at least of seeming
so; she made 'em hope that her Duty had overcome her Aversion; upon which she
had a whole Week's Liberty to walk where she would, unattended, or with what
Company she pleased, and to make Visits to whom she had a Mind, either of her
Relations or Acquaintance thereabouts; though for three or four Days before,
she was strictly Confined to her Chamber.

After Dinner, on the third Day of her Enlargement, being Summertime, she
proposed to her Mother that she would take a Walk to a Cousin of hers, who
lived about Four Miles thence, to entreat her to be one of her Bride-Maids,
being then in a careless, plain Dress, and having before discoursed very
pleasantly and freely of her Wedding Day, of what Friends she would have
Invited to that Solemnity, and what Hospitality Sir Robert should keep when she
was Married to him: All which was highly agreeable to her Parents, who then
could not forbear Thanking and Kissing her for it, which she returned to 'em
both with a Shower of Tears. This did not a little Surprise 'em at first, but
asking her what could cause such signs of Sorrow after so cheerful a Discourse
on the l^te Subject. She answered, That the Thoughts of her going now, suddenly
to Live from so Dear and Tender a Father and Mother, were the sole occasion of
such Expressions of Grief. This Affectionate Reply did amply Satisfy their
Doubts* and she presently took leave of 'em, after having desired that they
would not be uneasy if she should not return till a little before 'twas dark,
or if her Cousin should oblige her to stay all Night with her; which they took
for a discreet Caution in her; and considering that young Maidens love dearly
to talk of Marriage-Affairs, especially when so near at hand: And thus easily
parted with her, when they had walked with her about a Mile, over a Field or
two of their own.

Never before that time was the dear Creature glad that her Father and Mother
had left her, unless when they had pressed her to a Marriage with the old
Knight. They were therefore no sooner got out of sight, ever she took another
Path that led cross the Country, which she pursued till past Eight at Night,
having walked Ten Miles since Two a Clock, when Sir Francis and her Mother left
her, she was just now got to a little Cottage, the poor, but cleanly Habitation
of a Husbandman and his Wife, who had one only Child, a Daughter, about the
Lady Arabella's Age and Stature. 'Twas happy for him she got thither before
they were a Bed; for her Soft and Beautiful Limbs began now to be tired, and
her Tender Feet to be galled. To the good Woman of the House she applies her
self, desiring Entertainment for that Night, offering her any reasonable
Satisfaction. The good Wife at first Sight of her had Compassion of her, and
immediately bid her walk in, telling her that she might lie with her Daughter
if she pleased, who was very cleanly, tho not very vine. The good Man of the
House came in soon after, who was very well pleased with his new Guest; so to
Supper they went very seasonably for the poor young Lady, who was even ready to
faint with Thirst, and not overcharged with what she had eaten the Day before.
After Supper they asked her whence she came, and how she durst venture to
travel alone, and a foot. To which she replied, that she came from a Relation
who lived at Exeter, with whom she had stayed till she found she was
burdensome. That she was of Welsh Parents, and of a good Family; but her
Father dying, left a cruel Mother-in-law* with whom she could by no means
continue, especially, since she would have forced her to marry an old Man, whom
it was impossible she should love, tho he was very Rich; that she was now going
to seek her Fortune in London,, where she hoped, at least, to get her a good
Service. They all seemed to pity her very heartily, and in a little time after
they went to their two several Apartments; in one of which Arabella and the
Damsel of the House went to Bed, where the young Lady slept soundly,
notwithstanding the Hardness of her Lodging. In the Morning about Four,
according to her Laudable Custom, the young hardy Maiden got up to her daily
Employment, which wakned Arabella, who presently bethought her self of an
Expedient for her more secure and easy Escape from her Parents Pursuit and
Knowledge, proposing to her Bedfellow an Exchange of their Wearing Apparel. The
Heiress and Hope of that little Family was extremely fond of the Proposal, and
ran immediately to acquaint her Mother with it, who was so well pleased, that
she could hardly believe it, when the young Lady confirmed it; and especially,
when she understood the Exchange was to be made on even Hands. If you be in
earnest Forsooth (said the Mother) you shall even have her Sunday-Cloaths.
Agreed (returned Arabella) but we must change Shifts too; I have now a Couple
about me, new and clean, I do assure you: For my Hoods and Head-dress you shall
give me two Pinners, and her best Straw-Hat; and for my Shoes, which I have
not worn above a Week; I will have her Holyday-Shooes. A Match, indeed, young
Mistress; (cried the Good Wife). So without more Ceremony, the young unhappy
Lady was attired in her Bedfellow's Country-Weeds, by Help of the Mother and
Daughter. Then after she had taken her leave of the good old Man too, she put a
broad round Shilling into his Wife's Hand, as a Reward for her Supper and
Lodging, which she would fain have returned, but the other would not receive it.
Nay, then, by the Mackins, (said her Hostess) you shall take a Breakfast e're
you go, and a Dinner along with you, for fear you should be sick by the way.
Arabella stayed to eat a Mess of warm Milk, and took some of their Yesterdays
Provision with her in a little course Linnen-Bag. Then asking for the direct
Road to London, and begging a few Green Wallnuts, she took her last Farewell of
'em.

Near Twelve at Noon she came to a pleasant Meadow, through which there ran a
little Rivulet of clear Water, about Nine Miles from her last Lodging, but
quite out of the way to London. Here she sat down, and after drinking some of
the Water out of the hollow of her Hand, she opened her Bag, and made as good a
Meal as the courseness of the Fare, and the niceness of her Appetite would
permit: After which she bruised the outward green Shells of a Wallnut or two,
and smeared her lovely Face, Hands, and part of her Arms, with the Juice; then
looking into the little purling Stream, that seemed to murmur at the Injury she
did to so much Beauty; she sighed and wept, to think to what base Extremities
she was now likely to be reduced! That she should be forced to stain that Skin
which Heaven had made so pure and white! But ah! (cried she to her self) if my
Disobedience to my Parents had not stained my Conscience worse, this rents
needed not to have been done. Here she wept abundantly again; then, drying her
Eyes, she washed her Feet to refresh 'em, and thence continued her Journey for
Ten Miles more, which she compassed by Seven a Clock; when she came to a
Village, where she got Entertainment for that Night, paying for it, and the
next Morning, before Six, as soon as she had filled her little Bag with what
good Cheer that Place afforded, she wandered on till Twelve again, still
crossing the Country, and taking her Course to the Northern Parts of England,
which doubtless was the Reason her Father and his Servants missed of her in
their Pursuit; for he imagined that for certain she had taken her nearest way
to London. After she had refreshed her self for an Hours time by the side of a
Wood; she rose and wandered again near twelve Miles by Eight a Clock, and
lodged at a good substantial Farmer's.

Thus she continued her Errantry for above a Fortnight, having no more Money
than just Thirty Shillings, half of which brought her to Sir Christian Kindly's
House in Lancashire. 'Twas near Five a Clock in the Afternoon, when she reached
that happy Port, when coming to the Hall-Door she inquired for the Lady of the
House, who happily was just coming into the Hall with a little Miss in her
Arms, of about Four Years old, very much troubled with weak and sore Eyes: The
fair Wanderer addressing her self to the Lady with all the Humility and Modesty
imaginable, begged to know if her Ladyship had any Place in her Family vacant,
in which she might do her Service? To which the Lady returned (by way of
Question) Alas! poor Creature! what can thou do? Any thing, may it please
your Ladyship, (replied the Disguised Beauty) any thing within my Strength and
my Knowledge, I mean, Madam. Thou say well (said the Lady) and I Am sorry I
have not any vacant for thee. I beseech your Ladyship then (said Arabella) let
me lodge in your Barn to Night; for I am told it is a great way hence to any
Town, and I have but little Money. In my Barn, poor Girl! (cried the Lady,
looking very earnestly on her) Ay, God forbid else; unless we can find a better
Lodging for thee. Art thou Hungry or Thirsty? Yes, Madam, (replied the wandering
Fair One) I could both Eat and Drink if it please your Ladyship. The Lady
commanded Victuals and Drink to be brought, and could not forbear staying in
the Hall till she had done; when she asked her several Questions; as of what
Country she was? To which she answered, truly of Somersetshire. What her
Parents were, and if living. To which she returned, They were Good, Honest, and
Religious People, and she hoped they were alive, and in as good Health as when
she left 'em. After the Lady had done Catechizing her, Arabella, looking on the
little Child in her Ladyships Arms, said, Pardon me, Madam, I beseech you, if I
am too bold in asking your Ladyship how that pretty Creatures Eyes came to be
so bad? By an extreme Cold which she took (replied the Lady.) I had not
presumed (returned the other) to have asked your Ladyship this Question, were I
not assured that I have an Infallible Cure for the Infirmity: And if (Madam)
you will be pleased to let me apply it, I will tell your Ladyship the Remedy in
private. The Lady was much surpised to hear a young Creature so meanly
habited, talk so gentilely; and after surveying her very strictly, said the
Lady, Have you ever experimented it before? Yes Madam, (replied the fair
Physician) and never without happy Success: I dare engage, Madam, (added she)
that I will make 'em as well as my own, by God's Blessing, or else I will be
content to lose mine; which Heaven forbid. Amen (cried the good Lady) for they
are very fine ones on my word. -- Stay Child, I will desire Sir Christian to
hear it with me, and if he approves it, you shall about it; and if it take good
Effect, we will endeavor to requite the Care and Pains it shall cost you:
Saying thus, she immediately left her, and returned very speedily with Sir
Christian, who having discoursed Arabella for some time with great Satisfaction
and Pleasure, took her into the Parlour with his Lady, where she Communicated
her Secret to 'em both; which they found so Innocent and Reasonable, that they
desired her to prepare it as soon as possible, and to make her Application of
it withal convenient speed; which she could not do till the next Morning. In
the mean time she was ordered a Lodging with the House-Maid, who Reported to
her Lady, That she found her a very sweet and cleanly Bedfellow; adding, That
she never saw nor felt so white, so smooth, and soft a Skin. Arabella continued
her Remedy with such good Success, that in a Fortnights time, little Miss's
Eyes were as lively and strong as ever. This so endeared her to the Knight and
his Lady, that they Created a new Office in their Family, purposely for her;
which was Attendant on their Eldest Daughter Eleanora, a Lady much about her
Years and Stature, who was so Charmed with her Conversation, that she could not
stir abroad, nor Eat, nor Sleep, without Peregrina Good-house (for those were
the Names she borrowed:) Nor was her Modesty, Humility, and Sweetness of
Temper, less engaging to her Fellow Servants, who all strove which should best
express their Love to her. On Festival-Days, and for the Entertainment of
Strangers, she would lend her helping Hand to the Cook, and make the Sause for
every Dish, though her own Province was only to Attend the young Lady, and
prepare the Quidlings, and other Sweetmeats, for the Reception of Sir
Christian's Friends, all which she did to Admiration. In this state of easy
Servitude she lived there for near Three Years, very well contented at all
times, but when she bethought her self of her Father, Mother and Sisters,
Courted by all the principal Menservants, whom she refused in so obliging a
manner, and with such sweet, obliging Words, that they could not think
themselves injured, though they found their Addresses were in vain. Mr.
Prayfast, the Chaplain himself, could not hold out against her Charms. For her
Skin had long since recovered its Native Whiteness; nor did she need Ornaments
of Clothes to set her Beauty off, if any thing could Adorn her, since she was
dressed altogether as Costly, though not so Richly (perhaps) as Eleanora.
Prayfast therefore found that the Spirit was too weak for the Flesh, and gave
her very broad Signs of his Kindness in Sonnets, Anagrams, and Acrosticks,
which she received very obligingly of him, taking a more convenient time to
Laugh at 'em with her young Lady.

Her kind Reception of 'em encouraged him to that Degree, that within a few
Days after, supposing himself secure on her side, he applied himself to the
good Old Knight, his Patron, for his Consent to a Marriage with her, who very
readily complied with his Demands, esteeming it a very advantageous Match for
Peregrina, and withal told him, That he would give him Three Hundred Pounds
with her, besides the first Benefit that should fall, within his Gift. But
(said he) as I doubt not that you are sufficiently Acquainted with her Virtues,
and other excellent Qualifications, it is necessary that you should know the
worst that I can tell you of her, which is, That she came to us a mere
Stranger, in a very mean, though cleanly Habit; and therefore, as she has owned
to us, we may conclude, of very humble, yet honest Parentage. A! (possibly) her
Father might have been, or is, some Husbandman, or somewhat Inferior to that;
for we took her up at the Door, begging one Night's Entertainment in the Barn.
How, Sir! (cried Prayfast, starting) have you no better knowledge of her Birth,
then what you are pleased to discover now? No better, nor more (Replied the
Knight.) Alas! Sir, then (returned the Proud Canonical sort of a Farmer) She is
no Wife for me: I shall dishonor my Family by Marrying so basely. Were you
never told any thing of this before? (asked the Knight.) You know, Sir,
(Answered the Prelate that would be) that I have not had the Honor to
Officiate, as your Chaplain, much more than half a Year; in which time, it is
true, I have heard that she was Received as a Stranger; but that she came in so
low a Capacity, I never learned till now. I find then Parson, (said the Knight)
That you do not like the Author of your Happiness, at least, who might be so,
because she comes to you in such an humble manner; I tell you the Jews are
miserable for the same Reason. She cannot be such perfectly to me (returned
the other) without the Advantage of good Birth. With that I Am sure she would not,
returned his Patron, and left him to go to Peregrina, whom he happily found
alone. Child (said he to her) Have you any Obligation to Mr. Prayfast? As how,
Sir? she asked. Do you love him? Have you made him any Promise of Marriage? Or,
has he any way Engaged himself to you? Neither, Sir (she Answered.) It Is true,
I love him as my Fellow Servants, no otherwise. He has indeed been somewhat
Lavish of his Wit and Rhimes to me, which served well enough to divert my young
Lady and me. But of all Mankind, perhaps, he should be the last I would choose
for a Husband. I thought (said the good humored old Knight) that he had
already obtained a Promise from you, since he came but just now to ask my
Consent, which I freely gave him at first, upon that Thought; but he is
doubtful of your Birth, and fears it may dishonor his Family, if he should
Marry you. On my Word, Sir (returned Peregrina, blushing, with disdain, no
doubt) our Families are by no means equal. What thy Family is I know not (said
Sir Christian) but I am sure thou art infinitely Superior to him in all the
Natural Embellishments both of Body and Mind. Be just to thy self, and be not
hasty to Wed; Thou have more Merit than Wealth alone can Purchase. O! dear Sir
(she returned) you Ruin me with Obligations, never to be Re-paid but in
Acknowledgment, and that imperfectly too. Here they were Interrupted by the
young Lady, to whom she Repeated the Conference betwixt Sir Christian, and
Prayfast, as soon as ever Sir Christian left the Room.

About a Week after, Sir Lucius Lovewell, a young Gentleman, of a good
Presence, Wit and Learning enough, whose Father dying near a Twelvemonth
before, had left him upwards of 3000 l. a Year, which too was an Excellent
Accomplishment, though not the best, for he was admirably good Humored, came
to Visit Sir Christian Kindly, and as some of the Family imagined, 'twas with
design to make his Addresses to the young Lady, Sir Christian's Daughter;
whatever his Thoughts were, his Treatment there was very generous and kind. He
saw the Lady, and liked her very well; nay, doubtless, would have admitted a
Passion for her, had not his Destiny at the same time shown him Peregrina. She
was very Beautiful, and he as sensible; and it is not to be doubted but that he
immediately took Fire. However, his Application and Courtship, free and
unaffected as it was, were chiefly directed to Sir Christian's Daughter: Some
little Respects he paid to Peregrina, who could not choose but look on him as a
very fine, good-humored, and well Accomplished Gentleman. When the Hour came
that he thought fit to retreat, Sir Christian asked him, When he would make 'em
Happy again in his Conversation? To which he returned, That since he was not
above seven or eight Miles from him, and that there were Charms so Attractive
at Sir Christian 's, he should take the liberty to Visit him sooner and oftener,
than he either expected or desired. The Other replied, That was impossible; and
so without much more Ceremony, he took his leave of that delightful Company for
two or three Days; at the end of which he returned with Thoughts much different
from those at his first coming thither, being strongly Agitated by his Passion
for Peregrina. He took and made all the opportunities and occasions that Chance
and his own Fancy could offer and present to Talk to her* both before, at, and
after Dinner, and his Eyes were so constantly fixed on her, that he seemed to
observe nothing else, which was so visible to Sir Christian, his Lady and
Daughter, that they were Convinced of their Error, in believing that he came to
make his Court to the young Lady. This late Discovery of the young Knight's
Inclinations, was no way unpleasant to Sir Christian and his Lady, and to the
young Lady it was most agreeable and obliging, since her Heart was already
preengag'd elsewhere; and since she did equally desire the good Fortune of her
Beautiful Attendant with her own.

The Table was no sooner cleared, and a Loyal Health or two gone round, ever
Sir Christian asked his young Amorous Guest to take a Walk with him in the
Gardens: To which Sir Lucius readily consented, designing to disclose that to
him for a Secret, which was but too apparent to all that were present at Table:
When therefore he thought he had sufficiently Admired and Commended the
neatness of the Walks, and beauty of the Flowers, he began to this Effect:
Possibly Sir Christian, I shall surprise you with the Discourse I Am going to
make you; but it is certain, no Man can avoid the necessity of the Fate which he
lies under; at least I have now found it so. -- I came at first, Sir, with the
hopes of prevailing on you, to Honor and make me happy in a Marriage with
Madam Eleanora your Daughter; but at the same instant I was seized with so
irresistible a Passion for the Charming Peregrina, that I find no Empire, Fame
nor Wit, can make me perfectly Blessed here below, without the Enjoyment of that
Beautiful Creature. Do not mistake me, Sir, (I beseech you, continued he) I
mean an Honorable Enjoyment -- I will make her my Wife, Sir, if you will be
generously pleased to use your Interest with her on my part.

To which the good old Knight replied, What you think (Sir) you have now
imparted as a Secret has been the general Observation of all my Family ever
since you gave us the Happiness of your Company to day: Your Passion is too
great to be disguised; and I am extremely pleased that you can think any thing
in my House worthy the Honor you intend Peregrina. Indeed, had you made any
particular and public Address to my Daughter, I should have believed it want
of Merit in her, or in us, her Parents, that you should after that quit your
Pretensions to her, without any willing or known Offense committed on our side.
I therefore (Sir) approve your Choice, and promise you my utmost Assistance
afar. She is really virtuous in all the Latitude of Virtue; Her Beauty is too
visible to be disputed by, even by Envy it self: As for her Birth, she less can
inform you of it; I must only let you know, that as her Name imports she was
utterly a Stranger, and entertained by us in pure Charity. But the Antiquity
and Honor of your Family can receive no Diminution by a Match with a Beautiful
and Virtuous Creature, for whom, you say, and I believe, you have so true a
Passion. I have now told you the worst (Sir) that I know of her; but your
Wealth and Love may make you both eternally happy on Earth. And so they shall,
by her Dear self (returned the Amorous Knight) if both of 'em may recommend me
to her, with your Persuasions added, which still I beg. Say, rather you
Command; and with those Three Hundred Pounds which I promised her, if she
married with my Consent to Sir Lucius.

To this, the other smiling, replied, Her Person and Love is all I court or
expect, Sir: But since you have thought her worthy of so great an Expression of
your Favor and Kindness, I will receive it with all Humility as is from a
Father, which I shall ever esteem you -- But see, Sir, (cried he in an Ecstasy)
how she comes, led by Madam Peregrina, your Daughter. The young Lady coming to
him, began thus. I know (Sir) it is my Father and Mother's Desire and Ambition
to show you the heartiest Welcome in their Power, which can be no means be made
appear so particularly and undisputably, as by presenting you with what you
like best in the Family; In Assurance therefore that I shall merit their Favor
by this Act, I have brought your Dear Peregrina to you, not without Advice, and
some Instructions of mine, that may concern her Happiness with you, if
discreetly observed, and pursued by her. In short (Sir) I have told her that a
Gentleman of so Good a Figure, such excellent Parts, and generous Education of
so Ancient and Honorable a Family; together with so plentiful an Estate, as
you at present possess, is capable of bringing Happiness to any, the Fairest
Lady in this Country at least. O Madam (returned Sir Lucius) your Obligation is
so great, that I want Sense to receive it as I ought; much more Words to return
you any proportionable Acknowledgment of it. But give me Leave to say thus
much, Madam; that my Thoughts of making my Court to your Ladyship first invited
me to give Sir Christian your Father, the trouble of a Visit, since the Death
of mine. However, the overruling Powers have thought to divert my purpose, and
the Offering of my Heart, which can never rest, but with this Dear Charming
Creature. -- Your Merits, Madam -- are sufficient for the Gentleman on whom I
entirely fixed my Affections, before you did me the Honor, and your self the
Trouble of your first Visit, interrupted Sir Christian's Daughter. And now,
Sir, (added she to her Father) if you please, let us leave 'em to make an end
of this Business between themselves. No, Madam, (cried Sir Lucius) your Father
has promised me to make use of his Interest with her for my sake. This I now
expect, Sir. Then (said the Old Knight) thou Dear Beautiful and Virtuous
Stranger! If I have any Power to persuade thee, take my Advice, and this
Honorable Gentleman to thy loving Husband; I Am sure he will prove so to thee. If
I could command thee, I would. Ah Sir! (said she, kneeling, with Tears falling
from her Charming Eyes) I know none living that has greater Right and Power. --
But (alas Sir!) this Honorable Person knows not the Meanness of my Birth, at
least, he cannot think it any way proportionable or suitable to His. O thou
dear Creature, (cried her Lover, setting one Knee to the Ground, and taking her
up) Sir Christian has already discoursed all thy Circumstances to me. Rise and
Bless me with thy Consent. I must ask my Lady's, Sir, (she replied). See, here
my Mother comes (said the young Lady) and entreated her good Word for Sir
Lucius. The good ancient Lady began then to use all the Arguments to incline
her to yield to her Happiness; and in fine, she was prevailed on to say, I do
Consent, and will endeavor to deserve the Honorable Title of your Dutiful
Wife, Sir. 'Twas with no common Joy and Transport that he received her Hand,
and kissed those dear Lips that gave him an Assurance of his Happiness; which
he resolved should begin about a Month or two afterward; in which time, he
might send Orders to London for the making their Wedding Clothes. Into the
House then they all went, Sir Lucius leading Peregrina, and the first they met
of the Family was Prayfast, who was not a little surpised nor discomposed at
that Sight; and more especially when Sir Christian told him, That tho he did
not think that Beautiful Sweet Stranger worthy the Title of his Wife, yet now
he should be obliged to join her to that Honorable Person. The Slave bowed,
and looked very pale.

All things were at last got ready for the Consummation of their Bliss, and
Prayfast did their Business effectually, tho much against his Will, however he
received the Reward of Twenty broad Pieces. The Wedding was kept for a Week at
Sir Christian's House; after which they adjourned to the Bridegroom's, where it
lasted as long as at Sir Christian's; his Lady, Daughter, and the rest; of that
Family would stay. As they were leaving him, Sir Lucius disposed of Two Hundred
Pounds amongst Sir Christian's Servants, and the rest of the Three Hundred he
distributed among the Poor of both Parishes.

When they were gone, the Affectionate Tender Bridegroom could by no means be
persuaded by any Gentlemen, his Neighbors, to hunt with 'em, or to take any
Divertisement, tho but for half a Day; esteeming it the highest Unkindness
imaginable to leave his Lady: Not that she could be alone neither in his
Absence; for she never wanted the Visits of all the Ladies round about, and
those of the best Quality; who were equally Charmed with her Sweetness of
Temper, as the Men were with her outward Beauties. But in a Months time, or
thereabout, observing that he was continually solicited and courted to some
Sport or Pastime with those Gentlemen of his Neighborhood, she was forced to
her self the Violence to beg of him that he would divert himself with 'em as
before their Marriage he used: And she had so good Success, that he did allow
himself two Days in the Week to hunt: In one of which, coming home about Five a
Clock, and not finding his Lady below Stairs, he went directly up to her
Chamber, where he saw her leaning her Head on her Hand, and her Handkercheif
all bathed in Tears. At this Sight he was strangely amazed and concerned.
Madam, (cried he, in an unusual Tone) what means such Postures as these? Tell
me! For I must know the occasion. Surprised and Trembling at this his unwonted
manner of saluting her, she started up, and then, falling on her Knees, she
wept out, O thou Dear Author and Lord of all my Joys on Earth! Look not, I
beseech you, so wildly, nor speak terribly to me! Thou Center of all my
Happiness below (returned he) Rise and make me acquainted with the dreadful
Occasion of this Afflicting, and Tormenting Sight! All you shall know, (she
replied) Dearest of Humane Blessings! But sit, and change your Looks; then I
can speak. Speak then, my Life (said he) but tell me all; All I must know. Is
there a Thought about my Soul that you shall not partake? I Am sure there is
not, (he replied) say on then. You know, Sir, (she returned) that I have left
my Parents now Three Years, or thereabouts, and know not whether they are
Living or Dead. I was reflecting therefore on the Troubles which my undutiful
and long Absence may have caused 'em. For, poor and mean as they may be, they
well instructed me in all good things; and I would once more, by your dear
Permission, see 'em, and beg their Pardon for my Fault. For, they are my Parents
still, if living, Sir; tho (unhappily) not worth Your Regard. How! (cried he)
can that Pair who gave my Dearest Birth, want my Regard! or ought I can do for
'em! No, Thou shall see 'em, and so will I. But tell me, Peregrina, Is this the
only Cause of your Discomposure? So may I still be blessed in your dear Love
(she replied) as this is Truth, and all the Cause. When shall we see 'em then?
(he asked) We see 'em (cried she) O your Goodness descends too much; and you
confound me with your unmerited and unexpected Kindness. It Is I alone that have
offended, and I alone am fit to see 'em. That must not be (returned her
Affectionate Husband) no, we'll both go together; and if they want, either
provide for 'em there, or take 'em hither with us. Your Education shows their
Principles, and it is no Shame to own Virtuous Relations. Come, dry thy dear
lamenting Eyes; the beginning of the next Week we'll set forwards. Was ever
Disobedience so rewarded with such a Husband (said she) those Tears have washed
that Childish Guilt away. And there is no Reward above thy Virtue.

In a few Days Monday began the Date of their Journey to the West of England;
and in Five or Six Days more, by the help of a Coach and Six, they got to
Cornwall; where, in a little Town, of little Accommodation, they were obliged
to take up their Lodgings the first Night. In the Morning (said his Lady to
him) My Dear, about a Mile and a half hence lives one Sir Francis Fairname and
his Lady, if yet they be living, who have a very fine House, and worth your
seeing; I beg of you therefore, that you will be so kind to your self as to
walk thither, and Dine with the old Gentleman; for that you must, if you see
him; whilst I stay here, and send to my Father and Mother, if to be found, and
prepare 'em to receive you at your Return. I must not have no Denial (added
she) for if you refuse this Favor, all my Designs are lost -- Make haste my
Life; it is now Eleven a Clock. In your Absence I Will dress, to try if Change of
Clothes can hide me from 'em. This was so small a Request, that he did not stay
to reply to it, but presently left her, and got thither in less than half an
Hour, attended only by one Footman. He was very kindly and respectfully
received by the old Gentleman, who had certainly been a very Beautiful Person
in his Youth; and Sir Lucius fixing his Eyes upon his Face, could hardly remove
'em, being very pleasantly and surprisingly entertained with some Lines that he
observed in it. But immediately recollecting himself, he told him, that having
heard how fine a Seat that was, his Curiosity led him to beg the Favor that he
might see it. The worthy old Knight returned, that his House and all the
Accommodations in it, were at his Service: So inviting him in, he satisfied his
pretended Curiosity; and after he had shown all that was worthy the sight of a
Stranger in the House, he led him into his Gardens, which furnished Sir Lucius
with new matter of Admiration; whence the old Knight brought him into the
Parlour, telling him that 'twas his Custom to suffer no Stranger to return till
he had either dined or supped with him, according as the Hour of the Day or
Night presented.

'Twas here the Affectionate Husband was strangely surpised at the Sight of a
Picture, which so nearly counterfeited the Beauties of his dear lived Lady,
that he stood like an Image himself, gazing and varying; the Colors of his
Face agitating by the Diversity of his Thoughts; which Sir Francis perceiving,
asked him what it was that so visibly concerned him? To which he replied, That
indeed he was concerned, but with great Satisfaction and Pleasure, since he had
never seen any thing more Beautiful than that Picture, unless it were a Lady
for whom he had the most sincere Affection imaginable, and whom it did very
nearly represent; and then inquired for whom that was drawn? Sir Francis
answered him, 'Twas designed for one who Was, I dare not say who Is my
Daughter, and the other two nere drawn for her younger Sisters, And see, Sir,
(pursued he) here they come following their Mother: At which Words Sir Lucius
was obliged to divorce his Eyes from the Charming Shadow, and make his
Compliments to them; which were no sooner over than Dinner was served in, where
the young Knight eat as heartily as he could, considering he sat just opposite
to it, and in sight of the two Ladies, who were now exactly like his own Wife,
tho not so very Beautiful.

The Table being uncovered, Sir Lucius desired to know why Sir Francis said he
doubted whether the Original of that Picture were yet his Daughter? To which
the Mother returned, (big with Sorrow, which was seen in her Tears) That her
Husband had spoken but too rightly: For (added she) it is now Three Years since
we have either seen her, or heard from her. How Madam! Three Years (cried Sir
Lucius) I believe I can show your Ladyship a dear Acquaintance of mine, so
wonderfully like that Picture, that I am almost persuaded she is the very
Original; only (pardon me, Madam) she tells me her Parents are of mean Birth
and Fortune. Dear Sir, (cried the Tender Mother) Is she in this Country? She is
not Two Miles hence, (replied Sir Lucius). By all things most dear to you, Sir,
(said the Lady) let us be so happy as to see her, and that with all convenient
Expedition! For, it will be a Happiness to see any Creature, the only Like my
Dearest Arabella. Arabella, Madam! Alas. No, Madam, her Name is Peregrina. No
matter for Names, Sir, (cried the Lady) I want the ^ight of the dear Creature.
Sir, (added the worthy old Knight,) I can assure you it will be an Eternal
Obligation to us; or if you please we will on you to her. By no means, Sir,
(returned Sir Lucius) I will repeat my Trouble to you with her in an Hour at
farthest. We shall desire the Continuance of such Trouble as long as we live
(^^ply'd Sir Francis). So without farther Ceremony Sir Lucius left 'em, and
returned to his Lady, whom he found ready dressed, as he wished he might. Madam
(said he) where are your Father and Mother? I know not yet, my Dear, she
repiy'd. Well (returned he) we will expect 'em, or send for 'em hither at
Night; in the mean time I have engaged to bring you with me to Sir Francis
Fairname and his Lady with all imaginable Expedition. So immediately as soon as
Coach and Six, and Equipage, was ready, he hurried her away with him to Sir
Francis, whom they found walking with his Lady and two Daughters in the outward
Court, impatiently expecting their Coming. The Boot of the Coach (for that was
the Fashion in those Days) was presently let down, and Sir Lucius led his Lady
forwards to them; who coming within Three or Four Paces of the good old Knight,
his Lady fell on her Knees, and begged their Pardon and Blessing. Her
Affectionate Father answered 'em with Tears from his Eyes; but the good ancient
Lady was so overcome with Joy, that she fell into a Swoon, and had like to have
been accompanied by her Daughter, who fell upon her Knees by her, and with her
Shrieks recalled her, when she strait cried out, My Daughter, my Daughter's
come again! my Arabella alive! Ay, my dear offended Mother, with all the Duty
and Penitence that Humanity is capable of, returned the Lady Lovewell. Her
Sisters then expressed their Love in Tears, Embraces and Kisses, while her dear
Husband begged a Blessing of her Parents, who were very pleasantly surpised to
know that their Daughter was so happily married, and to a Gentleman of such an
Estate and Quality as Sir Lucius seemed to be: 'Twas late that Night e're they
went to Bed at Sir Francis's. The next day, after they had all pretty well
eased themselves of their Passions, Sir Francis told his Son-in-Law, that as he
had three Daughters, so he had 3000 l. a Year, and he would divide it equally
among 'em; but for Joy of the Recovery of his eldest Daughter, and her
Fortunate Match with so worthy a Gentleman as Sir Lucius, who had given him an
Account of his Estate and Quality, he promised him Ten Thousand Pounds in ready
Money besides; whereas the other young Ladies were to have but Five Thousand
apeece, besides their Dividend of the Estate. And now (said he) Daughter, the
Cause of your Retreat from us, old Sir Robert Richland has been dead these
Three Months on such a day. How, Sir, (cried she) on such a day! That was the
very Day on which I was so happy as to be married to my Dear Sir Lucius.

She then gave her Father and Mother, and Sisters, a Relation of all that had
happened to her since her Absence from her Dear Parents, who were extremely
pleased with the Account of Sir Christian and his Lady's Hospitality and
Kindness to her; and in less than a Fortnight after they took a Journey to Sir
Lucius's, carrying the two other young Ladies along with 'em, and by the way
they called at Sir Christian's, where they arrived time enough to be present
the next Day at Sir Christian's Daughter's Wedding, which they kept there for a
whole Fortnight.

FINIS.

