FIVE DISPUTATIONS OF Church Government, AND WORSHIP. I. Whether it be
Necessary or Profitable to the right Order or Peace of the Churches of England,
that we Restore the extruded Episcopacy? Neg. II. Assert. Those who Nullify
our present Ministry and Churches, which have not the Prelatical Ordination,
and teach the People to do the like, do incur the guilt of grievous Sin. III.
An Episcopacy desirable for the Reformation, Preservation and Peace of the
Churches. IV. Whether a stinted Liturgy or Form of Worship be a desirable
means for the Peace of these Churches? V. Whether Humane Ceremonies be
Necessary or Profitable to the Church?
By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, and are
to be sold by him there, and by Thomas Johnson at the Golden Key in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659. At 4. s. 6. d. bound.

To his Highness RICHARD Lord Protector OF THE Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland.
SIR,
THese Papers are ambitious of accompanying those against Popery into your
Highness presence, for the tender of their service, and that upon the same
account. The Controversies here decided, are those that have had a hand in most
of the great transactions that of late years have here past; and that still
have a hand in the differences that hinder our desired peace. I observe that
the Nation generally rejoices in your peaceable entrance upon the Government.
And are affected with indignation, if they hear but any rumors that troublesome
persons would disturb their hopes. And many are persuaded that you have been
strangely kept, from participating in any of our late bloody contentions, that
God might make you an Healer of our breaches, and employ you in that
Temple^work, which David himself might not be honored with, though it was in
his mind, because he had shed blood abundantly, and made great wars, 1 Chronicles.
22.7, 8. I perceive also that some settlement of Church Affairs will be
expected from you by the most. And therefore it concerns all our welfare that
you be well acquainted with the state of those differences, about which all
will expect your judgment. For my own part I think not that matters are half
so far out of order in the Churches, as most discontented men imagine: But yet
I know there is much to be mended, wherein both God and most good men expect
you should contribute a considerable part. Some think there is no settlement in
the Church, till they are in the saddle, and all their Brethren are become
their servants, and do them obeisance. And alas, we have those that take it for
no settlement, till they have the sword in their own hands, or have engaged you
to use it at their discretion, and may again fill the Prisons or other Lands,
with their Brethren that are far better then themselves* Those I mean that in
their writings so glory that their predecessors hanged the Puritans, and lament
that of late they were but silenced, as being a less effectual means. Some
would have no other settlement then we have, or else would have Licentiousness
settled by a Law, and have unlimited Liberty in Religion. Doubtless these are
conscious what it is that they have need of: If Heathens, Infidels and Papists
be but excepted out of the Toleration, it displeases them: And we can easily
conjecture why. If we grant them all the Liberty of their consciences (that is,
of their mis-belief, because, alas, we cannot cure it) it satisfies them not,
unless they may have also Liberty of tongue and Practice. When I have heard and
read the Reasonings of some of them against the Immortality of the soul, and
the Christian Religion it self, I have wondered why they should take it for
such a point of Liberty, to have leave to draw others to their opinion, when
they seem to think that men's Happiness or Misery is no more concerned in it.
These are the men that tell the world that Magistrates have nothing to do with
Religion, but only with our Peace and Bodily welfare, contrary to the fullest
Testimony of the Scriptures: Which is but to persuade men to esteem you as the
dirt of the earth, and to value the Ministry above the Magistracy, as much as
the Soul is better then the Body, and as Heaven is better then this
dunghill-world. And for this odious doctrine, they have no stronger reason,
then because that Heathen Princes are incapable of deciding matters about
Religion. As if men's wilful and wicked indisposition would change the office,
and disoblige both them and those that are guilty of no such unfitness, from
the obligations laid upon them by the Lord: They may as wisely say that a sober
Physician is obliged to no more then a drunken one can perform; or that a
seeing man may do no more then the blind can do: Or that a Learned Prince may
not meddle with Learning, because an unlearned Prince is unfit for it. But any
man that has read Bellarmine, Parsons, Gretser, or such like Jesuits, may
know the Fathers of this doctrine: Nothing more familiar with them, then that
Princes have nothing to do but for our Bodies, and the Common Peace: but
forsooth it is the Pope that must Rule all about our Souls. The Libertines know
whose cause they plead. But verily men that regard the Interest of Christ and
their salvation, would set light by Princes, if they believed them to be such
terrestrial animals as Papists and Libertines would make them.

Some also there be, that would have a settlement upon too rigorous terms,
though they would not have it executed with cruelty. Most men would fain have
their own opinions prevail, and too many place too much of their Religion in
censuring as Heterodox all that differ from them, and think it an evidence of
their Godliness that they are Uncharitable; and seeing many minds and ways,
they think that punishment must heal them all: Not that they would be driven to
their Brethren, but all their Brethren must be driven unto them.

In the midst of all these cross expectations, if you will consult with, and
obey the Lord, I dare boldly tell you, it is past all doubt, that you must
avoid extremes, and keep as tenderly the golden mean, in this point, as in any
that concerns you. If you give Liberty to All that is called Religion, you will
soon be judged of no Religion, and loved accordingly. If you so far close with
any Party of them that walk in the faith of Christ, and the fear of God, as to
deal rigorously with the rest, you will be hated by them as a Persecutor. And
if men be oppressed in that which they value above their lives, it will tempt
them to neglect their lives for their relief. If you join with no Church in the
Lords Supper and other holy Communion, lest you seem to espouse the party that
you join with, you will by most be judged to be carnally wise, self-seeking and
irreligious, or one that is yet to seek for your Religion. If you restrain all
that are against the great undoubted Truths of Christ, from infecting others,
and own all that hold the Necessary Truths in Godliness and Charity, you will
please both God, and most good men. And if you hold your personal Communion
with those that are of your own judgment in lesser differences, this will not
lose you the affections of the godly (though of a few factious persons it may)
as long as you are a tender Father to them all, though you Communicate but with
some. The Godly Emperors that suppressed the Arrians and many Heresies,
maintained the Novatians in the Liberty of their Churches, and were beloved
both by the Novatians and the Orohodox. But if you cou^^ be the happy
instrument of taking away the Divisions of the Godly, that there might be no
such thing as Parties or Separations known among them (though diversity of
opinions there will be) (and if you could give all the Ministers of the Nation
a pattern of such union of the tolerable dissenting parties in your own
Pastors, with whom you shall Communicate) this would be the way to lift you
highest in the Esteem and Love of all your people, and make them see that you
were appointed of God to be a Healer and Restorer; and to glory in you, and
bless God for you as the instrument of our chiefest peace. And O what a
precedent and preparative it would be, for the Healing of all the Protestant
Churches through the world! And certainly your Highness has a fair opportunity
for this happy work* You enter in a season when we are tired with contention,
and sensible of our loss and danger, and tenderer then formerly of one another,
and the most angry parties are much assuaged, and there is not so much reproach
and bitterness among the Godly, as lately there has been. A Spirit of Peace
and Healing is lately risen in the hearts of many thousands in the Land, and
Ministers that differed, do lovingly associate, and most do feel the smart of
our Divisions, and are so prepared for a perfecter closure, that they wait but
for some Leading hand. I am certain that there are Healing Principles before
us, and a temperament is obvious to judicious charitable men, upon which we
might accord. And, though some are too rough to lie in any building, yet
moderate men are to be found of every party, that deserves your encouragement,
whom you may use as a precedent to the rest, and instruments to promote this
work. It is you that have those great advantages that can facilitate that which
to others were impossible: and from you it is expected. In this Book, and one
of Confirmation, which I lately published, I confidently affirm, is contained
much of that Reforming, Reconciling Truth which must heal us if ever we be
healed. And though the study of such matters require much time, yet seeing God
commands Princes that the Book of his Law depart not out of their mouths,
but that they meditate in it day and night, that they may do according to it,
Josh. 1.8. I may suppose that they will be willing also to meditate on such
Books as help them to understand it. I should have been as ready as another to
censure such an address as this, as guilty of presumptuous boldness, but that I
consider what is the work of my Calling, and what it is to be faithful to the
Eternal God, and am conscious of fidelity to your Highness in my boldness, and
know that these are necessary Truths, and that to the Counselors of Peace is
joy, Prove. 12.20. and have no interest in this world that I regard, in
comparison of the Churches happiness. My earnest Prayers for your Highness
shall be, that your own soul being first subjected and devoted wholly unto God,
you may Rule us as one that is Ruled by him, and never know any Interest but
his, and that which is subservient to him, and may escape that stumbling stone,
on which the Princes of the earth do commonly dash themselves in pieces, even
by espousing an Interest contrary to Christ's, and so growing jealous of his
holy ways, and falling out with them: and that God would endue your Highness
with that heavenly Wisdom, that is first Pure, and then Peaceable, Jam. 3.17.
and you may escape the flattering suggestions of the Wisdom of the flesh, and
serious Piety may be the first part of your Policy, that so the Eternal God
may be engaged in the Protection of your Dominions and You: That you may
always remember, that you are Christ's and your Peoples, and not your Own: and
that the diligent promoting of GODLYNESS and CONCORD may be the study and
resolved work of your Life. This is the way, and only this, (let flesh and
blood say what it will) to make you truly Great and Happy. God is the Center
and Common Interest of all his servants. Keep close to him, and they will all
keep close to you. There is no other Common Interest, nor any thing that the
Godly do so highly value. If they see that it is indeed for God, they can bear
any thing, or do any thing; for they are wholly devoted to him alone. The more
of God appears on you, and the more you promote his Interest in the world,
the highlyer will you be advanced, and the dearer will you be to all that Love
him. And even with the ungodly multitude, that Piety is honored in Princes,
that is despised in their neighbors; and the hand of God is plainly
demonstrated in their surviving Honor; the names of Pious Princes being Great,
when the Greatest leave a name that is vile, even in the mouths of common
worldly men, who are ready to keep a Holy Day for a Saint when he is dead,
though they hate or will not imitate the living. Your Zeal for God will kindle
in your subjects a Zeal for you. The mo^e your Life and Government is Divine,
the more Divine will you appear, and therefore the more Amiable and Honorable
to the Good, and Reverend to the evil. Parliaments will Love and Honor you,
and abhor the motions that tend to a division, or your just displeasure.
Ministers will heartily Pray for you, and Praise the Lord for his mercies by
you, and teach all the people to Love, and Honor, and Obey you. The people
will rejoice in you; and you will be Loved or Feared of all: Such happiness
attends serious Piety, when impiety, selfishness, and neglect of Christ is
the shame and ruin of Prince and People. I crave your Highness pardon of this
boldness, and your favorable acceptance of the tendered service of

A faithful subject to your Highness, as you are an Officer of the Universal
King. Richard Baxter.

A PREFACE to those of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this Land, that
adhere to PRELACY.
Honorable, Worshipful, and Beloved Countrymen.
IT being much for your sakes that I have published the following Disputations,
it behooves me here to address my self to you, in a few preparatory words. What
distance there has long been, and still continues between you and your
Brethren (for so they are) is too much known to friends and foes, at home and
abroad, and too much daily manifested by each side. Shall it still continue, or
would you have it healed? If it must continue, tell us how long, and tell us
why? Would you have it go with us to Eternity? and will you not be reconciled,
nor dwell with us in Heaven? It is not in your Power to shut us out; And will
you not be there, if we be there? Or do you think there will be any Discord
where Love is Perfected, and we are One in God? If you can be content to be
saved with us, and believe that all of both Opinions, that truly love and fear
the Lord, shall live there in dearest Love for ever; how can you choose, when
you forethink of this, but Love them now, that you must for ever Love? and long
to be reconciled to them, with whom you must there so harmoniously accord? You
know that Earth is our preparation for Heaven: and such as men would be there,
they must begin to be here: As they must be Holy here, that ever will there see
the Lord in Holiness; so must they here be Loving and Peaceable, that ever will
live in that perfect heavenly Love and Peace. And why is it that the distance
must be so great? Are we not all the Children of one Father? Have we not all
the same God, the same Redeemer, the same Spirit in us? (if we are Christians
indeed, Romans 8.9.) Are we not in the same Baptismal Covenant with God? Have we
not the same holy Scripture for our Rule? and are we not in the same universal
Church, and of the same Religion? some of you say, No; to the grief of your
friends, and the shame of your own understandings, and uncharitableness. I
beseech you bear it, if I touch the sore: For my work is Healing; and therefore
though it Must be touched, it shall be as gently as the case will bear. If I
may judge by such as I have had any opportunity to know, I must say, that the
distance on your part is continued in some by confused apprehensions of the
case, and not distinguishing things that differ; In some by discontents of
mind, and too deep a sense of worldly losses, and the things that you take as
injuries from others: In some by the advantage of a co-interest and
consociation with those Divines that are of your way, and so by a Willingness
to think them in the right, and those in the wrong that you take for
adversaries: In some by a stiffness and stout^ess of disposition, that calls it
Constancy to hold your own, and Manliness not to stoop to others, and takes it
as dishonorable to seek for Peace, even in Religion with your supposed
adversaries; or to yield to it, at least without much importunity: With too
many (miserable souls!) it is mere ungodliness, and enmity to that way of
Piety, that in many that you differ from, appears: And in the best of you it is
a Remissness of Charity, and want of Zeal for the Churches Peace, and the Love
and Unity of Brethren. To confute the reasonings of all these sorts, would draw
out this Preface to too great a length. The first sort my experience has
caused me to observe. Often have I fallen into company with men that pour forth
bitter odious words against Presbytery: and I ask them what that Presbytery
is that they speak of with so much abomination? Is it the Name or the Thing,
which they so abhor? If the Name, is it not a term of Scripture used by the
Holy Ghost? 1 Timothy 4.14. Are not the Pastors of the Church most frequently
called the Presbyters, or Elders? Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. and 15.2, 4, 6, 22, 23.
1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 20.17. James 5.14. 1 Pet. 5.1, etc. It must needs then be the
Thing, and not the Name which they abominate. And what is that Thing? most of
them cannot tell me. Some presently talk of the disuse of the Common Prayer; as
if that were a part of Presbytery; and Government, and the form of worship
were all one. Some presently run to Scotland, and talk of forcing men to
Confession of sin, and of their secular enforcement of their Excommunications.
But 1. If this be odious, why was it used by the Bishops? Is it good in them,
and bad in others? 2. And why plead you for Discipline, and against Toleration,
if you so loath the things you plead for? 3. But will you not, when its known
so openly, distinguish the Ministerial Power from the secular? Its known by
their Laws and constant Practice, that all the Power that was exercised by
Violence, on Body or Estate, by the Assemblies, was derived from the
Magistrate, whose Commissioners also sat among them. And the Bishops in
England were seconded by the Sword, as much as they. Its known that the
Presbyterians commonly maintain in their Writings, that Pastors have no
Coercive or Secular Power, but only the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to
exercise on the Conscience, committed to them by Christ. 4. And the writings
and practice of those in England, openly manifest it: and its them with whom
you have most to do. Some tell me that Presbytery is the Government of the
Church without Bishops: And is it only the Negation of your Prelacy that is the
odious thing? Is there nothing Positive odious in Presbytery? Thus our Belief
is condemned by the Papists, even because we Believe not so much as they; when
in the Positives of our Faith there is nothing that they can blame. Some make
it the odious thing that they have Lay Elders; But 1. The Presbyterians account
them not Lay, but Ecclesiastics. 2. And what is the Odious harm that these men
do among them? They are present, and Consent to the admonishing and censuring
of offenders. And what great harm does that to the Church? Is it because they
do not Preach? No sure; in that your Readers are much like them. What work can
you Name that these Elders are appointed to, that by your Confession is not to
be done? It is not the Work then, that you blame, but that these men do it. 3.
But what is this to all that are in this point of your mind, and think that
unordained Elders wanting Power to preach, or administer the Sacraments, are
not Officers in the Church of Gods appointment? As far as I can understand, the
greater part, if not three for one of the English Ministers that you stand at a
distance from, are of this mind, and so far against Lay Elders as well as you;
of whom I confess my self to be One. (and that Mr Vines was One, I have showed
you in the End.) Surely then all we are none of the odious Presbyterians in
your eyes. Why then is there such a distance? And are Lay Elders as bad as
Lay-Chancellors?

So also when some have been hotly condemning us as being against Bishops, I
ask them what a Bishop is? and what sort of Bishops it is that they mean? And
most of them are unable to give me a rational answer to either of the
Questions? But some that are wiser, though they know no more sorts of Bishops
but one, yet they can say, that by a Bishop they mean an Ecclesiastic
Governor of Presbyters and the people. And if so, then why do they vilify
Bishops under the name of Presbyters? I have here showed you that if this be
all, then every Parish has a Bishop where there is a Pastor that has
Chapels, and Curates under him: Or any two Ministers that will subject
themselves to a third, do make a Bishop. You delude your selves and others,
while you plead only in general for Bishops: We are all for Bishops as well as
you. All the Question is, What sort of Bishops they must be? Whether only
Episcopi gregis, or also Episcopi Episcoporum gregis? and if so, Whether they
must be Bishops of single Churches, as our Parishes are, or a multitude of
Churches, as Diocess^s are? And if the last were granted, Whether these be not
properly Archbishops? In all other parts of the Controversy I find, that the
followers of each party go much in the dark, and take much upon trust from the
Teachers whom they value, and little understand the true state of our
differences: So that it is more by that common providence, commonly called Good
luck, that some of them are Protestants or Christians, then from any saving
grace within them. Had Papists or Mahometans but as much interest in them, as
the Bishops, it is like they would have been as much for them.

As for those of you that know your own Opinions, and the Reasons of them, you
must needs kn^w that the Divines called Episcopal in England, are of two sorts,
that very much differ from one another: And therefore supposing you to be the
followers of these differing Divines, I shall accordingly furthe^ speak to you
as you are.

I. The Bishops of England, and their followers from the first Reformation,
begun by King Edward the sixth, and revived by Queen Elizabeth, were s^und in
Doctrine, adhering to the Augustinian Method, expressed now in the Articles and
Homilies: They differed not in any considerable points from those whom they
called Puritans: But it was in the form of Government, and Liturgy, and
Ceremonies that the difference lay.

II. But of late years a new strain of Bishops were introduced, differing much
from the old, and yet pretending to adhere to the Articles and Homilies, and to
be Fathers of the same Church of England as the rest. I know of none before B p
Mountague of their way, and but few that followed him, till many years after.
And at the demolishing of the Prelacy, they were existent of both sorts. Would
you know the difference? If you have read the writings of B p Jewel,
Pilkington, Alley, Parry, Babbington, Baily, Abbot, Carlton, Morton, Usher,
Hall, Davenant, with such like on one side; and the writings of the New
Episcopal Divines that are now most followed, on the other side, I need not
tell you the difference. And if you will not be at the labor to know it by
their writings, its like that you will not believe it if I tell you. For if you
will take all on trust, I must suspect that you will put your trust in them to
whom you are addicted.

The New party of Episcopal Divines are also subdivided: some of them are (if
their Defense of Grotius, and Grotius his own Profession may be believed) of
Grotius his Religion, that is, Papists: Others of them, though they draw as
near the Grotians as Protestants may do, yet own not Popery it self. So that we
have three notable parties of Episcopal Divines among us. 1. The old Orthodox
Protestant Bishops and their followers. 2. The New Reconciling Protestant
party. 3. The New Reconciling Papists, or Grotians. A brief taste of the
difference I will give you.

1. The Old Episcopal party, as I said, in Doctrine agreed with the
Nonconformist, and held that Doctrine that now we find in the Articles, and
Homilies, and in the Synod of Dort, where B p Carlton, B p Hall, B p Davenant,
and three more Divines of this Nation were, and had a great hand in the framing
of those Canons, and by consenting, did as much to make them obligatory to us
in England, as commonly is done in General Councils by the Delegates of most
Nations.

But the New Episcopal Divines, both Protestants and Papists, do renounce the
Synod of Dort, and the Doctrine of our Articles and Homilies, so far as it is
conform thereto, in the points of Predestination, Redemption, Freewill,
Effectual Grace, Perseverance, and Assurance of Salvation: following that
Doctrine which is commonly maintained by the Jesuits and Arminians in these
points.

2. The Old Episcopal Divines did renounce the Pope as Antichrist, and thought
it the duty of the Transmarine Churches to renounce him, and avoid communion
with his Church, as leprous and unfit for their communion. But the New
Episcopal Divines do not only hold that the Pope is not Antichrist, but one
part of them (the Protestants) hold that he may be obeyed by the Transmarine
Western Churches as the Patriarch of the West, and be taken by us all to be the
Principium unitatis to the Catholic Church, and the Roman Determinations still
may stand, except those of the last four hundred years, and those, if they
obtrude them not on others. So B p Bramhall, and many more: And M r Dow, and
others tell us that the Canon Law is still in force in England, except some
parts of it which the Laws af the Land have cast out. And the Grotians teach,
that the Church of Rome is the Mistress of other Churches, and the Pope to stand
as the Head of the Universal Church, and to Govern it according to the Canons
and Decrees of Councils: and they receive the Trent-Creed and Council, and all
other Councils which the Pope receives, excepting only against some
School-points, and abuse of manners among the Papists, which their Canons and
Decrees condemn.

3. The old Episcopal Divines did take Episcopacy to be better then
Presbyterian Equality, but not nec^ssary to the Being of a Church, but to the
Better being where it may be had. But the New Prelatical Divines of both sorts,
unchurch those Churches that are not Prelatical.

4. The Old Episcopal Divines thought that Ordination by Presbyters without
Prelates was valid, and not to be done again, though irregular. But the New
ones take it to be No Ordination, nor those so ordained to be any Ministers,
but Laymen.

5. And accordingly the Old Episcopal Divines did hold the Foreign Protestant
Churches, of France, Savoy, Holland, Geneva, Helvetia, etc. that had no
Prelates, as true Churches, and their Pastors as true Ministers of Christ, and
highly valued and honored them as Brethren. But the New sort do disown them
all as no true Churches, though they acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a
true Church, and their Ordination valid.

6. The Old Episcopal Divines thought it lawful to join in actual Communion
with the Pastors and Churches that were not Prelatical. But the New ones
separate from their communion, and teach the people to do so, supposing
Sacramental administrations to be there performed by men that are no Ministers,
and have no authority.

7. The Old Episcopal Divines thought it meet to suspend, silence, imprison, or
undo those Godly Divines that did not bow toward the Altar, or publish to
their People Declarations or Instructions for Dancing on the Lords Day, or that
did preach twice a day. But many of the New ones practically told us, that this
was their judgment.

Of these differences I have given you some proof hereafter: and would do here
in the express words of the Authors on both sides, were it not that I should be
needlessly tedious, and that I should unnecessarily offend the particular
Divines of the New party who are among us, by reciting their words. More of the
differences I pass by.

I. And now I would know of those of you that follow the Ancient Episcopal
Divines, what hinders you from a charitable, peaceable Communion with those
Orthodox Ministers now in England, that some of you stand at a distance from?
Doctrinal differences (at least, requiring such a distance) you cannot pretend.
B p Hall tells you in his Peacemaker (after cited) that there is none between
you and the Foreign (Presbyterian) Churches. And as for the matter of
Episcopacy, if you will insist upon the late English Frame as necessary, viz.
[That there be but One Bishop over many hundred Churches, and that he have the
sole power of Excommunication, and that he rule by a Lay^Chancellor, etc. and
be a Lord, and seconded with a forcing power, etc.] then you will forsake the
Judgment of your Leaders: For they will tell you that some of these are but
separable appurtenances, some of them corruptions and blemishes, and some not
Necessary. What need we any more ado? You see in the published Judgments of B
p Hall, B p Usher, D r Holdsworth, Forbes, and others, (after cited) that they
would have all Presbyters to be Governors of the Churches, one of them having a
stated Presidency or Moderatorship, and this will content them. And are we not
then agreed? I am confident most of the Ministers in England would be content
to yield you this: But what if there be some that are not of your mind
concerning the stated Presidency which you desire? will you therefore
uncharitably refuse communion with them? so would not your Leaders! In this
therefore you will forsake them, and forsake many holy Churches of Christ, and
forsake charity, and Christ himself that teaches you another lesson. Will it
not content you that you have freedom your selves to do that which seems best
in your own eyes, unless all others be of your opinion?

But perhaps you will say that you have not Liberty your selves to practice
according to this your judgment. To which I answer, 1. Your Brethren of the
Ministry have not the power of the Sword, and therefore do neither deny you
Liberty, nor can give it you: It is the Magistrates work. And will you separate
from us for other men's doings? For that you have no rational pretense. If you
know of any that persuade Magistrates to restrain your Liberty, that's nothing
to others: Censure none but those that you know to be guilty. 2. I never knew
that you were deprived of the Liberty of exercising such an Episcopacy as the
forementioned Bishops do desire. I do not believe you could be hindered, and we
that are your neighbors never hear of it. I know not of either Law or
Execution against you. If you think that the clause in the Covenant, or the
Ordinance against Prelacy, or the late Advice that excepts Prelacy from
Liberty, are any restraint to you, I think you are much mistaken. It is only
the late frame of Prelacy as it stood by Law, exercised by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Chancellors, etc. and that by force upon dissenters, that is
taken down. You have not Liberty to force any by corporal punishment to your
obedience. But you have full Liberty (for ought that ever I heard) to exercise
the mere Episcopacy desired by Hall, Usher, and such like, on all that are of
your judgment, and will submit to it. That we may hold constant Assemblies of
Pastors we find by experience: And in these Assemblies if you will choose one
for your stated President, who will hinder you? No one I am confident; Tell us
whoever suffered for so doing? or was prohibited, or any way hindered from it
by any force? Nay more, if you will give this President a Negative vote, in
Ordination and Jurisdiction, who will hinder you? yea who can? If twenty
Ministers shall resolve that they will never Ordain, or Excommunicate any
without the consent (yea or Command if you must have it so) of such a man whom
they take for their President, who can or will compel them to the contrary?
And all the People that are of your mind, have Liberty to join themselves with
such Pastors on such terms, and submit themselves to you, if they will.

But you will say, that this is no setting up of Episcopacy, while every one
that is unwilling to obey us, may refuse it. I answer, This is all that the
Nature of Episcopacy requires: And this is all that the Church saw practiced
(even Rome it self) for above three hundred years after Christ. And is not that
now tolerable for your Communion with us, which served then for the Communion
of all the Churches on earth? Is the Primitive pattern of purity and simplicity
become so vile in your eyes, as to be inconsistent with Christian Communion?
Let not such principles be heard from your mouths, or seen in your practices.
Whether the Magistrate ought to compel us all to be of your mind or way, I
will not now meddle with: but if he will not, will you therefore separate from
your Brethren? Or will you not exercise the Primitive Episcopacy on Consenters*
because you have not the sword to force Dissenters? And are you denied your
Liberty, because you are not backed by the Sword? This concerns other men's
Liberties, and not yours. You have the Liberty of Episcopal Government, (though
not of smiting others with the Magistrates Sword) and as much Liberty for ought
I know as Presbyterians or Independents have (though not so much countenance)
And how comes it to pass that the other modes of Government are commonly
exercised upon mere Liberty, and yours is not? Is it because you have no
confidence in any Arm but flesh? If your Episcopal Power be of Divine
appointment, why may you not trust to a Divine assistance as well as others,
that you think are not of God? If it can do nothing without the Sword, let the
Sword do all without it, and retain its proper honor. If it can do less on
voluntary Subjects, then other ways of Church Government can do, say so, and
confess it most infirm, and give place to them. But if yours have most
Authority from Christ, and spiritual force upon the Conscience, exercise it,
and let us see it by experience; or else expect not that any should believe
you, or take you to be resolute servants of Christ, and true to your Ministry.

But perhaps you will say, that you cannot have Communion with us, because we
are schismatics: For so much B p Usher himself does seem to charge us with.]
To which I answer, 1. B p Usher charge none with Schism, but those that cast
off Bishops to whom they had sworn obedience. But if I may judge of other
Counties by this, there are so few of those, that they can afford you no
pretense of scruple against the Communion of our Assemblies. I know not (to my
remembrance) of one Minister in this County liable to this charge: but most
never swore to them, and the rest had no hand in their exclusion. 2. Whoever
among us did either swear to, or disobey such Bishops as Bishop Usher there
assures us were the Bishops of the ancient Churches? If they set up another
(intolerable) sort in stead of the Bishops which he himself requires, judge
whether it were a greater sin to swear to them, or to disobey them. 3. And the
schism which he mentions is not such in his own judgment as makes men
uncaple of your Communion. This pretense therefore is frivolous.

Especially considering that most of us have no Prelates that so much as claim
a Government over us. In this County since B p Prideaux died (who was one of
the ancient moderate sort) we know of none that ever made a pretense to the
place. And are we schismatics for not obeying a Bishop when we have none? And
surely none can justly lay a claim to such a superiority, even according to the
ancient Canons, unless he be first chosen by our selves, yea and the people, as
a Reverend Bishop (I hope yet living) of the ancient sort has told you, Morton
Apolog. Cathol. Part. 1. cap. 85. p. 257. Bellarmine himself confessing that ut
Clerus and populus Episcopumeligeret, hic modus fuit in usu tempore
Chrysostomi, Ambrosii, Augustini, Leonis, Gregorii. Bellarm. l. 1. de Clericis
cap. 9. And other of our Bishops say the same.

I conclude therefore that we are not only of one faith and Church with you,
but differ so little in our opinions about lower things, that you can thence
have no pretense for an alienation: And therefore with those of you that are
godly and peaceable, I take it for granted that we are actually agreed. But if
any will sacrifice the Churches Peace* their Charity, their souls to their
parties, or passions and discontents, I leave them to God, and to the reading
of other kind of Books, that tend to change an unrenewed mind.

II. And to those of you that follow the newer strain of Prelatical Divines, I
shall adventure a few words, how small soever the probability is of their
success. And 1. To those of you that are not departed from the Communion of all
Protestants; nor gone with Grotius over to the Romanists. I beseech you, as
before the Lord, proceed not in your bitterness, uncharitableness, or
separation from your Brethren, nor your hindering the work of God in their
ministration, till you are able to produce such solid grounds for what you do,
as you dare stand to at last, before the Iudgement-seat of Christ. 1. Some of
you charge us with no less then Heresy, as following Aerius in the rejecting
of Bishops, or equalizing Presbyters with them: and can you hold communion with
Heretics? I answer, 1. All is not heresy that every angry man has called so,
no not of the venerable Ancients. Do you indeed take your Dignity and
pre-eminence to be an Article of our Faith? Why then was it never in the Creed?
2. Many among us are for Episcopacy, that are not for your sort of Prelacy. It
is that species that our Controversy is about. 3. I shall answer you in the
words of our Reverend Morton (a Prelate, though not of the New strain) Apolog.
Cathol. Par. 1. cap. 33. page 96, 97. who answers the Papists that use
against us the same objection [Non de differentia omni, sed de differentia
Ordinis, seu Potestate Ordinandi (NB) quaestio est instituenda. Adversar.
Aerius haereticus ordinis differentiam negabat esse jure divino; idem
Protestants: Resp. Quod idem forte sanctus Hieronymus, nec aliud Patres alii
asseverarunt: hoc scholae vestrae Doctor primarius non ita pridem facile
largiebatur: Mich. Medina, lib. 1. de sac. orig. affirmat, non modo S.
Hieronymum idem in hoc cum Aerianis haereticis sensisse, verum etiam Ambrosium,
Augustinum, Sedulium, Primasium, Chrysostomum, Theodoretum, Oecumenium,
Theophylactum. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eccles. milit. c. 9. Ita, (inquit Valent.
Jesuit. Tom. 4. disp. 9. qu. 1. punct. 2.) isti viri alioqui sanctissimi and
orthodoxi -- At (inquit id. ibid.) non est tolerabilis haec responsio. Probabo
vero hoc non modo ferendum, sed etiam omnibus aliis responsis praeferendum
esse. Advocatus. Erasmus Annot. in 1 Timothy 4. [Antiquitas inter Praesbyterum and
Episcopum nihil intererat, ut testatur Hieronymus: Sed post propter schisma a
multis delectus est Episcopus, and quotquot Presbyteri, totidem erant
Episcopi.] Tua, Erasme, apud Jesuitas sordet authoritas (but not with you that
I write to) -- Advocat. Alphonsus a Castro advers. haeres. tit. Episcop.
[Hieronymus in ea opinione fuit, ut crederet Episcopum and Presbyterum ejusdem
esse ordinis and authoritatis] Ecce etiam alterum: Bellarm. lib. 1. de Romans
Pontif. c. 8. [Videtur REVERA Hieronymus in ea opinione fuisse.] An ille solus?
[Anselmus and Sedulius opinionem suam ad Hieronymi sententiam accommodarunt.]
Quam eandem sententiam Medina vester Patribus pariter omnibus tribuit -- Quid
ex his, inquies? ostendam; si cognovissent Patres hanc in Aereo haeresin
damnatam esse, tantum abest ut ei errori verbis suffragari viderentur; ut
potius in contrarium errorem abriperentur: si non cognoverunt hanc opinionem in
Aereo damnatam, cur vos eam hoc nomine in Protestantibus damnandam esse
contenditis? Cassander lib. consult. art. 14. [An Episcopatus inter Ordines
Ecclesiasticos ponendus sit, inter Theologos and Canonistas non convenit:
convenit autem inter OMNES in Apostolorum aetate inter Episcopos and
Presbyteros NULLUM DISCRIMEN fuisse; sed postmodum Schismatis evitandi Causa
Episcopum Presbyteris fuisse praepositum, cui Chirotonia* id est Ordinandi
potestas concessa est] If you will not keep company with Reverend Morton, I
pray you go not beyond these Moderate Papists.

2. But you say, that at least we are Schismatics, and you must not hold
Communion with schism. And how are we proved Schismatics? Why, [ 1. Because we
have cast off Bishops. 2. Because we now obey them not.] I have answered this
already; to which I add:] 1. Its a fine world, when men will separate
themselves from the Churches of Christ to avoid schism, and they that are
against separation, and offer Communion to the Separatists, must be taken to be
the Schismatics themselves. It is schism that we detest, and would draw you
from, or else what need we say so much for Concord and Communion? 2. I have
told you already, that it is not one Minister of a Multitude in our Communion
that did cast off the Prelates; half of them did nothing to it, and the other
half were Ordained since. 3. Nor can you truly say, that now they refuse
obedience to Bishops, where there are none to obey, or none that command them.
4. Again I tell you, it is not Episcopacy, but only the sinful species of
Prelacy, which the Parliament, and Assembly, and Covenanters did cast off. And
what if you think this species best? must all think so, or else be
Schismatics? And why not all Schismatics then that are against the Papacy,
which is thought by others the best form? I have here given you some Arguments
to prove your Prelacy which was cast off, to be against the will of Christ, and
the welfare of the Churches. And I shall not believe that its schism to be
against sin and the Churches ruin. And I cannot but admire to read in your
writings, that Discipline and Piety are pretended by you, as the things which
you promote, and we destroy, when I am most certain that the destruction of
Piety and Discipline are the very things by which you have so much offended
your Brethren; and we would heartily come as near you as we can, so that Piety
and Discipline may not be destroyed. Had we not known that the able faithful
Preachers whom you called Puritans (conformable and not conformable) that
labored in the word and doctrine, were fitter to promote piety then the
ignorant, drunken, worldly Readers, and lazy Preachers, that once a day would
preach against doing too much to be saved; and had we not known, that Piety was
better promoted by Learning the will of God, and praying, and meditating on the
Lords Day, then by dancing; and by cherishing men truly fearing God, then by
scorning, imprisoning, persecuting and expelling them; we would never have been
so much against your doings as we have been. But men's salvation is not so
contemptible a thing, as to be given away to humor the proud, that cannot live
in Communion with any, unless they may drive them to destruction. We will not
sell men's souls to you at such rates, nor buy your Communion, nor stop the
reproachful mouths of any by such horrid cruelties. We talk not now to you of
matters that are known by hearsay only: we see which way promoteth Piety, and
which destroys it: we see that most of the ungodly in the land, are the
forwardest for your ways. You may have almost all the Drunkards, Blasphemers,
and Ignorant haters of godliness in the Country, to vote for you, and if they
durst, again to fight for you at any time. I cannot be so humble as to say, I
am blind, and see not what indeed I see, because another tells me, that his
eyesight is better then mine, and that he sees things to be other then I see
them to be. I doubt not but there are some Pious persons among you: I censure
you no further then experience constrains me. But I know that the common
sense of most that are serious in practical Christianity, is against your
formal ways of worship, and against the course that you have taken in this
land; and the spirit of profaneness complyeth with you, and doteth on you, in
all places that ever I was acquainted in. Bear with plain truth: it is in a
cause of everlasting consequence. There is somewhat in a gracious soul, like
health in the body* that disposes it to relish wholesome food, and perceive
more difference between it, and mere air, or toyish kickshaws, then it can
easily express. In abundance of your most applauded Preachers, the things of
God were spoken with so little life and seriousness, as if they had not been
believed by the speaker, or came not from the heart; yea Godliness and
Diligence for Heaven, was the thing that they ordinarily preached against under
the name of preciseness, and being righteous overmuch. And the Puritans were
the men that Pulpits rendered most odious to the people, and your Preachers
exercised their wit and zeal against; while almost all their hearers through
the Land did take a Puritan to be one that was seriously Religious. Many a
place have I lived in, where there was not a man that ever spoke a word against
Bishops or Ceremonies; but a few there were (alas, a few) that would sometime
read a Chapter in the Bible, and pray with their Families, and speak of the
life to come, and the way to it, and for this they were commonly called
Puritans. If a man had but mildly asked a swearer why he swore, or a drunkard
why he would be drunk, or had once named Scripture, or the life to come, unless
profanely, the first word he should hear, was, [O you are one of the holy
Brethren! you would not drink or swear, but you will do worse in secret! It was
never a good world since there was so much talk of Scripture and Religion: but
the King and the Bishops will take an order with you, and all the Puritans and
Precisians in the Land] I profess upon my common sad experience, that this was
the common language of the people that were ignorant and profane in all parts
of England that ever I came in (which were not a few;) and these were the men
that they called Puritans, and on such accounts. And what could the Prelates
and Preachers of the Land have done more to men's damnation, then to preach them
into an hatred of Puritanism, when it was known by all that lived among them,
that Piety was Puritanism in their account, and no man was so free from it, as
he that would scorn at the very name of Holiness, and drink and swear, as if he
had defied God. This is true, and England knows it: and if you will after this
think that you have wiped your mouths clean, by saying as M r Pierce, that by
Puritans, he means none but [men of blood, sedition, violence, despisers of
dominion, painted sepulchers, Protestants frightened out of their wits, etc.]
the righteous God that loves righteousness, and has said, Be ye holy for I am
holy, will make you know to your penitent or tormenting sorrow, that the thing
which commonly was reputed Puritanism in England, was no such thing as you
describe: And that its none of your wisdom to ^ick against the pricks, and play
with the apple of Gods eye, and bring men to hate the members of Christ, and
then tell them you meant the members of the Devil, and to thrust men into Hell
in jest: I have heard before the King many a Sermon against Puritans, which I
judged impious, but yet had this excuse, that much of the auditory partly
understood, that it was not Piety as such, that was directly reviled: And so
perhaps it might be in the Universities, and some few intelligent auditories:
but so it was not among the common people through the Land. A Puritan with them
was of the same signification as a serious Christian is with me. And if you
bring the Land to an hatred of such as are called Christians, and then say that
by Christians you meant none but mad men, seditious, bloody, etc. you shall
answer in earnest for spitting in the face of Christ in jest; and that before
him that will not take your jears or jingles, or adding reproach unto reproach
for a sufficient excuse.

I know also that the casting out of the Ministers of your way, i^ much that
offends you: concerning which I shall only say, that I meet with none, or
very few that profess not their willingness that all men of your mind that
truly fear God, and are able and diligent, should be kept in. And if you be
angry for the casting out of the ignorant, insufficient, negligent or
scandalous, there is no remedy. But be ashamed to reproach us for casting out
such from the service of Christ, as Julian the Apostate would have cast out
from the Priesthood of his Idols: and let us crave your leave to expect as much
Devotion in the servants of Christ, as he expected in his enemies. Vid. Julian.
Oper. page 549, 550, 551, etc. fragment. [Facessant itaque procul a nobis
illeberales joci, ac petulans omne colloquium -- In his occupanda sunt studia,
and cum privatim, tum public Diis sa^pe supplicandum est; maxim quidem ter de
die: sin minus, saltem diluculo ac sub vesperam. Neque enim Sacerdotem decet,
diem ullum ac noctem sine sacrificio transigere. Est autem ut initium diei
diluculum, ita noctis vespera. Itaque rationi consentaneum est, ut amborum
intervallorum, velut primitiae quaedam Diis consecrentur -- Equidem sic statuo,
sacerdotem oportere noctes atque dies puru^ se ab omnibus and integrum
servantem -- p. 555. Non enim mediocriter adversus Deos delinquimus cum sacras
vestes ostentamus, and omnium oculis tanquam miru^ aliquid objicimus. Ex quo id
accidit, ut cum multi ad nos impuri homines accedant, sacra illa Deorum symbola
contaminentur. At vero nos sacerdotali uti vest, nisi ut sacerdotibus dignum
est vitam instituamus, id ipsum noxas omnes criminum, ac Deorum maxim
contemptum in sese continet. -- Ad obscaena illa theatrorum spectacula nullus
omnino sacerdos accedat -- neque cum histrione ullo vel auriga, vel saltatore
sit amicitia conjunctus, ad eorumve for as accedat. -- Placeat eos ex omnibus
constitui qui in Civitatibus optimi sunt, and imprimis quidem Dei, deinde vero
hominum amantissimos quosque, sive pauperes sint, sive divites. -- p. 557.
Duobus hisce praeditus sit ornamentis, Religione erga Deum, and in homines
benignitate -- Et Epist. 49. p. 203. [Sed velim omnes nostros sacerdotes
omnino, qui Galatiam incolunt, vel minis impellas, vel ratione persuadeas, ut
sint honesti; vel sacerdotali ministerio abdices, si non una cum uxoribus,
liberis, and famulis Diis colendis sedulo animos attendant -- Deinde sacerdotem
quemque hortare ne accedat ad spectacula, neve in taberna bibat, neu' artem
aliquam aut opificium turpe in ^ameve exerceat. Et qui tibi in his rebus morem
gerunt, eis honorem tribuito: qui autem resistunt expellito.] Leg. and fragm.
Epist. 62. We crave your leave to use the Presbyters as strictly as Julian did
these Priests, and to expect as much piety and sobriety in them; and that you
will not condemn all those for Puritanism, that will not be worse then this
Apostate Pagan.

And for Discipline, could we have any from your Episcopacy worth the naming,
we should be the more reconcilable to it: But it has not been, nor it cannot
be. Common drunkards that were for twenty or thirty years together drunk
usually once or twice a week, and abundance as profane in other kinds, were
the stated members of this Parish Church where now I live, in the Bishops
days; and were safer from any trouble then the Puritans among them that would
not imitate them. Let me here mind you of two of the following Arguments, which
persuade us that your Prelacy is not of God, because it is destructive of
Discipline.

1. When Episcopacy was first known in the Church, every Presbytery, or
Consessus Presbyterorum had a Bishop; and every Presbyter had right to be a
member of some such Presbytery. And seriously would you have all the
Presbyters in a Diocese to be a Presbytery, where your Bishop must preside for
the ordinary Government of the Diocese as one Church? Are you strangers in
England? Or do you not know what abundance we have that in one Parish are every
week scandalous, by drunkenness, cursing, swearing, railing, or such like? And
can all the Pastors travail so far to the Presbytery so frequently without
neglecting their Pastoral work? Or can all these people be persuaded without
the Magistrates sword to travail so far to answer for their impiety? Will they
not tell us, we have somewhat else to do? Are we not like to make them wait
seven years and seven, before the most of them can have a tolerable trial, when
so many hundred Parishes, of which some one may have hundreds of obstinate
scandalous persons, must all go so far, and have but one Judicature?

2. I beseech you give me leave but from Scripture, and from Dr. Hammonds
Paraphrase, to lay before you the work of a Bishop, and then tell me whether
one man, or ten, or an hundred can do this work for one of our ordinary
Diocese, any more then one man can build a City?

1. A Bishop must be the public Teacher of all the flock which he is to
Oversee. And can one man undertake this for many score or hundred Churches?

2. A Bishop must personally oversee and take care of all the flock, as
Ignatius speaks, enquiring of each one by Name; and can a Bishop know and
personally instruct so many hundred Parishes? These two parts of his Office I
prove together: Act. 20.20. [I taught you publicly, and from house to house.
28. Take heed therefore to your selves and to all the flock, over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood. 31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the
space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.
See Dr. Hammond on the Text, who tells you that it is spoke to Bishops.

1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an
Elder -- Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but as ensamples to the flock]
See Dr. Hammond expounding it as spoken to Bishops, q. d. [The Bishops of your
several Churches I exhort -- take care of your several Churches, and govern
them, not as secular Rulers by force (NB) but as Pastors do their sheep, by
calling and going before them, that so they may follow of their own accord.]

Heb. 13.7. Remember them that have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the word of God] Dr. Hammond Paraphr. [Set before your eyes the Bishops and
Governors that have been in your Church, and preached the Gospel to you -- ] O
all you Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
Middlesex, Kent, Worcestershire, etc. how many of your Parishes did ever hear a
Bishop preach the Gospel to them?

Verse. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls as they that must give account] D. H. [Obey those
that are set to Rule you in your several Churches, the Bishops, whose whole
care is spent among you, as being to give account of your proficiency in the
Gospel.] O dreadful account, for him that must give it for so many thousands
whose faces he never saw, and whose names he never heard, much less did ever
speak a word to them!

1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine] see Dr. H. expounding it
of Bishops.

1 These. 5.12. And we beseech you Brethren to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly
in love for their works sake] Dr. H. [Pay all due respects to the Bishops of
your several Churches -- ] Tell us ye Parishes of England, what labors have
Bishops bestowed among you? or how many of you have they admonished? and which
of them are you hence obliged to honor for their works sake? and is it them,
or is it the Presbyters? I mention none of this as blaming Bishops for
negligence; but as blaming them that will plead for, and undertake an
impossible task; and after all with an hardened forehead will defend it with
violence and separation from dissenters, when so many ages have told the world
to their faces, that the undertaken task was never done.

3. It is the work of Bishops to confirm the Baptized: and is now made peculiar
to them. D. H. [on Heb. 13. a. To teach, exhort, confirm, and impose hands,
were all the Bishops office in that place] And if so, then the examining all
the persons in a Diocese, till they have just satisfaction that they are fit to
be confirmed, and the actual Confirmation of them all, will be a considerable
task of it self.

4. It is the Bishops work to exercise Discipline in the Church, by admonishing
the unruly and disorderly, and hearing the case when the Church is told of
those that have continued impenitent, and openly to rebuke them, and to cast
them out by Excommunication, if they remain impenitent and unreformed. Dr. H.
on Tit. 3.10. [It is thy office and duty toward such an one, first to admonish
him once or twice, and if that will not work upon him or reduce him, then to
set a mark upon him, to inflict the censures on him, and to appoint all men to
break off familiar converse with him.] And O what abundance of work is this in
the several parts, even in one Parish, much more in a Diocese, see Dr. H. on
Mat. 18.17, 18.

5. It is the Bishops work to take the principal care of the poor, and their
stock, or the contributions for them, which contributions were made at every
Assembly. See Dr. H. on 1 Cor. 12.28. e. [The supreme trust and charge was
reserved to the Apostles and Bishops of the Church. So in the 41. Canon of the
Apostles: A Bishop must have the care of the moneys, so that by his Power all
be dispensed to the poor by the Presbyters and Deacons; and we command that he
have in his Power the goods of the Church. So Justin Martyr Apol. 2. That which
is gathered is deposited with the Prefect or Bishop, and he helps, relieves the
Orphans and Widows, and becomes the Curator or Guardian to all absolutely (NB)
that are in want. So Ignatius to Polycarp; After the Lord thou shall be the
Curator of the Widows. And Polycarp himself speaking of the Elders or Bishops,
They visit and take care of all that are sick, not neglecting the Widow, the
Orphan, or the poor.] So Dr. H. read him further. Remember this, all you that
are for our English Prelacy. See that the Bishop be at once in every Parish in
his Diocese to receive the contributions. Or see that you put all into his
hands and custody: see that he take care of all the poor, and widows, and
orphans, in all your Country, and that all their moneys be disbursed by him, or
his special appointment, and be the common Overseer of the poor for his
Diocese. And when you and he have tried this one seven years, come then and
tell us, whether he will be any longer a Prelate, or you will any longer be for
Prelacy. In the mean time judge in your Consciences by these passages of
Antiquity cited by D. H. whether the ancient Bishops had one Congregation, or
many score or hundred to be their Pastoral charge?

6. Also it is a part of the Bishops work to visit the sick, and pray with
them, and for them, Iam. 5.14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him] see Dr. H. that by Elders is
meant the Bishops* e. [Because there is no Evidence whereby these (inferior
Presbyters) may appear to have been brought into the Church so early, and
because (...) in the plural, does no way conclude that there were more of these
Elders then one in each particular Church (any more then that the sick man was
bound to call for more then one) and because (...) Elders of the Church was
both in the Scripture style, and in the first writers the title of Bishops: and
lastly, because the visiting of the sick is anciently mentioned as one branch
of the Office of Bishops; therefore it may very reasonably be resolved, that
the Bishops of the Church, one in each particular Church, but many in the
Universal, are here meant] so far Dr. H. Remember all you that are all for
Prelacy, to send for the Bishop when you are sick, every person in the Diocese,
according to this express command: And if he would do his work by a Deputy,
remember, that in all that Diocese which was the Bishops charge in the
Scripture-times, there was no Presbyter existent but himself, as is here
confessed. So in the following words the same Learned Dr. further proves from
Antiquity, [that one part of the Bishops office is set down, that they are
(...), those that visit all the sick] Let us have such Bishops as can and will
do this, and our Controversy will soon be at an end about Episcopacy.

Were it not that I have spoken of these things afterward, and fear being
tedious, I should have showed, that 7. Baptizing, 8. Congregating the
Assemblies, 9. Administering the Lords Supper, 10. Guiding the Assembly in the
whole public worship, 11. Blessing the people at the dismission, and 12.
Absolving the penitent; and more then all these were the works of the ancient
Episcopal function. And now I leave it to the Conscience of any man that has a
grain of Conscience left him, whether one man be able, were he never so
willing, to do any one of all these duties, much less to do all of them for
many hundred Parishes? Can a Bishop teach them all, and Catechize and confer
with all, and counsel, and comfort, and admonish all, and Govern all, and try
all cases of every scandalous impenitent person of so many thousand, and
Censure, and Absolve, and Confirm, and Try them for Confirmation, and receive
all the Churches stock, and be the Overseer of all the poor, and take care of
all the Orphans and Widows, and visit, counsel, and pray with all the sick,
and guide every Congregation in public worship, and give the Sacrament to all,
and pronounce the Blessing in every Assembly, etc. and this for a whole County
or more? O wonderful, that ever this should become a Controversy among men,
that vilify others as unlearned and unwise in comparison of them? I must lay
by respect to man so far, as plainly to profess, that I take these for such
errors as must need proceed from want of Piety and Conscience, and practice of
the duties that are pleaded for. If these men did not talk of Governing a
Church, as those talk of Governing a Navy, an Army, or a Commonwealth, that
never set their hand to the work, it is not possible sure that they should thus
err. O how many Bishops never tried what it is to Govern the Church, or
faithfully perform any one of all these works! I solemnly profess, that with
the help of three more fellow Presbyters, and three or four Deacons, besides
the greater help of abundance of Godly people here in their places, I am not
able to do all this as it should be done, for this one Parish. And yet the
greatest part of our trouble is taken off, by the refusal of the multitude of
the ungodly to come under Discipline, or be members of our Pastoral charge.
Sirs, these are not scholastic speculations! The everlasting Joy or Torment of
our people lies upon the successful performance of these works (as we that are
Christians verily believe) And therefore to Dispute, whether One man should do
all this for a Diocese, is all one as to Dispute, whether it shall all be
undone or no? and that is, whether we shall give up our Countries to the Dev^l
or no? And shall the Prelatical Controversy come to this? You have no way to
avoid it, but by Delegating your power to others, and casting your work upon
them. But you confess that this was never done in Scripture-times, there being
then no Subject Pesbyters to whom it might be committed. And by what authority
then can you do it? Can Episcopacy be transferred by Deputation to another?
This is long ago confuted by many writers, Popish and Protestant. Do the work
by another, and you shall have your wages by another. And what is your Office,
but your Authority and Obligation to do your work? He therefore that you commit
this to is a Bishop. So that this is but to make us Deputy Bishops: And if so,
let us call them Bishops.

I have read many of your writers of late, that say we have no Government, and
says one of them, the Presbyterian Government was never yet set up in any one
Parish in England] These are strange things to be reported to English men.
Persuade the world next that no man in England has a nose on his face. Is it
not known that the Presbyterian Government has been exercised in London, in
Lancashire, and in many Counties, these many years? And what Government is it
that you think we want? The people are guided in the matters of God by their
several Pastors. The Pastors live in Concord by Associations in many Countries.
Both Pastors and People are Governed by the Magistrate: And what need we more?
Look into this County where I live, and you shall find a faithful, humble,
laborious Ministry, Associated and walking in as great unity as ever I read of
since the Apostles days. No difference, no quarrels, but sweet and amicable
Correspondency, and Communion, that I can hear of. Was there such a Ministry,
or such love and concord, or such a godly people under them in the Prelates
reign? There was not: I lived where I do: and therefore I am able to say, there
was not. Through the great mercy of God, where we had ten drunken Readers then,
we have not one now: and where we had one able godly Preacher then, we have
many now: and in my own charge, where there was one that then made any show of
the fear of God, I hope there is twenty now: And the Families that were wont to
scorn at holiness, and live in open impiety, are now devoted to the worship and
obedience of the lord. This is our loss and misery in these times which you so
lament.

3. But perhaps you will refuse Communion with us, because of our differences
from you in doctrine about the Controversies called Arminian. But the
fierceness of many of you hereabouts does serve but to discover your ignorance
and uncharitableness. The Papists that differ among themselves about these
points, can yet hold Communion in one Church: and cannot you with us? Will you
be fiercer against us then the Jesuits against the Dominicans? Nay we go not
near so far as they. We cleave to Augustine, and the Synod of Dort, who own not
Physical Predetermination, and meddle not with Reprobation antecedent to
foresight of sin, and who confess a sufficiency in Christ's satisfaction for
all. And yet must we have those impotent clamors, with which the writings of
Mr. Pierce and other such abound? Why then do you pretend to follow the Church
of England, which Mr. Hickman has showed you plainly that you desert? Many of
the highest mere Arminians are charitable peaceable men, that hate separation
from their Dissenting Brethren. Curcellaus is one of the most eminent men
living of that way. And how charitable and peaceable an Epistle has he writ
before D. Blondels book de Papissa Joanna? And I hear that Mr. Hoard, the
Author of the Book called Gods Love to mankind, lives in peaceable Communion
with the Neighbor Ministers in Essex. And I have had Letters from many of that
way with whom I Correspond, full of Christian Love and Piety, and hatred of
calumny and separations. But verily I must tell you, that when we find any of
you in your writings and Sermons making it your work to vilify the Ministry,
and with the Quakers to make them odious to the people, and making your jeers,
and railing, and uncharitableness the life of your Sermons, we cannot but
suspect that you are Popish Emissaries, while we find you in their work, or
else that you are Malignant Enemies, and of the s^^pentine brood, whose heads
shall shortly be bruised by the Lord.

4. And if it be the disuse of your Common Prayer that you separate from us
for, I would know of you, whither you would have denied Communion with all that
lived before it had a being. If this be your Religion, I may ask you, where was
your Religion before Luther? before King Edwards days? If you say in the Mass
book (and what else can you say?) I ask you then, where was it before the Mass
book had a being? Would you have denied Communion to the Apostles and all the
Primitive Church for some hundreds of years, that never used your Book of
Common Prayer? will you still make things indifferent, necessary?

2. One word to those of you that follow Grotius: I have showed that he
professes himself a Papist, even in that Discussion which M r Pierce so
magnifieth as excellent. I hear Mr. Thorndike and others defend him: and some
think I injure him by calling him a Papist. Wonderful! what will not be a
Controversy among learned men? Are we fallen among such that deny him to be a
Papist, that professes expressly to be satisfied, if evil manners be but
corrected, (and school-opinions not imposed) which are contrary to Tradition
and all Councils? and that professes to own the Creed and Council of Trent,
and all the Popish Councils whatsoever, and the Mistriship of Rome, and the
Catholic Mastership of the Pope governing the Catholic Church according to
these Councils? What is a Papist if this be none? I refer you to my Evidence in
the Discovery of the Grotian Religion, and the first Chap. of the second Part
of my Catholic Key, replying to Mr. Pierce. Confute it rationally if you can.
I shall now only desire you when you have read Rivet, to read a Book called
Grotius Papizans, and to hearken to the testimony of an honest, learned Senator
of Paris, that admired Grotius, and tells you what he is from his own mouth:
and that is, Claud. Sarravius, who says in his Epistol. page 52, 53. ad
Gronov. [De ejus libro and libello postremis interrogatus, respondit plane
Milleterio Consona, Romanam fidem esse veram and sinceram, solosq^e Clericorum
mores degeneres schismati dedisse locum; adferebatque plura in hanc sententiam.
Quid dicam? Merito quod falso olim Paulo Agrippa (...). -- Deploro veris
lachrymis tantam jacturam] Here you have a credible witness, that from his own
mouth reports it, that our Reformation was to Grotius a schism, and nothing
but the ill manners of the Clergy gave us the opportunity. And page 190. Epist.
ad Salmas. [Vis ergo me exerte dicere quid sentiam de postremo Grotii libro?
and an omnia mihi in eo probentur? Rem rogas non magnam, nec adeo difficilem,
quemque expedire promptum est. Tantum abest ut omnia probem, ut vix aliquid in
eo reperiam, cui sine condition calculum apponam meum. Verissime dixit ille
qui primus dixit, Grotium Papizare. Vix tamen in isto scripto aliquid legi quod
mirarer, quodve (...) occurreret. Nunquid enim omnes istiusmodi ejusdem
authoris lucubrationes erga Papistarum errores perpetuam (...) and (...), erga
Jesuitas amorem, erga nos plus quam Vatinianum odium produnt and clamant: In
Voto quod ejus nomen praeferebat, an veritus est haec (...) profiteri?]

Had none of you owned Grotius his Popery, I would never have charged it on
you. But when Grotius himself glories of his adherents in England, and so many
of you plainly defend him, and profess your owning of those books, and those
doctrines in which his Popery is contained, (if ever Popery were known in the
world) I must then crave your pardon, if I think somewhat the worse of Popery,
because they that hold it are ashamed of it. For I abhor that Religion which a
man has cause to be ashamed of, and will not save him from being a loser by
it, that owneth it, and stands to it to the last. And I think that man has
no Religion, who has none which he will openly profess and stand to.

I have at this time but these few requests to make to you, which I beseech you
to answer without partiality. 1. That you will seriously consider, whether it
be truly Catholic, to unchurch us, and so many Churches of Christ as are of
our mind, as your partakers do? Because Catholicism is your pretense, consider
whether you be not further from it then most people in the world?

2. Because I conceive this Book is not suited to your great objections, I
desire your perusal of another that comes out with it, called A Key for
Catholics, especially the second Part, and if you cannot answer them, take
heed how you continue Papists.

3. While you hold us for no Ministers or Churches, or Capable of your
Communion, it is in vain for us to hope for Communion with you: but we desire
that you will consider of those terms of a more distant sort of Communion,
which there I have propounded in the End of the first and second Part: and deny
us not that much.

4. At least we beseech you, that while you are Papists, you will deal openly,
and no worse with us then sober Papists that speak according to their
Consciences use to do. Do not let it (as the Lord Falkland speaks) be in the
Power of so much per annum (nor of your factious interest) to keep you from
professing your selves to be what you are; and do not make the Protestant name
a mere cloak to secure you in the opposing of the Protestant Cause, and follow
not the example of Spalatensis, and the Counsel of Campian and Parsons, in
feigning a sort of Doctrinal Puritans, and railing at Protestants under that
name. Deal with us but as sober Papists do, and we shall take it thankfully.
How highly does Bodin a Learned Papist extol the Presbyterian Discipline at
Genevah from its effects, when among many of you it has as odious titles as if
it were some blasphemous damning thing. What sober Papist would talk as Mr.
Pierce does [p. 30. of the great abomination of the Presbyterian Directory,]
and not be able to name one thing in it that is abominable. Is it a great
abomination to exhort and direct men to preach, and pray, and praise God, and?
If it be the Omission of his forms and Ceremonies, that is no Part of the book;
and if it be some Directions that are against them, they that revile the Common
Prayer book, as most Papists have done, or they that count such Ceremonies and
Forms indifferent things, as others have done, have little reason to account
that so great an abomination that directs men to omit them. What abominable
thing is imposed by the Directory? Tell us if you can. What excellent things
does Thuanus speak of the Presbyterians or Calvinists? and how highly does he
extol the most of their Leaders or Teachers whom he mentions? But to Mr.
Pierce; what a bloody perfidious sort of men are they, unfit to live in a
Commonwealth? And to Grotius; the Protestants are not only of bad lives, but by
the Power of their Doctrine they are such. I have showed you in my Key for
Catholics how great the praises of Calvin are in the mouth of Papir.
Massonius, and other sober Papists: and the same may be said of others of our
Divines, who are mentioned by you with most calumniating odious words. Even
Maldonate the Jesuit, when he is rail^ng at the Calvinists, confesses of
them, (in Matthew. 7.15.) that [Nothing was in their mouths but, the Lord, and
our heavenly Father, and Christ, and Faith; an Oath was not heard: nothing
appeared in their deeds, but Alms-deeds, and Temperance, and Modesty] Is this
like your language of them? Nay, if Satan had dictated to him, how could he
have uttered more falsehood and detestable calumniation then Mr. Pierce has
done, p. 73. when he says [were Hacket, Lancaster, Arthington and others
hanged for Nonconformity? or was it nothing but Ceremonial which Coppinger,
etc. designed against the lives of the whole privy Council, and against the
person of the Queen? were not Cartwright, and Travers, and Wentworth, and
Egerton, and other Presbyterian Ministers privy to the plot?] The Lord will
rebuke this slanderous tongue. Did ever Cochlaeus, or Bolseck go beyond this
man? How fully is it known that Hacket and his Companions were Grundl^tonians
or Familists, just such as James Nailor, and the Quakers, (who are far nearer
the Papists then the Puritans or Presbyterians) and that they madly came into
London, Coppinger and Arthington, as his two Prophets, proclaiming Hacket to be
Jesus Christ; and that for obstinate insisting on this Blasphemy, Hacket was
hanged, and dyed blaspheming, and Arthington upon his Repentance published the
whole Story of the beginning and progress of the business, as you may see it in
the Book called Arthingtons Seduction. In which their madness, blasphemy, or
any Treason of theirs or others, this man might as honestly have said, that
Augustine, or Luther, or Cranmer had an hand, or were privy to the plot, as
Cartwright, Travers, and such Presbyterian Ministers. What he has read in
Bancroft, I know not, nor much regard, till Bancroft himself be better cleared
of what he is by writers charged with, concerning Ficlerus, Dolman, etc. and
while he was known to be the most violent persecutor of the Puritans. But I see
as the Papists will take it for a current truth, that Luther was fetched away by
the Devil, and that Calvin was stigmatized for Sodomy, and dyed blaspheming,
etc. if they can but say, that one Cochlaeus or Bolseck of their own has spoke
it; so such men among us dare tell the world the most odious falsehoods of
Cartwright, Travers, and the Presbyterian Ministers, if they can but say, that
Bancroft said it before them. And now the rest may take it as unquestionable,
when Mr. Pierce has said it. Do these men believe that there is a day of
Judgment? If they do, they make but lamentable preparation for it. And his
assertion page 77. that [Excommunicating Kings and killing them is the doctrine
of the Presbyterians] and much more of his writing is of the same kind. To this
I have given him an Answer in my Key for Catholics, where he shall see whether
Papists or Protestants are for King-killing? Had you not gone so far beyond
such moderate Papists as Cassander, Hospitalius, Massonius, Bodin, Thuanus,
etc. in your enmity and bitterness against the Protestants, as clearly to
contradict them, and to speak blood and venom, when they speak charitably, and
honorably, we might have had more peaceable neighbors of you, though none of
your Communion.

And I suppose that those who separate from us, as having no true Ministry or
Churches, would have all these Ministers that they take for none, to be
silenced and cast out. I do not think you will deny this to be your desire, and
your purpose, if ever you should have power? And if so, what men are you? and
what a case would you bring this Nation in? To your Objections I have answered
in this book, and said somewhat more to you in another Preface. And upon the
whole matter am forced now to conclude, that it is an Enmity to holiness in
unsanctified hearts that is the principal cause of our distance and divisions;
and that the way to convince such men, as too many are that we deal with, is
not Disputing, but praying to the Lord to change their hearts: And that if we
could once persuade them but to the Love of God and Holiness, and to a serious
practice of Christian Religion, and (if they be Bishops) to a faithful practice
of those works of a Bishop which they confess are his duty, and to try
Church Government before they plead for what was never tried by them, our
Controversies would then be ended* they would never more plead for such a
Prelacy that destroys Piety, and Discipline, nor never revile the Servants of
the Lord: nor never desire so much to promote the work of Hell, as the casting
out all that they account no Ministers, and the casting off of all that they
account no Ordinances or valid Administrations, would be. Farewell Disputing
with such men, in order to their Conviction, and an healing peace.

Hoc non est artis, sed pietatis opus.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHat the Publisher of Dr. Stewards Sermon does mean by his Commmending it to
my Consideration, when there is not a word in it that I am concerned in more
then he, I understand not. If he thereby intimate, that I charged Dr. Steward
to be of Grotius's Religion, or any other that disowneth it, he egregiously
abuses his Reader and himself. If he intend to argue that none of the
Prelatical Party were Grotians, because Dr. Steward was not: Let him prove his
Consequence; I disprove it, 1. From the testimony of Grotius himself. 2. From
the mouths and books of those that have owned Grotius among us, even since they
were acquainted with his judgment, and have owned his Votum and Discussio in
particular. If his meaning be that [Dr. Steward was a Grotian, and yet no
Papist: therefore Grotians are no Papists] one branch of his antecedent is
false: Either he was no Grotian, or he was a Papist. Again I profess, that it
is far from the desire of my soul, to raise so much as the least suspicion on
any that own not the Doctrine and Design of Grotius. Disclaim it, and we are
satisfied. Dr. Heylin was taken for as hot an antipuritan as most in England:
and yet (in a moderate Letter to me) he disclaimeth Grotianism: which I
mention, partly lest any, by my naming him on another occasion in that Book,
misconceive me to have accused him of this, and principally to discourage the
defenders of Grotius, when such men as Dr. Heylin and Dr. Steward are against
them.

The CONTENTS.
DISPUATION 1.
WHether it be Necessary or Profitable to the right Order or the Peace of the
Churches of England, that we restore the extruded Episcopacy? Neg. Peace with
Episcopal Divines to be sought, page 2, 3. The Nature of Church Government
opened, page 5. to 14. Twelve sorts of Bishops to be distinguished, page 14,
15. Which of these may be admitted for Peace, page 16. Vnfixed General
Ministers to do the Ordinary part of the Apostles work, are to be continued:
proved, page 21, 22. What Power Apostles had over other Ministers, p. 23, to
30. The Authors Concessions for Episcopacy, page 30, 31. Arguments against the
English Prelacy. 1. It destroys Government and its end, page 32. 2. It
gratifieth Satan and wicked men, page 36. 3. It unavoidably causes divisions,
page 37. 4. It suspendeth or degradeth all the Presbyters, page 38. 5. It
makes Lay men Church-governors. 6. And oppresses the Bishops with guilt, page
44. 7. It is the product of pride, page 45. 8. It gratifieth lazy Ministers,
page 46. 9. It is not of Gods Institution, page 48. 10. (...) is contrary to
Gods word, page 51. 11. It is unsafe, as never used in Scripture times.
How fully the supposition is granted us, page 58, 59. Many Reasons proving
that the Apostles (who de facto are confessed by Dr. H. to have settled no
subject Presbyters in Scripture times, but one Bishop over one stated
Congregation) intended not the changing of this Order afterward, page 63. to
74, etc. More Arguments that Diocesan Bishops are no Scripture-Bishops, page 75.
They are contrary to the Jewish and Apostolical Government, page 76, 77. Proved
by two Arguments more, page 83, 84. The Confession of Episcopal writers, page
85, 86. Against Diocesan Bishops (of many Churches) the Testimony of Clemens
Romanus, p. 87. (with Grotius's exposition, page 88. Of Polycarps and Ignatius
(who is full against them) page 88. Of Justin Martyr, and Gregory
Neocaesa^iensis, page 92, 93. Tertullian, page 93, 94. Of Clemens Alexandr. and
from the late division of Parishes, page 96. Ninius testimony cited by Mr.
Thorndike of 365. Bishoprics planted by Patrick in Ireland, page 96, 97. More
cited by Usher, page 97. The Testimonies of Councils, page 98. to 103. Many
weighty Consequents of the proved point, page 103.
DISPUTATION 2.
THose who Nullify our present Ministry and Churches which have not the
Prelatical Ordination, and teach the people to do the like, do incur the guilt
of grievous sin. A Preface to the Dissenters, page 109. One Letter of a
Minister of another County that opens the Necessity of this Disputation, page
127. Chap. 1. A Minister of Christ defined, page 130. Whether special Grace be
Necessary to the being of a Minister, page 130, 131. What Qualifications are
Necessary, page 132. Ministers Christ's Officers, page 133. Must be separated to
the work, page 134. Who are the true objects of the Ministry, page 134, etc.
Whether the Pastors or Church be first, p. 136. Whether a particular Church or
the Universal be first, ibid. The Pastors work in a particular Church, p. 137.
How far Intention is Necessary to the Validity of an administration, p. 138. A
Call to exercise after a Call to Office, p. 139.
Chap. 2. Of the Nature and Ends of Ordination, showing what it is that is the
Ordainers work, and what not, p. 141. Chap. 3. Humane Ordination not of
Constant Necessity to the Being of the Ministry, fully proved, p. 150. Chap. 4.
An uninterrupted Succession of Regular Ordination is not of Necessity, p. 168.
proved. Chap. 5. Ordination by such as the English Prelates, not Necessary to
the Being of the Ministry, proved, p. 178. Objections Answered. Chap 6.
Ordination especially at this time by English Prelates is unnecessary, p. 190.
Chap. 7. The Ordination used now in England, and in other ^rotestant Churches
is valid and agreeable to Scripture, and the practice of the ancient Church, p.
198. fully proved: and so our Ministry vindicated, by twenty Arguments. Chap.
8. The greatness of their sin that are now laboring to persuade the people of
the Nullity of our Ministry, Churches and Administrations: Manifested in forty
aggravations, p. 240. Chap. 9. The sinfulness of despising or neglecting
Ordination, p. 252. The distinct power of Pastors, People and Magistrates to
our Call, p. 253. Approbation of Pastors must be sought, p. 258. What Pastors
should be sought to for Ordination, p. 266.

DISPUTATION 3.
AN Episcopacy desirable for the Reformation, Preservation, and Peace of the
Churches, p. 274. Chap. 1. Of General unfixed Bishops or Ministers, p. 275.
Chap. 2. Of fixed Pastors, that also participate in the work of the unfixed, p.
286. Chap. 3. It is lawful for the several Associations of Pastors, to choose
one man to be their President durante vita, if he continue fit, p. 297. What
power shall such have? p. 301. Chap. 4. It is lawful for the Presbyters of a
particular Church to have a fixed President for life, p. 307. Chap. 5.
Objections against the forementioned Presidency answered, p. 316. Chap. 6. The
sum of the foregoing Propositions, and the Consistency of them, with the
principles of each party, and so their aptitude to reconcile, p. 335. Chap 7.
Some Instances proving that moderate men will agree upon the forementioned
terms, p. 339. Bishop H^lls full Consent, p. 340, 341. Dr. Hide (of the new
party) stigmatizeth his book with the brand of irrational Separatism and
Recusancy, p. 342, 343. Bishop Ushe^s full Consent to us, p. 344. with Dr.
Hold^worths, and Dr. Forbs. The Presbyterians Consent to the same terms. Mr.
Ga^akers, Mr. Gerees, the London Province, Beza's, Calvin's, Mr. Rich. Vines in
two Letters: Bishops can have no other power over Pastors of other Churches,
then the Synods have, p. 347, 348. Presbyterians for a Church of one
Congregation, p. 348. The Polonian Protestants Government, p. 353.
DISPUTATION 4.
WHether a stinted Liturgy or Form of worship be a desirable means for the
peace of these Churches? Proposition. 1. A stinted Liturgy is in it self
lawful, p. 359. Prop. 2. A stinted Liturgy in some parts of public holy
service is ordinarily necessary, p. 365. Prop. 3. In those parts of public
worship where a form is not of ordinary necessity, but only Lawful, yet may it
not only be submitted to, but desired, when the peace of the Church does
accidentally require it, p. 367. Prop. 4. So great is the difference between
men and men, times and times, that forms may be a duty to some men, and at some
times, and a sin to other men, and at other times, p. 368. Prop. 5. The
Ministers and Churches that earnestly desire it, should not by the Magistrate
be absolutely and generally prohibited the use of a convenient stinted Liturgy,
p. 372. Prop. 6. To prescribe a form of prayer, preaching (or other service
where is no necessity of it) and to lay a Necessity on it, as to the thing it
self, or the Churches peace, etc. and to punish, silence, suspend,
excommunicate, or reproach as Schismatics the able, godly, peaceable Ministers
or People that (justly or unjustly) dare not use it, is so great a sin, that no
godly Ministers should desire or attempt it, nor any godly Magistrate suffer
it, p. 373. Prop. 7. The safest way of composing a stinted Liturgy, is to take
it all, or as much as may be, for words as well as matter, out of the holy
Scripture, p. 378. Prop. 8. Yet is it lawful to use a Liturgy that is not so
taken out of Scripture as to words, p. 380. Prop. 9. The matter of a Liturgy in
which the Concord of many is expected, must not be doubtful or unnecessary
things, ibid. Prop. 10. Humane forms of public prayer or other worship
(excepting the fore-excepted necessary cases, as Psalms, etc.) should not be
constantly used by Ministers that have liberty, and are able to pray without
them: Nor should any (ordinarily) be admitted into the Ministry (except in
great Necessities of the Church) that are not able to pray without such forms,
p. 381. Objections on both sides, p. 386. The sum of this Dispute, p. 392.
DISPUTATION. 5.
Qu. WHether humane Ceremonies be Necessary or Profitable to the Church? p.
395. Chap. 1. Distinctions and Propositions in order to the decision, ibid.
Chap. 2. Ceremonies forbidden, or which man has not power to institute, are
not to be imposed as profitable or lawful, p. 399. which those be. Instances of
all our commonly controverted Ceremonies considered, p. 409. Chap. 3. In such
unlawful impositions it is an aggravation of the sin, if Ceremonies are
pretended to be Divine, p. 425. Chap. 4. If things unlawful are commanded as
indifferent, or things indifferent as necessary, they are sinfully imposed: and
the more, because of such pretenses, p. 427. Chap. 5. A lawful and convenient
thing is sinfully imposed, when it is imposed on a greater penalty then the
nature and use of it does require, or then the common good will bear, p. 429.
Chap. 6. It is not lawful to make any thing the subjects duty by a Command,
that is merely indifferent antecedently, both in it self and as clothed with
its accidents, p 433. Chap. 7. Some things may be lawfully and profitably
commanded at one Time and Place, and to one sort of People, that may not at, or
to another, no nor be obeyed if commanded, p. 439. Chap* 8. Those orders may be
profitable for the peace of the Churches in one Nation, that are not necessary
to the peace of the Churches of many Nations, p. 445. Chap. 9. There is no mere
Humane Universal Sovereign, Civil or Ecclestastical over the whole Church, and
therefore none to make Laws obligatory to the whole, p. 448. Chap. 10. If it be
not our Lawful Governors that command us, but usurpers, we are not formally
bound to obey them, though the things be lawful which they command, p. 452.
Chap. 11. The Commands of lawful Governors about lawful Ceremonies, must be
understood and obeyed with such exceptions as do secure the End: and not to the
subverting of it, p. 458. Chap. 12. It may be very sinful to command some
Ceremonies, when yet it may be the subjects duty to use them when they are
commanded, p. 460. Chap. 13. The Constant use of things indifferent should not
be commanded ordinarily (see the exceptions) but they should be sometimes used,
sometimes not, p. 464. Chap. 14. Thirty Reasons against the imposing of our
late Controverted Mystical Ceremonies, as Crossing, Surplice, etc. p. 467.
Chap. 15. Reasons persuading to Obedience in Lawful things, p. 483.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. 4. r. had not been by themselves. p. 24. l. 23. for Philetas, r.
Alexander. p. 30. l. penult. for Perfect, r. President. p. 33. l. 34, 35. r.
the 2000th. or 3000th. person. p. 37. l. 34. for it, r. is. p. 41. l. 9. r.
Presbytery. p. 72. l. ult. for that, r. the. p. 77. l. 24. r. occasioning. p.
78. l. 16. r. had in it. p. 81. l. 1. blot out any. l. 28. for at all, r. all.
l. 29. blot out the. p. 87. l. 17. for had r. have. Marg. l. 5. r. (...). p.
88. l. 17. for Prelacy, r. Policarpe. l. 37. for there that, r. that there. p.
89. l. 2. r. (...). p 93. l. 3. r. he was, and l. 34. for ad, r. at. p. 94. l.
29. r. we well. p. 95. Marg. l. 31. r. Blondel, and l. 33. for yet, r. and. p.
96. l. 9. r. Churches. p. 97. l. 5. for Scholarum, r. Scotorum. p. 100. Marg.
l. 13. for no, r. on. p 104. l. 8. for I mean, r. I wave. p. 106. l. 4. for
that, r. the. Disp. 2. Pref. p. 117. l. 16. for pass, r. pas^. p. 118 l. 30.
blot out and. p. 121. l. 14. r. Bishop. p. 124. l. 17. r. Iansenius. p. 137. l.
5. r. Members. p. 139. l. 5. for men, r. run. p. 157. l. 3. and 4. r. pleasure
and Pastors, and l. 34. r. and. p. 160. l. 2. r. will. p. 163. l. 11. for
Proctors, r. Doctors. p 166. l. 14. r. sin in the. p. 169. l. 6. blot out upon.
p. 181. l. 26. r. owed. p. 182. l. 11. r. And yet. p. 18^. l. ult. for as, r.
at. p. 184. l. 3. for Art. 11. r. Act. 11. p. 191. l. 29. for he, r. the, and
l. 37. for decase, r. depose. p. 194. l. 29. for and, r. etc. p. 199. l. 13.
for Art. 11. r. Act. 11. p. 219. l. 1. r. Arrianus. p. 229. l. 32. for three
and four, r. third and fourth. p. 241. l. 22. for name, r. main. p. 245. l. 14.
for Davenant, r. Davenport. p. 253. l. 18. blot out do. p. 265. l. 12. blot out
to. p. 277. l. 2. r. one and the. and l 12. r. works. p. 291. l. 18. for the,
r. that. p. 316. l. 16. r. as their. p. 317. l. 23. for Overseers, r. Others.
p. 328. l. 21. r. B^hmenists. p. 339. l. 16. r. had no other. p. 340. l. 9. r.
the least. p. 367. l. 9. r. add to. p. 372. l. 21. for h^, r. the. p. 409. l.
34. r. but what was. p. 420. l. 16. r. of the Will. p. 421. l. 26. for them, r.
than. p. 430. l. 28. r. Law.

An Advertisement to prevent misunderstanding.
MY exceeding scarcity of time, constraining me to write these Papers in much
haste, and allowing me but a cursory perusal of them when written, and the like
after the printing, for the collecting the Errata of the Press, I find by this
hasty review, and by some observation of men's readiness to misunderstand me,
that it is necessary to speak a little more about the following particulars,
that I may be understood by such as are willing to understand me: and the
mistakes of others I shall easily bear.

Sect. 1. Page 89. There is somewhat that requires correction of the pen, and
somewhat that requires explication. In translating that passage of Ignatius,
[Unus panis qui pro omnibus fractus est] must be written next [effusus est]
before [and unus Calix.] And for the following objection, though it was made by
a discreet person, yet I know no ground for it: unless Is. Vossius his Edition
leave out [(...)] (which I have not now at hand, but is likelyest) I know not
of any Greek copy that leaves it out. Indeed Bishop Ushers Latin does, and the
Vulgar Latin leaves out the translation of the next words before it [(...)] of
which says Bishop Usher [Ex interpretatione hac excidisse videantur.] And
noting the corruption of the Vulgar Translation in this very place, I there
premised to my Answer, that it might occasion a change in the Text: that it
has done so in many places, I think is easy to prove; but that it has done
so here, there is no probability, (if any Greek Copy be as is objected:) and
the Reasons of my conjecture of the possibility, are so little for a
probability, that as I express them not, so I think them not worth the
expressing, but rather bid you take that as non dictum. Though of the general I
find Bishop Usher himself saying, both of his Latin Version [Ex ea sola
integritati suae restitui posse Ignatium, polliceri non ausim,] and of the
first Greek Edition [Hanc reliqui sequuti sunt editores; non ex Graco aliquo
codice alio, sed partim ex ingenio, partim ex vetere Vulgato Latino Interpret,
non paucis in locis eandem corrigentes] Epist. ad Lect. ante Annot. and page
26. Dissert.

Sect. 2. I must entreat the Reader to observe that my drift in this writing is
not so much to oppose any form of Government merely as contrary to the
Institution or Apostolical Rule, as to plead against that which I take to be
destructive to the Ends of Government: Not that I desire not a careful adhering
to the sacred Rule, but 1. Because I suppose that many circumstantials of
Discipline undetermined in the Word are feigned by some to be substanstantial
necessary things: and that many matters are indifferent that some lay the Peace
if not the being of the Church upon. 2. Because I so far hate contention, that
if any Government contrary to my Judgment were set up, that did not apparently
in the nature of it wrong the Church, I would silently live under it in peace
and quietness: and accordingly would be now loath to enter a quarrel with any
Writers that differ from us in tolerable things: But if I know that their
judgment reduced to practice is like to be the undoing of many souls, and to
cast Discipline almost wholly out of the Church, I think it better to displease
them, then let them undo the Church without contradiction. The best is, the
serious Christians of this age have experience to help them to understand the
case, and I suppose my Disputation to be unto them as if I Disputed before a
man that is restored from want, or banishment or sickness, whether he should be
reduced to the Condition from which he is restored?

Sect. 3. Some passages here will occasion the Question (as p. 5.) Whether and
how far Church Government is jure Divino?] But of this, in the main I am agreed
with them that I dispute. To speak further, my own judgment is, 1. That the
Spirit of God has established all the Officers and worship-Ordinances of his
Church; and that no new Church-office or Ordinance of worship (as to the
substance) may be instituted by man; 2. But that there are many Circumstantials
about the Exercise of those Offices and Ordinances, that are not determined
particularly by a Law, but are left to humane prudence to determine of, by the
General directions of the Law. And so I suppose that Bishops and Presbyters are
but one Office, of Gods institution; but in the exercise of this Office if one
for order be made a Moderator or President of the rest, or by agreement (upon a
disparity of parts or interest) do unequally divide their work between them, in
the exercise, it is a thing that may be done, and is fit where the Edification
of the Church requires it, but not a thing that always must be done, nor is of
it self a Duty, but a thing indifferent. The following Case therefore I hence
resolve.

Sect. 4. Quest. [Whether the Order of subject Presbyters might lawfully be
created by Bishops or any humane Power? and whether the Order of Bishops might
lawfully be created for the avoiding of Schism by the consent of Presbyters? or
Metropolitans by Bishops?]

Answ. If you understand by the word [Order] a distinct Office, none may create
any of these but God. But if by [Subject Presbyters] be meant only men of the
same Office with Bishops, that do for the Churches benefit subject themselves
to the direction or Presidency of another, (upon some disparity in their gifts
or the like) in the exercise of that Office, I suppose that this is a thing
that by Consent may be lawfully done. And so I verily believe that betimes in
the Church it was done, (of which anon.) So if by [Bishops] be meant no
distinct Office, but one of the Presbyters chosen from among the rest, to
exercise his Ministry in some eminency above the rest, by reason of his
greater Gifts, or for Peace and Order, I doubt not but it is a thing that
consent may do: (And accordingly the Canon Law defines a Bishop that he is
[Unus e Presbyteris, etc.] So if by [a Metropolitan] be not meant another
Office, but one in the same Office, by reason of the advantage of his Seat,
chosen to some acts of Order for the common benefit, I doubt not but it may be
done: but every such Indifferent thing, is not to be made Necessary, statedly
and universally to the Church.

Sect. 5. When I do in these Papers plead that the Order of Subject Presbyters
was not instituted in Scripture times, and consequently that it is not of
Divine Institution, I mean as aforesaid, that as a distinct Office, or Species
of Church ministers, as to the Power from God, it is not of Divine Institution,
nor a lawful Institution of man; but that among men, in the same Office, some
might Prudentially be chosen to an eminency of degree as to the exercise; and
that according to the difference of their advantages there might be a disparity
in the use of their authority and gifts, I think was done in Scripture times,
and might have been after, if it had not then. And my judgment is, that
ordinarily every particular Church (such as our Parish Churches are) had more
Elders then One, but not such store of men of eminent gifts as that all these
Elders could be such. But as if half a dozen of the most judicious persons of
this Parish were Ordained to be Elders, of the same Office with my self, but
because they are not equally fit for public preaching, should most employ
themselves in the rest of the Oversight, consenting that the public preaching
lie most upon me, and that I be the Moderator of them for Order in
Circumstantials: This I think was the true Episcopacy and Presbytery of the
first times. From the mistake of which, two contrary Errors have arisen: The
one of those that think this Moderator was of another Office in specie, having
certain work assigned him by God, which is above the reach of the Office of
Presbyters to perform; and that he had many fixed Churches for his charge. The
other of them that think these Elders were such as are called now Lay Elders,
that is, Vnordained men, authorized to Govern, without Authority to Preach,
Baptize, or Administer the Lords Supper. And so both the Prelatical on one
side, and the Presbyterians and Independents on the other side, run out, and
mistake the ancient form, and then contend against each other. (This was the
substance of what I wrote to Mr. Vines, which his subjoyned Letter refers to,
where he signifies that his judgment was the same.) When Paul and Barnabas
were together, Paul was the chief speaker, and yet Barnabas by the Idolaters
called Jupiter. Nature teaches us that men in the same Office should yet have
the pre-eminence that is due to them by their Age, and Parts, and Interests,
etc. and that Order should be kept among them, as in Colleges and all
Societies is usual. The most excellent part of our work is public preaching,
but the most of it for quantity is the rest of the Oversight of the Church (in
Instructing personally, admonishing, reproving, enquiring into the truth of
accusations, comforting, visiting the sick, stablishing the weak, looking to
the poor, absolving, answering doubts, excommunicating, and much more.) And
therefore as there is a necessity (as the experienced know) of many Elders in a
particular Church of any great number, so it is fit that most hands should be
most employed about the said works of Oversight, yet so as that they may preach
as need and occasion requires (and administer Sacraments) and that the eminent
Speakers be most employed in public preaching, yet so as to do their part of
the rest as occasion requires: And so the former Elders that Rule well shall
be worthy of double honor, but especially these that labor in the Word and
Doctrine, by more ordinary public preaching: And such kind of seldom-preaching
Ministers as the former, were in the first times, and should be in most
Churches yet that are numerous.

Sect. 6. When I speak in these Papers therefore of other men's Concessions that
there were de facto in Scripture times, but One Bishop without any subject
Presbyters to a particular Church, remember that I speak not my own judgment,
but urge against them their own Concessions: And when I profess my Agreement
with them, it is not in this, much less in all things, (for then I needed not
disspute against them,) but it is in this much, that in Scripture times there
was de facto, 1. No mere Bishop of many particular Churches (or stated
worshipping Congregations,) 2. Nor any distinct Office or Order of Presbyters,
that radically had no Power to Ordain, or Govern, or Confirm, etc. (which are
the subject Presbyters I mean.)

Sect. 7. Specially remember that by [Bishops] in that dispute, I mean,
according to the Modern use, one that is no Archbishop, and yet no mere
Presbyter, but one supposed to be between both, that is, a Superior to mere
Presbyters in Order or Office, and not only in degree or modification of the
exercise; but below Archbishops (whether in Order or Degree:) These are they
that I dispute against; excluding Metropolitans, or Archbishops from the
question, and that for many Reasons.

Sect. 8. If it were proved or granted that there were Archbishops in those
times, of Divine Institution, it would no whit weaken my Arguments; For it is
only the lowest sort of Bishops that I dispute about: yea it confirms them.
For if every combination of many particular Churches had an Archbishop, then
the Governors of such Combinations were not mere Bishops, and then the mere
Bishops were Parish Bishops, or Bishops of single Churches only: and that is it
that I plead for, against Diocesan Bishops, that have many of these Churches
(perhaps some hundreds) under one Bishop of the lowest rank, having only
Presbyters under him of another Order.

Sect. 9. If any think that I should have answered all that is written for an
Apostolical Institution of Metropolitans, or of Archbishops, or of the subject
sort of Presbyters, or other points here touched, I answer them, 1. In the
former my work was not much concerned; nor can any man prove me engaged to do
all that he fancieth me concerned to do. 2. Few men love to be contradicted and
confuted, and I have no reason to provoke them further then necessity requires
it. 3. I take not all that I read for an argument so considerable, as to need
Replies. If any value the Arguments that I took not to need an Answer, let them
make their best of them: I have taken none of them out of their hands by
robbing them of their Books; if they think them valid, let them be so to them.
Every Book that we write must not be in folio; and if it were, we should leave
some body unanswered still. I have not been a contemner or neglecter of the
writings of the contrary-minded. But voluminously to tell the world of that I
think they abuse or are abused in, is unpleasing and unprofitable.

Sect. 10. And as to the Jus Divinum of limited Diocesses to the Apostles as
Bishops, and of Archbishops, Metropolitans, etc. I shall say but this: 1. That
I take not all for current in matter of fact, that two, or three, or twice so
many say was done, when I have either cross testimony, or valid Reasons of the
improbability: I believe such Historians but with a humane faith, and allow
them such a degree of that, as the probability of their report, and credibility
of the persons does require. 2. I take it for no proof that all that was done
in all the Churches, that I am told was done in some. 3. I take the Law of
Nature and Scripture to be the entire Divine Law, for the Government of the
Church and World. 4. And therefore if any Father or Historian tell me, that
this was delivered by the Apostles as a Law to the Universal Church, which is
not contained in Scriptures, nor to be proved by them, I will not believe them;
no more then I would have believed Papius and all his Millenary followers, that
pretended Tradition from Saint John; nor any more then I would have believed
the Asians or Romans that pretended different times for Easter, as a Tradition
Apostolical binding the whole Church. 5. If it were proved that de facto the
Apostles did thus or thus dispose of a circumstance of Government or Worship,
which yet is undetermined in Scripture, I take it not for a sufficient proof,
that they intended that Fact for an Universal Law, or that they meant to bind
all the Churches in all ages to do the like: no more then Christ intended at
the Institution of his Supper to tie all ages to do it after Supper, in an
upper room, but with twelve, and sitting, etc. 6. Yea if I had found a
Direction or Command from the Apostles, as Prudential determiners of a
Circumstance pro tempore and loco only (as of the kiss of love, hair, covering,
eating things strangled, and blood, etc.) I take it not for a proof that this
is an universal standing Law. One or two of these exceptions will shake off the
proofs that some count strong for the universal obligation of the Church to
Diocesans or Metropolitans.

Sect. 11. That the Apostles had Episcopal Power (I mean such in each Church
where they came, as the fixed Bishops had) I doubt not. And because they
founded Churches according to the success of their labors, and settled them, and
if they could, again visited them, therefore I blame not the Ancients for
calling them the Bishops of those Churches. But that each man of them was
really a fixed Metropolitan, or Patriarch, or had his proper Diocese, in which
he was Governor in chief, and into which no other Apostle might come as an
equal Governor without his leave, this and such like is as well proved by
silence as by all that I have read for it of Reason or History, that is, the
Testimonies of the Ancients. I find them sometime claiming a special interest
in the Children that they have begotten by their Ministry: But doubtless when
Paul and Barnabas or Silas went together, some might be converted by one, and
some by another within the same Diocese or City. If any man shall convince me,
that any great stress does lie upon this question, I shall be willing to give
him more of my reasons for what I say.

Sect. 12. And as to them that confidently teach that the Apostles suited the
Ecclesiastical Government to the Politic, and that as by a Law, for the Church
universally to obey: All the confutation at present that I will trouble them
with, shall be to tell them, that I never saw any thing like a proof of it, to
my understanding, among all the words that are brought to that purpose: and to
tell them, 1. That if Paul chose Ephesus, Corinth, and other the most populous
places to preach in, it was but a prudential circumstantiating of his work,
according to that General Law of doing all to Edification: and not an
obligation on all the Pastors or Preachers of the Gospel to do the same where
the case is not the same. 2. And if Paul having converted many in these Cities
do there plant Churches (and no other can be proved in Scripture times) it
follows not that we may plant no Churches but in Cities. 3. And if the greatest
Cities had then the most numerous Churches and the most eminent Pastors fitted
to them, and therefore are named with some note of excellency above the rest,
it follows not that the rest about them were under them by subjection. 4. Yea
if the Bishops of the chief Cities for order sake were to call Provincial
Assemblies, and the meetings to be in their Cities, and they were to be the
Presidents of the rest in Synods, with such like circumstantial difference, it
follows not that they were proper Governors of the rest, and the rest to
obey them in the Government of their proper charges. Nor that they had power to
place and displace them. 5. Much less will it prove that these Metropolitans*
taking the name of Diocesans, might put down all the Bishops of two hundred
Churches under them, and set up none but Presbyters (in order distinct from
Bishops) over the flocks, besides themselves; and so the Archbishops having
extinguished all the first Order of Bishops of single Churches, to take the
sole Government of so many Churches, even people as well as Presbyters into
their own hands. 6. And I do not think that they can prove that the Apostles
did institute as many sorts of Church Government then, as there were of civil
^olicy in the world. All the world had not the Roman form of Government: Nor
had lesser Cities the same dependence upon greater, in all other Countries. 7.
Was it in one degree of subordination of Officers only, or in all, that the
Apostles suited the Ecclesiastical Government to the Civil? If in One, how is
it proved that they intended it in that one, and not in the rest? If in all,
then we must have many degrees of Officers, more then yet we have* Inferiors
very many, and Superiors some of all conscience too high: then we must have
some to answer the Correctors, the Consular Presidents, and the Vicars, and
Lieutenants, the Pro-consuls and Prefects, and the Emperor himself: Even one to
be Universal in the Empire (that's yet some Limit to the Pope, and will hazard
the removing of the Supremacy to Constantinople, by the Rule that the Apostles
are supposed to go by.) And great variety must there be in the several
Diocesses of the Empire (which Blondell has punctually described de primatu in
Eccles. page 511. to 519. showing the causes of the inequality of Bishoprics
and Churches.) 8. According to this Opinion the form of Church must alter as
often as Emperors will change their Policy, or Wars shall change them: And upon
every change of the Privileges of a City, the Churches Pre-eminence must
change, and so we shall be in a mutable frame: Which if Basil and Anthymius had
understood, might have quicklier decided their controversy. Yea according to
this opinion, Princes may quite take down Metropolitans at pleasure, by
equalling the privileges of their Cities. The best is then, that it is in the
power of our Civil Governors to dissolve our obligation to Metropolitans, yea
and to all Bishops too, if Cities must be their only residence, as I have
showed.

Sect. 13. As for them that pretend humane Laws for their form of Government,
that is, the decrees of General Councils; I answer, 1. I disown and deny all
humane Laws as obligatory to the Church Universal: It is the prerogative of
God, yea the greatest point of the exercise of his Soraignty to be the
Lawgiver to his Universal Church. There can be no Universal Laws without an
Universal Lawgiver: and there is no Universal Lawgiver under Christ in the
world. 2. And for General Councils (since Scripture times at least) there have
beeen no such things nor any thing like them, unless the Roman Empire, yea a
piece of it, be the whole world. I know therefore no humane Universal Laws,
whether it be for forms of Government, Liturgies, Holy days, or any thing else.

Sect. 14. But the principal matter that tends to end our d^fference, is, the
right understanding of the Nature of that Government that is properly
Ecclesiastical: What is it that we must have Diocesans and Metropolitans to do?
(besides what I have granted to Apostolical Bishops in the third Dispute?) Is
it to Teach or Rule the people of the particular Churches? They cannot do it at
so great distance, not knowing them nor conversing with them; at least so well
as they that are on the place, as the ancient Bishops were. Is it to Rule the
Presbyters only? Why then has not every Church a Bishop to Rule the flock, but
a Presbyter that is forbidden to Rule them (in all that which they call
Jurisdiction themselves)? And how is it that Presbyters shall be Ruled by
Diocesans, and the Diocesans by Provincials? not by force: For the Pastors have
no coercive power by violence, or touching men's bodies or estates. Is it by
bare commanding? Why what will that do on dissenters that disobey? shall they
depose the Bishops or Presbyters that disobey them? But how? Not by any force,
but command, or exhortation, or Excommunication. They can do no more that I
know of. And what if they excommunicate a Pastor! Let the case be supposed as
now it is among us: What if a Bishop with the few that adhere to him,
excommunicated all the Pastors in the County that are not satisfied of the
Divine Right of Diocesans, or of the lawfulness of all his imposed Ceremonies
and Forms? The people will take it to be their duty (most generally where the
Ministry has been savingly effectual) to own their Pastors notwithstanding
such an Excommunication, and the Pastors will take it to be their duty to go on
with their work: and the excommunication will do no good (unless perhaps to
make some Division, and make both parties the scorn of the ungodly, or procure
the rabble to rail more bitterly at their Pastors, and hate all their advice,
be a desirable good.) And as when the Pope excommunicated them, some Bishops
again excommunicated the Pope; so some of these Pastors its like would
excommunicate their Metropolitans: And why a Bishop, or at least a Synod of
Bishops may not cast a wicked Metropolitan out of their communion, is past my
understanding to conceive.

Synods are for Communion of Churches; and if we had a Monarchical, National
Church in conformity to the Commonwealth, I know not how it would stand with
the Law of God, for the whole Nation to hold Communion with an Heretical
Primate. A Roman Synod deposed John the thirteenth, and other Popes have been
deposed by Councils. I conclude therefore, that what ever power men claim, if
the Magistate interpose not (which is extrinsick to the Church Government in
question) it will work but on men's Judgments, call it Deposing,
Excommunicating, or what you please: and this power no man can take from you
but by hindering you to speak. You may now depose thus and excommunicate whom
you please, and when they have slighted it, or excommunicated you again, you
will have done. Nay I think you do excommunicate us already: For you withdraw
from our Communion, and draw many with you, and so you exercise your power (I
mean it of that party that in the second Disputation I have to do with.)

Sect 15. Much of my Opposition to the English Prelacy depends on the
supposition, that they took all the people, and not only the Presbyters for the
objects of their Government, or for their charge: And I find some of the
younger sort that are sprung up since their fall, do doubt of this. But 1. all
men in England that knew but twenty year ago what belonged to these matters,
are past doubt of it. And I have no mind to dispute against them that
contradict the common knowledge of the Nation: as if they should doubt whether
we had ever a King in England. 2. Read over the Canons, and the yearly
Visitation Articles (which the Churchwardens ordinarily swear to present by,
before they had ever read the Book, or heard what was in it) and then judge. 3.
Their arguing for the sole Jurisdiction of Bishops, and that they only were
properly Pastors, and that Presbyters had not the Key of Discipline, but of
Doctrine, is some evidence. 4. It is known to the Nation, that the Pastors of
the Parish Churches had no power by their Laws (or sufferance) to cast out any
the most enormous sinner or Heretic from the Church, nor to bring them to open
confession of their sin, nor to Absolve the penitent, but by Reading of their
Sentence, and publishing what they sent from their Courts; and consequently
could do nothing of all the means in order hereto: (For the means cannot be
used where the end is known to be impossible.) All the obstinate scandalous
persons, and scorners at a holy life, we must take as members of our Churches,
having no power to cast them out. Indeed we had the same power as the
Churchwardens, to put our names to their presentiments. But a power of accusing
to a Chancellors Court is not a Power of Governing; especially when Piety under
the name of Preciseness and Puritanism, was so hated and persecuted, that to
have accused a man for mere profaneness would have been so far from obtaining
the end, as that it was like to have been the undoing of the accuser, except he
had been out of the suspicion of Preciseness (as they called it) himself. But I
need not dispute the with any but those that being bred i^ better times (though
far from what we desire) are unacquainted with the cas^ of their Predecessor.

Sect. 16. Object. But do you not contradict your self, in saying the Pastors
were degraded or suspended, as to the exercise of so great a part of their
work, and yet say here, and Pref. to the Reformed Pastor, that the Power of
Discipline was given them?] Answ. 1. In their Ordination the Bishops said to
them [Receive the Holy Ghost: whose sins thou do remit they are remitted;
whose sins thou do retain they are detained.] And in the Book of Ordination
it was asked of them [Whether they would give their faithful diligence always
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ as the
Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same according to the
Commandments of God?] And the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book enableth the
Curate to admonish open and notorious evil livers by whom the Congregation is
offended, and those that have wronged their neighbors, that they come not till
they have openly declared that they have repented and amended.] But 1. This
does but serve to leave them unexcusable, that acknowledged Discipline to
belong to the Office of a Presbyter, when yet he might not exercise it. The
Bishops in the Ordination of Presbyters enabled them to preach the Gospel: And
yet they were after that forbidden to preach till they had a License; and it
was put into the Visitation Articles, to present those Ministers that preached
without License. If they will deny us the exercise of the Power that they first
confess belongs to our Office, we are not answerable for their
self-contradictions. 2. By Discipline I suppose they mean but our Instruction,
and our publishing their Orders for Penance, Excommunication, or Absolution. 3.
They were the Judges of the sense of the Laws, as far as the execut^on
required: And the Universal Practice of England, with their writings, showed
us, to our cost, their judgment. What good would it do us, if the Law had been
on our side, while the Concurrent Judgment and Practice of the Governors
denied it, and went against it. 4. He that had kept a man from the Sacrament,
according to the plain words of the Rubric, was to have been accountable for
it at their Courts, and so likely (if he had been a man of serious piety, and
not a persecutor of Puritans) to have been undone by it, and was like to make
so little of it, as to the Ends of Discipline (all men being compelled by the
Presentiments to receive the Sacrament) that I never knew one (to my best
remembrance) in 25 years time that I lived under the Bishops, that was kept
from the Sacrament, except a Puritan that scrupled to take it kneeling. And
what was this to true Church Government?

Sect. 17. Object. But either they did it according to the established Law, or
not: If they did, the fault was in the Law, and not in them: If they did
transgress the Law, then the fault was in men's abuse, and the Law and Order
cannot be blamed. Answ. A sad case to poor ignorant miserable souls, that they
must be left in obstinacy, and deprived of Gods means of Reformation without
Remedy, because either the Law or Judges must be excused. The Judges are the
mouth of the Law to us: that is Law in the issue to us which they unanimously
call Law. If the fault were in the Law, it was time it should be altered: if it
was in the Bishops universally, it was time they should be altered. Let us but
have a Remedy, and enjoy Gods Ordinances, which he that is the Churches Head
and King has appointed for our benefit, and we have done.

Sect. 18. Object. But may not Bishops when they Ordain, Delegate what measure
of Ministerial Power they please? and if you never received more, why should
you use it?] Answ. A poor relief to the forsaken Church: Deprive her of
Government, and then tell us that we had no power! Is the Power desirable to
us, if the Ordinance were not desirable to the Church? 2. What Power have
Bishops, and whence did they receive it, to change the Office of Christ's
institution, or his Apostles? If so, they may turn the three Orders (which the
Papists themselves say the Pope cannot alter) into as many more. Then they may
create an Office for Baptizing only, and another for the Lords Supper only, and
another for praying only, and so of the rest; which is worse then making
Lay Elders, or then taking away the Cup in the Sacrament. Has Christ by his
Spirit instituted Church-offices, and are they now at the Bishops power to
transform them? 3. If they had power to distribute the work in the exercise,
part to one, and part to another, yet they have no power to deprive the
particular Churches of the whole or any part; but one or more must do it, and
the Office must be the same, and the power exercised to the edification, and
not the confusion and corruption of the Church.

Sect. 19. Object. But the Keys were given only to the Apostles, and not to the
seventy Disciples nor to Presbyters.] Answ. 1. If the seventy were only
Disciples, and not Church Officers, the Ancients and the English Bishops have
been much mistaken, that have so much urged it, that Presbyters succeed them as
Bishops do the Apostles: But if they be Officers, then they have the Keys. 2.
The Episcopal Divines, even the Papists, commonly confess that part of the Keys
are given to the Presbyters: and Christ gave them together. 3. Were they given
only to Apostles for themselves, or to convey to others? If to themselves only,
then no one has them now. If to convey to others, then either to Apostles only
as their Successors (but there is none such) or to Patriarchs or Primates, or
Metropolitans, or Archbishops only: (but none of this will please the Bishops)
or to Bishops only; which I grant, taking Bishops in the Scripture sense. And I
desire to see it proved, that it was not a presumptuous Innovation in them
whosoever they were, that after the days of the Apostles Ordained a new sort of
Presbyters in the Church that should have no power of the Keys. 4. They that
must use the Keys, must have Power to use them. But Parish Bishops must use
them (as the nature and necessity of the work does prove:) Therefore Parish
Bishops must have the Power. If only one man in a Diocese of an hundred or two
hundred Churches shall have the power of the Keys, we may know after all the
talk of Discipline, what Discipline to expect.

Sect. 20. Object. Why blame you Lay-chancellors, Registers, Proctors, etc.
when you set up Lay Elders? we are as well able to call Chancellors
Ecclesiastical, as you can call Lay Elders so.] Answ. I never pleaded for
Lay Elders: If other men err, will it justify your error? But I must tell
you, an unordained man in a single Parish, having power only to assist the
Pastor in Government, is far unlike a Lay-Court to Govern all the Churches of a
Diocese.

Sect. 21. Object. Do not your Arguments against Bishops for excluding
Discipline, make as much for the casting out of Ministers, of whom you complain
in your Reformed Pastor for neglect of Discipline?] Ans. 1. The Nature of
Prelacy as set up in England, ^here only one man had the Government of so many
Churches, unavoidably excludes it, if the best men were Bishops (till it be
otherwise formed:) But the nature of a Parochial Episcopacy is fitted to
promote it. 2. Those Presbyters that I blamed for neglecting the higher acts of
Discipline, do yet keep away more profane persons from the Lords Supper in
some one Church, then ever I knew kept away in all places under the Prelates.
3. If Ministers sinfully neglect Discipline, yet as Preachers and Guides, in
public worship, etc. they are of unspeakable need and value to the Church: But
few Bishops of England preached ordinarily: And 4. We are desirous that Bishops
shall continue as Preachers, but not as Diocesan excluders of Parochial
Church Discipline.

Sect. 22. Object. By pretending to agree with them that say there were no
Presbyters in Scripture times, you would put down Presbyters, and then the
Government of the Church will be such as you blame. Ans. It is the thing I
plead for, that every Church may have such Bishops as they had in the Apostles
days, and not mere (new devised Presbyters) that are of another Office and
Order.

Sect. 23. Object. Bishops had Deacons to attend them in the Scripture times,
though not Presbyters; therefore it follows not that Bishops had then but One
Congregation. Answ. Yes beyond doubt: For Deacons could not, and did not
perform the Pastoral part in the whole public worship of any stated Churches.
They did not preach (as Deacons) and pray and praise God in the public
Assemblies, and administer the Sacraments: It Is not affirmed by them that are
against us: therefore there were no more Churches then Bishops.

Sect. 24. Object. But what does your Arguing make against the other Episcopal
Divines that are not of the opinion that there were no mere Presbyters in
Scripture times? Answ. 1. Other Arguments here are as much against them, though
this be not (if they maintain that sort of Episcopacy which I oppose.) 2. They
also confess the smalness of Churches in Scripture times: (as I have showed out
of Bishop Downam;) and that is it that I plead for.

Sect. 25. Object. But if you would have all reduced to the state that de facto
the Church Government was in in Scripture times, you would have (as but one
Church to a Bishop, so) but One Bishop to a Church; as Dr. H. Dissert. 4 c. 19,
20, 21, 22. has proved copiously, that is, that Scripture mentions no
assistant Presbyters with the Bishop: and would that please you, that think a
single Congregation should have a Presbytery? You should rather as he teaches
you, c. 21. p. 237. be thankful to Ignatius, and acknowledge the dignity of
your Office, ab ^o primario defensore astrui and propugnari.] Answ. As we make
no doubt from plain Scripture to prove, (and have proved it) that single
Churches had then many Presbyters (some of them at least:) So having the
greatest part of Fathers and Episcopal Divines of our mind herein, (even
Epiphanius himself) we need not be very solicitous about the point of Testimony
o^ Authority. 2. We had rather of the two have but one Pastor to a
Congregation, then one to a hundred or two hundred Congregations, having a
Presbyter under him in each, authorized only to a part of the work. 3. Either
the distinct Office of the Presbyters is of Divine Institution, to be continued
in the Church, or not. If not, Bishops or some body it seems may put down the
Office. If it be, then it seems all Gods Universal standing Laws (even for the
species of Church Officers) are not contained in Scripture. And if not in
Scripture, where then? If in the Fathers, 1. How shall we know which are they,
and worthy of that name and honor? 2. And what shall we do to reconcile their
contradictions? 3. And what number of them must go to be the true witnesses of
a Divine Law? 4. And by what note may we know what points so to receive from
them, and what not?

But if it be from Councils that we must have the rest of the Laws of God (not
contained in the Scripture.) 1. Is it from all or some only? If from all, what
a case are we in, as obliged to receive Contradictions and Heresies? If from
some only, which are they, and how known, and why they rather then the rest?
Why not the second of Ephesus as well as the first at Constantinople. But this
I shall not now further prosecute, unless I were dealing with the Papists (to
whom have said more of it, in another writing.)

4. Ignatius his Presbyters were not men of another Office, nor yet set over
many Churches that had all but one Bishop: But they were all in the same
Churches with the Bishop, and of the same Office, only subject to his
moderation or presidency for Unity and Order sake: and this we strive not
against, if limited by the general Rules of Scripture.

Sect. 26. Object. Those that you have to deal with say not, that [There were
no Presbyters in the Apostles days, but only that in the Apostles writings, the
word [Bishops] always signifies Bishops, and the word Elders either never or
but rarely Presbyters. But it is possible for them to be in the time of those
writings that are not mentioned in those writings; and the Apostles times were
larger then their writings, as you are told Vind. against the Land. Minist. p.
106.] Ans. 1. The words I cited (from Annot. in Act. 11.) faithfully, which you
may peruse: which say that there is no evidence that in Scripture times any of
the second Order were instituted.] So that it is not Scripture writings only,
but Scripture times that is spoken of. And 2. If there be no evidence of it, the
Church cannot believe it or affirm it; for it judges not of unrevealed things;
and therefore to us it is no Institution that has no evidence. 3. The Apostles
were all dead save John before the end of Scripture times: So that they must be
instituted by John only: And John dyed the next year after Scripture times, as
the chief Chronologers judge: For as he wrote his Apocalypse about the 14th
year of Domitian, so his Gospel the year before Trajan, and dyed the next year,
being after the commoner reckoning, An. D. 98. and some think more. And what
likelihood, or proof at least, that John did institute them the year that he
dyed? when the same men tell us of his excursion into Asia to plant Elders
(before that year, it is like.) 4. And if they were not instituted in Scripture
time, then no testimony from Antiquity c^n prove them then instituted. But
indeed if we had such testimony and nothing of it in the Scripture it self, we
should take it as little to our purpose. For 5. does Ant^quity say that the
Institution was Divine, of Universal obligation to the Church, or only that it
was but a prudential limitation of the exercise of the same Office (the like I
demand of other like Testimonies in case of Diocesses, Metropolitans, etc.) If
only the later, it binds us not, but proves only the licet, and not the
oportet at least, as to all the Church. And then every Country that finds
cause, may set up another kind of government: ^ut if it be the former that is
asserted as from antiquity, then the Scripture contains not all Gods
Universal Laws; Which who ever affirms, must go to Fathers or Councils
instead of Scripture to day, and to the infallibility of the Pope, or a
Prophetical Inspiration to morrow, and next --

Sect. 27. Once more to them that yet will maintain that the Apostles modelled
the Ecclesiastical form to the Civil, and that as a Law to the whole Church, we
take it as their Concession, that then we ow no more obedience to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, then to the Civil Magistrate of Canterbury, (and
especially London sure is exempted from his superiority.) And I yet know not
that any Civil Magistrate of Canterbury, or York, or London, or Worcester, has
any government in this Country, except the Sovereign Rulers at Westminster be
meant. And I hope our Itinerant course of Judges, will prove the right (to the
Objectors) of Itinerant Apostolical Overseers of the Churches, for settlement
at least.

Sect. 28. Object. But Parishes being not divided till long after the Apostles
days, there might be then no ordinary Assemblies but in the City; and yet the
whole Territory adjacent be the Diocese.] Answ. Were there in the Territories
persons enough to make many Assemblies, or only so few as might travel to, and
join with the City Assembly? If the latter, it is it that I assert, as usual in
the first age at least; If the former, then either all those in the Territories
met for public Worship and Communion, or not: If not, they sinned against the
Law of God that obliged them thereto as well as Citizens: If they did, then
they must have either Bishop or Presbyter with them, for the due performance of
that worship.

Sect. 29. If any think all these straggling objections and advertisements here
unseasonable, I render him this true account of them: This first Disputation
was prepared only for our ordinarily Monthly Exercises here, and so written
long ago, before the London Ministers Book, or the Answer to it, and the rest
that have followed, and therefore could not take notice of much that has since
passed, and withal was not intended for public view: But when I saw s^ many of
the Gentry and Commonalty withdraw from the public worship, and the ignorant
and profane had learnt to refel their Pastors Instructions, by calling him a
Layman, and saw how the new separation threatened the perdition of multitudes of
the people, and especially was awakened by the Calls of Ministers in other
Countries that were far more troubled with them then we, I thought meet to
prefix this to the Second Disputation, which was it that was desired of me: and
therefore to take notice of those things so late.

Sect. 30. And the common experience tells you that it is not a few that go the
way that lately was singular even among the Episcopal; to which I may add the
Testimony in Vindic. against the London Ministers, p. 104. [And though I might
truly say that for those more minute considerations or conjectures, wherein
this Doctor differs from some others -- he has the suffrages of many of the
Learned men of this Church at this day (and as far as he knows, of all that
embrace the same cause with him) etc. -- ]

Sect. 31. And this at least I may expect from the Reader, that if he think we
argue weakly, he will confess that we argue not for worldly greatness, but go
against our carnal interest. We contend against Bishoprics of the English
mode, as desiring no such Wealth or Honor. Some of us have as good
opportunities to have a part in that kind of Greatness if it were again
introduced, as they: But I am not able alone for a Parish charge, and am loath
to have more on my hands, and my accounts; which is I suppose the mind of my
Brethren also.

Sect. 32. One more Advertisement I owe the Reader, that this being written so
long since I was made confident by Bishop Usher, de Primordiis Eccl. Brit. that
Ireland was the Ancient Scotia where Palladius, etc. planted the Gospel, which
page 97. I have signified. But I should wrong Scotland, if I should not tell
thee, that I have received such Arguments to the contrary since then, from the
Right Honorable, and my highly valued friend, the Earl of Lawderdail, that I
am forced to suspend my judgment in that point, till I have leisure better to
study the point, being yet unable to answer the said arguments.

Whether it be Necessary or Profitable to the right order or the Peace of the
Churches of England that we restore the extruded Episcopacy?
IN this Question here are these three things supposed. 1. That there are yet
particular Churches of Christ in England: and therefore those that conclude
that there has been no Church among us since the Diocesan Bishops were laid
by, are none o^ them that we are now disputing with: and indeed we think so
gross a conceit unworthy of a Confutation.

2. It is supposed that both the right Order and the Peace of these Churches
are matters highly to be valued. 3. And also that its our duty for the
obtaining of it, to do that which is necessary or profitable thereto. But the
doubt is* Whether the Episcopacy in question be necessary or profitable thereto?

For the decision whereof I shall briefly tell you my Judgment, in these
propositions, whereof the two first are but preparatory.

Proposition 1. A Peace with the Divines of the Episcopal judgment, is much to
be desired and earnestly to be endeavored.

Prop. 2. A certain Episcopacy may be yielded to, for the Peace (if not for the
right order) of the Church.

Prop. 3. The Diocesan Episcopacy which was lately in England, and is now laid
by, may not lawfully be reassumed or readmitted, as a means for the right
Order or Peace of the Church.

1. For the first of these, I think it easy to prove that we ought to seek an
Agreement in the Episcopal controversy, with those that differ from us in that
point.

For, 1. They are brethren, of the same faith with us, whom we are bound to
love and honor, and therefore to use all just means for peace with them. If we
must as much as in us lies, if possible, live peaceably with all men, Romans
12.18. much more with Brethren of the same family and profession.

2. They are very many; and the far greatest (though not the purest) part of
the Church is of their mind: All the Greek Church, and the Ethiopian Church,
and the Jacobites, Armenians, and all other parties without the verge of the
Reformation from Popery here in the West, that ever I read or heard of, are all
of that way, besides all the Roman Church: And, though I know that much
ignorance, and imperfection, if not superstition and fouler errors may be
justly charged on the Greek, Ethiopian, etc. Churches, as well as on Rome
(though not Popery it self) yet I think there is scarce a good Christian that
is not unwilling to cast off so great a part of the Church of Christ, as these
are Indeed, he that dares so far despise all the Churches of Christ on earth
except these few that are happily reformed, as to think that it is no duty of
ours* to seek unity and peace with them, by all just means, I think is no meet
person for us to dispute with. It is the heinous sin of Rome, to despise and
unchurch Greeks, Ethiopians, and all save themselves, which I hope Protestants
will never imitate, who have justly condemned them so deeply for it. Let the
Donatists shut up the Church of Christ in Afr^ca, and call the rest Cecilians;
and let the Papists reduce it to the subscribers to their Trent confession, or
to them only that believe in the Popes universal Headship and Government, and
call all others Heretics: yet will all true Catholics imitate Augustine and
the Councils that were called against the Donatists, who still described the
Catholic Church to be that which was dispersed over the world, having begun at
Jerusalem: and though to Gods praise we dare rejoycingly affirm, that the most
illustrious and the soundest part of it is in Europe, among the Reformed, yet
dare we not say that it is all or the greatest part here; Nay we confess that
we are but a small part of Christ's Church. And therefore common sobriety may
tell us, that the Peace of so great a part of Christ's Church as is in all the
rest of the world, is highly to be valued, and sought with all our might, in
righteousness.

Moreover, even among the reformed Churches there are many for some Episcopacy
or Superintendency: As the Church of England and Ireland was lately for
Diocesan Episcopacy: so the Churches in Denmark, Sweden, Saxionie, and other
parts of Germany, Transylvania, etc. are for a lower sort of Episcopacy, called
Superintendency among them.

3. And the quality of many of the Divines of that way, is such as bespeaks our
greatest reverence to them, and should move us to thirst after Unity and
Reconciliation with them. Many of them are men of eminent Learning and
Godliness, and sound in the faith.

I know that it is commonly objected, that they are generally ungodly men that
are that way; and though some of them are Learned men, yet they are all, or
almost all, of careless and carnal lives, or merely formal and superstitious,
and therefore their Communion is not much to be desired.

To which I answer. 1. The plain undeniable truth is that it was so here with
the most of them in the Bishops days, where ever I was acquainted: There were
more Ministers in many places that would have scorned, threatened or troubled a
man for a godly diligent life, then that would lead him that way by a good
example. We must speak that truth that cannot be hid, whoever be displeased. To
this day, too many of that way are careless and scandalous. But then Consider
withal, 2. That it is but too common for the common sort even of Ministers as
well as people, to be careless and bad, what ever opinions they are of:
Especially if the times do discountenance practical Religiousness, the greater
part are likely to follow the times, being that way also so strongly inclined
by nature. 3. Consider also that we have had, and have men of that Judgment
that have been excellent Instruments of the Churches good, and so eminent for
Gods graces and gifts, that their names will be precious whilst Christ has in
England a Reformed Church: were there in all England but one such man
dissenting from us, as Hooper, Farrar, Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, Jewel, Abbot,
Davenant, Usher, Hall, etc. what sober Godly man would not be exceeding
solicitous for a reconciliation? I am sure (besides the godliness of their
lives, and painful preaching) One Jewel, One Usher, One Davenant, has done so
much against the Roman Usurpers, as they will never well claw it off them to
the last.

Moreover who knows not that most of the Godly able Ministers of England
since the Reformation, did judge Episcopacy some of them Lawful, and some of
them most fit (for the Non-conformists were but few:) and that even before this
late trouble and war, the most, even almost all, of those that were of the late
Assembly at Westminster, and most through the land, did subscribe and conform
to Episcopal Government, as a thing not contrary to the word of God: so that it
is evident that it is very consistent with a Godly life to judge Episcopacy
lawful and fit; or else we should not have had so many hundred learned and
godly men of that mind.

And I am not altogether unapt to believe, that many of them yet are so far
reconcilable to it (moderated,) that if it were again established, they would
submit to it as they did: For I hear but of few that have made any recantation
of their former conformity; but contrarily have known diverse of them profess a
reconcilableness as aforesaid, as Mr. Gataker does in one of his books express
his own Judgment.

If I have proved this preparatory proposition (which I think needs but little
proof,) then have I also proved 1. That they have sinned much who have hitherto
forborne the use of any means for Peace, which was in their power. 2. And that
we are bound our selves to desire and seek after a peace with such men: and
that we cannot discharge a good conscience while we neglect such means as is
within our reach, and fit for us to use.

The second Proposition is, that [ A Certain Episcopacy may be yielded to, for
the peace, if not also for the right order of the Church] In the declaration of
my judgment concerning this, I make no doubt but I shall displease both sides;
the one for yielding so much; the other for yielding no more. But jacta est
alea: I live not upon men's favor, nor the air of their applause: That truth
which displeases at present, may tend to peace, and produce it at the last,
when the angry humor is allayed, or at least, when the angry age is gone.

For the clearer determination of this and the main Question following it is
necessary that I here stay 1. To open the nature of Church Government in
general: 2. To open the sense of the word [ Episcopacy] and the several sorts
of Bishops. And then 3. I shall tell you what sort of Episcopacy it is that I
could yield to for the Churches peace.

1. I must confess I think that the greatest part of the controversy by far,
is in this first question, of the nature of Ecclesiastical Government, strictly
so called, which is only in the hands of Christ's Ministers, Bishops or
whomsoever, commonly called, Clergy men. And concerning this (having written my
thoughts more largely el^ewhere) I shall now lay down these few Propositions.

Prop. 1. All this power Ecclesiastical is Jure divino, given from God himself;
and that either immediately, or by the mediation only of the Ap^stles. I mean
as to the determination in specie, what it shall be, and the constitution of
that order and power in the Church, though perhaps some other causes, at least
Of the difference between Election and Ordination; and that neither gives the
Ius or Power, but Christ only. See Gro^ius de Imperio Sum. Potest. c. 10. p.
269, 270.
sine quibus non may intervene for the reception of this power by an individual
person. These therefore that plead only the Laws of the Land, or only Canons of
former Bishops for their standing or authority, do say nothing that as to our
controversy is regardable. Wh^t men do, they may undo, if there be reason for
it, and if it depend on their authority, we must submit to their reason.

Prop. 2. This Divine Constitution of the Species of Church Power and
Government, is to be found wholly in the written word of God, called the holy
Scriptures. This we are agreed on against the Papists, who would supply the
supposed defects of Scripture by their unwritten Traditions, which they call
the other part of Gods word. Church Canons and Laws of men may determine of
some modes and circumstances for the better execution of the Laws of God, by
the People whom they are over: but they cannot make new Church Ordinances or
Governments, nor convey a Power which God the fountain of Power did not ordain
and convey: nor can they give what they themselves had not. The Church-office
and Authority therefore that is not proved from the Holy Scripture, is to be
taken as the fruit of humane arrogance and presumption. Yet I deny not but that
we may find much in Antiquity, in Fathers and Councils about matters of fact to
help us to understand some Scriptures, and so to discern the matter of right.

Prop. 3. The Scripture does not Contradict, but suppose and confirm the light
of Nature; nor does it impose upon any man Natural impossibilities, nor
constitute offices which cannot be executed, or which would destroy that end to
which they are supposed to be Constituted.

Prop. 4. Ecclesiastical Authority comprehends not the power of the sword,
nor any power of using violence to men's bodies, or laying mulcts or
confiscations on their estates. The Ecclesiastical Power which Christ ordained,
was exercised for the first three hundred years without any touching of men's
bodies or purses, before there were any Christian Princes.

Prop. 5. Magistrates are not eo nomine obliged to punish men because they are
Excommunicated (whether upon every just Excommunication they should punish, I
will not now dispute) but they are bound to know that their penalties be
deserved, before they inflict them; and therefore must themselves take
Cognizance of the Cause, and as rational agents, understand before they act;
and not blindly follow the Judgments of the Bishops, as if they were but as
Executioners where the Bishops are Judges.

Prop. 6. I comprehend in the word Directive all that is after expressed in the
following Propositions.
The Power of the highest Church Governors is but an Authority of Directing in
the way to salvation: It is but Directive: but then there is no room for the
common Objection, that [ then it is no greater then any other man may perform;]
for it is one thing to Direct Occasionally from Charity, and another thing to
Direct by Authority in a standing office, as purposely appointed hereunto. Quae
ante Imperatores Christianos in Synodis conscripta sunt ad ordinem aut ornatum
facientia, Leges non vocantur sed Canones, haben^que aut solam Concilii vim, ut
in his quae singulos magis specta^^ quam universos, aut obligant per modum
pacti volentes and nolentes etiam pauciores ex necessitate determinationis, ac
proinde ex lege naturali, non ex humano aliquo Imperio. Grotius de Imperio page
209, 210. Lege and cap. 9. per totum.
The Power of Church-Governors is but of the same nature as is the Power of a
Physician over his Patients, or of a Schoolmaster over his Scholars,
supposing he had not the power of the rod or actual force, but such a power as
the Professors of Philosophy or other sciences had in their several schools
upon the adult (nor all so great neither; because the Laws by which we must
rule, are made to our hands, as to the substantials.) Hence therefore it is
plain, that as we can bind or force no man to believe us, or to understand the
truth, and to be Christians, but by the power of demonstrated Evidence, and by
the light which we let in (through Gods grace) into their Consciences, so
neither can we cause any to execute our sentences against offenders further
than by light we convince them that it is their duty: so that if all the
Bishops or Presbyteries in the land should judge such or such an opinion to be
heresy, and should Excommunicate those that own it as heretics, in this case
if the Church do believe as the Pastors believe, they will consent and avoid
the Excommunicate person; but if they take it to be Gods truth which the
Pastors call heresy, they will not take themselves bound by that sentence to
avoid him: nor will the Offender himself any further be sensible of a penalty
in the sentence, then he shall be convinced that he has erred; and if the
Church avoid him, he will justify himself, and judge that they do it
wrongfully, and will glory in his suffering: so that it is on the Conscience
that Church-Governors can work; and no otherwise on the outward man, but
mediante Conscientia.

Prop. 7. The ground of this is partly because no Church Governors can bind any
man contrary to Gods word: Clave errante, and ita apparente, if the people know
that he erreth, they are not to obey him against God. Yet in the bare
inconvenient determination of some Circumstantials, by which the duty is not
destroyed, but less conveniently performed, the people are bound to obey their
Governors, because it is not against Gods determination, and because he erreth
but in an undetermined point, of which God appointed him to be the orderly
determiner. But if God have once determined, no man's contrary determination can
oblige; nor yet if they go beyond the sphere of their own work, and determine
of an aliene subject, which God did never commit to their determination: else a
Minister, or Bishop, might oblige every Tailor how to cut his garment, and
every Sho^-maker how to cut his shoe, so that they should sin if they did
disobey, which is ridiculous to imagine: and if they go about to introduce new
stated Ordinances or Symbols in the Church which they have nothing to do with,
or in any other work shall assume to themselves a power which God never gave
them, it does no more oblige then in the former case.

Prop. 8. Another reason of the sixth Proposition, is, because The People have
a Judgment of discerning, whether the Governors do go according to Gods word
or not: else they should be led blindfold, and be obliged by God to go against
Gods word, whenever their Governors shall go against it. It is not bruits or
Infants, but rational men that we must rule.

Prop. 9. The three things which Church power does consist in, are (in
conformity to the three parts of Christ's own office) 1. About matter of Faith,
2. About matter of Worship, 3. About matter of Practice in other cases.

1. Church-Governors about Doctrine or Matters of Faith, are the Peoples
Teachers, but cannot oblige them to Err, or to believe any thing against God,
nor make that to be truth or error that is not so before.

2. In matter of Worship, Church-guides are as Gods Priests, and are to go
before the people, and stand between God and them, and present their prayers
and praises to God, and administer his holy mysteries, and bless them in his
name.

3. The Commanding Power of Pastors is in two things: 1. In Commanding them in
the name of Christ to obey the Laws which he has made them already. And this
is the principal. 2. To give them new Directions of our own, which as is said,
1. Must not be against Gods Directions. 2. Nor about any matter which is not
the object of our own office, but is without the verge of it. 3. But it is only
in the making of under laws, for the better execution of the laws of Christ;
and those under-laws must be only the Determination of Ci^cumstances about Gods
service which Scripture has made necessary in genere, but left to the
Governors determination in specie; and they are such as are al^erable in
several ages, countries, etc. so that it had been unfit for Christ to have
determined them in his word, because his word is an u^iversal Law for all ages
and countries; and these Circumstances will not bear an universal
determination: else why could not Christ have done it? nay how is his Law
perfect else that does omit it? For example, God has commanded us to read the
word, preach, hear, sing, which must necessarily be done in some time, place,
gesture, number of words, etc. But he has not commanded us on what day of the
week our Lecture shall be, or at what hour of the day, nor what Chapter I shall
read, nor how many at once, nor what Text I shall preach on, nor what Psalm I
shall sing, nor in what words I shall pray, whether imposed by others, or not,
whether with a book, or foreconce^ved form, or not; nor whether I shall read
with spectacles or without, or whether I shall discern how the time p^sseth by
an hourglass, or by the clock, or by conjecture without them. These therefore
and other such like, must humane Prudence determine of. But with these Cautions.

1. These are mostly matters that require a various determination in several
places according to the great variety of Circumstances; and therefore it is for
the most part fitter for the particular Pastor of that Church, who is upon the
place, and sees the case, to determine them pro re nata, That Synods are not
absolutely necessary (and he thinks not of Scripture Institution but Natural
direction) see Grot. d^ Imperio Cap 7. per totum.
then for Synods, or distant Prelates, to do it by general Laws or Canons
binding all. 2. Though upon a small misdetermination of such a Circumstance*
the people must obey, yet if it be so grossly misdetermined as to destroy the
duty it self Circumstantiated, or to be notoriously against the end which it is
pretended for, then they are not to obey it. As if a Pastor would appoint the
People to hear in the night only, or at such unseasonable times that they
cannot come, or in many the like cases.

Note also tha^ it is one thing to prescribe these matters in a direct
Regimental Respect, and that belongs to him upon the Place* and its another
thing to prescribe them for common Union or Con^ord among many Churches, and
that belongs to a Synod, (of which a^on.)

And it is most certain by sad experience, that scarce any thing has broken
the uni^y and peace of the Church more, than unnecessary determinations
pretended to be for its ^nity and peace. Could men have been content to have
made Gods Laws the center and touchstone of the Churches Unity, all had been
well: but when they must make Canons for this Vesture, and that Gesture, and
the other Ceremony, and determine in what words all men shall pray, and how
many words he shall say, or how long he shall be, and so make standing Laws
upon mutable circumstances, and this without any necessity at all, but merely
to domineer, as if they had been themselves ordained and entrusted with Gods
worship and men's souls; such sottish Presbyters, that know not how to speak or
do any thing but as it is prescribed them, nor how to carry themselves soberly
or reverendly without being obliged which way to bow, and when and how often,
with the like. Unnecessary things made Necessary have destroyed the Churches
Peace; and so blind are the Authors of it, that yet they will not see their
error, though the cries, and groans, and blood of the Churches have proclaimed
it so long. The Church History of these one thousand and three hundred years
at least does tell us that it is the Church Governors by their too much
business and overdoing in such ways, even by too bold and busy determinations
about doctrines or Ceremonies, that have broken all in pieces and caused that
confusion, dissension and seemingly remediless divisions in the Church.

Prop. 10. In cases which are beyond the present understanding of the people,
they are bound as Learners, to submit to the judgment of their Guides: If they
see no sufficient cause, either in the matt^r to cause them to suspect that
their Teachers are mistaken, or in their Teachers to cause them to suspect them
to be seducers, they owe them ^o much credit and respect as their Guides, as to
believe them fide humana, or to suppose that they are likelier to be in the
righ^ then themselves; and therefore in matters of Doctrine not to contradict
them, but to submit to learn of them, till by learning they come to that
ripeness of understanding, as to be capable of discerning the errors of their
Guides, and so to contradict them groundedly, if indeed they err: so also i^
the order of variable ^ircumstantials about the service of God, though the
people ought not to obey their Governors, if under tha^ pretense they should
command them things sinful; yet when they are not able to see any certain evil
in the thing commanded, nor so strong a probability of evil as should cause
them to suspend obedience while they take better advice, in such a case it is
their Duty to obey the guides of the Church. For they are certain that they are
commanded to obey them that rule over them, and watch for their souls, Heb.
13.17. but they are not certain that in such a case it is an evil that is
prescribed by them, nor is it supposed to be much probable; therefore a certain
evil of disobedience must be avoided before an uncertain and improbable evil.
This the very office of Church Governors does plainly import.

Object. Then if the Minister mistake, all the people that understand not the
grounds of the matter, must err for company. Answ. If by Must, you speak of
their Duty, I deny the consequence: For their Duty is to be men of
understanding, and to see the truth in its own evidence, and so not to err; But
if by Must, you only express a Necessity of Infirmity which they have sinfully
contracted themselves, then I yield all: but I say, that it is a greater sin to
disobey their guides, without known reason, and consequently never to obey them
in any case beyond the present knowledge of the people, then it is to follow
them fide humana in such mistakes as we have no sufficient means at present to
discover. For the former will overthrow almost all Ministration and
Church Government.

Obj. Then it is no sin for an Ignorant man to Err with his Teacher for
company. Answ. I deny that Consequence: for it is his sin to be an Ignorant
man: and consequently to have any Error. But supposing him already Ignorant by
his own sinfulness, and that the Ministers of the Gospel come to heal it, we
may well say that it is his greater sin to disbelieve and disobey them without
apparent cause, then to mistake with them where he is not able to discern the
mistake.

Prop. 11. He that disobeyeth the Word of God in the mouth of a Minister or
Church governor, commits a double sin, in comparison of him that disobeyeth
the same word in the mouth of a private man: for bsides the sin which he first
commits, he breaks also the fifth Commandment, and despises Christ in his
Messenger: As a man that shall refuse to worship God, to use his name
reverently, etc. when a private man tells him that it is his duty, does sin
by that refusal: but if he refuse it when his own Father or Mother, or Minister
command him, he also breaks the fifth Commandment besides the rest. Ministerial
Authority therefore does aggravate the sins of persons that are disobedient.

Prop. 12. Yet for all this, one private man that evinceth out of Scripture a
sin or a duty contrary to the doctrine or commands of our Guides, must be
regarded in that before them; and the evidence and divine verity which he
brings must not be refused, because Church Governors are against it.
Otherwise we should make Gods Officers to be greater then himself; and the
Promulgators and Preachers of his Law, to have power to null or frustrate the
known Law which they should proclaim, and that the means is to be preferred
before the end, and when it destroys the end, and so cease it self to be a
means, which are things not to be imagined.

Prop. 13. Yet is it a great sin for any men lightly and rashly to suspect
their Teachers and Rulers, and much more Councils or the whole Church; and too
easily to credit the singular opinions of any private man or dissenting Pastor.
But we should be very suspicious of the private man rather, and of the singular
man; and therefore should search well, and see good reason for it before we
credit them, though we may not refuse any truth which they shall bring.

Prop. ^4. The uses of Synods or Councils, is not directly to be superior
Governors of particular Pastors and Churches; but it is Directly 1. For the
Information and Edification of the Pastor^ themselves by the collation of their
reasons and mutual advice; 2. For the Union and Communion of the said Pastors,
and of the particular Churches by them: that they may agree in one, and go hand
in hand to do Gods work; and so may avoid the crossing and hindering of each
other, and one may not receive those to communion without satisfaction, who are
excommunicated by others, and so that by this concord of Pastors they may be
strengthened to a more successful performance of their duties.

But then, these Direct ends of Synods being presupposed, Indidirectly they may
truly be said to be for Government; Because God in general having commanded us
to carry on his work as much as we can in Unity and Peace, and it being the
proper work of Councils to agree upon ways of Unity, it follows that for
Unity sake it becomes our duty to submit to their just Agreements; and so that
the forming of such Agreements or Canons, is consequently or Indirectly a part
of Government, though Directly it is but for Unity and Concord. Pastors in
Synods have the same power over their people as they have out: and therefore
what Canons they make justly for the Government of the people, as Pastors, are
Directly acts of Government: but as Assembled Pastors, and also as to the
Canons by which they bind each other, they act but by consent or contract in
order to concord and communion, and not by a superior Ruling power. So that
Synods as Synods are Directly only Gratia Vnitatis and Communionis, and not
Gratia Regiminis; but Indirectly and by consequence from the first use, they
are after a sort Regimental.

To conclude this about the Nature of Church Government, in the two former
similitudes it is somewhat apparent: For Christ calls himself the Physician
that comes to heal diseased souls: and his Church is also a School, and his
people are all Scholars or Disciples, and Ministers his Ushers or
under-Schoolmasters. Now the Physician may prescribe to his Patient the times,
the quantities of taking Medicines, and what diet to use, and what exercise in
order to his health; and also Physicians may make a College, and frequently
meet for mutual Edification, and Agree what Patients to meddle with, and what
not, and that they will not receive those Patients that run from one to another
to their own hurt, and that they will use none but such and such approved
Medicaments, with diverse the like circumstances. But yet no Physician can
either compel men to be their Patients; nor compel them (any otherwise then
by persuasion) to take their Medicines, when they are their Patients; nor can
they corporally punish them for any disobedience to their directions: But this
they may do: they may tell them first that if they will not be ruled, they
shall be without the Physicians help, and then their desease will certainly
kill them, or endanger them; and if the Patient continue so disobedient as to
frustrate the means of cure, the Physician may give him over, and be his
Physician no more; and this is the Power of a Church Guide, and this is his way
of punishing: Only he may further acquaint them with a Divine Commission, then
a Physician can do to his Patient, (at least gradually) and so press obedience
more effectually on their consciences.

So a Schoolmaster may make orders for the right circumstantiating of matters
in his School (supposing one Grammar enjoined by superior Authority,) and he
may order what Authors shall be read, and at what hours, and how much at a
time, and dispose of the seats and orders of his Scholars: But yet if he be a
Teacher of the Adult, according to our case, he cannot corporally punish those
that either refuse to be his Scholars, or to learn of him or obey him; but the
utmost that he can do is to put some disgrace upon them while they abide in his
School, and at last to shut them out. And then all the Schoolmasters in the
Country may well agree upon one Method of Teaching, and that they will not
receive those without satisfaction into one School, who are for obstinacy and
abuse cast out of another. But such Agreements or Meetings to that end do not
make either one Physician or Schoolmaster to be the Governor of the rest, or
above another, nor yet to have the charge of all the Scholars or Patients of
all the rest; so is it in the case of Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

HAving said this much concerning the Nature of Church Power and Government, I
come to the second thing promised, which is to enumerate the several sorts of
Bishops that are to fall under our consideration, that so we may next consider,
which of them are to be allowed of.

And here I suppose none will expect that I show them all these sorts
distinctly existent; it is enough that I manifest them to be in themselves
truly different.

1. And first the name [ Bishop] may be given to one, that is only the Overseer
or Ruler of the People of one particular Church, and not of any Church-rulers
themselves: That rules the flock, but not any Shepherds.

2. Those also may be called Bishops, who only are Ioint-Rulers with others of
a particular Church, and Presidents among the Elders of that one Church for
Unity and order sake, without assuming any Government over those Elders.

3. A third sort there are that are Presidents in such an Eldership, and withal
do take a Negative voice in the Government, so that nothing shall be done
without them in such affairs.

4 A fourth sort are the sole Pastors of such a particular Church that have
many Ministers under them as their Curates, who are properly to be Ruled by
them alone; so that the Pastor is the sole Ruler of that Church, and the
Curates do only teach and otherwise officiate in obedience to him: Which is the
case of diverse Ministers of great Parishes, that keep one Curate at their
Parish Church, and others at their Chapels. Yet its one thing to be the sole
Ruler of the Parish, and another to Rule the rest of the Elders.

5. A fifth sort of Bishops are those that are the fixed Presidents of a
Classis of the Pastors of many particular Churches; who hold the title durante
vita, or quam diu been se gesserint, though they are in use only while the
Classis sits, and have only a power of Moderating and ordering things, as
the foreman of a Jury, or a double or casting voice, as the Bailiff in
Elections in most Corporations, or as the President in some Colleges; but no
Negative voice, which makes a Power equal with all the rest.

6. A sixth sort are the heads of such Classes, having a Negative voice, so
that the rest can do nothing without them.

7. A seventh sort are the Presidents of Provinces or Diocesses containing many
Classes, which have only a Moderating Power, but no Negative voice.

8. An eighth sort are the Bishops of particular Cities with all the Rural
parts that are near it, containing many Churches; who assume the Power of
Governing that Diocese to themselves alone without the Presbyters of the
particular Churches, either not using them at all in matter of Government, or
only consulting with them in Assemblies, but giving them no determining votes.

9. A ninth sort is a Diocesan Bishop of such a City, who does not take upon
him the Rule of the people of the Diocese (beyond his own Congregation) but
only of the Pastors; supposing that the several Pastors or Presbyters have
power to Rule the several Congregations, but withal that they themselves are
to be ruled by him.

10. A tenth sort are such Bishops as assume the Government of these Diocesan
Bishops, which are common^y called Archbishops: to which also we adjoyn
Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, who assume the Power of Governing all
below them: as under the seventh rank I do also for brevity comprehend
Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, who assume no Governing Power over
other Bishops, but only the primam sedem, and the moderating Power in Councils.

11. The eleventh sort are unfixed general Pastors, called Ambulatory, or
Itinerant, that have a care of all the Churches, and are no further tied to any
particulars, then a^ the necessary defect of their natural capacity (seeing
they cannot be in all places at once,) or else the dispatch of that work which
they there meet with, before they go further, and some such occasion does
require: and being excluded out of no part of the Church, further then by
consent for the common good, they shall exclude themselves; such, I mean, as
the Apostles were.

12. The twelfth and last sort is the Judas that goes under the name of St.
Peter's Successor, and Christ's Vicar General, or the Vice-Christ, who claims a
power of Governing the whole universal Church as its Head, having Infallible
power of determi^ing Controversies, and matters of Faith, and whose Office must
enter the definition of the Catholic Church, and those that separate from him
are no Catholics, or true Christians. This is he that bears the bag, and
makes the twelfth sort.

3. I Come now in the third place to tell you, how many and which of these
sorts of Episcopacy I think may be admitted for the Peace of the Church: And,

1. Of the first sort ^here is no Controversy among us: few will deny the Ius
Divinum of Presbyters, as having the Rule of the people of a particular Church,
and the sole Rule, supposing that there is no other Pastor over that Church but
himself.

2. Of the second sort of Parish Bishops (who are mere Presidents over the
whole Eldership of that particular Church, and that continually, or fixedly.) I
think there is little question will be made by any, but they also will easily
be admitted.

3. The third sort ( A Parochial Bishop, having a Negative voice in a Parish
Eldership) I should be content to admit for the Peace of the Church: but
whether of it self it be desirable, I do not dispute: for if one Pastor even in
a Parish may have a Negative voice among two or three Curates, it will follow
that the thing it self is not unlawful, viz. for one Minister to have a
Negative vote among many, and so among an hundred, if there be nothing else to
forbid.

4. The fourth sort (for brevity) Comprehends two sorts. 1. Such Pastors of a
single Congregation, which having diverse Curates under them who are
Presbyters, do yet themselves take upon them the sole Government of the people
and of their Curates. I think this is intolerable, and indeed a Contradiction,
or a Nulling of the Presbyters office: for it is essential to the Presbyter of
any Church to be a Guide or Ruler of that Church: to put them out of all Rule
therefore is to Null, or suspend the exercise of their office; which cannot
statedly be done without destroying it. But then 2. if we speak of the second
sort, that is, such Pastors of particular Churches, as have Curats who are
Presb^ters, and they govern their Curates, but take the Curates as true
Governors of the flock, these as I dare not simply defend, (for if it be lawful
for one Pastor to Rule two or three in a Parish, then why not twenty or an
hundred, if nothing else forbid?) so I confess I should be ready to admit of
them, if it might attain the Churches peace: for I see many godly Divines that
are against Episcopacy, yet practice this; and will have no Curates in their
Parish, that will not be Ruled by them. And there is a certain Obedience which
Juniors and men of weaker parts, do owe to their Seniors and men of far greater
knowledge, though the Office be the same. And the Nature of the Government
being not Compulsive and Coercive, but only upon the voluntary, whose
judgments approve and their wills consent, its considerable how far even a
Ruler of others may voluntarily consent and so oblige himself to be Ruled by
another, that could not have any power to Rule him, without that consent of his
own, and voluntary Condescension.

5. As for the fifth sort, that is, [ The standing President of a Classis,
having no Negative voice] I should easily consent to them for order and Peace:
for they are no distinct Office, nor ass^me any Government over the Presbyters.
And the Presbyterian Churches do commonly use a President or Moderator pro
tempore. And doubtless if it be lawful for a Month, it may be lawful for a
year, or twenty years, or quam diu se been g^sserit: and how many years had we
one Moderator of our Assemblies of Divines at Westminster? and might have had
him so many years more if death had not cut him off? And usually God does not
so change his gifts, but that the same man who is the fittest this month or
year, is most likely also to be the fittest the next.

6. And for the sixth sort, viz. [A President of a Classes having a Negative
voice,] I confess I had rather be without him, and his power is not agreeable
to my Judgment, as a thing instituted by God, or fittest in it self. But yet I
should give way to it for the Peace of the Church, and if it might heal that
great breach that is between us, and the Ep^scopal Brethren, and the many
Churches that hold of that way; but with these Cautions and Limitations. 1.
That they shall have no Negative in any thing that is already a duty or a sin:
for an Angel from heaven cannot dispense with Gods Law. This I doubt not will
be yielded. 2. That none be forced to acknowledge this Negative vote in them,
but that they take it from those of the Presbyters that will freely give or
acknowledge it. For its a known thing that all Church Power does work only on
the Conscience, and therefore only prevail by procuring Consent, and cannot
compel. 3. Nor would I ever yield that any part of the Presbyters dissenting
should be taken as Schismatics, and cast out of Communion, or that it should
be made the matter of such a breach. This is it that has broken the Church,
that Bishops have thrust their Rule on men whether they would or not, and have
taken their Negative voice at least, if not their sole Jurisdiction, to be so
necessary, as if there could be no Church without it, or no man were to be
endured that did not acknowledge it; but he that denies their disputable Power
must be excommunicated with them that blaspheme God himself. And as the Pope
will have the acknowledgement of his Power to be inseparable from a member of
the Catholic Church, and cast out all that deny it, so such Bishops take the
acknowledgement of their Jurisdiction to be as inseparable from a member of a
particular Church, and consequently (as they suppose) of the universal: and so
to deny them shall cut men off, as if they denied Christ. This savoureth not of
the humility that Christ taught his followers 4. Nor would I have any forced to
declare whether they only submit for Peace, or consent in approbation: nor
whether they take the Bishops Negative vote to be by Divine Institution, and so
Necessary, or by the Presbyters voluntary consent and contract, as having power
in several cases to suspend the exercise of their own just authority, when the
suspension of it tends to a public Good. No duty is at all times a duty. If
a man be to be ordained by a Presbytery, it is not a flat duty to do it at that
time when the President is absent, except in case of flat necessity; why may
not the rest of the Presbyters then, if they see it conducible to the good of
the Church [resolve never to ordain (except in case of such Necessity,) but
when the President is there, and is one therein;] which is indeed to permit his
exercise of a Negative vote, without professing it to be his right by any
Institution? It is lawful to ordain, when the President is present; it is
lawful (out of cases of Necessity) to forbear when he is absent: according
therefore to the Presbyterian principles, we may resolve to give him de facto a
Negative voice, that is, not to ordain without him, but in Necessity: and
according to the Episcopal principles, we must thus do: for this point of
Ordination is the chief thing they stand on. Now if this be all the difference,
why should not our May be, yield to their, Must be, if the Peace of the Church
be found to lie upon it. But 5. I would have this Caution too, that the
Magistrate should not annex his sword to the Bishops censure, without very
clear reason: but let him make the best of his pure spiritual Authority that he
can: we should have kept peace with Bishops better, if they had not come armed,
and if the Magistrates had not become their Executioners.

7. As to the seventh sort, viz. [A President of a Province fixed, without any
Negative voice] I should easily admit of him, not only for Peace, but as
orderly and convenient, that there might be some one to give notice of all
Assemblies, and the Decrees to each member, and for many other mattters of
order: this is practiced in the Province of London pro tempore, and in the
other Presbyterian Churches. And as I said before in the like case, I see not
why it may not be lawful to have a President quam diu se been gesserit, as well
for a month, or a year, or seven years, as in our late Assembly two
successively were more, (as I remember) so that this kind of Diocesan or
Provincial Bishop, I think may well be yielded to for the Churches Order and
Peace.

8. As to the eighth sort of Bishops, viz. [The Diocesan who assumeth the sole
Government of many Parish Churches both Presbyters and People] as ten, or
twelve, or twenty or more, as they used to do, even a whole Diocese, I take
them to be intolerable, and destructive to the Peace and happiness of the
Church, and therefore not to be admitted under pretense of Order or Peace, if
we can hinder them. But of these we must speak more when we come to the main
Question.

9. As for the ninth sort of Bishops, viz. [ A Diocesan Ruling all the
Presby^ers, but leaving the Presbyters to Rule the People] and consequently
taking to himself the sole or chief Power of Ordination, but leaving Censures
and Absolution to them, except in case of Appeal to himself; I must needs say
that this sort of Episcopacy is very ancient, and has been for many ages of
very common reception, through a great part of the Church; but I must also say
that I can see as yet no Divine institution of such a Bishop taken for a fixed
limited officer, and not the same that we shall mention in the eleventh place.
But how far men's voluntary submission to such, and consent to be ruled by them,
may authorize them, I have no mind to dispute. Only this I will say, that
though I allow not in my judgment this sort of Episcopacy, yet I think it
incomparably more tolereable than the eighth sort, which takes the whole
Government of the people from the Presbyters to themselves; And if I lived in a
place where this ^overnment were established, and managed for God, I would
submit thereto* and live peaceably under it and do nothing to the disturbance,
disgrace or discouragement of it. My reasons I Will not stay to produce.

10. As for the ten^h sort of Bishops, viz. Archbishops, Metropolitans,
Primates and Patriarchs, having not only the moderation of Synods, but also
either the sole Government of all the Clergy, and chief Government of all the
people, or a Negative voice in all, I am much more in judgment against them,
then the former, and so much the more against them, by how much the larger
their Jurisdiction is, for reasons which I shall anon have occasion to produce.

11. As for the eleventh sort of Bishops that is [ such as succeed the Apostles
in the office of Preaching and Governing, to wit as unlimited universal
Officers] it is a great doubt among many whether any such should be? For though
it be certain that such were, yet we are in doubt whether they have any
successors. For my own part, I confess my self satisfied in this, that the
Apostles have Successors, though not in their extraordinary Immediate manner of
Mission, nor in their extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, yet in all that part
of their office which is of standing Necessity to the Church: And I am
satisfied that their general Ministry, or ambulatory p^eaching as unfixed
officers, and their Government of the Church by Office (such as they did then
use) are of standing Necessity to the Church: Ap^stoli vere erant Presbyteri;
atque ita s^ipsos vocant. -- Nulli tamen loco ascripta ^^rum functio.
Evangelistae quoque Presbyteri ^^ant, sed nulli loco alligati. Sic and multo
post a Demetrio Alexandriae Episcopo Pan^aenus, ab Athanasio Frumentius,
ordinati, missique ut Evange^ium per Indi^m praedicarent, q^od ^odie quo (...)
vid^mus; Atque utin^m dilig^ntius fieret.
And therefore that as such unfixed general Officers, the Apostles de jure have
Successors. And this I have formerly proved to you in my Theses de Polit.
Ecclesiast. briefly thus.

Argument 1. Christ promised when he instituted this General Office to be with
them to the end of the world: therefore it was his will that it should continue
to the end of the world, ( Mat. 28 20, 21.) It was to a Ministry that were sent
to preach the Gospel to every Creature, or to all the world, and to Disciple
Nations, that this promise was expressly made; therefore such a Ministry is to
be continued.

Argum. 2. The same work and Necessity still continues: For, 1. There are
still most of the Nations on earth unconverted. 2. The Converted and
Congregated to be Confirmed and Governed, therefore the Office continues.

Argum. 3. We can fetch no Argument from the Apostles Example or from any
Precept or Promise to them, to prove the succession of fixed Pastors, which is
stronger then this by which we prove the succession of General unfixed
Officers: therefore either we must yield to this, or by the same reasons as we
deny it, we must deny the Ministry too: Which is not to be done.

Argum. 4. The Apostles had many Associates in this General Office in their own
times: Therefore it was not proper to them, ^rotius de Imperio. p. 271. And of
the Can. Council. Calced. 6. against ordaining Presbyters sine titulo, he says
[ Quum ut recte* notat Balsamon, Ipse Canon indicio est aliter fieri solitum:
Etiam post Calced. Synod. Iustinianus Periodentarum meminit quorum and in
Laodicena aliisque veteribus Synodis est mentio. Ibid.
nor to ce^se with them. Barnabas, Sylas, Timothy, Titus, Apollo, with
multitudes more in those times, were unfixed General Officers, that went up and
down to convert the world, and staid only to order and confirm the new gathered
Churches, and then went further; sometimes returning to review, preserve, and
strengthen their converts.

Argum. 5. If we can prove that such unfixed General officers were by Christ
settled in his Church, and that by such the Churches were in any sort then to
be governed, then our cause is good, till the repeal or revocation of this
office and order be proved. Let them therefore that affirm such a revocation
prove it: for till then, we have proved enough, in proving that once it was
instituted. But they cannot prove that revocation, I think, nor yet any
Cessation, or that the institution was but pro tempore.

Argum. 6. It is not a tolerable thing to charge God with such a sudden
Mutation of his Law or Order of Church Government without very certain proof.
If we find Christ settling one way of Church Government, in his own time, and
presently after, for the first age, it is a most improbable thing that he
should take that down again, and set up another kind of Government to continue
ever after. This seems to charge Christ with so great mutability, that it is
not to be done without very clear proof. But such proof is not produced.

I know it is easily proved that the immediate Mission, and extraordinary
measure of the Spirit, for Miracles, ^nogues, Infallible delivery of the
doctrine of Christ are ceased: But this is nothing to the general office of
Preaching or Governing the Church, which is of standing use.

So that I am satisfied of this, that the Apostles as General Preachers and
Governors have successors. But then I must confess my self not fully
satisfied, what Governing Power it was that the Apostles had over the Pastors
of the Church. I find that when Saravia, and after him, the Disputants in the
Isle of Wight, do insist on this Argument from the way of Church Government by
the Apostles, that their Antagonists do presently grant the Minor [ that The
Government of the Church at first was by men authorized to Rule the Presbyters
and their Churches.] but they deny the Major, that [ the Government which was
then in the Church should continue till now,] because it was by Apostles, whose
Office they think cease. Whereas I must confess I am unavoidably forced to
yield the Major, that we must have the same kind of Government that was at
first instituted, unless we had better proof of a change: For the stablishment
of particular Churches and Presbyters was no change of the Apostles power,
seeing they gave not away their power to the Presbyters nor ceased to have the
same Apostolical power which they had before. Only the Apostles extraordinary
Mission, Gifts and Privileges, I confess are ceased. But then I conceive that
the Minor which is so easily granted, viz. [that the Apostles had the
Government of the particular Presbyters] will hold more dispute, at least as to
the nature and degree of their power: and were I as fully satisfied about the
Minor as I am of the Major, I must by this one Argument be forced to be for the
Ius Divinum of Ep^scopacy. What at present seems truth to me, I shall lay down
in these Propositions.

Prop. 1. It is certain that the Apostles were general unfixed Officers of
Christ, having the care of the whole world committed to them within the reach
of their natural Capacity: and that their business was to take that course in
the particular management of their work, as is most conducible to the
propagation of the faith through the whole world: and that in all places where
they came, they had the same power over the Churches gathered, as the fixed
Pastors of those Churches have. This much is past doubt.

Prop. 2. It is as certain that common prudence required them to make a
convenient distribution of the work, and not go all one way, and leave other
places that while without the Gospel. But some to go one way, and some another,
as most conduced to the conversion of all the world.

Prop. 3. It is certain that the Apostles were not armed with the sword, nor
had a compulsive coercive power by secular force; but that their Government was
only forcible on the Conscience, and therefore only on the Conscientious, so
far as they were such; unless as we may call men's actual exclusion by the
Church and their desertion and misery the effect of Government.

Prop. 4. It is most certain that they who had the extraordinary privilege of
being eyewitnesses of Christ's Miracles and Life, and ear-witnesses of his
Doctrine, and had the extraordinary power of working Miracles for a
Confirmation of their Doctrine, must needs have greater Authority is, 1.
Rational and of mere Interest upon Consenters. 2. Imperial, over Dissenters
also.
Authority in men's Consciences then other men, upon that very account, if there
were no other. So that even their Gifts and Privileges may be (and doubtless
were) one ground at least of that higher degree of Authority, which they had
above others. For in such a Rational persuasive Authority which works only on
the Conscience, the case is much different from the secular power of
Magistrates. For in the former, even Gifts may be a ground of a greater measure
of Power, in binding men's minds. And here is the greatest part of the
difficulty that rises in our way, to hinder us from improving the example of
the Apostles, in that it is so hard to discern how much of their power over
other Presbyters or Bishops was from their supereminency of Office and Imperial
Authority, and how much was merely from the excellency of their Gifts and
Privileges.

Prop. 5. Its certain that the Magistrates did not then second the Apostles in
the Government of the Church, but rather hinder them by persecution. The
excommunicate were not punished therefore by the secular power, but rather men
were enticed to forsake the Church for the saving of their lives: so that
worldly prosperity attended those without, and adversity those within: which
further shows that the force of Apostolical Government was on the Conscience,
and it was not corrupted by an aliene kind of force.

Prop. 6. Yet had the Apostles a power of Miraculous Castigation of the very
bodies of the Offenders, at least sometimes: which Peter exercised upon Anania^
and Sapphyra, and Paul upon E^^mas, and some think upon Hymenaeus and Philetas,
and those other that were said to be delivered up to Satan: certainly Paul [had
in readiness to revenge all disobedience] 2 Cor. 10.6. which its like extends
somewhat farther than to mere censures. But its most certain that the Apostle
used no^ this power o^ hurting men's bodies ordinarily, but sparingly as they
did other Miracles; perhaps not according to their own wills, but the Holy
Ghosts. So that this did not corrupt their Government neither, and destroy the
Spirituality of it. Yet this makes it somewhat more difficult to us to improve
the Apostles example, because we know not how much of their power upon men's
Consciences might be from such penal Miracles.

Prop. 7. The Apostles had power to Ordain and send others to the work of the
Ministry. But this only by the consent of the ordained, and of the people
(before they could be complete fixed P^stors) for they forced not any to go, or
any people to entertain them. And it seems they did not Ordain singly, but
many together, Acts 14.23. If one were not meant of Confirmation or giving the
Holy Ghost, and the other of Ordination, which I rather incline to think.
Timothy had his Gift by the laying on of Paul's hands and of the hands of the
Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 2 Timothy 1.6.

Prop. 8. It seems that each Apostle did exercise a Government over the
Churches which were once planted: but this was principally in order to well
settling and confirming them.

Prop. 9. No one Apostle did appropriate a Diocese to himself, and say, Here I
am sole Governor, or am chief Governor; nor did they or could they forbid any
others to Govern in their Diocese: though, as is said, they did agree to
distribute their work to the public advantage, and not to be all in one place
at once: but yet successively they might.

Prop. 10. Nay its certain that they were so far from being the sole Bishops of
such or such a Diocese, that they had usually some more unfixed general
Officers with them. Paul and Barnabas went together at first: and after the
Division, Barnabas and Mark, Paul and Silas, and sometimes Timothy, and
sometime Epaphroditus, and sometime others went together afterward. And others
as well as James were usually at Jerusalem: and all these had a general power
where they came. And it cannot be proved that James was Ruler of Peter, Paul
and the rest when they were at Jerusalem, nor that he had any higher power then
they.

Prop. 11. Yet it seems that the several Apostles did most look after those
same Churches which themselves had been the instruments of gathering, and that
some addition of respect was due to those that had been spiritual Fathers to
them, above the rest, 1 Cor. 4.15.

Prop. 12. It was therefore by the General Commission of Apostleship that they
Governed particular Churches pro tempore while they were among or near them,
and not by any special Commission or Office of being the Diocesan or
Metropolitan of this or that place. 1. It was below them, and a diminution of
their honor to be so affixed, and take the charge of any particular Churches.
2. We find not that ever they did it. 3. If they had, then all the disorders
and ungovernedness of those Churches would be imputable to them, and therefore
they must be still with them as fixed Bishops are, seeing they cannot govern
them at such a distance as make^ them incapable. 4. When Peter drew Barnabas
and many more to dissimulation, and almost to betray the liberties of the
Gentiles, Paul does not say, This is my Diocese, and I must be the Ruler here:
nor does Peter plead this against him, when Paul and Barnabas fell out, whether
Mark should be taken with them or not; neither of them did plead a Ruling
Authority, nor say, This is my Diocese, or I am the superior Ruler, but they
produced their reasons, and when they could not agree concerning the validity
of each others reasons, they separated and took their several companions and
ways.

Prop 13. It was not only the Apostles, but multitudes more that were such
general unfixed Ministers: as the seventy, Barnabas, Silas, Epaphroditus.
Timothy and many others. And all these also had a Power of Preaching and Ruling
where they came.

Prop. 14. None of these General Officers did take away the Government from the
fixed Presbyters of particular Churches; nor kept a Negative vote in their own
hands, in matters of Government: for if no fixed Bishop (or Presbyter) could
excommunicate any member of his Church without an Apostle, then almost all
Churches must remain polluted and ungoverned, through the unavoidable absence
of those twelve or thirteen men.

The Apostles therefore did admonish Pastors to do their duties, and when
themselves were present had power to do the like, and to censure Pastors or
people that offended: but they did not take on them the full Government of any
Church, nor keep a Negative vote in the Government.

Prop. 15. It seems utterly untrue that Christ did deliver the Keys only to
the twelve Apostles as such, and so only to their Successors, and not the
seventy Disciples or any Presbyters. For 1. The seventy also were General
unfixed Officers, and not like fixed Presbyters or Bishops: and therefore
having a larger Commission must have equal power. 2. The Apostles were not
single Bishops as now they are differenced from others: but they were such as
had more extensive Commissions, then those now called Arch Bishops or
Patriarchs. If therefore the Keys were given them as Apostles, or General
Officers, then they were never given to Bishops. For Bishops as fixed Bishops
of this or that Diocese are not Successors of the Apostles, who were Gene^al
unfixed Officers. 3. It is granted commonly by Papists and Protestants, that
Presbyters have the power of the Keys, though many of them think that they are
limited to exercise them under the Bishops, and by their Direction and Consent,
(of which many Schoolmen have wrote at large) 4. The Key of Excommunication is
but a Ministerial Authoritative Declaration, that such or such a known Offender
is to be avoided, and to charge the Church to avoid Communion with him, and him
to avoid or keep away from the Privileges of the Church; and this a mere
Presbyter may do: he may authoritatively Declare such a man to be one that is
to be avoided, and charge the Church and him to do accordingly. The like I may
say of Absolution: if they belong to every authorized Pastor, Preacher and
Church guide, as such, then not to a Bishop only, but to a Presbyter also. And
that these Keys belong to more then the Apostles and their Successors, is
plain, in that these are insufficient Naturally to use them to their Ends. An
Apostle in Antioch cannot look to the censuring of all persons that are to be
Censured at Athens, Paris, London, etc. so that the most of the work would be
totally neglected, if only they and their supposed Successors had the doing of
it. I conclude therefore that the Keys belong not only to Apostles and their
Successors in that General Office, no nor only to Diocesan Bishops: for then
Presbyters could not so much as exercise them with the Bishops in Consistory,
which themselves of late allow.

Prop. 16. The Apostles were fallible in many matters of fact, and consequently
in the Decisions that depended thereupon; as also in the Prudential
determination of the time and season and other Cirumstances of known duties.
And thence it was that Paul and Barnabas so disagreed even to a parting, where
one of them was certainly in the wrong. And hence Peter withdrew from the
uncircumcision, and misled Barnabas and others into the same dissimulation so
far that he was to be blamed and withstood, Gal. 2.

Prop. 17. In such Cases of misleading, an Apostle was not to be follownd: no
more is any Church-Governor now: but it is lawful and needful to dissent and
withstand them to the face, and to blame them when they are to be blamed, for
the Churches safety, as Paul did by Peter, Galatians 2.1.

Prop. 18. In this Case the Apostles that by Office were of equal Authority,
yet were unequal when the Reasons and Evidence of Gods mind which they produced
was unequal: so that a Presbyter or Bishop that produces better Reasons, is to
be obeyed before another that produces less Reason, or that Erreth. And the
Bishop of another Church that produces better Evidence of Gods mind, is to be
obeyed before the proper Bishop of that same Church that produces weaker and
worse Evidence. Yea a private man that produces Gods Word is to be obeyed
before Bishops and Councils that go against it, or without it (in that case,
where the word binds us:) so that, in all cases where Scripture is to
determine* he that brings the best Scripture proof, is the chief Ruler, that
is, ought chiefly to prevail. Though in the determination of mere Circumstances
of duty, which Scripture determines not, but has left to Church-Guides to
determine pro re nata, it may be otherwise, so that the Apostles power in
determining matters of faith, was not as Church-Governors, but as men that
could produce the surest Evidence.

Prop. 19. It is not easy to manifest, whether every Presbyter in prima
instantia be not an Officer to the Church Universal, before he be affixed to a
particular Church; and whether he may not go up and down over the world to
exercise that office, where ever he has admittance. And if so, what then could
an Apostle have done by virtue of his mere office, without the advantage of his
extraordinary abilities, and privileges, which the Presbyter may not do? May
an Apostle charge the people where he comes to avoid this or that seducer or
heretic? so may any Preacher that shall come among them, and that by
authority. May an Apostle Excommunicate the very Pastor of the place, and
deprive him? why what is that but to persuade the people, and Authoritatively
require them, to avoid* and withdraw from such a Pastor, if the Cause be
manifest? And so may any Pastor or Preacher that comes among them. For if (as
Cyprian says) it chiefly belong to the people even of themselves to reject and
withdraw from such a Pastor, then a Preacher may by Authority persuade and
require them to do their own duty. Yet I shall acknowledge, that though both
may do the same duty, and both by Authority, yet possibly not both by equal
Authority, but an Apostle Majore authoritate, and so may lay a stronger
obligation on men to the same duty; but the rest I determine not, but leave to
enquiry.

Prop. 20. In making Laws or Canons to bind the Church which are now laid down
in Scripture, the Apostles acted as Apostles, that is, as men extraordinarily
Commissioned, illuminated and enabled infallibly to deliver Gods will to the
world. And therefore herein they have no Successors.

In Conclusion therefore seeing that matters of mere Order and Decency
depending on Circumstances sometime rationally mutable, sometime yearly, daily,
hourly mutable, are not to be determined Universally alike to all the Church,
nor to all a Nation, nor by those that are at too great a distance, but by the
present Pastor, who is to manage the work, and being entrusted therewith, is
the fittest Judge of such variable Circumstances: and seeing for standing
Ordinances that equally belong to all ages and places, Gods word is perfect and
sufficient without the Bishops Canons; and seeing that Scripture is a perfect
Law of God, and Rule of Christian faith; and seeing that in the expounding of
the Scripture, they that bring the best Evidence will beget the most Knowledge,
and they that produce the clearest Divine Testimony, will beget most
effectually a Divine belief, and those that are known to be of far greatest
abilities in learning, experience and grace, and consent with the most of the
Church, will procure more effectually an humane belief, then a weak unlearned
unexperienced Pastor of our own; therefore the Jurisdiction of supereminent
Bishops, Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs, will appear to be reduced into
so narrow a room, and written in so small a character, that he has need of
very quick sight that can read it, and humble men may be easily drawn to think,
that the Unity, Happiness, and Safety of the Church lies not in it, and that
if it had been only for Christ and not their own Greatness, there had not been
such Contention and Division made about it in the Church, as there has been*

TO draw some of this which I have said into a narrower room, I shall briefly
tell you what I could heartily wish both Magistrates and Ministers would
speedily accomplish for the order and Peace of the Church in these matters.

1. I could wish that they would choose out the ablest Godly men, and let them
be appointed General Teachers, and Guides, to call the uncalled, and to order,
confirm, and so take care of the Churches that are gathered: And if by the
Magistrates consent and their own, they divide their Provinces, it will be but
meet. These I would have to go up and down to the several Parishes in their
Provinces, and to have no particular Parishes of their own, nor to take the
fixed Pastors power from them, but to take care that it be by themselves well
exercised: And I would have the Magistrate keep his sword in his own hand, and
let these prevail with men's consciences as far as they can; and in that way, if
they would exceed their bounds, and arrogate any unjust power to themselves, we
shall dissent and deny it them, and stand upon our ground, and deal with them
upon equal terms, and so need not to fear them. And I have cause to think that
neither Presbyterians nor all the Independents will be against such General
Officers (Successors of the old ones) as I here describe: Not the
Presbyterians: for in Scotland they appointed and used such in the beginning,
of their Reformation when they made Visitors of the particular Churches, and
assigned to each their limited Provinces, and so they were Commissioners, to
cast out Ministers, put in others, and plant Kirks, and they had several
Superintendents, all which is to be seen in the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Kirk of Scotland (printed not long ago again.) And the Itinerant Comm^ssioners
in Wales that were set there to go about preaching and Reforming, does show
that their Judgments were not against the Power.

2. I could wish that every Parish Church may have one Eldership (where they
may be had) or some Elders and Deacons, with one Constant Fixed, Perfect for
Order and Unity.

3. I could wsh that Ordination and Constitutions for Unity and Communion may
be done only in Synods, less or greater: Essentiale fui^, quod ex Dei
ordinatione perpetua; necesse fuit, est and erit ut Presbyterio quispiam and
loco and dignitate primus actioni gubernandae praesit, cum ^o q^od ipsi
divinitus* attributum est jure. Beza de Minist. Evang. Grad. cap. 23.
and that of many Presbyteries there may consist a Classis, as commonly called,
and of many of those a Province: And that the Classical meeting may be
frequent, and that some one, the fittest man, may be standing President of that
Classis during life, except he deserve removal.

4. I could wish also that the Provincial Assembly (to be held once a quarter
or half year in each County) may have the most able, discreet, godly Minister
chosen to be the standing President also during life* unless he deserve removal.

So that here are four several sorts of Bishops that for Peace and Order I
could consent to: to wit, 1. A General unfixed Superintendent. 2. A fixed
Parochial Bishop President of that particular Presbytery. 3. A Classical
Bishop, President of that Classis. 4. A Provincial Bishop, President of the
Provincial Assembly. But there is no necessity of these.

5. Of the degree of their Power I said enough before. It is intolerable they
should have a Negative vote in Excommunications and Absolutions and such
Government of the people (except the Parochial Bishop) save only in case of
appeals, and there I leave it to each man's consideration, though I had rather
they had none: But whether they should be admitted a Negative in Ruling the
Pastors, I determine not. Only in case of Ordination, I would have all resolve
to do nothing (except in a case of Necessity) but when the President is One:
and stop there; which will permit him de facto the use of his Negative, and yet
trouble no man's conscience to acknowledge de jure that it Must so be* for to
that none should be forced.

This much I could willingly yield to for reconciliation and unity: And I doubt
not but I shall be sufficiently reproached by some for yielding so far, and by
others for yielding no further.

AND now at last after these (not needless) preparations, I come to the main
Question it self, Whether it be Necessary or Profitable for the right Order or
Peace of the Churches, to restore the extruded Episcopacy? And this I deny, and
having said so much already for explication, shall presently give you the
Reasons of my denial; in which the rest of the necessary explication will be
contained.

Argument 1. That sort of Prelacy or other Government which destroys the End
of Government, and is certainly inconsistent with the Necessary Government and
discipline to be exerci^ed in the Churches, is not to be restored, under
pretense of the Churches Order or Peace (nor can be consistent with its right
Order and Peace.) But such is the Episcopacy which was of late exercised in
England, and is now laid by. Therefore, etc.

The Major needs no proof; for few Christians I think, will deny it. If
Episcopacy as lately here exercised, be the certain excluder of Government it
self and Christ's discipline, while it only retains the empty name, then
doubtless it is not to be restored.

The Minor I prove thus. If there be a very Natural Impossibility that the late
English Episcopacy though in the hands of the best men in the world, should
Govern the Churches as Christ has appointed, and as they should and may
otherwise be Governed; then the foresaid inconsistency and destructiveness is
apparent. But that there is such a Natural Impossibility for the late English
Episcopacy to Govern the Church, thus I shall prove. 1. By showing you what is
undoubtedly necessary in Christ's Government; 2. And then what was the late
English Episcopacy; and then 3. The Impossibility will appear of it self when
both these are opened and compared together without any more ado.

1. And 1. It is past controversy among us, that Church Governors should
watch over each particular soul in their flock, and instruct the ignorant,
admonish the fallen, convince gainsayers, counterwork seducers among them, seek
to reclaim the wandering, strengthen the weak* comfort the distressed, openly
rebuke the open obstinate offenders, and if they repent not, to require the
Church to avoid their Communion, and to take cogniscance of their cause before
they are cut off: as also to Absolve the penitent, yea to visit the sick (who
are to send for the Elders of the Church*) and to pray with and for them, etc.
yea and to go before them in the worship of God. These are the acts of Church
Government that Christ has appointed, and which each faithful Shepherd must
use, and not Excommunication, and other Censures and Absolution alone.

2. But if they could prove that Church Government contains only Censures and
Absolution, yet we shall easily prove it Impossible for the late English
Episcopacy to do that. For, 3. It is known to our sorrow that in most Parishes
there are many persons, and in some greater Parishes very many, that have
lived, common open swearers, or drunkards, and some whoremongers, common
scorners of a godly life, and in many more of those offenses, for which
Scripture and the ancient Canons of the Church do excommunicate men, and we are
commanded with such no not to eat. And its too well known what numbers of
Heretics and Seducers there are, that would draw men from the faith, whom the
Church Governors must after the first and second admonition reject. 4. And
then its known what a deal of work is Necessary with any one of these, in
hearing accusations, examining Witnesses, hearing the defendants, searching
into the whole cause, admonishing, waiting, re-admonishing, etc. 5. And then
its known of how great Necessity, and moment all these are to the honor of the
Gospel, the souls of the offenders, to the Church, to the weak, to them
without, etc. So that if it be neglected, or unfaithfully managed, much
mischief will ensue. Thus in part we see what the Government is.

Next let us see what the English Episcopacy is. And 1. For the extent of it, a
Diocese contained many score or hundred Parishes, and so many thousands of such
souls to be thus Governed. Perhaps some Diocesses may have five hundred
thousand souls, and it may be London Diocese nearer a million. And how many
thousand of these may fall under some of the forementioned acts of Government,
by our sad experience we may conjecture.

2. Moreover the Bishop resideth, if not at London (as many of them did) yet in
his own dwelling, many miles, perhaps twenty or thirty from a great part of his
Diocese, so that most certainly he does not so much as know by face, name, or
report the hundredth, perhaps the thousandth, or perhaps the second or third
thousandth person in his Diocese. Is it Possible then for him to watch over
them, or to understand the quality of the person and fact? In Church Cases the
quality of the person is of so much moment, that without some knowledge of it,
the bare knowledge of the fact sometimes will not serve.

I know Bishop Usher in his papers to the King, does say that by the Order of
the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged (in the form of Ordering of
Priests) to administer the Discipline of Christ: But the Bishops understood
that only of their publishing their Censures. For no such Administration was
known among us, or allowed: Nor would they suffer men to suspend them from the
Sacrament, as the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book requi^eth.
3. And then it is known that the English Episcopacy denies to the Presbyters
all power of Excommunication and Absolution, u^less to pronounce it as from the
Bishop when he has past it: And they deny him also all power so much as of
calling a sinner to open Repentance, which they called Imposing penance: and
also they denied all power of denying the Lords Supper to any without the
Bishops censure, except in a s^dden case, and then they must prosecute it after
at the Bishops Court; and there render the Reason of that suspension: So that
the trouble, danger, labor, time would be so great that would be spent in it,
that scarce one Minister of a hundred did venture on it once in seven and seven
years, except only to deny the Sacrament to a man that would not kneel, and
that they might do easily and safely.

4. And then Consider further, that if the Minister should be one of an
hundred, and so diligent as to accuse and prosecute all the open scandalous
offenders of his Parish, before the Bishops Court, that so he might procure
that act of Government from them, which he may not perform himself, it would
take up all his time, and perhaps all would not serve for half the work,
considering how far he must ride, how frequently he must attend, etc. And then
all the rest, or most of the Pastoral work must be neglected, to the danger of
the whole Congregation.

5. It is a great penalty to an innocent man to travail so far to the trial of
his ^ause. But the special thing that I note is this, that it is Naturally
Impossible, for the Bishop to hear, try and judge all these causes, yea or the
fifth or hundredth of them, or in some places one of five hundred. Can one man
hear so many hundred as in a day must be before him, if this discipline be
faithfully executed? By that time that he has heard two or three Causes, and
examined Witnesses, and fully debated all, the rest can have no hearing; and
thus unavoidably the work must be undone. It is as if you set a Schoolmaster to
teach ten or twenty thousand Scholars? Must they not be needs untaught? Or as
if you set one Shepherd to look to two or three hundred several flocks of
Sheep, that are every one of them three or four miles asunder, and some of them
forty miles from some of the rest. Is it any wonder th^n if many of them be
lost?

6. But what need we further witness then the sad experience of the Church of
late? Are we not sure that discipline lay unexercised, and our Congregations
defiled, and Gods Laws and the old Canons were dead letters, while the Bishops
keep up the lame and empty name of Governors? How many drunkards, swearers,
whoremongers, raylers, Extortioners, scorners at a godly life did swarm in
almost every Town and Parish? and they never heard of discipline, except it
were one Adulterer or fornicator once in seven years within twenty miles
compass (where I was acquainted) that stood in a white sheet in the Church: We
know that there was no such Matter as Church Government exercised to any
purpose, but all left undone, unless it were to undo a poor Disciplinarian (as
they therefore scornfully called them) that blamed them for neglect of
Discipline. For my part, the Lord my Judge knows, that I desire to make the
matter rather better then it was, then worse then it was; and I solemnly
profess that for the Peace of the Church, I should submit to almost any body
that would but do the work that is to be done. Here is striving between the
Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent, who it is that shall Govern. I would
make no great stir against any of them all that would but do it effectually.
Let it be done, and its not so much matter by whom it is done, as it is to have
it lie undone. But I can never be for that party that neither did the work,
when they might, nor possibly can do it. To be for them, is to consent that all
should be undone; and that Drunkards and Railers and all wicked persons shall
continue so still, or continue members of our Churches in all their obstinacy:
and that there shall be nothing but the name of Government and Censure without
the thing. Its hard making men of Conscience believe the contrary that have had
the trial that we have had: If where good men were Bishops thus it was, what
hope of better by that way? We cannot shut our eyes against so great
experience. And certainly those Learned men among us that think so much
Discipline may serve turn to all the Congregations in the whole Diocese, as the
Bishop can perform or have a Negative Vote in, do too manifestly show that they
Its an easy matter to preach or write a strict Lesson; but they that would
practically when they have done open a gap to licentiousness, and overthrow all
Discipline almost, will hardly persuade men that they mean as they teach, or
are themselves such as they describe, or really would promote a holy life;
especially when Scorners ^t a godly life were favored more then the practisers
of it.
are less friends to real godliness, and greater friends to sin, and care too
little for the matter it self while they contend about the manner or agent,
then serious Christians should do. If men once plainly show themselves mere
formalists, and would set up a scarecrow, and pull down all true Discipline, by
setting up one man to do the work of five hundred, and making the exercise of
it impossible, what serious Christian will ever take their part? Not I while I
breath: Who can choose but see that such do seek their dignity, and Lordships,
and worldly Mammon more then the Kingdom of Christ. I know they will be angry
with me for this language; but so are most impenitent persons with reproofs. I
would advise all of them that survive to lay to heart before the Lord, what
they did in undertaking such an impossible task, and leaving so many souls and
Congregations without Christ's remedy, and suffering the Churches to be so foul,
while they had the Beesom in their hands.

This being so manifest that it is impossible for an English Bishop to Govern
as they undertook so many Congegations, I may well next argue from the
mischiefs that follow.

Argum. 2. THat Government which gratifieth the Devil and wicked men, is not to
be restored under any pretense of the Order or Peace of the Church: But such
was the English Episcopacy; therefore, etc.

The Major is un^enyable, supposing that it do not this by an avoidable
accident, but by natural Necessity, as I have proved, I confess some of the Men
were so Learned and Good men, that I think few men honor their names more then
my self. But it is the way of Government that I have spoke of.

And for the Minor, it is as plain from experience, and the argument before
used. If it necessarily exclude the exercise of Christ's discipline from most
Congregations, then does it gratify Satan: But, etc*

And if it keep wicked obstinate sinners from the power of discipline, then
does it gratify sinners in their Sins, and consequently please Satan. But this
it does: therefore, etc.

Who knows not (for it cannot be denied) that the generality of the rabble of
ignorant persons, worldlings, drunkards, haters of Godliness* etc. are very
zealous for Episcopacy, whilst multitudes of truly conscientious people have
been against it? And who knows not that they both fetched their chief Motives
from experience? The ungodly found that Bishops let them keep their sins, and
troubled them not with this preciseness, but rather drove away the precise
preachers and people whom they abhorred. And the godly people that disliked
Ep^scopacy, did it principally on the same experience, observing that they
befriended the wicked, at least by preserving them from the due rod of
discipline; but exercised their zeal against them that scrupled or questioned
at least their own standing or assumed power, or the abuse of it. And then
further,

Argum. 3. THat Government which unavoidably causes separations and divisions
in the Church, is not ^o be restored under any pretense of its Order and Peace?
But such is the English Episcopacy? therefore; etc.

I know the clean contrary is strongly pretended, and they tell us that we may
see how Episcopacy kept men in Unity, See my Preface to Mr. Pierce of Grotius
Religion* Were Prelacy now tolerated only as Presbytery and the Congregational
way are, does any man think it would cast or keep out Heresie^
by the many Sects that since are risen. But let it be observed, 1. That these
Sects were hatched in the separation which was caused by themselves. 2. That
the increase has been since there was no Government at all. 3. It was not
Episcopacy, but the Magistrates Sword whose terror did attend it, that kept
under heresies in that measure that they were: Had Episcopacy stood on its own
legs, without the support of secular force, so that it might have workt only on
the conscience, then you should have seen more Sects then now. Do you think
that if Episcopacy were in Scotland in the Case as Presbytery is now, without
the Sword to enforce it, that it would keep so much Unity in Religion as is
there? Its known in France and other places that Presbytery has kapt more
Unity, and more kept out Heresies and Schisms, even without the Sword, then
Episcopacy has done with it. 4. But the thing that I speak of it undeniable;
that it was the pollution of our Churches that caused the Separatists in the
Bishops days to withdraw. This was their common cry against us, Your Churches
bear with Drunkards, Whoremongers, Railers, open Scorners at Godliness, with
whom the Scripture bids us not eat; And we could not deny it: for the Bishops
did keep it so, by keeping out all effectual Discipline. Only we told them,
that it was the Prelates sin, and not theirs that could not help it, and that a
polluted Church might be a true Church. And so the Disciplinarian
Non-Conformists were fain by many painful writings to suppress the spirit of
separation, or else it had been like to have overwhelmed all; Mr. John Paget,
Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Arthur Hildersham, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Brightman, Mr. Paul
Bains, Mr. Dod, Mr. Parker, Dr. Ames, and many other such, were fain to make it
a great part of their business, to quench the fire of separation, which even
their persecutors kindled by the exclusion of Discipline. And yet the sense of
the Churches uncleanness was so deep in men's minds, that it had bred such
abundance of discontended humors, that they easily broke out, and turned into
this disorderly swarm which we have seen, as soon as the wars had but given
them liberty.

And even to this day it is the uncleanness of our Churches, (wherein I would
the Pastors were wholly innocent) which maintains much of the separation,
among many sober godly men. For the Churches were left so polluted by the
Bishops, that in most places the Presbyters dare scarce go roundly about the
cure, unless they had the help of the sword, wherein yet for my part I think
them deeply sinful.

Argum. 4. THat Episcopacy which degradeth all the Presbyters in the Diocese,
or causes them to suspend the exercise of an Essential part of their Office,
is not to be restored under any pretense of right order, or peace. But such was
the late English Episcopacy: therefore.

I confess this is the second inconvenience which follows it, which I think
utterly intolerable, where there is any possibility of a remedy. The Major I
suppose will be granted. For though an Office may be unexercised for a time on
some special reason, yet if it be statedly suspended, and that suspension
established by Law or Custom, during the life of the Minister, this is plainly
a destroying or nulling of the Office it self, and not to be endured.

And that it is not to be endured appears thus; 1. Because the Office of the
Presbyter is of Divine Institution, and therefore not to be nulled by man. I
never yet read or heard of any more but one Divine of any reputation who denied
that Presbyters as now called are appointed in the Scriptures, and I think,
Functiones in Ecclesia perpetuae sunt duae; Presbyterorum and Diaconorum:
Presbyteros voco cum omni Ecclesia veteri, eos, qui Ecc^esiam pas^unt v^rbi
praedicatione, Sacramentis and Clavibus; quae Iure Divino sunt individua: (he
means inseparable) so that its inseparable from a Presbyter to have the Power
of the Keys. Grot. de Imperio, page 267. c. 1^.
that one has destroyed his cause by it, of which more anon. 2. Because the
Church cannot with any safety spare the Office of the Presbyters, because they
are many, perhaps many hundred to one Prelate: and if so many of Christ's
Officers be laid by, it is easy to see what loss the vineyard and harvest may
sustain.

The Minor I prove thus. That Episcopacy which takes from the Presbyters the
power of Church Government, and allows them only the power of preaching and
administering Sacraments, and those other parts of the work which they
distinguish from Government, do thereby destroy the very Office of the
Presbyters (and so degrade or suspend them) But the late English Episcopacy
takes from the Presbyters the power of Church-Governing; etc. therefore.

The Antecedent is well known by those that know their Canons, claim and
constant practice in England, till the time of their exclusion. That the
Consequence is current appears thus. Church Government is as real and as
essential a part of the Presbyters work and office as any other whatsoever.
Therefore they that take this from him, do destroy his Office.

The Antecedent is proved thus: if those Texts of Scripture which mention the
Office of Presbyters, Acts 20. and 14.23. and many other places do speak of
Presbyters as now understood, and not of Prelates, then Ruling is as much
essential to their office as Preaching. This is proved* 1. From the express
wo^ds of the several Texts, which make them Overseers of the flock, Acts 20.28.
and to be over the people in the Lord, to whom they are to submit, 1 These.
5.12, 13. and Rulers of them, whom they must obey, as well as Preachers to
them, Heb 13.7, 17* 24. 1 T^m. 3, 4* 5. 2. Its proved from common Consent. For,
1. Those that think these Texts speak of Presbyters as now understood, do most
commonly confess this sense of the Text, v^z. that it makes them Rulers; only
some of them add, that themselves must be Ruled by the Bishops. 2. He that
denies these Texts to speak of such Presbyters, does confess that those of
whom it does speak, are certainly Rulers of the Church.

And then I assume: But the general vote of almost all Expositors old and new,
Pastorum ergo est Ordinare Pastores: neque id officium eis competit qua hujus
au^ illius Ecclesiae Pastores sunt, sed qu^ ministri Ecclesiae Catholicae.
Grotius ibid. p. 273.

Pastores tales (ubi n^ll^ sunt Episcopi) etsi cum (...) Presbyteris id comm^^^
habent quod aliis non praesunt; habe^t tamen illud Episcopale, quod n^mini
Pastori subs^n^ at (...) ad^o dubium est, Episcopisn^^ an meris Presbyteris
(...). Idem page 320.


Episcopal and others from the Apostles days till now, as far as we can know
by their writings, did take these Texts, at least many of them, to speak of
such Presbyters: and I think the new exposition of one man, is not to be taken
against the Exposition of the whole stream of Expositors in all ages, without
better reason to evince them to have erred, then any I have yet seen produced.
At least, all the Episcopal Divines except that one man, and those that now
follow his new Exposition, must yield to what I say, upon the authority of
these Texts.

But if this Divine were in the right, and none of these Texts be spoken of
Presbyters, yet I make good my Antecedent thus.

For 1. If Presbyters be of humane Institution, then neither Preaching or
Ruling is any Essential part of their Office by Divine Institution; because
they have none such: and therefore I may say one is as essential as the other:
that is, neither is so. But yet of their humanly instituted Office, it is as
essential a part still: for if it be true, that there were no Presbyters in the
Church till about Ignatius his days, yet its certain that when they were
instituted (whether by God or man) they were as truly made Rulers as Preachers.
And therefore we find their Ignatius still calling on the people to obey the
Presbyters as well as the Bishops. And Hierom tells us, ( Epist. ad Evagr.) how
long the Presbyters governed the Churches Communi Consilio, by Common Counsel
or Consent, and how themselves at Alexandria chose our one and made him their
Bishop: and Cyprian tells us enough of the Presbyters ruling in Council or
Consistory with the Bishop in his time: so that he would do nothing without the
Presbyters. Much more proof may easily be brought of this, but that I find it
now acknowledged, and so it is needless. I will not go far, but only note a few
Canons, especially of the fourth Council of Carthage. Can. 23. is, Vt Episcopus
nullius Causam audi^t absque praesentia Clericorum suorum; alioquin ir^ita erit
sententia Episcopi, nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur.

Can. 22. Episcopus sine Consilio Clericorum suorum Clericos (...) ordinet; ita
ut Civium assensum, and conniventiam, and testimonium quaerat.

Can. 29. Episcopus si Clerico vel laico crimen imposuerit, deducatur ad
probationem in Synodum.

Can. 32. Irrita erit donatio Episcoporum, vel venditio, vel c^mmutati^ r^i
Ecclesiasticae, absque conniventia and subscriptione clericorum.

Can. 34. Vt Episcopus in quelibet l^co sedens stare Presbyterum non patiatur.

Can. 35. Vt Episcopus in Ecclesia in consessu Prsebyterorum sublimior s^deat:
Intra domum vero collegam se Presbyterorum esse cognoscat.

Can. 36. Presbyter qui per dioeceses Ecclesias regunt, non a quibuslibet, etc.

Can. 37. Diaconusita se Presbyteri ut Episcopi Ministrum esse cognoscat.

Here you see that Bishops may not Ordain, hear any cause, accuse a Clergy man
or Layman, not give, sell, or Change any Church goods, without the Presbyters:
and that he is their Colleague, and must not let them stand if he sit, and that
they Rule the Churches through the Diocesses, and that the Deacons are Servants
as well to them as to the Bishop. Aurelius and Augustine were in this Council.

If they that think it uncertain whether Presbyters be mentioned in the New
Testament, Communi Presbyterorum Concilio gubernabantur, says Hier.

See Grotius ubi sup. p. 354, 355, 356, 357. proving that Prelacy is not of
Divine precept, and that of old many Cites had many Churches and Bishops in
each: and that Presbyters, except ordination (as Hier. and Chrysostom.) may do
all that a Bishop; and he adds, Quid obstat quo minus id ita ^nterp^^temur ut
Presbyteri neminem potu^rint ordinare contempto Episcopo?

And page 359. He shows that where Bishops are not, Presbyters do rightly
ordain.

See the beginning of Bishop Ushers Reduction of Episcopal Government.


and that think they began about Ignatius his time, do mean that yet they were
of Divine Apostolical Institution, then they strike in with the Papists in
making the Scriptures to be out part of Gods word, and insufficient to reveal
all Divine institutions about his Church Government, and Worship, and so we
must look for the rest in uncertain Tradition. Nay I know not of any Papist to
my best remembrance that ever reckoned up the Office of Presbyters under their
mere unwritten Traditions.

If they say that they are of Ecclesiastical Episcopal Institution, not by
inspired Apostles, but by Ordinary Bishops, then 1. They make all Presbyters to
be jure Episcopali, and Bishops only and their Superiors to be jure Divino, as
the Italians in the Council of Trent would have had all Bishops to depend upon
the Pope: But in this they go far beyond them; for the Italian Papists
themselves thought Presbytery jure Divino. 2. Either they may be changed by
Bishops who set them up, or not: If they may be taken down again by man, then
the Church may be ruined by man; and so the Bishops will imitate the Pope*
Either they will Reign, or Christ shall not Reign, if they can hinder it:
Either they will lead the Church in their way, or Christ shall have no Church:
If man cannot take them down, then 1. It seems man did not Institute them; for
why may they not alter their own institutions? 2. And then it seems the Church
has universal standing, unchangeable Institutions, Offices and binding Laws of
the Bishops making: And if so, are not the Bishops equal to the Apostles in Law
making, and Church Ordering? and are not their Laws to us as the word of God,
and that word insufficient? and every Bishop would be to his Diocese, and all
to the whole Church, what the Pope would be to the whole.

3. Moreover, how do they prove that ever the Apostles gave power to the
Bishops to institute the order of Presbytery? I know of no text of Scripture
by which they can prove it And for Tradition, we will not take every man's word
that says he has tradition for his conceits, but we require the proof. The
Papists that are the pretended keepers of Tradition, do bring forth none as
merely unwritten, but for their ordines inferiores, and many of them, for
Bishops as distinct from the Presbyters; but not for Presbyters themselves. And
Scripture they can plead none; For if they mention such texts where Paul bids
Titus ordain Elders in every City, etc. they deny this to be meant of Elders as
now, but of Prelates whom Titus as the Primate or Metropolitan was to ordain:
And if it be meant of Elders, then they are found in Scripture, and of Divine
Apostolical Institution.

4. If they were Instituted by Bishops after the Scripture was written, was it
by one Bishop, or by many? If by one, then how came that one to have Authority
to impose a new Institution on the universal Church? If by many, either out of
Council, or in; if out of Council, it was by an accidental falling into one
mind and way, and then they are but as single men to the Church: and therefore
still we ask, how do they bind us? If by many in Council, 1. Then let them tell
us what Council it was that Instituted Presbytery, when and where gathered,
and where we may find their Canons, that we may know our order, and what
Au^hors mention that Council. 2. And what authority had that Council to bind
all the Christian world, to all ages? If they say it bound but their own
Churches, and that age; then it seems the Bishops of England might for all that
have nulled the Order of Presbyters there. But O miserable England and
miserable world, if Presbyters had done no more for it, then Prelates have done!

I conclude therefore that the English Prelacy either degraded the Presbyters,
or else suspended to ally an essential part of their office: for themselves
called them Rectors, and in ordaining them said, [ Receive the Holy Gh^st:
Whose sins thou do remit they are remitted, whose sins thou do retain they
are retained] And therefore they delivered to them the Power of the Keys of
opening and shutting the Kingdom of Heaven; which themselves make to be the
opening and shutting of the Church, and the Governing of the Church by
Excommunication and Absolution: And therefore they are not fit men to ask the
Presbyters; By what authority they Rule the Church, by binding and loosing,
when themselves did expressly as much as in them lay, confer the Power on them:
And we do no more then what they bid us do in our Ordination; Yea they thereby
make it the very work of our office: For the same mouth, at the same time that
bid us [ t^ke authority to preach the word of God] did also tell us that whose
sins we remit or retain they are remitted or retained: and therefore if one be
an Essential, or true integral part at least of our office, the other is so
too. From all which it is evident, that if there were nothing against the
English Prelacy, but only this that they thus suspend or degrade all the
Presbyters in England, as to one half of their off^ce, it is enough to prove
that they should not be restored under any pretense whatsoever of Order or
Unity.

Argum. 5. THat Episcopacy which gives the Government of the Church, and
management of the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution into the hands of a
few Lay^men* while they take them from the Presbyters, is not to be restored
under any pretense of Unity or Peace: I have, it and can p^oduce it under the
Kings own hand and seal, wherein he forbids that any Church man or Priest in
holy orders should be a C^^ncellor: And this was the occasion of all the
corruptions, etc. They must for their own advantage and profit have instruments
accordingly* So the R^gisters, Proctors, Apparato^s, were p^ssi^um genus
hominum: G. Goodman, Bishop of Glo^. in the Preface to his Two Mysteries, etc.
But such was the English Prelacy: therefore, etc.

The Major is plain: because it is not Laymen that are to be Church
Governors, as to Ecclesiastical Government: This is beyond Question with all
save the Congregational, and they would not have two or three Lay men chosen,
but the whole Congregation to manage this business.

The Minor is known by common experience, that it was the Chancellor in h^s
Court, with his assi^^ants and the Register, and such other mere Laymen, that
managed this work. If it be said, that they did it as the Bishops Agents and
Substitutes, and therefore it was he that did it by them* I answer, 1. The Law
put it in the Chancellors, and the Bishop^ could not hinder it. 2. If the
Bishops may delegate others to do their work, then it seems Preaching and
Ruling, Excommunica^ing and Ab^olving may as well be done by Laymen as Clergy
men: Then they may commission them also to administer the Sacraments: And so
the Ministry is not necessary for any of these works* but only a Bishop to
depute Laymen to do them; which is false and confusive.

Argum. 6. THat Episcopacy which necessarily overwhelmeth the souls of the
Bishops with the most heinous guilt, of neglecting the many thousand souls
whose charge they undertake, is not to be restored for Order or Peace (For men
are not to be ove^whelmed with such heinous sin on such pretenses) But such is
the English Prelacy: and that not accidentally, through the badness of the men
only, but unavoidably through the greatness of their charge, and the Natural
Impossibility of their undertaken work. How grievous a thing it is to have the
blood of so many thousands charged on them, may soon appear* And that man that
undertakes himself the Government of two or three, or five hundred thousand
souls that he never sees or knows, nor can possibly so Govern, but must
needs leave it undone (except the shadow of a Government which is committed to
a Lay Chancellor,) does wilfully draw this fearful Guilt upon himself.

Argum. 7. THat Episcopacy which is the product of Proud Ambi^ion and
Arrogance, contrary to the express command of Christ, is not to be restored for
Order or Peace. But such is the late English Prelacy: therefore, etc.

The Major is undoubted. The Minor is proved thus. Were it not for p^oud
Ambition men would not strive to have the doing of more work then an hundred
times as many are able to do, and the answering before God for as many souls:
But the English Prelates did strive to have the work and account of many
hundreds: therefore, etc.

The Minor is proved and known by experience. And the Major is proved thus. 1.
From the common aversness that all men have to labor, excessive oppressing
labor, and that spiritual too. 2. From the self-love that is naturally in all:
No man can naturally and rationally desire that which would tire him, oppress
him, and finally damn him, without great repentance, and the special mercy of
God, unless by the power of some lust that draws him to it. 3. And common
prudence will teach men not to thrust themselves into impossible undertakings.
If we see a man desirous to have the Rule of a whole County under the Prince,
and that there should be no Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate to Rule there
but he, though he know that he must answer it upon his life, if the County be
no^ well Ruled, as to the punishing of all the known drunkards, swear^rs,
adulterers etc. in the County; may not any man see that Ambition makes this man
in a manner besides himself, o^ e^se he would never set so light by his own
life, as certainly and wilfully to cast it away, by undertaking a work which
he knows many men are unable to perform: And Ambition it must needs be*
because Honor and Preheminency is the bait and thing contended for, and there
is nothing else to do it. And how expressly do^^ Christ forbid this to his
Apostles, telling them, [ With you it shall not be so: but he that will be the
greatest shall be the servant of all] Luke 22.26. As the old Rimer has it [
Christus dixit quodam lo^o; Vos non sic, nec dixit j^co: dixit sui^ ergo isti
Cujus sunt? non certe Christi] Speaking of the Prelates. I own not the Censure,
but ^ own Christ's prohibition. Certainly the Honor is but the appendix for the
work sake, and the work is the first thing and the main of the office. And I
would know whether they would strive thus for the work and the terrible
account, without the honor and worldly gain. Nay do they not destroy the work,
wh^le they quarrel for the doing of it, for the honor sake? If it were the
Churches good and the work that they so much minded, they would contend that so
many should have the doing of it as are necessary thereto* and not that none
should do it but they. He that would turn all the laborers out of the Harvest
saving himself, in all this County, that he may maintain his own privilege, I
should think does not much mind the good of the owner, or the well doing of the
work, or his own safety, if he were to answer for all upon his life.

Argum. 8. THat Episcopacy which so far gratifieth lazy Mi^isters as to ease
them of the most p^inful, troublesome and hazardous part of their work, is not
to be restored for order or unity: but such was the late English Prelacy:
therefore, etc.

The Major is undoubted. The Minor is before proved as to the work it self. And
as to the quality and consequents, experience puts it past all doubt, that
the work of Government and Oversight, is incomparably more troublesome then the
preaching of a Sermon, Baptizing, administering the Lords Supper, and praying
with them. When we come to touch men by personal reproof, and make that
public, and that for disgraceful sins, and suspend or excommunicate them if
they be obstinate, usually we do not only turn their hearts against us, but
they rage against us, and could even be revenged on us with the cruellest
revenge. We find that all the Preaching in the world does not so much
exasperate and enrage men, as this Discipline. I can Preach the most cutting
and convincing truths, in as close a manner as I am able, to notorious wicked
livers, and they will bear it patiently, and say it was a good Sermon, and some
of them say that they care not for hearing a man that will not tell them of
their sins. And yet call them to an open confession of these sins in the
Congregation, or proceed to censure them, and they will rage against us as if
we were their mortal enemies. The Bishops let all these men (almost) alone; and
therefore never exasperated them: and so now they rage the more against us, and
love the Bishops the better, because they were never so troubled by them.

And here I cannot but note, how groundless that accusation is of some
Prelatical men against the Conscionable adversaries of their way, when they
say, the Presbyters would fain have the Reins of Government in their own hand:
which may be true of the unconscionable, that know not what it is that they
undertake: but for others, it is all one as to say, They would fain have all
the trouble, hatred and danger to themselves. These Objecters show their own
minds, and what it is that they look at most themselves and therefore think
others do so: its dear bought honor that is purchased at such rates of labor
and danger. I here solemnly profess for my own part, that if I know my heart, I
am so far from thinking it a desirable thing to Rule, much less to Rule a
Diocese, that if I might so far gratify my carnal desires, and were not under
the bond of Gods Commands, and so were it not for fear of sinning and wronging
men's souls that are committed to my charge, I would give, if I had it, many
thousand pounds, that I might but Preach, Pray, Read, Baptize, administer the
Lords Supper, though I did more then I do in them, and be wholly freed from the
care and trouble of oversight and government of this one Congregation, which is
further required. O how quiet would my mind be, were I but sure that God
required none of this at my hands, nor would call me to any account for the
neglect of it! And that this is not my case only, but the common case to find
Discipline so troublesome, is apparent in this; that the whole body of the
Nation (for the generality) have contended against it these many years, and in
almost every Congregation in England, the greater part do either separate from
the Ministers, and forbear the Lords Supper, or some way oppose it and
withdraw, that they may avoid it. And most of the Ministers in England, even
godly men, do much, if not altogether neglect it. So that some through a Carnal
indulging of their own ease and quiet, and to avoid men's ill will; and some
through the great oppositions of the people, or for one such cause or other, do
let all alone. In so much, as even here in this County where we have associated
and engaged our selves to some execution of Discipline, this work goes on so
heavily as we see, and need not mention further: when yet there is not a days
omission of Sermons and other Ordinances: so that its apparent that its it
which all lazy, carnal, man-pleasing Ministers may well comply with, as that
which suites their Carnal Interests, to be free from the toil and care of
Discipline.

If you say, why then do the Bishops desire it, if flesh and blood be against
it? I answer; Experience and the impossibility of performance tells us, that it
is not the work, but the empty name and honor that they took up: and that
indeed the flesh does much more desire. Had they desired or been willing of the
work, as they were of Lordships and Riches, they would have done it.

Argum. 9. NO Episcopacy, (at least which has so many evils as aforesaid
attending it) which is not of Gods Institution, should be admitted into the
Church. The late English Prelacy, as to the disapproved properties before
mentioned, is not of Gods Institution: therefore it is not to be admitted into
the Church.

The Major is confessed by all that plead for the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy, or
most: and with the qualification, from the ill consequents, will be yielded by
all.

The Minor I prove by parts: 1. That the exclusion of Presbyters from Rule, and
the putting the Government from them into a Lay-mans hand, with the rest before
mentioned, are not of Divine Institution, is proved already, as much as needs.
2. If at the present we yield a superintendency or pre-eminence of one Pastor
before others, yet the Controversy remains, whether a Prelate should be only
Parochial, that is, only the President of the Elders of one particular Church,
or at the utmost of that with two or three, or a few neighbor small Parishes
which he may well oversee, without the neglect of the Discipline. Now I know
not how any man of that way can prove out of Scripture, that a Bishop must have
more then one Parish, much less more then three or four, or a few. For it is
confessed by them, for ought I know, that Scripture does not determine how many
Presbyters, or Churches a Bishop must have under him, (only we say he must have
but one:) for the main thing that they labor to prove is, that a Bishop is
above Presbyters as to Ordination and Jurisdiction: and so he may be if he be a
Parish-Bishop: for a Parish Church may have a Curate, and 2 or 3 Chapels with
Curates at them, besides Deacons; and according to the old course, perhaps many
Presbyters more that did not publicly preach (though they wanted not
authority) but oversee the flock. Now one man may have all that most of their
Arguments require, if he be but the chief over this Parish Presbytery.

But perhaps they will say, that according to Scripture, every City only must
have a Bishop, and therefore all the Country about must be his Diocese, though
the number of Churches and Presbyters under him be not determined. To which I
answer, that the word Only, is not in Scripture: no Text says that it was Only
in Cities that Churches or Bishops were to be seated. There is no prohibition
of settling them in Villages.

It will be said, that There is no example of any Bishop but in a City. To
which I answer. 1. Themselves ordinarily tell us in case of Sacrament gesture,
and many other things, that examples do not always bind affirmatively; much less
can they prove that they bind negatively; I mean, not to do that which was not
done. Can you prove in Scripture that there were any particular Churches or
Assemblies for Sacraments and other worship in Villages? If not, then is it
lawful now to have any? If not, then all our Parish Churches in the Country are
unlawful. If yea, then why may we not have Bishops in the Countries without
Scripture example, as well as Churches? for we shall prove that the reasons why
there were none or few Bishops in the Country, was for want of Churches for
them to oversee. The Gospel was not then preached, nor any Bishops placed in
many Nations of the world: it does not follow therefore that there must be none
since. 2. The reason is evident why Churches and Bishops were first planted in
Cities; because there was the greatest Concourse of people* not that God loves
a Citizen better then a Countryman, or that he will have his Churches so
limited to soil, or place, or situation: it is the number of persons wherever
they live, that must be regarded, that the Church be not too great nor too
small: but if there be the same number of people Cohabiting in the Country, as
one of the Apostolical Churches did consist of, then there is the same reason
to have a Church and Bishop in that Country Village, as was then for having one
in a City. 3. Elders should be ordained in every Church, and therefore Bishops
(for some of them say that these were Bishops) But Churches may be in Country
Villages; therefore Elders and Bishops may be in Country-Villages. 4. I prove
from Scripture that there were Bishops in Villages, or out of Cities, thus.
Where there was a Church, there was a Bishop. But in a Village there was a
Church; therefore. The Major I prove from Act. 14.23. compared with 1 Timothy 3.
They ordained them Elders in every Church, or Church by Church: but these
Elders are called Bishops in 1 Timothy 3. (and by some of that way maintained to
be such*)

For the Minor I prove it from Romans 16.1. where there is mention of the Church
at Cenchrea: but Cenchrea was no City, but as Grotius speaks, Portus
Corinthiorum, ut Piraeus Atheniensium, viz. ad sinum Saronicum: apparet ibi
Ecclesiam fuisse Christianorum. Grot. in Act. 18.18. and in Romans 16.1. vide et
Downam, Defens^ page 105. who out of Strab^ says, it was the Port that served
most properly for Asia. But Bishop Downam says (ibid.) that Cenchrea was a
Parish subordinate to the Church of Corinth, having not a Bishop or Presbytery,
but a Presbyter assigned to it: so before he says, by a Church, he means a
Company of Chr^sti^ns ha^ing a Bishop and Presbytery.] But if he will so define
a Church as that the Prelate shall enter the Definition, then he may well prove
that every Church had a Prelate. And so a Patriarch may be proved to be
Necessary to every Church, if you will say, you mean only such congregations as
have a Patriarch. But it was denominated a Church, Act. 14.23. before they had
Presbyters ordained to them, and so before fixed Bishops: when the Apostles had
converted and congregated them, they were Churches. And the Text says that
they ordained them Elders in every Church, or Church by Church* and therefore
Cenchrea being a Church, must have such Elders ordained to it, according to the
Apostles Rule. And that it was a Parish with one Presbyter subject to Corinth,
is all unproved, and therefore to no purpose.

5. Yet I prove that the English Prelacy on their own grounds, is not Iure
Divino in that it is against the word of God, according to their own
interpretation; of which next.

Argum. 10. THat Episcopacy which is contrary to the w^rd of God, or
Apostolical Institution, according to their own interpretation, is not to be
restored. But such is the late English Episcopacy: therefore, etc.

I prove the Minor (for the Major needs none:) according to their own
interpretation of Tit. 1.5. and other Texts; Every City should have a Bishop,
(and if it may be, a Presbytery) (And so many Councils have determined, only
when they grew greater, they except Cities that were too small: but so did not
Paul) But the late Episcopacy of England is contrary to this: for one Bishop
only is over many Cities. If therefore they will needs have Episcopacy, they
should at least have had a Bishop in every City: and though we do not approve
of confining them to Cities, yet this would be much better then as they were:
for then 1. They would be nearer their charges, and within reach of them. 2.
And they would have smaller charges, which they might be more capable of
overseeing; for there would be ten or twenty Bishops ^or one that be now. If
they say that except Bath and Wells Coventry and Lic^fi^ld, or some few, they
have but one City. I answer, its not so. For every Corporation or Burrough-Town
is truly (...); and therefore should have a Bishop Let them therefore either
prove that a Market Town, a Borough, a Corporation, is not (...), or else let
every one of these Towns and Buroughs have a Bishop, to govern that Town with
the Neighboring Villages by the consent and help of the Presbyters of these
Vil^ages, (according to their own grounds.) And if it were so, they would be no
more then Classical Bishops at most.

Perhaps they will say that, while we pretend to take down Bishops, we do but set
up more, and would have many for one, Object.
while we would have every Corporation or Parish to have a Bishop. To which I
answer, its true: Answ.
but then it is not the same sort of Bishops which we would exclude and which
we would multiply: we would exclude those Bishops that would undertake two or
three hundred men's work themselves, and will rule a whole Diocese alone (or by
a Lay Chancellor) when every conscionable man that has faithfully tried it,
does feel the oversight of one Congregation to be so great a burden, that it
makes him groan and groan again. We would exclude those Bishops that would
exclude all others in a whole Diocese, that they may do the work alone, and so
leave it undone, while they plead that it belongs to them to do it. If they
will come into the Lords Harvest, and exclude from the work of Government, the
Laborers of a whole County or two, we have reason to contradict them. But this
is not to bring in more such Bishops as they that will shut out others, but to
keep in the necessary laboring Bishops whom they would shut out. Nor do we
shut out them themselves as Laborers or Rulers, but as the excluders of the
Laborers or Rulers. If we have a Church to build that requires necessarily
two hundred workmen, and some Pillars in it to Erect, of many hundred tun
weight, if one of the workmen would say, that it belongs to him to do it all
himself, or at least when the materials are brought to the place prepared, to
rear and order and place every stone and pillar in the building, I would no
o^herwise exclude the vain pretender then by introducing necessary help that
the work may be done; and I should think him a silly Civiller that would tell
me, that while I exclude him, I do ^ut multiply such as he; when his every
fault consisted in an hinderance of that necessary multiplication.

Object. 2.
I know that some will say, that we feign more work then is to be done* and we
would have the sentence of Excommunication pass upon every light offense. I
answer; that its a thing that we abhor: Answ.
we would have none Excommunicated but for obstinacy in heinous sin; when they
will not hear the Church after more private admonition. But there is much more
of the work of Government to be done on men that are not Excommunicable, to
bring them to Repentance, and open confession, for man^fe^^a^ion of that
Repentance to the satisfaction of the Church: but what need we plead how great
the work is which every man may see before his eyes, and experience puts
beyond dispute?

Furthermore that the English Episcopacy is dissonant from all Scripture
Episcopacy, I prove thus. The Scripture knows but two sorts of Episcopacy:
the one General, unfixed as to any Church or Country or Nation; which was not
called Episcopacy in the first times: the other ^ixed Overseers of determinate
Churches appropriated to their special charge: these were called Bishops in
those times: whereas the former were, some called Apostles, from their
immediate mission and ex^raordinar^. Privileges; or Evangelists, or Fellow
laborers and he^pers of the Apostles, or by the like titles signifying their
unlimited indeterminate charge. But our English Bishops are neither of these:
therefore not any of Scripture appointment but different from them. 1. They are
not of the Apostolical Order of General Ministers: for 1. Their principal work
was Preaching to convert, and congregate, and then order Churches but our
Bishops seldom preached, for the most part. 2. They were not tied to any
particular Church more then other, save only as prudence directed them p^o
tempore and re not, for the succe^s of their work for the Church Un^ve^s^l* nor
were they excluded or restrained from any part of the world as being another
man's Diocese; save only as prudence might direct them for the common good, to
distribute themselves pro tempore. This is apparen^ 1. by Christ's Commission,
who sends them into all the world, only by certain advantages and particular
calls, sitting Pe^er more for the Circumcision, and Paul for the
Uncircumcision, when yet both Pet^r and Paul and all the rest, did preach and
look to both Circumcision and Uncircumcision. 2. By the History of their
peregrinations and labors, which show that they were not so fixed, whatever
some writers may ungroundedly affirm. Eus^bius (discrediting by fabulous
mixtures the lighter sort of his Testimonies, and censured by some rejection by
Gelasius and others) and some with him, do tell us of some such things, as some
Apostles being fixed Bishops, but with no such proofs as should satisfy a man
that weighs the contrary intimations of Scripture, and the discord of these
reporters among themselves. Only it is certain, that nature it self would so
restrain them that as they could be but in one place at once, so they could not
be in perpetual motion: and prudence would keep them longest in those places
where most work was to be done. And therefore Paul's three years abode at
Ephesus and the neighboring parts of Asia, did not make him the fixed Diocesan
Bishop of Ephesus.

And what I say of the Apostles, I say also of many such Itinerant unfixed
Ministers which were their helpers, as Silas, Apollo, Barnabas, Titus, Timothy,
etc. For though Timothy be called by some An^ients the first Bishop of Ephesus,
and Titus of Crete; yet it is apparent they were no such fixed Ministers, that
undertook a Diocese durant^ vita as their proper charge, which were then called
Bishops; but they were ^tinerant helpers of the Apostles in gathering, planting
and first ordering of Churches. And therefore Titus was left in a whole Nation
or large Island, to place Bishops or Elders in each City, and set things in
order, and this but till Paul come, and not to be himself their fixed Bishop:
and Timothy is proved by Scripture to have been unsettled and itinerant as a
helper of Paul, after that he is by some supposed to be fixed at Ephesus. I
will not needlessly actum agere: let any man that is unsatisfied of this, read
impartially Mr. Prins unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, and note there the
Itinerary of Timothy from Scripture Texts. If therefore our Bishops would have
been of the Apostles and their General helpers race, they should have gone up
and down to gather and plant Churches, and then go up and down to visit those
which they have planted; or if they live where all are Enchurched already, they
should go up and down to preach to the rud^r sort of them, and by the power of
the word to subdue men further to Christ, an^ to see that all Ministers where
they come do their duty, reproving and admonishing those that neglect it, but
not forbidding them to do it, as a thing belonging only to them. And by
Spiritual weapons and authority should they have driven Ministers to this duty,
and not by mere secular force (of which more anon.)

2. And as for the fixed Bishops of Apostolical Institution, our English
Prelacy are not like them. For the fixed Bishops established by the Apostles
were only Overseers of one particular Church: But the English Prelates were the
Overseers of many particular Churches. Therefore the English Prelates were not
the same with the old Bishops of the Apostles institution.

The course that the Prelates take to elude this argument is by giving us a
false definition of a particular Church. That we may not therefore have any
unprofitable strife about words, I shall signify my own meaning. By a
Particular Church I mean an Associated or combined company of Christians, for
Communion in Public Worship, and Furtherance of each other in the way to
heaven, under the Guidance of Christ's Church Officers, (one Elder or more;)
such as are undivided, or Churches of the first order commonly called Ecclesiae
Primae, as to existence, and which contain not diverse Political Churches in
them. A family I mean not: for that's not a Political Church, having no Pastor.
An accidental company of Christians I mean not. For those are no Association,
and so no Political Church: Nor do I mean a National, or Diocesane or Classical
Church, or any the like; which are composed of many particular Churches of the
first order, conjunct. It is not of Necessity that they always or most usually
meet in one Congregation: because its possible they may want a capacious
convenient room, and its possible they may be under persecution, so that they
may be forced to meet secretly in small companies; or there may be some aged
weak people or children that cannot travail to the chief place of Meeting; and
so may have some Chapels of ease, or smaller meeting. But still it must be a
number neither so big, nor so small as to be incapable of the ends of
Association, which enter the definition; how ever weakn^ss, age or other
accidents may hinder some members from that full usefullness as to the main
end, whith other members have. So that they which are so many, or live at such
a distance as to be incapable of the ends, are not such a Church, nor are
capable of so being: For the number will alter the species. In a word, it
cannot, I think, be proved that in the Primitive times, there was any one fixed
Bishop that Governed and Oversaw any more then one such particular political
Church, as was not composed of diverse lesser political Churches: nor that their
Churches which any fixed Bishop oversaw were more then could hold Communion in
Worship in one public place, for so many of them as could ordinarily hear at
once (for all the families cannot usually come at once:) they were not greater
then some of our English Parishes are, nor usually the tenth part so great. I
have been informed by the judicious inhabitants, that there are fourscore
thousand in Giles Cripple-gate Parish in London: and about fifty thousand in
Stepney, and forty thousand in Sepulchers. There cannot any Church in
Scripture be found that was greater, nor near so great as one of these
Parishes. No not the Church at Jerusalem it self of which so much is said: No
not if you admit all the number of moveable Converts and Sojournours to have
been of that particular Church, which yet cannot be proved to have been so. I
know Bishop Downam does with great indignation Dispute that Diocesses were
before Parishes, and that it was more then one Congregation that was contained
in those Diocesses; We will not contend about the name Diocese and Parish,
which by the Ancients were sometime used promiscuously for the same thing: But
as to the thing signified by them, I say that what ever you call it, a Diocese,
or a Parish, there were not near so many souls as in some English Parishes; nor
take one with another, their Churches commonly were no more Numerous then our
Parishes, nor so numerous. A Diocese then and a Parish were the same thing, and
both the same as our particular Churches now are; that is, the Ecclesiae
primae, or Soceities of Christians combined under Church-Rulers, for holy
Communion in Worship and Discipline. And there were no otherwise many
Congregations in one Church, then as our Chapples of ease, or a few meeting in
a private house because of rainy weather, are many Congregations in one Parish.
The foresaid Learned and Godly, (though angry) Bishop Downame, says Def. li.
2. cap. 1. page 6. that [ Indeed at the very first Conversion of Cities, the
whole Number of the people converted, being some not much greater then the
Number of the Presbyters placed among them, were able to make but a small
Congregation.] Call that Church then a Diocese or a Parish, I care not, so we
come near an agreement, about the proportion of Members that the definition be
not overthrown, and the ends of it made impossible by the distance, number, and
unacquaintedness of the members that cannot have any Church communion
immediately one with another. If there be no communion, how is it a Church? Nay
or if there be no such communion as consists in mutual assistance and
conjunction in Worship, and holding familiarity also in our conversation (which
the excommunicated are excluded from) And if a communion there be, it is either
Immediate by the members themselves Assembled, or else but Mediately by their
Officers or Delegates. If it be only by the latter Mediately, then it is not
the Ecclesia prima, but orta: It is an association of several Political
Churches: For that is the difference between the communion of a single
particular Church, and many combined Churches, that as the first is a
combination of persons and not of Churches, so the communion is held among the
Members in common, whereas the other being a combination of Churches, the
communion is maintained orderly by Officers and Delegates, joining in Synods,
and sent from the Congregations. If therefore it be an Immediate ordinary
communion of members in Ecclesiastical affairs, viz. Worship and Discipline,
that is the Particular Church that I intend, call it what you will else, and
whether there may be any private meetings in it besides the main body, or not,
as possibly through some accidents there may be; and yet at Sacrament and on
the most solemn occasions, the same persons that were at Chapels or less
meetings, may be with the chief Assembly.

But I shall proceed in the proof of this by the next Argument, which will
serve for this and the main together.

Argum. 11. THat sort of Church Government may most safely be now practiced
which was used in the Scripture times, and that's less safe which was not then
used. But the Government of many Elders and particular Churches by one Bishop
(fixed, and taking that as his proper Diocese, such as the English Bishops
were) was not used in Scripture times. Therefore it is not so safe to use it or
restore it now.

The Major is proved hence: 1. In that the Primitive Church which was in
Scripture times, was of unquestionable Divine Institution, and so most pure.
And it is certainly lawful to practice that Church Government which alone was
practiced by all the Church in the Scripture times of the New Testament. 2.
Because we have no certain Law or Direction but Scripture for the frame of
Government as jure Divino. Scripture is Gods sufficient and perfect Law. If
therefore there be no mention of the Practice of any such Episcopacy in
Scripture, no nor any precept for the practice of it afterward, then cannot we
receive it as of Divine Institution. The Objections shall be answered when we
have proved the Minor.

And for the Minor I shall at this time argue from the Concessions of the most
Learned and Reverend man that at this time has deeply engaged himself in
defense of Episcopacy, who does grant us all these things following. 1. That in
Scripture times they were the same persons, and of the same office that were
called Bishops and Presbyters. 2. That all the Presbyters mentioned in
Scripture times, or then instituted (as far as we can know) had a Power of
Ordination. 3. And also a Power of Ruling the Church, Excommunicating and
Absolving. 4. That there was not then in being any Presbyter (such as the
Bishops would have in these times) who was under the Bishop of a particular
Church or Diocese. His words are these [ And although this title of (...),
Elders, have been also extended to a second Order in the Church, and is now
only in use for them, under the Name of Presbyters, yet in the Scripture times
it belonged principally, if not alone to Bishops; there being no Evidence, that
any of that second order were then instituted, though soon after, before the
writing of Ignatius Epistles there were such instituted in all Churches.] 5. It
is yielded also by him that it is the office of these Presbyters or Bishops to
Teach frequently and diligently, to reduce Heretics, to reprove, rebuke,
Censure and absolve, to visit all the sick and pray with them, etc. And
therefore it must needs follow that their Diocese must be no larger then that
they may faithfully perform all this to the Members of it: And if there be but
one Bishop to do it, I am most certain then by experience that his Diocese must
be no bigger then this Parish, nor perhaps half so big. 6. And it must needs
follow, that in Scripture times a Particular Church* consisted not of seve^al
Churches associated, Dr. H. Dissert. 4. p. 208. [. 9. Prius non usqu^quaque
verum esse quod p^o concesso sumitur (in una civitate non fuisse plur^s
Episcopos) Quamvis enim in (...) Ecclesia aut C^^tu plures simul Episcopi
nunquam fuerint, nihil tamen obstare quin in eadem civitate d^o aliquando
distermina^^ Coe^us fuerint, duobus Apostolis ad fidem adducti, di versi^
^orsa^ dialectis and aliquando ritibus disjuncti, quibus duo itidem Episcopi
scorsim, and divisis (...) praesidere^t.

Et p. 211.. 21. [ Ex his ratio constat, quare sine Presbyterorum mentione
interveniente, Episcopis Diaconi immediate adjiciantur, quia scilicet in
singulis Macedoni^e civitatibus, quamvis Episcopus esset, no^dum Presbyteri
constituti sunt, Diaconis tantum (...) ubique Episcopis adjunctis.

Mark well the stating of the question by Dr. H. Dissert. Epist.. 30, 31. The
controversy is not Quibus d^mum ^ominibus cogniti fuerint* Ecclesiarum
Rectores, sed an ad unum in singulari Ecclesia, an ad plures, potestas ista
devenerit. Nos ad unum singularem Praefect^m, quem ex famosiore Ecclesiae usu
Episcopum vulgo dicimus, potestatem istam in singulari Coetu ex Christi and
Apostolorum institutione nunquam non pertinuisse affirmamus.] You see here that
it is but [in singulari Ecclesia] and [in si^gulari Coetu] that he affirms an
Episcopacy of Christ's and the Apostles institution. And such Bishops most
Churches in England have already.


nor of several Congregations ordinarily meeting in several places for
Christian communion in the solemn Worship of God, but only of the Christians of
one such Congregation with a single Pastor (though in that we dissent, and
suppose there we^e more Pastors then one usually, or often.) That this must be
granted with the rest is apparent. 1. The Reverend Author says as Bishop
Downam before cited [ That when the Gospel was first preached by the Apostles
and but few Converted, they ordained in every City and region, no more but a
Bishop and one or more Deacons to attend him, there being at the present so
small store out of which to take more, and so small need of ordaining more, that
this Bishop is constituted more for the sake of those which should after
believe, then of those which did already.] 2. And its proved thus: If there
were in Scripture times any more ordinary Worshipping Assemblies on the Lords
days then one under one Bishop, then either they did Preach, Pray, Praise God,
and administer the Lords Supper in those Assemblies, or they did not: If not,
then 1. They were no such Worshipping Assemblies as we speak of. 2. And they
should sin against Christ who required it. 3. And differ from his Churches
which ordinarily used it. But if they did thus, then either they had some
Pastor (Presbyter or Bishop) to perform these holy actions between God and the
people, or not: If not, then they suppose that Laymen might do all this
Ministerial work, in Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and Praise in the name of the
Assembly, etc. And if so, what then is proper to the Ministry? then farewell
Bishops and Presbyters too. If not, the^ ^^her the Bishop must be in two
Assemblies at once performing the Holy Worship of God in their communion (but
that's impossible:) or else he must have some assisting Presbyters to do it; But
that's denied: Therefore it must needs follow that the Church order,
constitution and practiced Government which was in Scripture times, was this;
that a single Worshipping Congregation was that particular Church which had a
Presbyter or Bishop (one or more) which watched over and ruled that only
Congregation as his Diocese or proper charge, having no Government of any other
Church (Congregation) or Elders. De facto this is plainly yielded.

Well: this much being yielded, and we having come so far to an agreement,
about the actual Church Constitution and Government of the Scripture times, we
desire to know some sufficient reason, why we in these times may not take up
with tha^ Government and Church order which was practiced in the Scripture
times? And the Reason that is brought against it is this; Because it was the
Apostles intention that this single Bishop who in Scripture times had but one
Congregation, and Governed no Presbyters, should after Scripture times, have
many settled Congregations, and their Presbyters under them, and should have
the power of ordaining them, etc. To this I answer, 1. The Intentions of men's
hearts are secret till they are some way revealed. No man of this age does know
the Apostles hearts but by some sign: what then is the revelation that Proves
this Intention? Either it must be some Word or Deed. For the first I cannot yet
find any color of proof which they bring from any word of the Apostles, where
either they give power to this Presbyter or Bishop to Rule over many Presbyters
and Congregations for the future: Nor yet where they do so much as foretell
that so it shall be. As for those of Paul to Timothy and Titus* that the^
rebuke not an Elder, and receive not accusation against them but under two or
three Witnesses, the Reverend Author affirms that those E^ders were not
Presbyters under such Bishops as we now speak of, but those Bishops themselves,
whom Timothy and Titus might rebuke. And for mere facts without Scripture
words, the^e is none that can prove this pretended Intention of the Apostles.
First, there is no fact of the Apostles themselves or the Churches or Pastors
in Scripture time to prove it. For Subordinate Presbyters are confessed not to
be then ^nstituted, and so not existent: and other fact of theirs there can be
none. And no fact after them can prove it. Yet this is the great Argument that
most insist on, that the practice of the Church after Scripture times, does
prove that Intention of the ^p^stles which Scripture does not (for ought is yet
proved by them that I can find) at all express. But we deny that, and require
p^oo^ of it. It is not bare saying so that will serve. Is it not possible for
the succeeding Bishops to err and mistake the Apostles Intentions? If not, then
are they Infallible as well as the Apostles, which is not true. They might sin
in going from the Institution: And their sin will not prove that the Apostles
intended it should be so de jure, because their followers did so de facto.

If they say that it is not likely that all the Churches should so suddenly be
ignorant of the Apostles Intention, I answer, 1. We must not build our faith
and practice on Conjectures. Such a saying as this is no proof of Apostolical
intentions, to warrant us to swerve from the sole practiced Government in
Scripture times. 2. There is no great likelihood that I can discern that this
first practiced Government was altered by those that knew the Apostles, and
upon supposition that these which are pretended were their intents. 3. If it
were so, yet is it not impossible, nor very improbable, that through humane
frailty they might be drawn to conjecture that that was the Apostles intents
which seemed right in their eyes, and suited their present judgments and
interests. 4. Sure we are that the Scripture is the perfect Law and Rule to the
Church for the Establishing of all necessary Offices and Ordinances: and
therefore if there be no such intentions or Institutions of the Apostles
mentioned in the Scripture, we may not set up universally such Offices and
Ordinances, on any such supposed intents.

De facto we seem agreed, that the Apostles settled One Pastor over one
Congregation having no Presbyters under his Rule: and that there were no other
in Scripture time: but shortly after when Christians were multiplied, and the
most of the Cities where the Churches were planted, were converted to the
faith, together with the Country round about, then there were many
Congregations, and many Pastors, and the Pastor of the first Church in the City
did take all the other Churches and Pastors to be under his Government, calling
them Presbyters only, and himself eminently or only the Bishop. Now the
Question between us is, Whether this was well done or not? and Whether these
Pastors should not rather have gathered Churches as free as their own? and
Whether the ^hristians that were afterward converted should not have combined
for holy Communion themselves in particular distinct ^hurches and have had
their own Pastors set over them, as the first Churches by the Apostles had?
They that deny it, and Justify their fact, have nothing that we can see for
it, but an ungrounded surmise, that it was the Apostles meaning that the first
Bishops should so do: But we have the Apostles express Institution, and the
Churches practice during Scripture times, for the other way. We doubt not but
Christians in the beginning were thin, and that the Apostles therefore preached
most, and planted Churches in Cities because they were the most populous
places, where was most matter to work upon, and most disciples were there; and
that the Country round about did afford them here and there a family which
joined to the City Church: Much like as it is now among us with the Anabaptists
and Separatists, who are famed to be so Numerous and potent through the Land,
and yet I do not think that in all this County, there is so many in Number of
either of these sects as the tenth part of the people of this one Parish; nor
perhaps as the twentieth part. Now if all the Anabaptists in Worcestershire, or
at least that lived so near as to be capable of Church communion, should be of
Mr. T's. Congregation at Bewdley, or of a Church that met in the chief City,
Worcester; yet does not this intimate that all the space of ground in this
County is appointed or intended for the future as Mr. T's. Diocese; but if the
successive Pastor should claim the whole County as his charge, if the whole
were turned to that opinion, no doubt but they would much cross their founders
mind. And (if the comparison may be tolerated) we see great reason to conceive
that the Ancient Bishops did thus cross the Apostles minds. When there were no
more Christians in a City and the adjoining parts, then half some of our
Parishes, the Apostles planted fixed Governors called Bishops or Elders over
these particlar Churches, which had constant communion in the worship of God:
And when the Cities and Countries were converted to the faith, the frailty of
ambition co-working thereto, these Bishops did claim all that space of ground
for their Diocese where the members of their Church had lived before; as if
Churches were to be measured by the acres of Land, and not by the number of
souls; whereas they should have done as the Bee-hives do, when they are ready
to swarm, so that the old hive cannot contain them all, the swarm removes and
seeks them another habitation, and makes them a New hive of their own. So when
a Church grows big enough for two Churches, one part should remove to another
meeting place, and they should become two Churches, and the later be of the
same sort as the former, and as free, and not become subject to the former, as
if men had right to be Rulers of others, because they were Converted before
them, or because they dwell in a walled City, and others in the Villages. This
Error therefore was no contrived or sudden thing, but crept on by degrees, as
Countries were Converted and Churches enlarged; we are agreed therefore de
facto, that it was otherwise in the Apostles days, and that soon after, in
some places, it came to that pass as the Prelates would have it (in some
degree.) But whether the Apostles were willing of the change, is the Question
between us; we deny it, and expect their better proof. And till they prove it,
we must needs take it for our duty to imitate that Government which themselves
confess was only practiced in Scripture times; supposing this the safest way.

BUt yet, though the proof lie on their part, who affirm the Apostles to have
had such Intentions, that Pastors of single Congregations should afterward
become the Pastors of many, I shall ex super abundanti give them some Reasons
for the Negative.

1. And first we are most certain that the holiest Pastors of the Church, had
so much Pride and Ambition, Reason 1.
that might possibly make them guilty of such a mistake as tended to the
^ncrease of their own power and rule. Conqu^ritur jam olim Socrates Episcopatus
quosdam suis temporibus extra sacerdotii sines ^gressos and (...)* esse
delapsos: Conqueritur apud Pelusiotam Hierax lenitatis and m^nsuetudinis
dignitatem in Tyrannidem tran^^sse: conqueritur de Episcoporum ambitione
Nazianzenus; and propterea si non Episcopatum, c^rte civi^atum (...) perpetuum
in retinenda Epis^opali dignitate mutatum velle^* He adds yet more such, and
concludes, that Ecclesiastical Ambition never made such progress from the
Apo^tles days to those, as it has done since to ours, almost ^ncurably.
Grotius de imperio page 360* 361.
We find even the twelve Apostles contending in Christ's own presence for the
Primacy, till he is put sharp^ly to rebuke them, and tell them the Necessity of
humility, and teach them better the state of his Kingdom. Paul met with many
that contended against him for a pre-eminence, and put him upon all those
defenses of the dignity of his Apostleship^ which we find him using. Peter
found it necessary to warn the Pastors that they should not Lord it over Gods
Heritage. And John did meet with a Lording Diotrephes, that loved to have the
pre-eminence. While they lay under the Cross, the Bishops were aspiring, and
usurping authority over one another; or else Victor of Rome had not presumed to
Excommunicate the Asian Bishops for not conforming to his opinion: What
abundance of unworthy contentions did the Bishops of the first ages fill the
Churches with? and much about superiority, who should be greatest; what should
be the privileges of their several Seas; etc. Their pride no doubt was a great
cause of their contention; and those contentions necessitated the interposition
of Emperors to reconcile them that could not agree of themselves. If the
Emperors called a Council to that end, even the Council it self would fall to
pieces, and make all worse, if the Magistrate did not moderate them. Had not
Constantine burnt the Nicene Schedules, and done much to maintain an Union
among them, the success of that Council might have been such as would have been
no great encouragement to succeeding ages to seek for more. What bitter
quarrels are there between the most eminent of all the Fathers and Bishops of
the Church? between Chrysostom and Epiphanius; Chrysostom and Theophilus
Alexandrinus; Hierom and John of Jerusalem; Jerome and Ruffinus; besides his
quarrels with Chrysostom and Augustine. I open not the concealed nakedness of
the Saints; but mention those public doleful tragedies which made the Church
an amazement to it self, and a scorn to the Heathens that lived about them;
witness the well known censure of Ammianus Marcellinus: when so many people
shall be murdered at once in contention for a Bishopric as were at the choice
of Damasus; ambition was too predominant. The mentioning of the contentions of
those most excellent Bishops, and the first four general Councils, makes Luther
break out into so many admiring exclamations, in his Treatise de Conciliis,
that ever such men should so ambitiously quarrel about toys and trifles, and
childish things, and that even to the disturbing of all the Churches, and
setting the Christian world on a flame. Of the two Churches of Rome and
Constantinople he says, Ita hae ^uae Ecclesiae ambitiose r^^atae sunt, de re
nihili, vanissimis and nugacissimis naeniis, done^ ^^ndem utraque horribiliter
vastata and deleta est. page 175. This caused Nazianzen (who complains so
much himself of the ^dium or displeasure of his fellow Bishops) to profess
himself to be so affected, that he would avoid all Assemblies of Bishops,
because he had never seen a good end of any Synod, and which did not rather
increase the evils than remove them; and his reason is not as B^llarmine
feigneth, only because they were all Arrians; but because, The desire of
contending, and of preheminency or principality, and their emulation, did
overcome reason, (which Luther mentioning ib. page 225. wondereth that for
these words he was not excommunicated as an arrant heretic) Who knows not,
that knows any thing of Church history, how the Church has been torn in
pieces in all ages except the first, by the dissension of the Bishops, till the
Pope drew part of them to unite in him? And who knows not, that knows any
thing of the present state of the Christian world, into how many fractions it
is broken at this day, and almost all through the Division of these Guides? If
therefore we shall imagine that the Pastors of the Church could not be tainted
with so much ambition as to enlarge their own Diocesses, and gather the new
Chuches under themselves, when they should have formed them into the same order
and freedom as were the first, we shall shut our eyes against the most full
experience of the Christian world* especially when the change was made by
degrees.

2. The second Reason that persuades me to stick to the sole practiced
Government in Scripture times, Reason 2.
and not to alter it upon pretended Intentions of the Apostles, is this:
Nothing that intimates temerity, or mutability, is to be charged upon the Holy
Ghost but to institute one frame or species of Church Government for Scripture
times, and to change it presently into another species to all succeeding ages,
does intimate temerity or mutability; or at least, is so like it, that
therefore without good proof it is not to be charged on the Holy Ghost. That
they are two distinct species of Government is plain: one is the Government of
a Particular Congregation, without any other Congregations or Elders under that
Government: the other is the Governing of many Elders and Churches by one
supereminent Prelate: and if these be not two differing sorts of Government,
then let the Prelates confess that the Government which we would continue is of
the same sort with theirs: for ours is of the first sort; and if theirs be of
the same, we are both agreed.

And that the Lord Jesus Christ should settle one kind of Government de facto
during Scripture time, and change it for ever after, is most improbable: 1.
Because it intimates levity, or mutability in a Lawgiver, so suddenly to
change his Laws and form of Government; either something that he is supposed
not to have foreseen, or some imperfection is intimated as the cause. Or if
they say, that it was the change of the state of the body Governed, viz. the
Church: I answer, 2. There was no change of the state of the Church to
necessitate a change of the kind of Officers and Government: for (as I shall
show anon) there was need of more Elders then one in Scripture times* and the
increase of the Church might require an increase of Officers for Number, but
not for Kind. There was as much need of assisting Presbyters, as of Deacons. I
may well conclude therefore, that he that will affirm a Change of the
Government so suddenly, must be sure to prove it; and the rather, because this
is the Bishops own great and most considerable Argument on the other side, when
they p^ead that the Apostles themselves were Rulers of Presbyters, therefore
Rulers over Presbyters (and many Churches) should continue as Gods Ordinance:
many on the other side answer them, (though so do not I) that this Ordinance
was temporary, during the Apostles times, who had no Successors in Government:
to which the Prelates reply, that its not ^^agi^ab^e that Christ should settle
one sort of Church-Governme^t for the first age, and another ever after,
abolishing that first so soon: and tha^ they who affirm this, must prove it.
For my part, I am overcome by this Argument, to allow all that the Apostolical
pattern can prove, laying aside that which depended on their extraordinary
gifts and privileges; but then I see no reason but they should acknowled^e the
^o^ce of their own Medi^m: and conclude its not im^ginable that, if God set^led
^ixed Bishops only over particular Congregations, without any such order as
subject Pre^byters, in the first age, he should change this, and set up subject
Presbyters and many Churches under one man for ever after.

If they say, that this is not a change of the spe^ies, but a growing up of the
Church from Infancy to Maturity: I answer* It is a plain change of the Species
of Government, when one Congregation is turned into Many, and when a new order
of Officers, viz. subject Presbyters without power of Ordination or
Jurisdiction, is introduced, and the Bishops made Governors of Pastors, that
before were but Governors of the People, this is plainly a new Species. Else I
say again, let them not blame us for being against the right Species.

3. The third Reason is this: Reason 3.
They that affirm a change (not of the Governors, but also) of the very nature
or kind of a particular Governed or Political Church, from what it was in
Scripture times, do affirm a thing so improbable* as is (...) without very
clear proof to be credited. But such are they that affirm that Congregational
Bishops were turned to Diocesan: therefore, etc.

The Church that was the object of the Government of a fixed Bishop in
Scripture times, was, [ A competent Number of persons in Covenant with Christ
(or of Christians) co-habiting, A particular Church, what.
by the app^intment of Christ and their mutual expressed consent, united (or
associated) under Christ's Ministerial Teachers and Guides for the right
worshipping of God in public and the Edification of the Body in Knowledge and
Holiness, and the maintaining of obedience to Christ among them* for the
strength, beauty and safety of the whole and each part, and thereby the
Pleasing and Glorifying God the Redeemer, and Creator,] I^ would be too long,
rather then difficult to stand to prove all the parts of this Definition, of
the first particular Political Church. That part which most concerns our
present purpose, is the Ends, which in Relations must enter the Definition:
which in one word is, The Communion of Saints personally, as Associated
Churches consisting of many particular Churches, are for the Communion of
Saints by officers and Delegates. And therefore this communion of Saints is put
in our Creed, next to the Catholic Church, as the end of the combination. I
shall have occasion to prove this by particular Texts of Scripture anon. A
Diocesan Church is not capable of these Ends. What personal communion can they
have that know not nor see not one aonther? that live not together, nor worship
God together? There is no more personal communion of Saints among most of the
people of this Diocese, then is between us and the inhabitants of France or
Germany: For we know not so much as the names or faces of each other, nor ever
come together to any holy uses. So that to turn a Congregation into a Diocesan
Church, is to change the very subject of Government.

Obj. This is mere independency, to make a single Congregation, the subject of
the Government. Answ. 1. I am not deterred from any truth by Names. I have
formerly said, that its my opinion that the truth about Church Government, is
parcelled out into the hands of each party, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independents, and Erastian: And in this point in Question the Independents are
most right. Yet I do dot affirm (nor I think they) that this one Congregation
may not accidentally be necessitated to meet in several places at once, either
in case of persecution, or the age and weakness of some members, or the
smalness of the room: But I say only that the Church should contain no more
then can hold communion when they have opportunity of place and liberty; and
should not have either several settled Societies or Congregations, nor more in
one such Society then may consist with the Ends. And that these Assemblies are
bound to Associate with other Assemblies, and hold communion with them by the
mediation of their Officers; this, as I make no doubt of, so I think the
Congregational will confess. And whereas the common evasion is by
distinguishing between a Worshipping Church and a Governed Chuch, I desire them
to give us any Scripture proof that a Worshipping Church and a Governed Church
were not all one, supposing that we speak of a settled society or combination.
I find no such distinction of Churches in Scripture. A family I know may
perform some worship, and accordingly have some Government: And an occasional
meeting of Christians without any Minister, may perform some Worship without
Government among them. But where was there ever a Society that ordinarily
assembled for public worship, such as was performed by the Churches on the
Lords days, and held communion ordinarily in worship, and yet had not a
Governing Pastor of their own? Without a Presbyter they could have no
Sacraments and other public Worship* And where was there ever a Presbyter that
was not a Church Governor? Certainly if subject Presbyters were not till after
Scripture times, nor any settled Worshipping Church without a Presbyter (unless
the people preached and administered the Sacraments,) then there could be no
Worshipping Church that had not their own proper Governor, nor any such
Governor (fixed) that had more Churches then one.

Reason 4. The contrary opinion feigneth the Apostles to have allotted to each
Bishop a space of ground for his Diocese, Reason 4.
and to have measured Churches by such spaces, and not by the number of souls:
But this is unproved, and absurd. 1. Unproved, For there is no place in
Scripture that gives the Bishop charge of all that space of ground, or of all
the Christians that shall be in that space during his time. Indeed they placed
a Bishop in each City, when there was but a Church in each City: But they never
said* there shall be but one Church in a City, or but one Bishop in a City;
much less in all the Country region. 2. And its absurd: For its the number of
souls that a Church must be measured by, and not a space of ground, (so they do
but co-habite:) For if in the same space of Ground, there should be twenty or
an hundred times as many Christians, it would make the number so great as would
be incapable of personal communion, and of obtaining Church Ends. If a
Schoolmaster have a School in the chief City or Town of this County, and there
come as many from many miles compass as one School can hold, and there be no
more there: so long all that space may belong to his School, not for the space
sake, but the number of Scholars: For if there be afterward an hundred times
as many in that space to be taught, they must set up more Schools, and it were
no wise part in the old Schoolmaster to maintain that all that Country
pertaine^h to his School, because that it was so when there were fewer. So that
to measure our the matter of Churches by space of ground, and not by number of
souls, is plainly against the Reason of the Relation.

Reason 5. Reason 5.
The opposed opinion does imply that God more regards Cities then Country
Villages, or that Churches are to be measured according to the number and
greatness of Cities rather then according to the number of souls. For they
suppose that every City should have a Bishop if there be but twenty, or forty,
or an hundred Christians in it: but if there be five hund^ed Country Parishes,
that have some of them many thousand souls in them, these shall have no Bishops
of their own, but be all ruled by the Bishop of the City. Now how unreasonable
this is, methinks should not be hard to discern. For, 1. What is a City to God
any more then a Village, that for it he should make so partial an institution?
Does he regard Rome any more then Eugubium, or Alexandria more then Tanis, for
their worldly splendour or privileges? No doubtless it is for the multitude of
inhabitants. And if so, its manifest that an equal number of inhabitants
elsewhere, should have the same kind of Government. 2. Is it probable that God
would have twenty thousand or an hundred thousand people in a Diocese (and in
some a Million) to have but one Church-Ruler, and yet would have every small
congregation in a City to have one, though there be none else under him? What
proportion is there in this way of Government, that an hundred or fifty men
shall have as many Governors as a Million? as if ten thousand or an hundred
thousand Scholars ou^ of a City shall have no more Rulers, then an hundred in
a (...); and all because one part are in a City, and the other not? Or a
Physician shall have but an hundred Patients to look to in a City, and if there
be a Million in that City and Country, he shall also upon pain of Gods
everlasting wrath undertake the care of them all? Let them that strive for such
a charge look to it; I profess I admire at them, what they think 1. Of the
needs of men souls: 2. Of the terrors of Gods wrath. 3. And of their own
sufficiency for such a work? Were it my case, if I know my own he^rt at all* I
should fear that this were but to strive to damn thousands, and to be damned
with them, by undertaking on that penalty to be their Physician (under Christ)
when I am sure I cannot look to the hundredth man of them, and I had rather
strive to be a gally-slave to the Turks, or to be preferred to rid Cha^els, or
the basest office all my days.

Reason 6. According to the oppos^d opinion, it is in the power of a King to
make Bishops to be either Congregational or Diocesan, Reason 6.
to make a Bish^p to have a Million of souls or a whole Nation in charge, or to
have but a^ few. For if a King will but dissolve the Privilege and title, and
make that no City which was a City, though he diminish not the number of souls;
and if he will do thus by all the Cities, save one in his dominion, then must
there be but one Bishop in his dominion. And if he will but make every country
Town, that has four or five hundred or a thousand inhabitants to be
incorporate, and honor it with the title and privileges of a City, th^n shall
they have a Bishop. Moreover, thus every Prince may de jure banish Episcopacy
out of his Dominions, without diminishing the number of Christians, if he do
but defranchise the Cities, and be of the mind as I have heard some men have
been, that Cities are against the Princes interest, by strengthening the
people, and advantaging them to rebellions. Also if there be any Indian Nations
so barbarous as to have no Cities, though they were converted, yet must they
have no Bishops: Also it would be in the Princes power de jure to depose any of
those Bishops that the Ap^stles or their Successors are supposed to set up: For
the R^man Emperor might have proclaimed Antioch, Alexandria, or any of the
rest to be no Cities, and then they must have no longer have had any Bishops.
And what Bish^ps shall Antioch have at this day?

Now how absurd all this is, I need not manifest: that whole Contre^e^ shall
have no Government for want of (...), that Kings shall so alter Church Officers
at their ple^sure ^hen they intend it not, merely by altering the Civil
Priviledg^s of their people; that a King may make one Diocese to become an
hundred, and an hundred become one, by such means. And yet all this does
unden^ably follow, if the Law be that every City and only every City shall be a
Bishops Sea where there are Christians to be governed.

Reason 7. There is no sufficient Reason given, R^ason 7.
why subject P^^s^byters should not have been set up in the Scripture times* as
well as after, if it had been the Apostles intent that such should be
instituted. The Necessity pretended, was no necessity, and the Nonnecessity is
but pre^ended. First it is pre^e^^ed that there were so few fit men that there
was a Necessity of forb^arance. But this is not so: For, 1. The Church had
larger gifts of the Spirit then, then now, and therefore proportionable to the
flocks they might have had competent men, then as well as now. 2. They had men
enough to make Deacons of, even s^ven in a (...): And who will believe then
that they could find none to make such Elders of? Was not Stephen or Philip
sufficiently qualified to have been a subject Elder? 3. They had many that
prophesied, and interpreted, and spoke with tongues in one Assembly, as
appears, 1 Cor. 14. And therefore its man^f^st that there were enough to have
made Ruled Elders: At least sure the Church at Jerusalem, where there were so
many thousands, would have afforded them one such, if it had been requisite.

But secondly, its pretended not to have been Necessary, because of the fewness
of the people. But I answer, 1. The same persons say that in Ignatius his time
all Churches had such Presbyters: And its manifest that many Churches in the
Scripture times, were more populous or large, then many or most beside them
were in Ignatius time. 2. Did the numerous Church at Jerusalem ordinarily meet
on the Lords days for holy communion, or not? If they did, then it was but a
Church of one Congregation (which is by most denied) If not, then the several
Assemblies must have several Presbyters (for several Bishops they will not hear
of,) Doubtless they did not celebrate the holy communion of the Church and
Ordinances of God, by mere Laymen alone. 3. What man that knows the burden of
Pastoral Oversight, can say that such Churches of thousands, as Jerusalem,
Rome, Alexandria, etc. had need of no more than one man, to Teach them, and do
all the Pastoral work? and so that assisting Ruled Presbyters were then
needless? If they were needless to such numerous Churches then; let us even
take them for needless still, and set up no new orders which were not seen in
Scripture times.

Reas. 8. The Apostles left it not to the Beshops whom they established to make
new Church-offices and orders quoad speciem, Reason 8.
but only to ordain men to succeed others in the offices and orders that
themselves had (by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost) appointed, or else Christ
before them. A Bishop might make a Bishop or a Deacon perhaps, because these
were quoad speciem made before, and they were but to put others into the places
before appointed. But if there were no such creature in Scripture times as a
subject Presbyter, that had no power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, then if
the Bishops afterward should make such, they must make a new office, as well as
a new officer. So that either this new Presbyter is of the institution of
Christ by his Apostles, or of Episcopal humane institution. If the former, and
yet not institututed in Scripture times, then Scripture is not the sufficient
rule and discoverer of Divine Institutions and Church Ordinances: and if we
once forsake that Rule, we know not where to fix, but must wander in that
Roman uncertainty. If the latter, then we must expect some better proof then
hitherto we have seen, of the Episcopal (or any humane) power to make new
Offices in the Church of Christ, and that of universal and standing necessity.
Till then we shall think they ought to have made but such Presbyters as
themselves.

Reason 9. Reason 9.
If there be not so much as the name of a Ruled Presbyter without power of
Ordination, or Jurisdiction, in all the Scripture, much less then is there any
description of his Office, or any Directions for his ordination, or the
qualifications prerequisit in him, and the performance of his office when he is
in it: And if there be no such Directory concerning Presbyters, then was it not
the Apostles intent that ever any such should be ordained. The reason of the
consequence is, 1. Because the Scripture was written not only for that age then
in being, but for the Church of all ages to the end of the world: And therefore
it must be a sufficient directory for all. The second Epistle to Timothy was
written but a little before Paul's death. Surely if the Churches in Ignatius
days were all in need of Presbyters under Bishops, Paul might well have seen
some need in his time, or have foreseen the need that was so near, and so have
given directions for that office. 2. And the rather is this consequence firm,
because Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus does give such full and
punctual Directions concerning the other Church Officers, not only the Bishops,
but also the Deacons, describing their prerequisite qualifications, their
office, and directing for their Ordination, and conversation: Yea he
condescendeth to give such large Directions concerning Widows themselves, that
were serviceable to the Church. Now is it probable that a perfect Directory
written for the Church to the worlds End, and largely describing the
qualifications and office of Deacons, which is the inferior, would not give
one word of direction concerning subject Presbyters without power of Ordination
or Rule, if any such had been then intended for the church? No nor once so much
as name them? I dare not accuse Paul's Epistles written to that very purpose,
and the whole Scripture, so much of insufficiency, as to think they wholly omit
a necessary office, and so exactly mention the inferior and commonly less
necessary, as they do.

Reason 10. Reason 10.
The new Episcopal Divines do yield that all the texts in Timothy, Titus, and
the rest of the New Testament, that mentitn Gospel Bishops or Presbyters, do
mean only such as have power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, without the
concurrence of any superior Bishop. The common Inerpretation of the Fathers,
and the old Episcopal Divines of all ages, of most or many of those texts, is,
that they speak of the office of such as now are called Presbyters. Lay both
together, and if one of them be not mistaken, they afford us this conclusion,
that the Presbyters that now are, have by these texts of Scripture, the power
of Ordination and Jurisdiction without the concurrence of others. And if so,
then was it never the Apostles intent, to leave it to the Bishops to ordain a
sort of Presbyters of another order, that should have no such power of
Ordination or Jurisdiction, without the Bishops Negative.

Reason 11. We find in Church History that it was first in some few great
Cities (especially Rome and Alexandria) that a Bishop ruled many settled
worshipping Congregations with their Presbyters; Reason 11.
when no such thing at that time can be proved by other Churches: therefore we
may well conceive that it was no Ordinance of the Apostles, but was occasioned
afterward, by the multiplying of Christians in the same compass of ground
where the old Church did inhabit; and the adjacent parts, together with the
humane frailty of the Bishops, who gathered as many as they could under their
own Government when they should have erected new Churches as free as their own.

Reason 12. If the Description of the Bishops settled in the New Testament,
Reason 12.
and the work affixed to them, be such as cannot agree to our Diocesan Bishops*
but to the Pastors of a single Church, then was it never the mind of the Holy
Ghost that those Bishops should degenerate afterward into Diocesan Bishops:
But the Antecedent is certain? therefore so is the Consequent.

I here still suppose with Learned Dr. H Annot. in Act. 11. and passim, that
the name Presbyter in Scripture signifies a Bishop, there being no Evidence
that in Scripture time any of that Second Order, ( viz. subject Presbyters)
were then instituted. Though I am far from thinking that there was but one of
these Bishops in a Church at least as to many Churches. Now as we are agreed de
facto that it was but a single Church that then was under a Bishop and not many
such Churches (for that follows undenyably upon the denying of the existence of
subject Presbyters; seeing no such Churches can be, nor the worshipping
Assemblies held without a Bishop or Presbyter;) so that it was the mind of the
Apostles that it should so continue, is proveed by the Desciption and work of
those Scripture Bishops.

Argument 1. From Acts 20.28, 29, 31. The Bishops instituted and fixed by the
Holy Ghost were and are to take heed to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made them overseeers, to feed the Church of God, and to watch against
Wolves, and to warn every one night and day] But this cannot be done by
Diocesan Bishops, nor any that have more then one Church: Therefore Diocesan
Bishops are not the Bishops that the Holy Ghost has so fixed and instituted,
such as Paul describes were to continue: and that's such as can do that work.

Argument 2. The Bishops that the Holy Ghost settled and would have continue,
(and had the Power of Ordination given them,) were such as were to be Ordained
in every City and every Church, Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.3, 4, 5. See Dr. Hammonds
Annotat. But it is not Diocesan Bishops that are such (for they are over many
Churches and Cities) therefore it is not Diocesan Bishops that were settled by
the Holy Ghost, nor meant in those texts.

Ar. 3. The Bishops which were instituted by the Holy Ghost, and are meant in
Scripture, were to watch for their peoples souls as those that must give
account, Ruling over them, and to be obeyed by all, and speaking to them the
word of God, Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. But this cannot be done by a Bishop to a whole
Diocese, (nor will they be willing of such an account if they be wise:)
therefore it is not Diocesan Bishops that are meant in Scripture.

Argument 4. The Bishops settled for continuance in Scripture were such as all
the people were to know as laboring among them, and over them in the Lord, and
admonishing them, and to esteem them very highly in love, for their work sake,
1 These. 5.12, 13. But this cannot be meant of our Diocesan Bishop, (whom the
hundredth part of the flock shall never see, hear, nor be admonished by:)
therefore it is not such that were settled for continuance in the Church.

Argument 5. The Bishops settled by the Holy Ghost, must by any that are sick
be sent for, to pray over them. But this a Diocesan Bishop cannot do, to the
hundredth or thousandth person in some places; therefore it is not Diocesan
Bishops (but the Bishops of a single Church that are capable of these works
that are meant by the Holy Ghost, to continue in the Church, and consequently
to whom the power of Ordaining was committed. If any question whether the Texts
alleged do speak of subject-Presbyters, or Bishops, I refer them to the
foresaid Reverend Doctor, with whom I am agreed, that there were no
subject-Presbyters instituted in Scripture times.

Reason 13. It was not one or two or all Churches for a year or two or more in
their mere fieri or infancy before they were well formed, Reason. 13.
that consisted only of one settled worshipping Assembly and its guides; See
Grotius de ^mperio. p. 351. Proving that the Christian Church Government was
not fitted to that of the Temple, but that of the Synagogues, and endeavoring
to prove Bishops, he does it thence, that they are such as the (...). Let them
then hold to such a Congregational Episcopacy.
but it was the formed and stablished state of the particular Churches.

To prove this I shall briefly do these three things. 1. I shall show it in
respect to the Jewish Synagogues. 2. As to the Churches in the Apostles days
after many years growth; even of every Church that's mentioned in the New
Testament, as a particular Political Church. 3. As to some of the Churches
after the Apostles days, mentioned by the ancients.

1. It is apparent that the Jews Synagogues were particular Congregational
Churches, having each one their several Rulers, and as many Learned men
suppose, they had an Ecclesiastical Judicature of Elders, belonging to each of
them, where fit men could be found, and this distinct from the Civil
Judicature: Or as others think, they had a Sanhedrim which had power to judge
in both Causes, and one of these was in every City, that is, in Places of
Cohabitation. For in every City of Israel which had one hundred and twenty
families (or free persons say others) they placed the Sanhedrim of twenty
three. And in every City which had not one hundred and twenty men in it, they
set the smallest Judicature of three Judges, so be it there were but two wise
men among them, fit to teach the Law and resolve doubts. See A^nsworth on Numb.
11.16. citing Talmud. Bab. and Maimonides, more at large. And doubtless many of
our Country Villages, and almost all our Parishes have more then 120. and every
Country Village may come in, in the lesser number below 120. which are to have
three Elders: and that say some, was every place where were ten men. And that
these were under the great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, is nothing to the matter;
For so we confess that such particular Churches as we mention, have some such
General officers over them de jure, as the Apostolical men were in the
Primitive Church; but not that any of these Synagogues were under other
Synagogues; though one were in a great City, and the other but in a small Town.
And that these Synagogues were of Divine institution, is plain in diverse texts,
particularly in Lev. 23.1, 2, 3. where a convocation of holiness, or a holy
Convocation is commanded to be on every Sabbath in all their dwellings, which
most plainly could be neither the meeting at Jerusalem at the Temple, nor yet
in single families: and therefore it is not to much purpose that many trouble
themselves to conjecture when Synagogues began, and some imagine it was about
the Captivity: For as their controversy can be but about the form of the
meeting place, or the name, so its certain that some place there must be for
such meetings; and that the meetings themselves were in the Law commanded by
God: and that not to be tumultuary confused ungoverned Assemblies. If the
scourging in the Synagogues prove not this power (which is much disputed,) Mat.
10.17. and 23.34. Luke 6.22. and 12.11. and 21.12. Acts 22.19. and 26 11. Yet
at least, excluding men their Synagogue Communion, may John 9.22, 34. and
12.42. and 16.2. But because this argument leads us into many Controversies
about the Jewish customs, lest it obscure the truth by occasion in quarrels, I
shall pass it by.

2. I find no particular Political Church in the New Testament, consisting of
several Congregations, ordinarily meeting for communion in Gods Worship;
(unless as the forementioned accidents might hinder the meeting of one
Congregation in one place,) nor having half so many members as some of our
Parishes.

When there is mention made of a Country, as Judea, Galile, Samaria, Galatia,
the word [Churches] in the plural number is used, Gal. 1.2. Acts 15.41. and
9.31. 2 Cor. 8.1. But they will say, These were only in Cities: But further
consid^r, there is express mention of the Church at Cenchrea, which was no
City; and they that say that this was a Parish subject to Corinth* give us but
their words for it, without any proof that ever I could see: and so they may as
well determine the whole cause by bare affirmation, and prevent disputes. The
Apostle intimates no such distinction, Romans 16.1. 1 Cor. 11.18, 20, 22.16. [
When ye come together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you.
-- When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper.] -- 16. [ We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God] Here the
Church of Corinth is said to come together into one place: And for them that
say, This is per parts, and so that one place is many to the whole; I answer,
the Apostle says not to a part, but to the whole Church, that they come
together in one place, and therefore the plain obvious sense must stand, till
it be disproved. And withal he calls the Christian Assemblies in the plural
number [ Churches:] for its plain that it is of Assembly Customs that he there
speaks. So 1 Cor. 14. there is plainly expressed that it was a particular
Assembly that was called the Church, and that this Assembly had it in many
Prophets, Interpreters, and others that might speak. Verse 4. [ He that
Prophesies, Edifieth the Church] that is, Only that Congregation that heard.
And Verse 5. [ Except he interpret that the Church may receive Edifying] And
Verse 12. [Seek that ye may excel to the Edifying of the Church.] Verse 19. [
In the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that I may
teach others also. -- ] And Verse 23. [ If therefore the whole Church be come
together into one place, and all speak with tongues -- ] One would think this
is as plain as can be spoken, to assure us that the whole Churches then were
such as might, and usually did come together for holy communion into one place.
So Verse 28. [ If there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church:]
And which is more, lest you think that this was some one small Church that Paul
speaks of, he denominateth all other particular Congregations, even Ordered
Governed Congregations, [ Churches] too. Verse 33. For God is not the author of
confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints.] So that all the
Congregations for Christian Worship, are called, All the Churches of the
Saints. And it seems all as well as this, so stored with Prophets and gifted
men that they need not take up with one Bishop only for want of matter to have
made subject Elders of: And Verse 34. [Let your women keep silence in the
Church] for it is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church.] So that so many
Assemblies, so many Churches.

Obj. But it seems there were among the Corinthians more then one Congregation
by the plural [Churches.] Answ. 1. Many particular seasons of Assembling, may
be called many Assemblies or Churches, though the peoole be the same. 2. The
Epistle was a Directory to other Churches, though first written to the
Corinthians. 3. Those that say, it was to Corinth, and other City-Churches that
Paul wrote, need no further answer: It seems then each City had but a
Congregation, if that were so. 4 Cenchrea was a Church near to Corinth, to whom
Paul might well know his Epistle would be communicated: and more such there
might be as well as that, and yet all be entire free Churches.

So in Col. 4.16. [ And when this Epistle is read among you, cause that it be
read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the
Epistle from Laodicea.] This Church was such as an Epistle might be read in,
which doubtless was an Assembly. The whole matter seems plain in the case of
the famous Church at Antioch, Acts 11.26. A whole year they assembled
themselves with the Church, and taught much people] Here is mention but of One
Assembly, which is called the Church; where the people, it seems, were taught.
And its plain that there were many Elders in this one Church; for Acts 13.1. it
said [ There were in the Church that was at Antioch certain Prophets and
Teachers] And five of them are named, who are said to Minister there to the
Lord* And though I do not conclude that they were all the fixed Elders of that
particular Church, yet while they were there they had no less power then if
they had been such. In the third Epistle of John, where there is often mention of
that particular Church, it appears Verse 6. that it was such a Church as
before which the ^rethren and strangers could bear witness of Gaius Charity:
And its most probable that was one Assembly; but utterly improbable that they
travailed from Congregation to Congregation to bear this witness. And Verse. 9,
10. it was such a Church as John wrote an Epistle to, and which Diotrephes cast
men out of: which is most likely to be a Congregation, which might at once hear
that Epistle, and out of which Diotrephes mig^t ^asilier reject strangers, and
reject the Apostles letters, then out of many such Congregations, Gal. 1.22.
When Paul says, he was Unknown by face to the Churches of Judea, it is most
likely that they were Churches which were capable of seeing and knowing his
face not only by parts, but as Churches. And its likely those Churches that
praised Luke, and sent him with Paul as their chosen messenger, were such as
could meet to choose him, and not such as our Diocesses are, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
Paul gives order both to the Church of Corinth, and the Churches of Galatia,
that upon the Lords day at the Assembly (as it is ordinarily expounded) they
should give in their part for the relief of the Churches of Judea. So that it
seems most likely that he makes [ Churches] and such Assemblies to be all one,
Acts 14.23. They ordained them Elders, Church by Church, or in every Church.
Here it is confessed by those we plead against, that Elders signify not any
subject Elders having no power of Ordination or Government: And to say that by
Elders in each Church is meant only one Elder in each Church, is to forsake the
letter of the text without any proved Necessity: We suppose it therefore safer
to believe according to the first sense of the words, that it was Elders in
every Church, that is, more then one in every Church that were ordained. And
what sort of Churches these were, appears in the following verses, where even
of the famous Church of Antioch its said, Verse 27. when they were come, and
had gathered the Church together, they rehearsed all that God had done by them
-- So that its plain that this Church was a Congregation to whom they might
make such rehearsal. And Chap. 15.3. Its said that they were brought on their
way by the Church: And if it be not meant of all, but a part of the Church, yet
it intimates what is aforesaid.

To conclude, though many of these texts may be thought to speak doubtfully,
yet consider 1. That some do most certainly declare that it was particular
stated Assemblies that were then called Churches, even Governed Churches,
having their Officers present. 2. That there is no certain proof of any one
particular Political Church that consisted of many such stated Assemblies. 3.
That therefore the Texts that will bear an exposition either way, must be
expounded by the certain, and not by the uncertain texts; so that I may argue
thus.

If in all the New Testament, the word [Church] do often signify stated
worshipping single Assemblies, and often is used so as may admit that
interpretation; and is never once used certainly to signify many particular
stated worshipping Assemblies ruled by one fixed Bishop, then we have any just
cause to suppose that the particular Political Churches in Scripture times
consisted but of one such stated Congregation. But the Antecedent is true,
therefore so is the Consequent.

As for the New Episcopal Divines that say There were no subject Presby^ers in
Scripture times: I suppose according to their principles, they w^ll grant me
all this, as is aforesaid And for others, the Instances that they bring to the
contrary should be briefly considered. The great swaying Instance of all (which
did sometime prevail with me to be my self of another mind) is the Numerous
Church at Jerusalem: Of which its said that three thousand were converted at
once, and five thousand at another time, and the word mightily grew and
prevailed, and daily such were added to the Church as should be saved: to which
some add the mention of the Miriades of believing Jews yet zealous of the Law,
which the brethren mentioned to Paul, Acts 21.20. And the instance of Ephesus
and Rome come next. But I remember how largely this business is debated between
the late Assembly at Westminster and the Dissenting Brethren, that I think it
unmeet to interpose in it any further then to annex these few considerations
following.

1. That all that is said on that side, does not prove certainly that that one
Church at Jerusalem was the eighth part so big as Giles Cripple-gate Parish, or
the fifth part so big as Stepney or Sepulchers, nor near so big as Plimoth or
some other Country Parishes. 2. That it is past doubt that the magnitude of
that Body of Believers then at Jerusalem, was partly acccidental, and the
members cannot at all be proved settled cohabitants, nor that Church as in its
first unordered Mass be the proved to be the fittest pattern for imitation.
Heb. 13.17. proves that Churches should be no bigger then that the Ruler may
watch for all their souls as one that must give account of all. On which text
Dr. Ier. Tailor in his late Book of Repentance, Pref. says [I am sure we
cannot give account of souls of which we have no Notice] And so presses to
personal conduct. Let them then be Bishops of no bigger a Diocese then they can
take such personal notice and conduct of, lest they judge themselves.
3. That Christ has not punctually determined how many members shall be in a
particular Church. 4. But the ends (being personal holy communion) are the Rule
by which humane prudence must determine it. 5. That its fitter one Church
instance give way to many in point of our imitation, then of many to that one,
caeteris paribus. 6. That its known among us that more then are proved to have
been members of that Church, may hear one man preach at the same time. I have
none of the loudest voices, and yet when I have preached to a Congregation
judged by judicious men to be at least ten thousand, those farthest off said
they could well hear (as I was certainly informed.) 7. That its certain by many
passages historical in ^cripture that men did then speak to greater
multitudes, and were heard at far greater distance then now they can orderly
be: which I conjecture was because their voices were louder, as in most dryer
bodies (which dryer Countries have) is commonly seen, when moister bodies have
of^er hoarser voices; and other reasons might concur. 8. That it is confessed
or yielded that the Church at Jerusalem might all hear at once, though not all
receive the Lords Supper together. And if so, then they were no more then might
at once have personal communion in some holy Ordinances, and that the Teachers
might at once make known their minds to. 9. And then the reason of receiving
the Supper in several places seems to be but because they had not a room so fit
to receive all in, as to hear in. And so we have now in many Parishes
Assemblies subordinate to the chief Assembly: For diverse families at once may
meet at one house, and diverse at another, for repetition, prayer or other
duties; and some may be at Chapels of ease that cannot come to the full
assembly. 10* They that are for Presby^erial Churches of many Congregations, do
not say, that There must be many, to make the first political Church, but only
that, There may be many? If then there be no Necessit^ of it, 1. Should it not
be forborne when it appeare^h to prudence most inconvenient (as frequently it
will no doubt.) 2. And when it is Necessary for a peaceable Accommodation,
because others think it a sin, should not a May be give place to a Must not be,
in pacificatory consultations, caeteris paribus? 11. It is granted also by
them, that the Pastors of one Congregation have not a charge of Governing other
neighbor Congregation in Consistory, (one rather then another, which they
g^vern not, though perhaps as near them) but b^ con^ent. And therefore as there
is but a licet, not an oportet* of such consent pleaded for: so while no such
consent is given, we have no such ch^^ge of Governing neighbor Congregations;
and none may force us to such consent. 12. And Lastly, that if a si^gle
Congregation with it own Officer, or Officers, be not a true particular
Political Church; then our ordinary Parish assemblies are none; and where the
Presbyterian Government is not set up (which is up but in few places of
England) it would then follow that we have no true Political Churches left
among us (and perhaps never had:) which I meet yet with few so uncharitable as
to affirm, except the Papists and the Separatists and a few of the new sort of
Episcopal Divines, who think we have no Churches for want of ^ishops, (except
where Bishops yet are retained and acknowleged.)

For my part I would not lay too great a stress upon any forms or modes which
may be altered or diversified. Let the Church have but such a Number of souls
as may be consistent with the ends and so the essence of a particular Church,
that they may held personal holy communion, and then I will not quarrel about
the name of one or two Congregations, nor whether they must needs all meet
together for all ordinances, nor the like. Yea I think a full number (so they
be not so full or distant, as to be uncap^ble of that communion) are
desirable, for the strength and beauty of the Church; and too small Churches,
if it may be, to be avoided. So that all the premises being considered, out
difference appears to be but small in these matters between the Congregational
and Presbyterian way, among them that are moderate.

I shall not presume more particularly to enter into that debate, which has
been so far proceeded in already by such Reverend men, but shall return to the
rest of the task before promised against the Diocesan Churches as the supposed
subject of the Bishops Government.

As for Scripture times and the next succeeding together, I shall before I look
into other testimonies, propound these two Arguments. 1. From the Bishops
office, which was before mentioned. If the office of a Bishop in those times,
was to do so much work as could not be done by him for a Church any greater
than our Parishes, then were the Churches of those times no greater then our
Parishes: But the Antecedent is true; therefore so is the consequent. The works
are before mentioned, Preaching, Praying, administering the Lords Supper,
visiting the sick, reducing heretics, reproving, censuring, absolving: to
which they quickly added too much more of their own. The impossibility of a
faithful performance of this to more is so undeniable, that I cannot suppose
any other answer but this that they might ordain Presbyters to assist them in
the work, and so do much of it by others. But 1. I before desired to see it
proved by what authority they might do this. 2. Their office and work are so
inseparable that they cannot depute others to do their work (their proper work)
without deputing them also to their office. For what is an office but the state
of one Obliged and Authorized to do such or such a work? A Presbyter may not
authorize another to preach as the Teacher of a Congregation, and to administer
the Sacraments, without making him a Presbyter also: Nor can a Bishop authorize
any to do the work of a Bishop in whole or by halves without making him a
Presbyter or half a Bishop. And he is not authorized either to make new
officers in the Church, or to do his work by deputies or substitutes.

2. I argue also from the Identity of that Church to which the Bishops and
Deacons were appointed for ministration. It was not a Church of many stated
Congregations, or any larger than our Parishes for number of souls that the
Deacons were made Ministers to: therefore it was no other or bigger which the
Bishops were set ove^. The consequence is good: because where ever Deacons are
mentioned in Scripture or any Writer that I remember near to Scripture times,
they are still mentioned with the Bishops or Presbyters as Ministers to the
same Church with them, as is apparent b^th in the seven chosen for the Church
at Jerusalem, and in Phil. 1.1, 2. and in the Direction of Paul to Timothy for
ordaining them. And the Antecedent is proved from the nature of their work: For
they being to attend on the tables at the Love feasts and the Lords Supper, and
to look to the poor, they could not do this for any greater number of people
then we mention; Whether they had those feasts in one house or many at once, I
determine not; but for the number of people, it was as much as a Deacon could
do at the utmost to attend a thousand people.

I shall proceed a little further toward the times next following; and first I
shall take in my way the confession of one or two learned men that are for
Prelacy.

Grotius in his Annotat. on 1 Timothy 5.17. says [ Sed notandum est in una Vrbe
magna sicut plures Synagogas, See the same thing proved at large by Grotius de
Imperio page 355, 356, 357* Yet I think as Bloudell that he mistook Epiphanius
de Alex. Eccl.
ita and plures fuisse Ecclesias, id est, conventus Christianorum. Et cuique
Ecclesiae fuisse suum praesidem, qui populum alloqueretur, and Presbyteros
ordinaret. Alexandriae tantum eum fuisse morem, ut unus esset in tota urbe
praeses qui ad docendum Presbyteros per urbem distribueret, docet nos Sozomenus
1.14. and Epiphanius, ubi de Ario agit, dicitque Alexandriae nunquam duos
fuisse (...) voce ^a sumpta (...), ita ut significat jus illud quod habebat
(...).] So that Grotius affirms that Bishops had not then so much as all the
converted persons of a great City under their care, but the Churches and
Assemblies were the same, and each Assembly had a Prelate, and in the great
Cities there were many of these Churches and Prelates, and that only the City
of Alexandria had the custom of having but one such Bishop in the whole City.

2. Those learned men also must grant this cause who maintain that Peter and
Paul were both of them Bishops of Rome at once, there being two Churches, one
of the Circumcision under Peter, the other of the uncircumcision under Paul:
and that one of them had Linus, and the other Cletus for his Successor, and
that this Church was first united under Clemens: and the like they say of two
Churches also at Antioch, and elsewhere. If this be so, then there is no Law of
God that Bishops should be numbered by Cities, but more Bishops then one may be
in one City, and were, even when Christians comparatively were a small part of
them.

3. Also Mr. Thorndike and others affirm that it was then the custom for the
Bishops and Presbyters to sit in a semicircle, and the Bishop highest in a
Chair, and the Deacons to stand behind them: This he gathers from the Apost.
Constitut. Ignatius, Dionysius Arcop. and the Jews Constitutions, (in his
Apost. form page 71. and Right of the Church, etc. p. 93.94, 95.) And if this
were so, it seems that Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons were all the Officers of
one such stated Congregation, and had not many such Congregations under them:
For the Bishop could be but in one place at once, and therefore this could be
the custom but of one Church in his Diocese, if he had many, whereas it is
made the form of the ordinary Christian Assemblies.

The same learned man (Right of Church p. 65.) says that [ About Saint
Cyprians time, and not af^re, he finds men^ion of settled Congregations in the
Country] By which it may be well conjectured what a small addition the Bishops
had out of the Countries to their City Chu^ches, and how many Congregations
they Governed in the Apostle days and after.

He affirms also that [ the power of the Keys belongs to the Presbyters,
and that its convertible with the power of celebrating the Eucharist, and that's
the Reason Why it belongs to them, page 98. ibid. and that [ the Power of the
Keys, that is, the whole power of the Church whereof that power is the root and
sourse, is common to Bishops and Presbyters] page 128 and that to this all
sides agree, page 106. and that by their Grant Deacons and others may preach,
but not Rule or administer the Lords Supper: see page 118.123. And he is far
from being of their mind that think in Scripture times there was but one single
Bishop without other Presbyters in a Diocesan Church: For he supposed many in a
Congregation. Page 126 he says [ You see by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. that one
Assembly whereof he speaks there, furnished with a great number of Prophets,
whether Presbyters, or over and above them. In the Records of the Church, we
find diverse times a whole Bench of Presbyters presiding at one Assembly.] And
before he had showed how they sat about the Bishop, and the congregation stood
before them. And page 127. he says that [ Clemens the Disciple of the
Apostles, in his Epistle to the Corinthians to compose a difference among the
Presbyters of that Church partly about the celebration of the Eucharist,
advises them to agree and take their turns in it.] I confess I knnw not whence
he has this (doubtless not in the true approved Epistle of Clement;) but it
shows in his judgment, 1. That there were then many Presbyters in the Church
of Corinth 2. And that that Church was but one Congregation, or not very many:
Else what need the Presbyters take their turns, when they might have done it at
once? 3. That the word Presbyter in Clemens signifies not a Prelate. 4. And it
seems this intimates there was then no Bishop in Corinth: else no question but
Clemens would have charged these disagreeing Presbyters to obey their Bishop,
and used some of Ignatius language: 5. Nay if Bishops had been then known in
the world, is it not likely that he would have charged them to get a Bishop if
they had not, to Govern such a disagreeing Presbytery? And page 129, 130, 131.
he shows that [ the condemning of Marcion at Rome, and of Noelus at Ephesus,
are expresty said by Epiphanius, Haeres. 42. number. 1. and 2. Haeres. 57 number. 1.
to have been done and passed by the Act of the Presbyters of those Churches --
And which is of later date, the Excommunication of Andronicus in S^nesius 57.
Epist. I find reported to have passed in the same sort, and all this agreeable
to the practice recorded in Scripture] alleging, 1. Tim. 5.19. Acts 21.18.
citing Cyprian Ep. 46. and the Apost. Constit. and says, Bloudell in this
might have spared his exact diligence, it being granted, etc. Mr. Thorndike
also tells us page 62. of the words of Ninius, that [in Ireland alone, Saint
Patrick at the first plantation of Christianity founded three hundred and
threescore and five Bishopricks] And can any man believe that all these had
Cities or more then one of our Parish Churches, when all Ireland to this day
has not seven Cities? and when all this was done at the first plantation of
the Gospel? I think we had this sort of Episcopacy. Even since the Reformation
there is reckoned in Ireland but four Archbishops, nineteen Bishops. What
think you then were 365. Bishops at the first plantation of the Gospel?

To proceed to some further Evidence. 1. Its manifest in Clemens Romans Epist. to
the Corinthians there is mention of no more but two Orders; the one called
sometime Bishops, sometime Presters, the other Deacons, page 54.55.57 Page 54,
he says [(...), etc.] i. e. [ Per regiones igitur and U^bes praedicantes,
constituerunt primitias eorum, approbantes in Spiritu, Episcopos and Diaco^os
^orum qui Credituri erant.] I know that (...) is supposed by some to respect
only the place of their preaching, and not of their settling Bishops: But the
words according to the more obvious plain sense do seem to extend it to both,
and make no such difference at all.
and this he says the Apo^^les did as knowing that contention would arise
about the name of Episcopacy, and that they so se^led the Ministerial Offices
that others should succeed in them when some were deceased. For my part I
cannot see the least reason to be of their mind that think Clemens here does
speak only of Prelates or supereminent Bishops, (of which I refer the Reader to
Mr. Burtons notes in his English Translat^on of Clemen^) But suppose it were
so: If at that time the Churches had none but single Bishops, it is plain then
that they were but single Congregations: For no other Congregations having
communion in the^r-then-ordinary, public worship, could be managed without a
Bishop or Presbyter to do the work. But for them that slight Mr. Burtons and
other men's plain Reasons concerning the judgment of Clem. Romanus, and force
his words to speak what they mean not, I desire them to observe the judgment
of Grotius whom they profess so much to value: who in his Epistol. 162 ad*
Bignon. gives this as one Reason to prove this Epistle of Clemens genuine [
Quod nusquam meminit, exsortis illius Episcoporum autoritatis, quae Ecclesiae
consuetudine post Marci mortem Alexandriae, atque eo exemplo alibi, introduci
cepit, sed plane ut Paulus Apostolus ostendit Ecclesias communi Presbyterorum
qui iidem omnes and Episcopi ipsi Pauloque dicuntur, consilio fuisse
gubernatas. Nam quod (...), and (...) nominat, omnia ista nomina non ad
Ecclesiam sed ad Templum Hieros. pertinent: unde infert omnia recto ordine
agenda, si Iudaeis, tanto magis Christianis] You see that Grotius (then,) and
Clemens, in his judgment, were against Prelacy.

2. The very same I say of Prelacie, Epist. ad Philip. which mentions only
two sorts, Presbyters and Deacons.

3. And though Ignatius often mention three, it seems to me that they were all
but the Governors or Ministers of one Congregation, or of no more people then
one of our Parishes. In the Epist. ad Smyr^. he says [(...). i. e. Vbi
Episcopus praesens fuerit, illuc and plebs Congregetur, sicuti and ubi Christus
est omnis militia coelestis a^est] as the common interpreter translateth it, [
ut vid. est in Edit. Perionii and Vsherii,] etc. [Vbi comparuerit Episcopus,
ibi and Multitudo sit; quemadmodum ubi Christus, ibi omnis astat exercitus
coelestis] as Hier. Vairlenius and Videlius translate it: Or, [ Vbi utique
apparet Episcopus, illic multitudo sit; quemadmodum utiq, ubi est Christus
Jesus, illic Catholica Ecclesia] as Vshers old Tranlation. And by the Context
it appears that this pl^bs, or multitudo is the Church which he rules, and
not only one Congregation among many that are under him: For this does without
distinction bind all the people one as well as another, to be where the Bishop
is or appears, viz. in the public Assembly for Communion in Worship. It is
plain therefore there that were not then many such Assemblies under him:
otherwise all save one must have necessarily disobeyed this command.

And in the Epistle to the Philadelphians he has [(...).] i. e. [ Vna enim est
caro Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and unus illius sanguis qui pro nobis effusus
est, and unus calix qui pro omn^bus nobi^ distributus est, unus panis qui
omnibus fractus est, unum altar omni Ecclesiae, and unus Episcopus cum
presbyterorum Collegio and Diaconis conservis meis.]

Here it is manifest that the particular Church which in those days was
governed by a Bishop, Presbytery and Deacons, was but one Congregation; for
every such Church had but one Altar.

Object. But some Greek Copies leave out (...). Answ. 1. The corrupt vulgar
translation might occasion the change of the text, says Bishop Usher (Annot.
in loc. page 40.) [ intermedia illa, ex interpretatione hac excidisse
videantur.] 2. The old translation of Bishop Usher which leaves it out, yet
has Vnum Altar and unus Episcopus, etc. and the sense is ^he same if the
other words were out. 3. Ignatius has the like in other places, as we shall
see anon; which forbids such quarrels here.

Object. But says the Learned and Godly Bishop Downame, (Def. li. 2. cap. 6.
page 109.) the word Altar being expounded for the Communion table, is not
likely, and too much savoureth of Popery: but by one Altar is meant Christ who
sanctifies all our Sacrifices and Oblations and makes them acceptable to God;
as Ignatius expounds himself in h^s Epistle to the Magnesians: All as one run
together into the Temple of God unto one Jesus Christ as it were unto one
Altar.]

To this I answer, that it is some confirmation to me, that the words are so
express, that so learned a man has no more to say by way of evasion. For
doubtless this is too gross and palpable to satisfy the judicious impartial
reader. 1. That the very text which he cites of the Epistle to the Magnesians
does make fully against him* I shall show anon. 2. That it is not Christ that
is meant here by the (...), is evident, 1. In that Christ his flesh and blood
are before distinctly mentioned: 2. In that the word is put in order among the
external Ordinances: 3. In that it is so usual with other ancient writers and
Ignatius himself to use the word (...) in the sense as we now take it, that it
will be plain violence to imagine that it is Christ that was meant by it. And
for Popery, there is no such matter of danger, in using a word Metaphorically:
Otherwise we we must make the Ancients commonly to be friends to Popery; for
they ordinarily call the Lords Table and the place where it stood (...): I say
The Table and the Sacrarium or place of its standing: for this seems plainly
the meaning of Ignatius: so says Bishop Usher Annot. in loc. ubi sup. [Altare
apud Patres mensam Dominicam passim denotat apud Ignatium and Polycarpum;
Sacrarium quoque. So H. Stephens Altarium Sacrarium. See what Learned Mr.
Thorndike himself in his Right of the Church, etc. page 116. says to this
purpose more largely; where concerning Ignatius his use of the same word to the
Ephesians he says [ Where it is manifest that the Church is called a Sanctuary
or place of sacrificing: Mr. Mead in his Discourse of the name Altar page 14.
shows that Ignatius by (...) means the Lords Table, and takes Videlius his
concession, as of a thing that could not be denied. In the Epistle of Ignatius
(or whoever else) to Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna he says, Crebrius celebrantur
conventus Synodique Nominatim omnes inquire. Servos and ancillas ne fastidias
(as Vairlenius translateth) or (as Bishop Vshers old Translation) Saepe
Congregationes fi^nt. Ex nomine omnes quaere: Servos and ancillas ne despicias.
-- ] Whether this were Ignatius or not, alls one to me, as long as I use it but
historically to prove the matter of fact in those times. But surely no man
should marvail if I hence gather that great Polycarp was Bishop but of one
Congregation, when he must enquire or take notice of every one of his
Congregation by name, even as much as servants and maids. I would every Parish
Minister were so exactly acquainted with his flock!

Another passage there is in Ignatius to the same purpose Epist. ad Magnes.
[(...),] i. e. Omnes adunati ad Templum Dei concurrite, sicut ad unum Altar*
sicut ad unum Iesum Christum, as the vulgar translation. Or as Vairl^nius,
[Omnes velut unus quispiam in templum Dei concurri^^, velut ad utum Alnare; ad
unum Iesum Christum] So the old Latin in Usher to the same purpose. And in the
words before going he bids them [ Come all to one place for prayer] Here is no
room for Bishop Downams conceit, that its Christ that's meant by (...): For they
are plainly put as distinct things: as if he should say, come all to one Altar,
as to one Christ. i. e because it is but one Christ that is there to be
partaked of. All this does so evidently prove that in those days a Bishop with
his Presbytery and Deacons, had but one Congregation meeting at one Altar for
Church Communion in the Eucharist, that it caused Mr. Mead (in his Discourse of
Churches page 48, 49, 50. Cent. 2.) to say as follows, having cited these
words of Ignatius [Loe here a Temple with an Altar in it, whether the
Magnesians are exhorted to gather themselves together to pray: To come together
in one place, etc. For it is to be observed that in these Primitive times they
had but one Altar in a Church, as a Symbol, both that they worshipped but one
God through one Mediator Jesus Christ, and also of the Unity the Church ought
to have in it self. Whence Ignatius not only here, but also in his Epistle to
the Philadelphians urges the unity of the Altar for a motive to the
Congregation to agree together in one: For unum Altar (says he) omni
Ecclesiae, and unus Episcopus cum Presbyterio and Diaconis conservis meis. This
custom of one Altar is still retained by the Greek Church: The contrary use is
a transgression of the Latins, not only Symbolically implying, but really
introducing a (...), -- etc. Nay more then this it should seem that in those
first times, before Diocesses were divided into those lesser and sub^rdinate
Churches, we ca^l now Parishes, and Presbyters assigned to them, they had not
only one Altar in one Church or Dominicum, but one Altar to a Church, taking
Church for the company or Corporation of the faithful, united under one Bishop
or Pastor, and that was in the City or place where the Bishop had his See and
Residence, like as the Jews had but one Altar and Temp^e for the whole Nation
united under one high Priest. And yet as the Jews had their Synagogues, so
perhaps might they have more Oratori^s then one, though their Altar were but
one; there namely where the Bishop was. Die solis says Justin Martyr, omnium
qui vel in oppidis vel ruri degunt, in eundem locum conventus fit: Namely as he
there tells us, to celebrate, and participate the holy Eucharist. Why was this,
but because they had not many places to celeb^ate in? and unless this were so,
whence came it else, that a Schismatical Bishop was said constituere or
collocare aliud Altar? and that a Bishop and an Altar are made correlatives?
See S. Cyprian Epist. 40.72, 73. de unit. Eccles. And thus perhaps is Ignatius
to be understood in that forequoted passage of his (...) Unum Altar omni
Ecclesiae, and unus Episcopus cum Presbyterio and Diaconis] So far Mr. Mead.

I hope upon the consent of so admirable a Critic and learned man, it will not
be so much blameworthy in me, if I speak somewhat the more confidently this
way; and say, that I think that the main confusion and Tyranny that has
overspread the Churches, has been very much from the changing the Apostolical
frame of Churches, and setting up many Altars and Congregations under one
Bishop in one (pretended particular) Church.

I had three or four passages ready to cite out of Ignatius, but these are so
express, that I apprehend the rest the less necessary to be mentioned.

The next therefore that I shall mention shall be the forementioned words of
Justin Martyr Apol. 2, cited by Mr. Mead, and by others frequently to this
purpose: In which I observe all these particulars full to the purpose. 1. That
they had but one Assembly each Lords day for Church communion for one Church.
2. That this was for reading and prayer and the Eucharist. 3. That the
President (who is commonly by those of the Episcopal judgment said to be here
meant the Bishop) did preach and give thanks and administer the supper: so that
it was administered but to one Congregation as under that Bishop of that Church,
for he could not be in two places at once. 4. That to the Absent the Deacons
carried their portion after the consecration: so that they had not another
Meeting and Congregation by themselves for that end. This is all so plain that
I shall think it needs no Vindication. So that were there but these two
Testimonies, I should not marvail if Bishop Downam had extended his confession
a little further, when he acknowledges ( D^f. li. 2. cap. 6. page 104. that [
At the first and namely in the time of the Apostle Paul, the most of the
Churches so soon after their Conversion, did not each of them ex^eed the
proportion of a populous Congregation,] (And then we are not out in so
interpreting the words of Paul and other writers of the holy Scripture.) The
next that I shall mention (whoever was or when ever he lived) is Dionys. de
Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 4. where he tells us that the Prefect (who was the
Bishop, if there were any) did Baptize those that were converted, and the
Presbyters and Deacons did but assist him: And abundance of work he mentions
which they had with all that they Baptized, and they called all the
Congregation together who joined in Prayers with the Bishop at the Baptism. All
which shows that he was then the Bishop but of one particular Church, which
ordinarily Assembled together for public worship. For, 1. If he had many such
Churches or Congregations under him, he could not be thus present to celebrate
Baptism in them all. Nor would one only be mentioned as his charge. 2. Nor is
it possible that one Bishop should with so long a way of Baptism as is there
described, be able to Baptize all the persons in a Diocese such as ours, or the
twentieth part of them, much less in those times, when besides the Infants of
Believers, the most eminent sort of Baptism, and greatest labor, was about the
multitudes of Adult Converts, that by the Gospel were daily added to the Church.

Gregory Thaumaturgus was as by force made Bishop of Neocesarea: and yet his
whole Diocese or City had but seventeen ^hristians in it at his entrance,
though when he died he found upon enquiry but seventeen Pagans, so great a
change was made by the Gospel and by Miracles: But by this Diocese of seventeen
souls we may conjecture what the Churches were in those times (though we should
allow others to be an hundred times as great, they would not be so great as the
tenth part of many Parishes in England.) See the truth of this passage in Greg.
Nissen Oration in Greg. Thaumatur. twice over he recites it. And Basil. Mag. l.
de Spir. Sanc. c. 19. And Roman. Breviar. Die 15. November. And the Menolog
Graec. mentioned before Greg. Neocesar. works Printed ad Paris 1622. But I
shall return to some before Gregory.

The next that I shall cite is Tertullian, that well known place in his Apolog.
c. 39. [ Corpus sumus de conscientia Religionis and Discipline unitate and spei
federe. Coimus in coetum and Congregationem ut ad Deum quasi manu facta
precationibus ambiamus orantes. -- Cogimur ad div^narum literarum
Commemorationem -- Certe fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus,
fiduciam figimus, disciplinam praceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus:
ibidem etiam exhortationes, Castigationes, and censura Divina: nam and
judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque futuri
judicii praejudicium est siquis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione Orationis,
and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur. Praesident probati quiq,
seniores, etc.] If I be able to understand Tertullian, it is here plain that
each church consisted of one Congregation, which assembled for Worship, and
Discipline at once or in one place, and this Church was it that had Presidents
or Seniors to guide them both in Worship and by Discipline. So that if there
were any more of these Assemblies in one particular Political Church, then
there were more Bishops then one, or else others besides Bishops exercised this
Discipline: But indeed its here plainly intimated that Bishops were then the
Guides of Congregations (single,) and not of Diocess^s consisting of many such.

I shall put Tertullians meaning out of doubt by another place, and that is, de
Corona Militis cap. 3. [ Eucharistiae Sacramemtum and in tempore victus, and
omnibus mandatum a Domino, etiam antelucanis ritibus, nec de aliorum manu ^uam
praesidentium sumimus.] And if they received this Sacrament of none but the
Presidents, (and that every Lords day at least, as no doubt they did) then they
could have no more Congregations in a Church then they had Presidents. And
(though Pamelius say that by Presidents here is meant also Presbyters, yet)
those that we now dispute against, understand it of the Prelates. And if they
will not so do, then may we will interpret the foresaid passage Apol. to be
meant of the same sort of Presidents; and then you may soon see what Bishops
were in Tertullians days. For we have no reason to think that they are not the
same sort of Officers which he calls Presidents, and of whom he there says,
Praesident probati Seniores.

So in the foregoing words in Tertullian, ibid. its said [ Aquam adituri
ibidem, sed and aliquando prius in Ecclesia sub Antistiti^ manu contestamur nos
renunciare Diabolo, and Pompae and angel^s ejus] Where it seems that there were
no more thus initiated then the Antistes himself did first thus engage in the
Congregation; And I believe they take this Antistes for a Bishop.

And here by the way let this argument be noted. Seeing its past doubt that the
first sense of the word (...) is the Catus or holy Assembly it self, why should
the Meeting place be so often called also Ecclesia in those times, in the
borrowed sense, but only in Relation to the People there assembled? and its
plain that it was but one Congregation and not many that assembled in that
place: and therefore it was from that one that the Place is called Ecclesia.
That it is often so called, besides this place of Tertullian (which seems so to
use the word) I refer you to Mr. Meads exercitation of Temples, who proves it
distinctly in the several Centuries. That saying of Theophilus Antiochenus ad
Antolychum seems to intimate the whole that I intend [ sic Deus dedit mundo qui
peccatorum tempestatibus and Naufragiis jactatur, Synagogas, quas Ecclesias
Sanctas N^minamus in quibus veritatis doctrina ferv^t, ad quas confugiunt
veritatis studiosi, quotquot s^lvari, Deique judicium and iram evitare volunt.]
So that the Churches of those times which were as Noah's Ark, and where safety
was to be found for the soul, were Synagogues or Assemblies. So Tertul. de
Idololatr. c. 7. page (mihi) 171. Tota die ad hanc partem zelus fidei
peroravit, ingenuu^ Christianum ab Idolis in Ecclesiam venire, de adversaria
officina in domum Dei venire. -- ] See more places of Tertullian cited by
Pamelius on this place number. 29. page 177. specially see that de virg. Veland.
cap. 13. p. 224.

Very many passages in Cyprian do intimate that then the Diocesses were small,
perhaps having yet but unum Altar: As when he says that [ a primordio
Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine concilio vestro and sine consensu plebis
meae, privata sententia gerere, etc. And [ Prohibeantur offerre, acturi apud
nos, and apud confe^^ores ipsos, and apud plebem universam causam suam] And [
Haec singulorum tractanda sit and limanda before ratio, non tantum cum]
collegis meis, sed and cum plebe ipsa universa] And [ Vix plebi persuadeo, immo
extorqueo, ut tales patiantur ^dmitti, and justior factus est fraternitatis
dolor, ex eo quod unus atque alius obnitente pl^be and (...), mea tamen
facilita e suscepti, pejores extiterunt -- ] How the Universa pleb^ of many
Congregations or a Diocese like ours, should be consulted and hear and do any
thing to admission or exclusion from Communion, and be advised with by Cyprian
in all such affairs, is not easy to conceive. See his Epist. 3.6.10.13, 14,
26, 31, 27, 28, 33, 40, etc.

Peruse all the citations of Bloudwell de jure Plebis in Regim. Eccles. and see
whether they intimate not the smalness of their Diocesses. (Though I believe
they prove no such thing as proper Government in the people.) Yet peruse all
the Authors cited by him there to prove that (...) Eccle^iae M^th. 18. refers
to the Congregation of Pastors and people together; and it will much confirm
the point in hand. I shall not recite any of them, because you may there find
them in the end of Grotius de Imperio Sum. Potest.


Clemens Alexandrinus has diverse passages to the purpose now in hand. Stromat.
li. 7. in the beginning, he mentions the Church and its officers, which he
divides only into two sorts, Presbyters and Deacons. But I will name no more
particular persons, but come to some intimations of the point before us from
customs or Practices of the Church and the Canons of Councils.

And it seems to me that the dividing of Parishes so long after (or of Titles
as they are called) does plainly tell us that about those times it was that
particular Pol^cical Church did first contain many stated Congregations. And
though it be uncertain when this began (Mr. Thorndike as we heard before,
conjectureth, about Cyprians days) yet we know that it was long after the
Apostles, and that it was strange to less populous places long after it was
introduced at Rome and Alexandria, where the number of Christians, and too much
ambition of the Bishop, occasioned the multiplication of Congregations under
him, and so he became a Bishop of many Churches (named as one) who formerly was
Bishop but of a single Church. For if there had been enough, one hundred or
fifty or twenty or ten years before, to have made many Parishes or stated
Assemblies for communion in worship, then no doubt but the light o^ Nature
would have directed them to have made some stated divisions before; For they
must needs know that God was not the God of Confusion but of order in all the
Churches: And they had the same reasons before as after: And persecution could
no^ be the hindrance any more at first then at last: For it was under
persecuting Emperors when Parishes or Titles were distinguished, and so it
might, notwi^hstanding persecutions have been done as well at first as at last,
if there had been the same reason. It seems therefore very plain to me that it
was the increase of Converts that caused this division of Titles, and that in
planting of Churche^ by the Apos^les, and during their time, and much after,
the Chu^ches consisted of no more then our Parishes, w^o being most inhabitants
of the Cities had their meetings there for full communion, though they might
have other subor^inate me^tings as we have now in men's houses for Repenting
Ser^^ons and Prayer.

And as Mr. Thornd^ke out of N^nius tells us of 365. Bishoprics in Ireland
planted by Patrick, so other Authors tell us that Patrick was the first Bishop
there; or as others and more credible, Palladius the first, and Patrick next:
and yet the Scots in Ireland had Churches before Palladius his days, (as
Bishop Usher shows de Primordiis Eccles. Britan. 798, 799, 800, etc.)
Johannes Major de gestis scholarum li. 2. cap. 2. prioribus illis temporibus
per Sacerdotes and Monachos, sine Episcopis Scotos in fide eruditos fuisse
affirmat. Et ita sane ante Majorem scripsit Johannes Fordonus Scotichron. li.
3. cap. 8. [ Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei Doctores ac
Sacramentorum Ministratores Presbyteros solummodo vel Monaches, ritum sequentes
Ecclesiae Primitivae (N. B.) Of which says Usher [ Quod postremum ab iis
accepisse videtur qui dixerunt (ut Johan. Semeca in Glossa Decreti did. 93.
ca. Legimus) [quod in Prima Primitiva Ecclesia commune erat officium
Episcoporum and Sacerdotum: and Nomina erant communia, and officium commune;
sed in secunda primitiva caeperunt dinstigui and nomina and officia.] So that
it seems that some Churches they had before; but Palladius and Patrick came
into Ireland, as Augustine into England, and abundantly increased them, and
settled withal the Roman Mode* So that it seemed like a new Plantation of
Religion and Churches there. Yet it seems that the Bishops settled by Patrick
(save that himself an Archbishop was like our Bishops) were but such as were
there before under the name of Presbyters, says Fordon, after the rite or
fashion of the Primitive Church.

And says Usher ibid. p. 800. [Hector Boethius fuisse dicit Palladium primum
omnium qui Sacrum inter Scotos egere Magistratum a summo Pontifice Episcopum
creatum: quum antea Populi suffragiis ex Monachis and Caldeis pontifices
assumerentur. Boeth. Scotorum Histor. lib. 7. fol. 128. b.

And he adds the saying of Balaeus, (Scriptor. Britanic. centur. 14. cap. 6.) [
A Caelestino illum missum ait Johannes Balaeus, ut Sacerdotalem ordinem, inter
Scotos Romano ritu institueret. Habebant (inquit) antea Scoti suos Episcopos ac
Ministros, ex verbi Divini Ministerio plebium suffragiis electos, prout
Asianorum more fieri apud Britannos videbant: Sed haec Romany, ut magis
ceremoniosis atque Asianorum osoribus, non placebant] By these passages it is
easy to conjecture whether they were Bishops of a County, or Bishops of a
Parish that were there in those days. For my part I heartily wish that Ireland
had three hundred sixty five good Bishops and Churches at this day, even when
the whole Nation profess themselves to be Christians, (which then they did not.)

To this purpose runs the 14. Canon Concilii Agath. (and if it were so then,
much more long before) [ Si quis etiam extra Parochias in quibus legitimus est
ordinariusque conventus oratorium habere voluerit reliquis festivitatibus, ut
ibi Missam audiat, propter fatigationem familiae, justa ordinatione
permittimus. Pascha vero, Natali Domini, Epiphania, Ascensione domini,
Pentecoste, and Natali Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and siqui maxim dies in
festivitatibus habentur, non nisi in Civitatibus, aut Parochiis audiant] Here
it appears that there was but one legitimus ordinariusque conventus in a
Parish; though they tolerated an Oratory or Chapel of ease. And that a Parish
here is taken for a Diocese, or such a Church as had proper to it self a Bishop
and Presbytery, as it is probable from the ordinary use of the word by
Eusebius and other ancients in that sense, so also from what is further said in
the following Canons of this Council: And so the word Parish here may be
expository of the word City, or else denote a Rural Bishopric. For Can. 30.
says [ Benedictionem super plebem in Ecclesia fundere aut paenitentem in
Ecclesia benedicere presbytero penitus non licebit.] And if a Presbyter may not
bless the people or the penitent, (when the blessing of the people was part of
the work in every Solemn Assembly for Church communion) then it is manifest
that a Bishop must be present in every such Assembly to do that part which the
Presbyter might not do: and consequently there were no more such Assemblies
then there were Bishops. And to prove this more fully mark the very next Canon
of that Council, viz. the 31. [ Missas die dominico secularibus totas audire
speciali ordine praecipimus, ita ut ante benedictionem Sacerdotis egredi
populus non praesumat. Quod si fecerint, ab Episcopo public confundatur] So
that its plain that on every Lords day all the people (for here is no
distinction or limitation) were to be present in the public worship to the
end, and the Bishop to pronounce the blessing (whoever preached) and openly to
rebuke any that should go out before it. From whence it is evident that all
such Church Assemblies for communion every Lords day were to have a Bishop
present with them to do part of the work: and therefore there were no more such
Assemblies then there were Bishops.

In the 38. Canon of the same Council we find this written [ Cives qui
superiorum solennitatum, id est, Paschae and Natalis Domini, vel Pentecostes
festivatibus cum Episcopis interesse neglexerint, quum in Civitatibus
commnionis vel benedictionis accipiendae causa positos se nosse debeant,
triennio communione priventur Ecclesiae.] So that it seems there were no more
Church Members in a City then could congregate on the festival days for
Communion and the Bishops Blessing: therefore there were not many such
Congregations: when every one was to be three years excommunicate that did not
Assemble where the Bishop was.

Moreover all those Canons of several Councils that forbid the Presbyters to
confirm by Chrysm, and make it the Bishops work, do show that the Diocese were
but small when the Bishop himself could do that besides all his other work.

In the Canons called the Apostles, cap. 5. it is ordained thus [ Omnium
ali^rum primitiae Episcopo and Presbyteris domum mittuntur, non super Altar.
Manifestum est autem quod Episcopus and Presbyteri inter Diaconos and reliquos
clericos eas dividunt.] By which it appears that there was but one Altar in a
Church to which belonged the Bishop, Presbytery, and Deacons, who lived all as
it were on that Altar.

And Can. 32. runs thus [ Si quis Presbyter contemnens Episcopum suum, seorsim
collegerit, and Altar aliud erexerit, nihil habens quo rebrehendat Episcopum
in causa pietatis and justitiae, deponatur quasi principatus amator existens --
Haec autem post unam and secundam and tertiam Episcopi obsecrationem fieri
conveniat.] Which shows that there was then but one Convention and one Altar to
which one Bishop and Presbyters did belong: So that no other Assembly or Altar
was to be set up apart from the Bishop by any Presbyter that had nothing
against the Bishop in point of Godliness or Justice.

And I believe if Bishops had a whole Diocese of two hundred or three hundred
or a thousand Presbyters to maintain, they would be loath to stand to the fifty
eighth Canon which makes them Murderers if they supply not their Clergies
wants: But let that Canon pass as spurious.

And long after when Concilium Vasense does grant leave to the Presbyters to
preach, and Deacons to read Homilies in Country Parishes as well as Cities, it
shows that such Parishes were but new and imperfect Assemblies.

In the Council of Laodicea the 56. Canon is [ Non oportet Presbyteros ante
ingressum Episcopi ingredi Ecclesiam, and sedere in tribunalibus, sed cum
Episcopo ingredi: nisi forte aut aegrotet Episcopus, aut in peregrinationis
commodo eum abisse constiterit.] By which it seems that there was but one
Assemby in which the Bishop and Presbyters sat together: Otherwise the
Presbyters might have gone into all the rest of the Churches without the Bishop
at any time, and not only in case of his sickness or peregrination.

The fifth Canon of the Council of Antioch is the same with that of Can. Apost.
before cited, that no Presbyter or Deacon contemning his own Bishop, shall
withdraw from the Church and gather an Assembly apart, and set up an Altar. By
which still it appears that to withdraw from that Assembly, was to withdraw
from the Church, and that one Bishop had but one Altar and Assembly for Church
Communion.

So Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 35. which order the sitting of the Presbyters and
Bishop together in the Church: And many decrees that lay it on the Bishop to
look to the Church lands and goods, and distribute to the poor the Churches
Alms, do show that their Diocesses were but small, or else they had not been
sufficient for this.

All the premises laid together me thinks afford me this conclusion, that the
Apostolical particular Political Churches were such as consisted of one only
Worshipping Congregation (a Congregation capable of personal communion in
public worship) and their Overseers; and that by little they departed from
this form, each Bishop enlarging his Diocese, till he that was made at first
the Bishop but of one Church, became the Bishop of many, and so set up a new
frame of Government, by setting up a new kind of particular Churches. And thus
was the primitive Government corrupted, while men measured their charge by the
circuit of Ground, thinking they might retain the old compass when they had
multiplied converts, and therefore should have multiplied Churches and Bishops.
And it seems the Churches were not so large as some imagine, even at the sixth
General Council at (...) in Consta^ti^op. when Canon 78. it was ord^^ed that no
the fifth day of the week the Baptized were to say over their Belief to the
Bishop or the Presbyters: And it was not such Diocesses as ours that this work
could be th^^ done for.


To all this I add these observations. 1. That the very Nature of Church
Government tells us that a Governor must be present upon the place, and see to
the execution: For God has made us the Laws already, and Synods must in way of
Union determine of the most advantageous circumstances for the perfo^ming of
the duties which God imposes: And particular Bishops are to guide their
particular Congregations in Gods Worship, and in order thereto; Their guidance
is but a subservient means to that worship: And therefore they must Rule the
Church as a Captain does his Company in fight, or a Physician his Patient, or a
Schoolmaster his School, by his own presence, and not at many miles distance by
a Surrogate.

2. The doctrine which makes the first particular Political Church to consist
of many stated Worshipping Churches like our Parishes, does set on the saddle,
if not also hold the stirrup for a Diocesan Bishop to get up, to head those
prepared bodies.

3. Seeing the Presbyterians do confess that it is not Necessary (but lawful)
for a particular Political Church to consist of many Worshipping Churches, and
say, It may consist only of one: Common Reason and experience will then direct
us to conclude that its best ordinarily take up with that one: seeing people
that know one another, and live within the reach of each other for common
converse* and ordinarily meet and join in the same public Worship, are most
capable of the ends of Church Policy; and a Pastor capable of guiding such,
better then other Parishes that he knows not.

4. He that makes the Pastor of one Parish the Ruler of the rest adjoining,
does lay upon him much more duty then sitting in a Presbytery to vote in
censures. For those censures are a small part of Church Government,
comparatively (else most Congregations in England have little or no Government;
for they have little or none of these Censures.) Yea indeed true Church
Guidance or Government contains a great part, if not most of the Pastoral work,
which a man would be loath to undertake over too many distant unknown
Congregations: Though he may well undertake in Synods to promote Unity, and to
do the best he can for the whole Church of Christ. If therefore those of the
Congregational way, were as near us in other things, as in this before insisted
on, (especially if they would renounce As many of them d^ (...), when they hold
it in terms, of which see what I have said in the Preface to the Reform^^
Pastor; And even in this while they confess that Pastors are Rulers and the
People must obey, according to the express words of the text, Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 These. 5.12, etc. They grant us what we plead for.
that great mistake of the Peoples having the Power of the Keys or Government,
and take up for them with a Iudicium Discretionis, and just liberty) we need
not stand at so great a distance.

And lastly, If Ministers of the Gospel would tenderly weigh the greatness of
their work and charge, and the dreadfulness of their account, the worth of
souls, the power and prevalency of sin, the rage of all the Churches enemies,
and the multitudes of them, they would sooner tremble to think of the
difficulties in Governing or guiding one Congregation in the way to heaven,
than grasp at more, and think themselves able to be the guides of many, and
draw such a heavy burden on themselves, and prepare for such a reckoning. Lest
they be offended with my words, I will say the like in the words of Chrysostom
(or whoever else was the Author of the Imperfect work) on Matthew 20. Hom. 35.
page (mihi) 901. [ Si haec ergo ita se habent, secularem quidem primatum
desiderare, et si ratio non est, vel causa est: quia etsi justum non est, vel
utile est. Primatum autem Ecclesiasticum concupiscere, neque ratio est, neque
causa: quia neque justum est, neque utile. Quis enim sapiens ultro se subjicere
festinat servituti, labori, dolori, and quod majus est, periculo tali ut det
rationem pro omni Ecclesia, apud justum judicem? nisi forte qui non credit
Iudicium Dei, nec timet, uti abutens primatu suo Ecclesiastico seculariter,
convertat ^um in Secularem. Sed ne forte qui talis est in appetendo primatum,
profectum pietatis pie praetendat, dico, Nunquid qui in ordine prior est* jam
and meritis est melior?] And of the Ministerial honors he says (ibid.) D^niq,
ipsi honores in Christo in prima quidem facie videntur honores, revera autem
non sunt honores diversi, sed sunt diversa Ministeria: ut puta honor oculi
videtur, quia illuminat Corpus: Sed ipse honor illuminandi non est ei honor sed
Ministerium ejus. -- ]

So much to prove the Proposition, that the late English Episcopacy is not to
be restored, under any pretense of Order or Peace.

Wherein I have purposely forborne the mention of its Abuses, and doleful
consequents, because they may suppose that Abuse to be separable from the thing.

Consequents of that which is already Proved.
TO save the debating of many great Controversies that break the peace and
destroy or diminish the Charity of many, I may abbreviate the work, by giving
you some of the true sequels of what has been sufficiently proved.

Cons. I. The taking down of the English Episcopacy was (as to the thing) so
far from being evil, Cons. 1.
and deserving the Accusations that some lay upon it, that it was a matter of
Necessity to the Reformation and well being of the Churches of Christ in these
Nations. It was no worse a work in it self considered, then the curing of a
grievous disease is to the sick, and the supply of the necessities of the poor
in their indigence. What guilt lies upon that man, that would have all the
sick to perish, for fear of injuring one Physician, that had undertaken the
sole care of all the County? or that would have all the County to have but one
Schoolmaster: Or an hundred Ships to have but one Pilot, and consequently to
perish: How much greater is their guilt, that would have had the forementioned
Episcopacy continued, to the hazard of many thousand souls, and the abasement
and ejection of holy Discipline, the pollution of the Churches, and the
hardening of the wicked, and the dishonor of God? I mention not this to
provoke any to dishonor them, but to provoke the persons themselves to
Repentance. And I entreat them to consider, how sad a thing it is, that without
any great inducement, they should draw such a mountain of guilt upon their
souls. The Bishops had the temptation of Honor and Riches: but what honor or
gain have you to seduce you, to choose a share with other men in their sin and
punishment?

I meddle not here with the Manner of demolishing Episcopacy, but with the
Matter: because I would not mix other Controversies with this. But I am
confident those men that usually own the late Episcopacy, and revile them that
demolisht it, shall one way or other feel ere long, that they have owned a very
unprofitable cause, and such as they shall wish, they had let alone, and that
it made not for their honor to be so much enemies to the welfare of the
Church, as the enemies of the abolition of that Prelacy will appear to be.

Cons. 2.
Cons. II. The matter of that clause in the National Covenant, which concerns
the abolition of this Prelacy before mentioned, was so far from deserving the
Reproaches and Accusations that are bestowed on it by some, that it was just
and necessary to the well being of the Church.

In this also I purposely mean the Civil controversy about the authority of
imposing, taking, or prosecuting the Covenant, and speak only of the Matter of
it: (to avoid the losing of the truth by digressions, and new controversies)
They that by reproaching this clause in the Covenant, do own the Prelacy which
the Covenant disowneth, might show more love to the Church and their own souls,
by pleading for sickness, and nakedness, and famine, and by passionate
reproaches of all that are against these, then by such owning and pleading for
a far greater evil.

Cons. 3.
Cons. III. Those of the English Ministry, that are against the old Episcopacy,
and are glad that the Church is rid of it, are not therefore guilty of Schism,
nor of sinful disobedience to their spiritual superiors.

If any of them did swear obedience to the Prelates (a tyrannical imposition
that God never required, nor the Primitive Church never used) that's nothing to
our present case, which is not about the keeping of oaths, but the obeying or
rejecting the Prelacy in it self considered. It is not schismatical to depart
from an ^^^rpation that God disowneth, and the Church is endangered and so much
wronged by, and to seek to pull up the Roots of Schism, which have bred and fed
it in the Churches so long.

Cons. IV. Those that still justify the ejected Prelacy, Cons. 4.
and desire the restoration of it, as they needlessly choose the guilt of the
Churches desolations, so are they not to be taken for men that go about to heal
our breaches, but rather for such as would widen and continue them, by
restoring the main cause.

Cons. 5.
Cons. V. If we had had such an Episcopacy as Bishop Hall and Bishop Usher did
propound as satisfactory, (and such men to manage it,) Episcopacy and Peace
might have dwelt together in England to this day: It is not the the Name of a
Bishop that has been the matter of our trouble, but the exorbitant Species
introducing unavoidably the many mischiefs which we have seen and felt.

Cons. VI. Ordination by the ejected Prelacy, in specie, is not of necessity to
the being or well-being of a Presbyter or Deacon. Cons. 6.
If the Species of Prelacy it self be proved contrary to the word of God, and
the welfare of the Church, then the Ordination that is by this Species of
Prelacy, cannot be necessary or as such desirable.

Cons. VII. A Parochial or Congregational Pastor, Cons. 7.
having assistant Presbyters and Deacons, either existent or in expectance, was
the Bishop that was in the days of Ignatius, Justin, Tertullian, and that Dr.
Hammond describes as meant in many Scriptures, and existent in those days. I
speak not now to the question about Archbishops.

Cons. VIII. The Ordination that is now performed by these Parochial Bishops
(especially in an assembly, Cons. 8.
guided by their Moderator) is, beyond all just exception, Valid, as being by
such Bishops as the Apostles planted in the Churches, and nearer the way of the
Primitive Church, then the Ordination by the ejected Species of Prelates is.

Cons. IX. As the Presbyters of the Church of Alexandria did themselves make
one their Bishop, Cons. 9.
whom they chose from among themselves, and set him in a higher degree (as if
Deacons make an Archdeacon, or Soldiers choose one and make him their
Commander, says Hierom ad Evagr.) so may the Presbyters of a Parochial Church
now. And as the later Canons require that a Bishop be ordained or consecrated
by three Bishops, so may three of these (Primitive) Parochial Bishops, ordain
or consecrate now another of their degree. And according to the Canons
themselves, no man can justly say that this is invalid, for want of the
Consecration by Archbishops, or of such as we here oppose.

Cons. X. Those that persuade the People that the Ordinanation of those in
England and other Churches is null that is not by such as the English Prelates
were, Cons. 10
and that persuade the people to take them for no Presbyters or Pastors, that
are not ordained by such Prelates, and do make an actual separation from our
Churches and Ministers, and persuade others to the like, upon this ground, and
because the Ministers have disowned the English Prelacy, and withal confess
that Church of Rome to be a true Church, and their ordination and Priesthood to
be just or true, are uncharitable, and dangerously Schismatical (though under
pretense of decrying Schism,) and many ways injurious to the Church and to the
souls of men and to themselves. This will not please; but that I not only speak
it but further manifest it, is become Necessary to the right Information of
others.

FINIS
The Second DISPUTATION: VINDICATING The Protestant Churches and MINISTERS that
have not Prelatical Ordination, from the Reproaches of those Dividers that
would nullify them. WRITTEN Upon the sad complaints of many Godly Ministers in
several parts of the Nation, whose Hearers are turning Separatists. By Rich.
Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster.
1658.

The Preface.
Christian Reader,
IF thou be but for the interest of Christianity, more than of a party, and a
Cordial friend to the Churches Peace, though thou be never so much resolved for
Episcopacy, I doubt not but thou and I shall be one, if not in each Opinin, yet
in our Religion, and in Brotherly affection, and in the very bent of our
labors and our lives: And I doubt not but thou will approve of the scope and
substance of this following Disputation, what imperfections soever may appear
in the Manner of it. For surely there is that of God within thee, that will
hardly suffer thee to believe, that while Rome is taken for a true Church, the
Reformed that have no Prelates must be none: that their Pastors are mere
Laymen, their Ordination being Null: and consequently their administrations in
Sacraments, etc. Null and of no Validity. The Love that is in thee to all
believers, and especially to the Societies of the Saints, and the honor and
interest of Christ, will keep thee from this, or strive against it, as nature
does against poison or destructive diseases. If thou art not a mere Opinionist
in Religion, but one that have been illuminated by the spirit of Christ, and
felt his love shed abroad in thy heart, and have ever had experience of
spiritual communion with Christ and his Church, in his holy Ordinances, I dare
then venture my cause upon thy judgment: Go among them that unchurch our
Churches, and degrade our Ministers, and persuade all people to fly from them
as a plague, and try their doctrine, their spirits, their public worship,
their private devotion, and their whole conversation; and when thou have done,
come into our Assemblie^, and spare not, if thou be impartial, to observe our
imperfections: judge of our Order and Discipline and Worship, together with our
Doctrine and our lives: and when thou have done un^church us if thou dare,
and if thou can. We justify not our selves or our ways from blemishes: but
if thou be but heartily a friend to the Bridegroom, offer us then if thou
dare a bill of divorce, or rob him if thou dare of so considerable a
portion of his inheritance. Surely if thou be his friend, thou can hardly
find in thy heart to deliver up so much of his Kingdom to his Enemy, and to set
the name of the Devil on his doors, and say, This is the house of Satan and not
of Christ. If thou have received but what I have done (though, alas too little)
in those Societies, and tasted in those Ordinances but that which I have
tasted, thou would abhor to reproach them, and cut them off from the portion
of the Lord.

Remember it is not Episcopacy nor the old conformity that I am here opposing.
(My judgment of those Causes I have given in the foregoing and following
disputation:) But it is only the New Prelatical Recusants or Separatists, that
draw their followers from our Churches as no Churches and our Ordinances of
Worship as none, or worse then none, and call them into private houses, as the
meetest places for their acceptable worship. Who would have thought that ever
that generation should have come to this, that so lately hated the name of
separation, and called those private meetings, Conventicles, which were held
but in due subord^nation to Church meetings, and not in opposition to them, as
theirs are! Who would have thought that those that seemed to disown Recusancy,
and persecuted Separatists, should have come to this? Yea that those that under
Catholic pretenses can so far extend their charity to the Papists, have yet so
little for none of the meanest of their Brethren, and for so many Reformed
Protestant Churches? Yea that they should presume even to censure ut out of the
Catholic Church and consequently out of heaven it self. I have after here
given thee an instance in one, Dr. Hide, who brandeth the very front of his
Book with these Schismatical uncharitable st^gmata. The senseless Queres of one
Dr. Swaddling, and others run in the same channel, or sink. If these men be
Christians indeed, me thinks they should understand, that as great (that I say
not greater) blemishes, may be found on all the rest of the Churches, as those
for which the Reformed are by them unchurched: and consequently they will
deliver up All to Satan; and Christ must be deposed: And how much does this
come short of Infidelity? At least me thinks their hearts should tremble least
they hear at last, [In not loving the^e you loved not me: in despising and
reproaching these, you despised and reproached me.]

And yet these men are the greatest pretenders next the Romanists, to
Catholicisme, Unity, and Peace! Strange Catholics that cut off so great and
excellent a part of the Catholic Church! And a sad kind of Unity and Peace
which all must be banished from, that cannot unite in their Prelacy, though the
Episcopacy which I plead for in the next Disputation they can own. The sum of
their offer, is, that if all the Ministers not Ordained by Prelates, will
confess themselves to be mere Laymen, and no Ministers of Christ, and will be
Ordained again by them, and if the Churches will confess themselves No
Churches, and receive the essence of Churches from them, and the Sacrament and
Churh Assemblies to be Null, invalid, or unlawful till managed only by
Prelatical Minister^, then they will have Peace and Communion with us, and not
till then. And indeed must we buy your Communion so deer? As the Anabaptists do
by us in the point of Baptism, so do these Recusants in the point of
Ordination. You must be Baptized says one party, for your Infant Baptism wat
none. You must be Ordained says the other sort, for your Ordination by
Presbyters was none. The upshot is, We must be all of their Opinions and
parties, before we can have their Communion, or to be reputed by them the
Ministers and Churches of Christ. And on such kind of terms as these, we may
have Unity with any Sect.

If really we be not as hearty friends to Order and Discipline in the Church as
they, we shall give them leave to take it for our shame, and glory in it as
their honor. But the question is not, whether we must have Church Order? but
whether it must be theirs, and none but theirs? Nor whether we must have
Discipline, but whether it must be only theirs? Nay, with me, I must profess,
the question is, on the other side whether we must needs have a Name and show
of Discipline that's next to none, or else be no Churches or no Ministers of
Christ? The main reason that turns my heart against the English Prelacy is
because it did destroy Church Discipline, and almost destroy the Church for
want of it, or by the abuse of it, and because it is (as then exercised)
inconsistent with true Discipline. The question is not, whether we must have
Bishops and Episcopal Ordination. We all yield to that without contradiction.
But the doubt is about their Species of Episcopacy, Whether we must needs have
Ordination by a Bishop that is the sole Governor over an hundred, or two
hundred, or very many particular Churches? or whether the Bishops of single
Churches may not suffice, at least as to the Being of our office? I plead not
my own cause, but the Churches* For I was ordained long ago by a Bishop of
their own with Presbyters. But I do not therefore take my self to be disengaged
from Christianity or Cathol^cism, and bound to lay by the Love which I owe to
all Christ's members, or to deny the Communion of the Churches, which is both my
Duty, and I am sure an unvaluable Mercy. And I must say, that I have seen more
of the Ancient Discipline exercised of late, without a Prelate, in some Parish
Church in England, than ever I saw or heard of exercised by the Bishops in a
thousand such Churches all my days. And it is not Names that are Essential to
the Church, nor that will satisfy our expectations.

We are for Bishops in every Church; And for Order sake, we would have one to
be the chief. We dislike those that disobey them in lawful things, as well as
you. But let them have a flock that is capable of their personal Government,
and then we shall be ready to rebuke all those that separate from them, when we
can say as Cyprian (Epist. 69. ad Pupian.) [Omnis Ecclesiae populus collectus
est, and adunatus, in individua concordia sibi junctus. Soli illi foris
remanserint, qui etsi intus essent, ejiciendi fuerant -- Qui cum Episcopo non
est, in Ecclesia non est (that is, in that particular Church.) Cyprian had a
people that could all meet together to consult or consent at least about the
Communion or Excommunication of the members. Epist. 55. Cornel. he tells
Cornelius how hard the people were to admit the lapsed or scandalous upon their
return if the manifestation of repentance were not full. The Church with whom
the person had Communion, was then it that had a Bishop, and was no greater
then to be capable of the Cognizance of his cause, and of receiving
satisfaction by his personal penitence.

Brethren! (for so I will presume to call you, whether you will or not) Some
experience has persuaded me, that if we had honestly and faithfully joined in
the practice of so much of Discipline, as all our principles require, it would
have helped us to that experimental knowledge (by the blessing of God) which
would have brought us nearer even in our Principles, then our idle
Disputations, separated from practice will ever do. As Augustine says of the
disputes de causa mali (Lib. de utilitat. Credendi, cap. 18.) Dum nimis
quaerunt unde sit malum, nihil reperiunt n^si malum] so I may say of these
disputes, while we thus dispute about the causes of disorder and division, we
find nothing but disorder and division.

It is easy to conjecture of the ends and hearts of those that cry down Piety
as preciseness, while they cry up their several wa^es of order: it seems they
would have ordered impiety: and their order must be a means to keep down
holiness, which all just order should promote. Those men that can fall in with
the most notoriously ungodly, and favor and flatter them for the strengthening
of their interest, do tell us what Discipline we may expect from them. If they
tell us that our Churches also are corrupted, and all are not truly or
eminently godly, we can say to them as Augustine (lib. de utilitat. Credend.
cap. 17.) [Pauci hoc faciunt, pauciores been prudenterque faciunt: sed populi
probant, populi audiunt, populi favent] yea we can say much more.

But f^r those that go further, and clap the prophanest railers on the back,
and hiss them on to hiss at those that diff^r from them, and are glad to hear
the rabble revile our M^nist^y and our Churches, in taking part with their
Prelacy and Liturgy, they tell us louder what unity and order they desire, and
what a mercy of God it is, that such as they have not their will: and though
among themselves the slanders and reproaches of such men may go for credible or
be accepted as conducing to their ends; yet in the conclusion such witnesses
will bring no credit to their cause, nor with just men much discredit ours; at
least it will not diminish our reputation with God, nor abate his love, nor
hinder his acceptance and then we have enough. Says (Cyprian Epist. 69. ad
Pupian) Quasi apud lapsos and prophanos, and extra Ecclesiam positos, de quorum
pectoribus excesserit Spiritus Sanctus, esse aliq^id possit nisi men's prava,
and fallax lingua, and odia venenata, and sacrilega mendacia, quibus qui
credit, cum illis necesse est inveniatur, cum judicii dies venerit.] That is
[As if with the scandalous and profane, and those that are without the Church,
from whose breasts the holy Spirit is departed, there could be any thing but a
naughty mind, and a deceitful tongue, and venomous hatred, and sacrilegious
lies; and those that bel^eve them must needs be found with them when the day of
judgment comes.]

Me thinks rather the hatred, and railing of the ungodly should intimate to you
that our Ministry is of God! why else do all the most obstina^ely wicked
malign us as their enemies, though we never did them wrong? why seek they our
destruction, and are glad of any Learned men that will encourage them in their
malignity, and to strike in with any party that are against us; when all the
harm we wish or do them, is to pray for them* and persuade them, and do our
best to save them from damnation! As Cyprian (ubi sup.) said to Pupian [ut
etiam qui non credebant Deo Episcopum constituenti, vel Diabolo crederent
Episcopum proscribenti] so say ^ [They that will not believe Gods testimony of
our Ministry, let them believe the Devils testimony, as the confession of an
enemy, that by the mouths of the wicked revileth us as Ministers, and
persecut^ti^us for doing our Masters work.

Another reproach is commonly laid upon our Min^stry by those that vilify them
in order to their end^, viz that they are boys, and raw and unlearned, and
manage the work of God so coursely as tends to bring it into contempt. I would
there were no ground for this accusation at all: but I must needs say, 1. That
no men are more unmeet then you to be the accusers. Have you so corrupted the
Ministry with the insufficient and ungodly, that we are necessitated to supply
their places with men that are too young; and now do you reproach us, because
we imperfectly mend your crimes? yea because we work not in possibilities? It
is the desire of our souls, that no able useful man may be laid by, however
differing in smaller matters, or controversies of policy? But we cannot create
men, nor infuse learning into them; but when God has qualified them, we gladly
use them; the b^st that can be had are chosen; and what can be done more? And I
hope y^u will acknowledge, that godly and tolerably able young men are fitter
then impious, ignorant Readers.

We excuse no man's weakness: but to speak out the truth, too many of the
adversaries of our Ministry accuse our weakness with greater weakness* when
they are unable or undispos^d themselves to manage the work of God with any of
that gravity, and seriousness as the unspeakable weight of the business does
require, they think to get the reputation of learned able men, by an empty
childish, trifling kind of preaching; patching together some shreds of
sentences, and offering us their Centons with as much ostentation, as if it
were an uniform, judicious work. And then they fall a j^ering at plain and
serious Preachers, as if they were some ignorant bawling fellows, that were
nothing but a voice, and had nothing to produce but fervent nonsense. Brethren,
will you bear with us a little, while we modestly excuse our simplicity which
you contemn. We will not say, that we can speak wisdom to the wise, nor make
ostentation of our Oratory: but we must tell you that we Believe what we speak*
and somewhat feel it; and therefore we endeavor so to speak wh^t we believe
and feel, that others also may bel^eve and f^el us. If a man speak smilingly,
or not affectionately of very great affecting things, the hearers use to say,
You are but in jest; and they believe him not, because he speaks as one that
does not believe himself. It is not wit but Levity and stupidity that we
renounce. As Seneca says, we refuse not an eloquent Physician: but it is not
eloquence, but Healing that we need: the easing of our pains, and saving of our
lives, and not the clawing of our ears. We dare not speak lightly or triflingly
of Heaven or Hell. We more condemn our selves when we find within us but a dull
apprehension of th^se exceeding great eternal things, then we do for want of
neat expressions. A vain curiosity in attire, does show that substantial worth
is wanting. We most abhor the preaching of false doctrine: and next, that
manner of preaching Truth that causes an airy levity in the hearers; and when
the manner seems to contradict the matter. One taste or sight of Heaven or
Hell would put you into another pass your selves. Truly Brethren (though I am
one my self, that have the least advantages to vie with you in that wherein you
glory* yet) there are many among them whom you thus despise, that have wits
inclined to as much unruliness and luxuriancy as yours: but being balanced
with the sense of everlasting things, and seasoned with the Light and Life of
Christ, they are as careful to keep under and rule their wit, as others are
diligent to feed its wantonness, and make ostentation of it to the world. It
will shortly appear but ingenious folly which was not animated and regulated by
Christ. The wisdom of the world is foolishness with God: and the foolishness
of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 1.25. etc. We find the most experienced
Learned Divines betake themselves to the plainest style; and much more addicted
to the ancient simplicity, then green, inflated, empty brains. When we
displease both our selves, and ou^ queasie* come and acry auditors by the
hom^lyness of our style, w^ usually hear more of the success of those sermons,
then of those wherein by a wordy Curiosity, we procure from the acry more
applause. Says Augustine (de Catechiz* ^ud^b cap. 2.) [Na^ and mihi semper
prope sermo men's di^plicet sic and tu eo ipso quod ad te saep^us adducu^tur
baptizandi -- deb^s intelligere n^n ita displicere aliis sermonem tuum ut
displicet tibi: nec infru^tuosum ^e debes puta^e, quod ea quae cernis non
explicas ita ut cupis; quando fo^te ut cupis nec cernere valeas] Our business
is to teach the ignorant, to convert the impen^tent, and to edify and confirm
the weak; and therefore if repetitions, and homely expressions, with all the
seriousness we can use, be found the fittest means to attain these ends, we
shall study them and not decline them, though some dislike them. Augustine de
doctrine. Christ lib. 4. cap. 12. Qui ergo dicit cum doc^re vult, quamdiu non
intelligitur, nondum se existimet dixisse quod vult e^ quem vult docere: quia
etsi dixit quod ipse intelli^it, nondum ille (illi) dixisse putandus est, a quo
intellectus non est: si vero intellectus est, quocunque modo dixerit, dixit.]

I confess when I heard a through pased preacher in the Prelates re^gn,
experience taught me presently to expect three great infirmities in him, viz.
stumbling, spotling, and tiring: stumbling either in doctrine, conversation, or
both; especially in a stony way: spotling even the clearest of his Br^thren,
and that both in the Pulpit, and behind their backs. For most of the wounds we
have from such are in our back parts, though we never fled. They can most
effectu^lly confute us when we do not hear them. As one of them that I knew,
divided his Text into one part, and so do many of them their Disputations: they
are best at Disputing alone, when there is none to contradict them. They are
better gun-men then swordmen: Eminus fortissimi; cominus -- more valiant a far
off than near at hand: and making more use of powder then of bullet; the noise
exceeding the execution: and being nearest themselves, it is a wonder that
their Consciences start not at the report. It is the reward of these pugnacious
souls, to be cried up as victorious, and to have their triumph attended by
their like: and it is enough to prove them victors that they can but crow and
erect the crist. And if they are soon ti^ed we must not wonder; for they preach
at too high rates to hold out long. Iunkets are not for full meals; and
feasting must not be all the year. When they preached but seldom, they justified
it by telling us, that one of their sermons was worth ten of theirs that
preach^d so often: and half a crown was as good as ^iv^ six pences.

For my part, I do not undervalue their w^t, nor envy them the honor of it:
but I would fain have things Divine to be Divinely handled; and the weightiest
matters to be spoken off in the most serious weighty manner. And I would not
have a school boy when he has said a Declamation, to thin^ that he is more
learned then Scotus or Ockam, because he has a smoother style: nor to think
that he has done a gallanter piece of work, then he that has read a Lecture
in Metaphysics. I am much inc^ined to honor their parts; I value the wit of a
Comaedian, when I value not the employment of it. I have often hea^d a Rustical
Justice call a f^dler a Rogue, that cal^ed himself a Musician; and perhaps he
puts him in the ^locks, that thinks he deserves a Princes ear: when I have
thought of their Art, and forgotten the abuse, I have be^n (...) to (...) their
case. I could be well content that so (...) as Nero perish not: le^ him live a^
an Artist (...) as an Emperor. I honor and love the learning and (...) of the
Jesuits: let (...) be encouraged as (...) not as Jesuits. Let them a^l be used
^n that which they are (...) for. But a (...) wit is not enough to make a
Minister of the Gospel of salvation. Counters can jingle as well as gold. If
such must be Bishops, let them be Diocesans, (so they be ^ept without a sword)
for when they have an hun^red Chur^he^* they will trouble them but seldom, with
their preaching: and that may be endured for a day that cannot for a year.

If you think I have turned my excuse of a plain and serious Ministry into a
recrimination, or seemed guilty of what I blame, consider of what and to whom I
speak.

I am far from a contempt of learning, or encourageing ignorant insufficient
men, or justifying any ridiculous unseemly deportment, or any rash, irrational
expressions, in the work of God. And I earnestly entreat the servants of the
Lord to take heed of such temerity and miscarriages, and remember what a work
they have in hand, and how much depends on the success, and that the eyes of
God and men are on them, and that it is no light matter to an honest heart,
that Christ and his cause should be dishonored by our weaknesses, and our
labors should hereby be frustrated, and sinners hardened in their impiety. But
yet I must say, that many that are but low in Learning, have greater abilities
(by grace and use) to manage the great essentials of Christianity, and set home
a necessary truth upon the heart, and deal with ignorant dead-hearted sinners,
then many very Learned men did ever attain to. And I confess I could wish for
the service of the Church, that some such (now private) less-learned men, in
great Congregations were yoaked with some Learned men that are less fit for
lively rouzing application; that they might Lovingly go together, the one
confessing his defect in Learning, and the other his defect in application, and
the unlearned depending for guidance from the more Learned, in cases of
difficulty, where his abilities fall short; that so they might be both as one
able Minister, communicating the honor of their several abilities to each
other to supply and cover each others defects. But if such a thing should be
attempted (though agreeably to the Churches practice for many hundred years
after Christ) what an outcry should we have from the men now in hand, against
Mechanics and unlearned men! and how many would reproach their work that
cannot mend it! I have been long on this subject: I will end it with this story.

Gregory Nysen tells us in his relation of the Life of Gregory Thaumaturgus,
that this holy man then Bishop of Neocaesarea, was so famous by his miracles
and successes that the Neighbor Countries sent to him, to preach and plant
Churches among them. Among others Comana a neighbor City sent to him to come
and plant a Church and Bishops among them. When he had stayed a while, and
preached and prepared them, and the time was come that he was to design them a
chief Pastor (or Bishop) the Magistrates and principal men of the City were
very busy in enquiring anxiously and curiously, who was of most eminent rank
and splendor, excelling the rest, that he might be chosen to the office* and
dignity of being their Bishop. For Gregory himself had all these Ornaments, and
therefore they thought their Pastor must have them too But when it came to
choice they were all to pieces, some for one and some for another: so that
Gregory looked to heaven for Directions, what to do. When they were thus taken
up with proposing men of splendour and eminency. Gregory (remembering Samuels
anointing David,) exhorted them to look also among the meanest: for possibly
there might be found among them some of better qualifications of mind:
Whereupon some of them signified, that they took it as a contumely and s^orn,
that all the chief m^n for eloquence, dignity and splendour should be refused,
and that Mechanics and tradesmen that labor for tehir living should be
thought fitter for so great an office. And says one of them to him in
derision, If you will pass by all these that are chosen out of the best of the
Citizens, and go to the scum and basest of the people for a Pastor for us: its
best for you even to make Alexander the Collier a Priest, and lets all agree to
choose him. The good man hearing these scornful words, it struck into his mind
to know who that Alexander the Collier was? Whereupon they brought him
presently with laughter, and set him in the midst of them collowed and
half-naked, and ragged and sordid, and thus stood Alexander among them. But
Gregory suspected somewhat better by him, then they that laughed at him; and
thereupon taking him out of the company, and examining his life, he found that
he was a Philosophic man, that being of a very comely person, and loath it
should be any occasion of incontinency, and also renouncing the vanities of the
world, had addicted himself to the life of a Collier, that his person and worth
might be hid from men, and his mind be kept in an humble frame. Whereupon
Gregory appoints some to take away Alexander, and wash him and cloth him
with his Pastoral attire, and bring him into the Assembly as soon as they had
done. In the mean time Gregory goes to the Assembly, and falls a preaching to
them of the nature of the Pastoral office, and the holiness of life required
thereto, entertaining them with such speeches, t^ll Alexander was brought, and
comely adorned in Gregory's garm^nts was set before them. Whereupon they all
fell a gazing and wondering at Alexander: and Gregory falls a preaching to them
again of the deceitfulness of judging by outward appearances, about the inward
worth of the soul, and that Satan had obscured Alexander, lest he should
subvert his kingdom. To be short, he ordains Alexander their Bishop (a Pastor
of a single Church.) And when they desired to bear him preach, he showed that
Gregory was not deceived in him: His sermon was sententious and full of
understanding: but because he had no flowers of Oratory, or exactness and
curosity of words, one that was a curious hearer derided him, who it is said
was by a vision brought to repent of it. And thus despised Alexander the
Collier was made Bishop (or Pastor) of Comana, when the great ones were
rejected: and afterward proved a Champion for Christ, to whom he passed in
Martyrdom through the flames. I have recited this for their sakes that deride
the gifts of God in men whom they account unlearned: but not to encourage any
to thrust themselves on so great a work without Ordination and due
qualifications.

Object. But it is Ordination it self that is wanting to the Pastors of the
Reformed Churches, and therefore they are no Pastors, etc. Answ. The contrary
is manifested in this ensuing Disputation. This separating Principle is it that
I here purposely contend against. For it is cast in to divide and to destroy:
And to quench such granado's and fireworks of the Devil, is a necessary work
for them that will preserve a Churches Peace. I read in Thuanus of a Bishop in
France that turning Protestant, took his Popish consecration for insufficient,
and was again elect, and ordained by the Protestant Minsters, without a
Prelate, to be a Prelate. But that Presbyters Ordained by a Presbytery of
Protestants should be reordained by a Prelate, and that as necessary to the
being of their office, is strange doctrine to all the Protestant Churches. It
was rejected commonly by the English Bishops, even by A. B. Bancroft himself.
Says Firmilian (inter Epist. Cypriani) [Omnis potestas and gratia in Ecclesia
constituta est, ubi praesident Majores natu, qui and baptizandi, and Manus
imponendi and ordinandi poffident potestatem] i. e. All Power and Grace is
placed in the Church where Elders do preside, who possess the power of
Baptizing* Imposing hands, and Ordaining.]

I know it will be said that Firmilian speak of Bishops only. But I believe not
that he spoke of such Bishops only as we have in question, or that he did not
plainly speak of Presbyters as such. For he speaks of the plenitude of Power
and Grace in the Church: and therefore intended more then what was proper to a
Prelate. 2. He mentions Elders, Majores natu, in general without distinction.
And 3. His praesident is plainly related to the Church (as the ubi shows:) it
being the People and not the Elders over whom these Elders are said to preside.
And 4. Baptizing is first instanced, which was known to be commonly the work of
Presbyters, and never appropriated to the Prelate. So that the same persons
that did Baptize, even the Elders of the Church, according to Firmilian, did
then possess the power of laying on hands and of ordaining. But these things
are more fully discussed in what follows. And if any either adversary or
friend would see the Reformed Churches Ministry and Ordination more fully
vindicated, I refer them to Voetius against Jasenius Desperata causa Papatus:
which if I had read before I had written this Disputation, I think I should
have spared my labor.

Reader, if others are too busy to misled thee, I may suppose thee unwilling
to be misled, especially in a matter of so great concernment: For says Blessed
Agustine, Multos invenimus qui mentiri velint, qui autem falli ^eminem: de
Doctrine. Christ. l. 1. cap. 36.) And therefore as thou love Christ, his
Church, and Gospel, and the souls of others and thine own, take heed how thou
venturest in following a sect of angry men, to unchurch so great and excellent
a part of the Catholich Church, and to vilify and depose so great a number of
able faithful Ministers of Christ, as those that had not Prelatical Ordination.

And if you are Gentlemen, or unlearned men, that for want of long and diligent
studying of these matters, are incapable of judging of them, and therefore take
all on the Authority of those whose Learning and parts you most esteem* I
beseech you before you venture your souls on it any further; procure a
satisfactory answer to these Questions.

1. Whether the Reformed Churches that have no Prelates, have not abounded with
as learned men as any one of those that you admire of a contrary judgment?

2. If you are tempted to suspect men of partiality, whether they that plead
for Lorship, honor and preferment, or they that plead against it, and put it
from them, are more to be suspected, ca^teris paribus?

3. If you will needs suspect the Protestant Ministers of partiality: what
ground of suspicion have you of them that were no Ministers? such as the two
Scaligers, whose learning made them the admiration of the Christian world, even
to Papists as well as Protestants: and yet were cordial friends to those
Reformed Churches which these men deny and draw men to disown. Such also as
Salmasius, that has purposely wrote about the subject: with abundance more.

4. If these are not to be trusted, why should not Bishops themselves be
trusted? were not Bishop Usher, Andrews, Davenant, Hall, and others of their
mind, as learned pious men as any whose Authority you can urge against them?

5. If all this be nothing, I beseech you get a modest resolution of this doubt
at least: whether the concurrent judgment of all the Protestant Churches in
Christendom, even of the English Bishops with the rest, should not be of more
authority with any sober Protestant, then the Contrary judgment of those few
that are of late risen up for the cause that you are by them solicited to own.
It is a known Truth that the generality of the Bishops themselves and all the
Protestant Churches in the world, have owned them as true Ministers that were
ordained by Presbyteries, without Prelates: and have owned them as true
Churches that were guided by these Ministers, and have taken them for valid
administrations that were performed by them. And are your few Recusants that
would draw you to separation of greater Learning, authorty and regard, then all
the Protestants in the world besides? I beseech you, if you will needs take
things upon trust, consider this, and trust accordingly. Though I must say it
is pity that any truly Catholic Christian should not have better grounds
than these, and be able himself in so palpable a case to perceive his duty.

For my own part, my conscience witnesses that I have not written the
following Disputation out of a desire to quarrel with any man, but am drawn to
it, to my great displeasure, by the present danger and necessity of the
Churches, and by compassion to the souls that are turned from the public
Ordinances, and engaged in the separation, and also of the Churches that are
divided and troubled by these means. The sad complaints of many of my Brethren
from several parts have moved my heart to this undertaking. Through Gods Mercy,
I have peace at home: but I may not therefore be insensible of the divisions
and calamities abroad. I shall adjoin here one of the Letters that invited me,
and no more; because in that one you may see the scope and tenor of the rest,
and that I rush not on this displeasing work, without a Call, nor before there
is a cause. The passages that intimate an ever-valuing of my self, you may
charitably impute to the Authors juniority and humility, with some mistake
through distance and disacquaintance.

One of the Letters that invited me to this task.

Reverend Sir,
UNderstanding by the Preface to the Reader before your Gilda^ Salvianus, that
you intend a second part, wherein you promise to speak of the way how to
discern the true Church and Ministry, I make bold to present you with the
desire of some Godly Ministers: viz. that if you see it convenient, you would
do some thing toward the vindication of the present Churches and Ministers
from the aspersions of the new Prelatical party in England. It is a principle
much made of by many of the Gentry and others, that we are but Schismatical
branches broken off from the true body; and this by faithful tradition is
spread amongst them: the learning of some rigid Prelatical Scholars is very
prevalent with them to make them thus account of us. With these men we must be
all unchurched for casting off Diocesan Episcopacy: though we be found in the
faith, and would spend our selves to save souls, and the main substance of our
Ordination (at least) cannot be found fault with; yet because we had not a
Bishop to lay his hands on us, we are not sent from God. Of what consequence
this opinion may prove, if it spread without being checked, an ordinary
apprehension may perceive. I can guess something from what I observe from those
of this leaven already, that our most serious pains will be little regarded, if
our people take this infection; when we would awaken them, we cannot, because
they take it that we have no power to teach them. It must not be men of mean
parts that must undertake more fully to wipe off this reproach: for the learned
adversaries are tall Cedars in knowledge in comparison of many of us: and if
men of parts do not grapple with them herein, they will easily carry the vote
in many men's judgments; for they judge that the greater Scholars by far
certainly have the better in the contest. Sir, We beseech you that you would
improve your acquaintance in Antiquity for our help in this case. Not that we
would engage you in wrangling with particular men by name, who will not want
words: but however you would evidence it that our Ordination by Presbyters is
not void, and of no effect. I have this reason ready to give for this request:
for (besides what I had formerly heard) I was lately with some of those not of
the meanest influence, who urged Episcopacy as of absolute necessity, affirming
that this order the Church of God ever observed: and that it was doubtless of
Apostolical institution, being a thing of Catholic tradition, and that is the
best standard to intepret Scripture by. What then are we arrived at, that have
forsaken the whole Church herein? Though I am little versed in the Ancients,
yet I tell them we acknowledge that soon after the Apostles times the name
Bishop came up as distinct from the Presbyters; but then I call for their proof
that the Primitive Bishops had the power of jurisdiction over Presbyters, or
that to him only ordination was appropriated. I tell them also that we have
certain evidence that in some Churches these Bishops were made by Presbyters,
so was the custom in Alexandria* and when did ever the Church judge them to be
no Bishops or Ministers? And also of Tertullians Praesident probati quique
Seniores, and of Cyprians Salvo inter Collegas pacis and concordiae vinculo:
and that doubtless if Cyprian be to be believed, the Church was then ruled by
the joint consent of its Pastors, of whom one was indeed the President or
Moderator, who yet called himself compresbyter, and the Presbyters s^atres (not
filios as it was of l^te.) This answer I have had from some of them, that the
Church in those times was much under the clo^d, being persecuted, and had not
that liberty to settle Diocesan Episcopacy in that Glory, which the Apostolical
institution aimed at, and that the Church was then what it could be, and not
what it would be. Do you judge of its weight. For my part, I am most stumbled
at the reading of Ignatius (whom Dr. H. so strenuously d^fends) and cannot tell
how to evade that Testimony in the behalf of Episcopacy, if it be indeed the
testimony of the true Ignatius. But methinks his phrase is much unlike either
that of Clemens, or of Cyprian in this case. Its great pity that Dr. Bloudel
wants his eyes, and so we are hindered of enjoying of more of his labors in
this point. His Notion of the (...) is a very pretty on, and it were well if we
had fuller evidence added to that which he has endeavored after in his
Preface, to his Apology for Hierom.

Or if your judgment about the power of every single Pastor were fully
improved, it would conduce much to the clearing of these controversies. I could
methinks be glad of the practice of those proposals which Bishop Usher has
made in a late printed sheet: But these angry Brethren who now oppose us are of
a higher strain.

But I run out too far and forget whom I am writing to. Truly I am deeply
sensible, what mischief those seeds which are as yet but thin-sown (as I may
say) may grow up to in time: I know not how it is with yo^; but with us, I fear
(...) for one at least would be easi^y drawn to ^uch an opinion of us, if the
temptation were but somewhat stronger; multitudes observing how c^vil
transactions have (...) in a round, begin also to think we shall also arive at
our old Church-customs again: now ^f th^se Episcopal (...) judgment should but
be dispersed mo^e abroad, how easily would it make these people think that we
have d^luded them all this whi^^? and so will not regard us. Alas* that a sad
thought is it if I should study and preach and pray for men's souls* and yet be
re^ected as one that had no change of them as a M^nister, laid on me for God*
We thank you for what you said in your Christian Concord: and (...) you would
enlarge further on this Subject, as you see convenient: That the striplings in
the Ministry may be furnished with arguments against our (...) such able hands
as yours are.

I have do^e; only I shall desire your pardon for my interrupting you in your
other business; and if I shall hereafter crave your assistance and direction i^
some cases, I pray you excuse me if uncivil, and vouchsafe to let me hear from
you* for I am about to settle where the charge is great. The Lord continue you
(...) us, that you may be further an instrument of good. I rest,

Ian. 8. 1657. Your Affectionate friend and weak Brother M. E.


Assert. Those who nullify our present Ministry and Churches, which have not
the Prelatical Ordination, and teach the people to do the like, do incur the
guilt of grievous sin.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. FOR the making good this Assertion, 1. I shall prove that they
groundlesly deny our Ministry and Churches; and 2. I shall show the greatness
of their sin.

In preparation to the first I must 1. Take some notice of the true Nature of
the Ministerial function: and 2. Of the Nature and Reasons of Ordination.

Sect. 2. We are agreed ( ore tenus at least) that the Power and Honor of the
Ministry is for the Work, and the Work for the Ends, which are the revelation
of the Gospel, the application or conveyance of the benefits to men, the right
worshipping of God, and right Governing of his Church, to the saving of our
selves and our people, and the Glorifying and Pleasing God.

Sect. 3. So that [ A Minister of the Gospel is an Officer of Jesus Christ, set
apart (or separated) to preach the Gospel and thereby to convert men to
Christianity, and by Baptism to receive Disciples into his Church, to
congregate Disciples, and to be the Teachers, Overseers, and Governors of the
particular Churches, and to go before them in public worship and administer to
them the special Ordinances of Christ, according to the word of God; that in
the Communion of Saints, the members may be edified, preserved, and be fruitful
and obedient to Christ; and the Societies well ordered, beautified and
strengthened; and both Ministers and People saved; and the Sanctifier, Redeemer
and the Father Glorified and Pleased in his People now and for ever]

Sect. 4. In this Definition of a Minister, 1. It is supposed that he be
competently qualified for these works: For if the Matter be not so far Disposed
as to be capable of the Form, it will not be informed thereby. There are some
Qualifications necessary to the being of the Ministry, some but to the well
being. Its the first that I now speak of.

Sect. 5. Before I name them, lest you misapply what is said, I shall first
desire you to observe this very necessary distinction: Its one thing to ask,
Who is to take himself for a called and true Minister; and to do the work, as
expecting Acceptance and Reward from God: and its another thing to ask, Whom
are the people (or Churches) to take for a true Minister, and to submit to as
expecting the Acceptance and bl^ssing of God in that submission from hi^
admin^stratio^s. Or its one thing to have a Call which will before God justify
his Ministration and another thing to have a Call which will before (...)
justify the Peoples submission, and will justify in foro Ecclesia, both him
and them. And so its one thing to be a Minister whom God and Conscience will
justify and own, as to Himself and another thing to be a Minister to the
Church, whom they must own, and God will own and bless only as to their good.

In the first sense, none but truly sanctified men can be Ministers; but in
the latter an unsanctified man may be a Minister. As there is a difference
among Members between the Visible and Mystical, (of which I have spoken
elsewhere. Dispute of Right to Sacraments.
) So is there between Pastors. Some have a Title that in foro Ecclesiae or
Ecclesia judice will hold good, that have none that is good in foro Dei: In one
word* the Church is bound to take many a man as a true Minister to them, and
receive the Ordinances from him in faith, and expectation of a Blessing upon
promise; who yet before God is a sinful invader, an usurper of the Ministry,
and shall be condemned for it.

As in worldly Possessions, many a man has a good Title before men, and at the
bar of man, so that no man may disturb his Possession, nor take it from him,
without the guilt of theft, when yet he may have no good Right at the bar of
God to justify him in his retention. So it is here.

Sect. 6. It is too common a case in Civil Governments (the ignorance of which
occasioneth many to be disobedient.) A man that invadeth the Sovereignty
without a Title, may be no King as to himself, before God, aod yet may be truly
a King as to the People. That is, He stands guilty before God of Usurpation,
and (till he Repent, and get a better Title) shall be answerable for all his
administrations as unwarrantable: And yet, when he has settled himself in
Possession of the Place, and exercise of the Sovereignty, he may be under an
obligation to do justice to the people, and defend them, and the people may be
under an obligation to obey him and honor him* and to receive the fruits of
his Government as a blessing. Men's Title in Conscience and before God (for
Magistracy and Ministry) themselves are most to look after, and to justify;
and its often crakt and naught, when their Title in foro humano may be good; or
when the people are bound to obey them. And those miscarriages or usurpations
of Magistrates or Ministers which forfeit Gods Acceptance and Blessing to
themselves, do not forfeit the blessing of Christ's Ordinances and their
administrations to the Church: For it is the guilty and not the Innocent that
must bear the loss. A Sacrament may be as effectual, and owned by God, for my
benefit, when it is from the hand of a man that shall be condemned for
administering it, as when it is from the hand of a Saint that has a better
call; supposing still that I be innocent of his usurpation or error.

This necessary distinction premised, I say, that special Grace is necessary to
that Call of a Minister that must be warrantable and justifyable to himself
before God; but it i^ not necessary to that call that is justifyable before the
Church, and is necessary to our submission and to the blessing of the
Ordinances and their Validity to our good.

Sect. 7. But yet here are some Qualifications essentially necessary, to
Dispose the man to be Receptive of the Ministry, coram Ecclesia (though saving
grace be not.) As 1. It is of Necessity that he be a Christian by Profession;
and so that he Profess that faith, repentance, love, obedience, which is
saving. For the Minister in question is only A Christian Minister: and
therefore he must be a Christian, and aliquid amplius by profession.

2. It is therefore Necessary that he Profess and seem to Understand and
Believe all the Articles of the faith, that are essential to Christianity, and
do not heretically deny any one of these (what ever he do by inferior
Articles.)

3. He must be one that is able to preach the Gospel: that is, in some
competent manner, to make known the Essentials of Christianity: or else he
cannot be a Minister at all.

4. He must be one that understands the Essentials of Baptism, and is able to
administer it (Though the actual administration be not always necessary.)

5. He must understand the Essentials of a particular Church, and profess to
allow of such Churches as Gods Ordinance, or else he cannot be the Pastor of
them.

6. He must Profess to Value and Love the Saints, and their communion: Or else
he cannot be a Minister for the communion of Saints.

7. He must Profess and seem to understand, believe, and approve of all the
Ordinances of Christ which are of Necessity to Church Communion.

8. And he must be tolerably able to dispense and administer those Ordinances:
Or else he is not capable of the office.

9. He must Profess and seem to make the Law of God his Rule in these
administrations.

10. And also to desire the saving of men's souls, and the welfare of the
Church, and Glory and Pleasing of God. If he have not beforehand all these
Qualifications, he is not capable of the Ministry, nor can any Ordination make
him a true Minister.

Sect. 8. If you demand my proof, it is from the common principles that 1. The
form cannot be received but into a disposed capable matter: but such are no
disposed capable matter: therefore, etc. -- 2. The office is for the work* and
therefore presupposes a Capacity and ability for the work. The office
contains 1. An Obligation to the Duty: But no man can be obliged to do that
which is Naturally Impossible to him (though a Moral Impossibility may stand
with an obligation to duty, and a Natural only as founded in the Moral) 2. It
contains an Authority or Power to do the work: But such Power (which is but a
Right of excercising Natural Abilities) does presuppose the Abilities to be
exercised: Natural Power, is presupposed to Civil Authority. 3. It is Essential
to such Relations that they be for their Ends: And therefore where there is an
apparent incapacity for the end, there is as apparent an incapacicy of the
Relation. But enough of this.

Sect. 9. 2. A Minister is [ an officer of Christ,] and therefore receives his
Authority from him, and can have none but what he thus recieves. And therefore
1. He has no Sovereignty or Lordship over the Church, for that is the
perogative of Christ. 2. He has no degree of underived Power, and therefore
must prove his Power, and produce his Commission before he can expect the
Church to acknowledge it. 3. He has no Power to work against Christ, or to
destroy the souls of men, or to do evil: Though he has a Power by which
occasionally he may be advantaged to evil, yet has he no Authority to do it:)
For Christ gives no man power to sin, nor to do any thing against himself. 4.
He deriveth not his authority from man (though by man, as an instrument, or
occasion, he may) The People give him not his Power: The Magistrate gives it
not: The Ordainers (Bishops or Presbyters) give it not, any further then (as I
shall show anon) by signifying the will of Christ that indeed gives it, and by
investing men in it by solemn delivery. The Choosers may nominate the person
that shall receive it; and the Magistrate may encourage him to accept it; and
the Ordainers may Approve him and Invest him in it: but it is Christ only that
gives the Power as from himself. As in Marriage, the persons consent, and the
Magistrate allows it as Valid at his bar; and the Minister blesses them and
declares Gods consent: But yet the Power that the Husband has over the wife
is only from God as the conferring cause; and all that the rest do is but to
prepare and dispose the person to Receive it; save only that consequently, the
consent of God is declared by the Minister. Of which more anon, when we speak
of Ordination.

Sect. 10. 3. A Minister is a man [ separated, or set a part] to the work of
the Gospel. For he is to make a calling of it, and not to do it on the by.
Common men may do somewhat that Ministers do, even in preaching the Gospel: but
they are not [ separated or set apart to it, Romans 1.1, 2.
and so entrusted with it, nor make a Calling or Course of employment of it.]
Ministers therefore are Holy persons in an eminent sort, because they have a
twofold Sanctification. 1. They are as all other Christians sanctified to God
by Christ through the spirit, which so devoteth them to him, and brings them so
near him, and calls them to such holy honorable service, that the whole Church
is called a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, etc. to offer spiritual sacrifice
to God. 1 Pet. 2.5.9. Romans 1.6.
And Christ has made them Kings and Priests to God. But 2. They are moreover
devoted and sanctified to God, (not only by this separation from the world,
but) by a separation from the rest of the Church to stand nearer to God, and be
employed in his most eminent service! I mention not man's Ordination in the
Definition, because it is not essential to the Ministry, nor of Absolute
Necessity to its being (of which anon.) But that they be set apart by the will
of Christ and sanctified to him, is of Necessity.

Sect 11. 4. These Ministers have a double subject to work upon, or object
about which their Ministry is Employed. The first is [ The world, as that
matter out of which a Church is to be raised] The second is, Believers called
out of the world] These Believers are, [ Either Only Converted, and not
invested in a Church state; or such as are both Converted and Invested:] These
later are either [such as are not yet gathered into a particular Church, or
such as are.] For all these are the objects of our office.

Sect. 12. 5. Accordingly the first part of the Ministerial office is to Preach
the Gospel to unbelievers and ungodly ones for their Conversion. This therefore
is not, as some have imagined, a common work, any more then preaching to the
Church* Occasionally ex Charitate, only another man may do it. But ex Officio,
as a work that we are separated and set a part to and entrusted with, so only
Ministers may do it. No man has the Power of Office; but he that has the Duty
or Obligation, to make it the trade or business of his life, to preach the
Gospel (though bodily matters may come in on the by.)

Sect. 13. 6. Hence it appears that a man is in order of Nature a Preacher of
the Gospel in General, before he be the Pastor of a particular flock: though in
time they often go together: that is, when a man is ordained to such a
particular flock.

Sect. 14. 7. And hence it follows that a man may be ordained sine Titulo or
without a particular charge, where the Converting preparatory work is first to
be done.

Sect. 15. 8. And hence it appears that a Minister is first in order related
to the unbelieving world, as the object of his first work, before he be related
to the Church existent: either Catholic or particular: And that he is under
Christ first a Spiritual Father, to beget children unto God, from the
unbelieving world, and then a Governor of them. If others have already
converted them to our hands, and saved us that part of our work, yet that
overthrows not the order of the parts and works of our office, though it
hinder the execution of the first part (it being done to our hands by others in
that office.)

Sect. 16. 9. The second part of the Ministers work is about Believers merely
converted, together with their Children, whom they yet have power to Dedicate
to God: And that is to Invest them in the Rights of a Christian, by Baptism in
solemn Covenanting with God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. And these are the
next Material objects of our Office.

Many of the Ancients ( Tertullian by name, and the Council of Eliberis)
thought that in case of Necessity, a Layman (though not a Woman) may Baptize:
If that be granted, yet must not men therefore pretend a Necessity where there
is none. But I am satisfied 1. That Baptism by a a private man, is not eo
nomine a Nullity, nor to be done again: 2. And yet that it is not only a part
of the Ministers work to Baptize and approve them that are to be Baptized, ex
officio, but that it is one of the greatest and highest actions of his office:
Even an eminent exercise of the Keys of the Kingdom, letting men into the
Church of Christ: it being a principal part of their Trust and power to judge
who is meet to be admitted to the Privileges and fellowship of the Saints.

Sect. 17. 10. The third part of the Ministers work is about the Baptized, that
are only entered into the universal Church (for many such there are,) or else
the unbaptized that are Discipled, where the former work and this are done at
once: And that is, to congregate the Disciples into particular Churches for
Holy Communion in Gods Worship, etc. They must do part of this themselves in
Execution. But he leads them the way, by Teaching them their duty, and
provoking them to it, and directing them in the execution, and oft-times
offering himself or another to be their Teacher, and Leading them in the
Execution. So that it belongs to his office to gather a Church, or a member
to a Church.

Sect. 18. 11. Hence is the doubt resolved, Whether the Pastor, or Church be
first in order of time or Nature? I answer: The Minister as a Minister to
Convert and Baptize and gather Churches, is before a Church gathered in order
of Nature and of time. But the Pastor of that particalar Church as such, and
the Church it self whose Pastor he is, are as other Relations, together and at
once; as Father and Son, Husband and Wife, etc. As nature first makes the
Nobler parts, as the Heart and Brain and Liver; and then by them as instruments
forms the rest; And as the Philosopher or Schoolmaster opens his School,
and takes in Scholars; and as the Captain has first his Commission to gather
Soldiers: But when the Bodies are formed, then when the Captain or Schoolmaster
dies, another is chosen in his stead; So is it in this case of Pastors.

Sect. 19. 12. Hence also is the great controversy easily determined, Whether
a particular Church or the universal be first in order, and be the Ecclesia
Prima: To which I answer 1. The Question is not de ordine dignitatis, nor which
is finally the Ministers chief End: For so it is past controversy that the
Universal Church is first. 2. As to order of existence, the universal Church is
considered either as consisting of Christians as Christians, converted and
Baptized: or further as consisting of Regular Ordered Assemblies, or particular
Churches. (For all Christian^ are not members of particular Churches: and they
that are, are yet considerable distinctly, as mere Christians and as
Church Members (of particular Churches) And so its clear, that men are
Christians in order of Nature, and frequently of time, before they are member
of particular Churches: and therefore in th^s re^pect the universal Church
(that is, in its essence) is before a particular Church. But yet there must be
One particular Church, before there can be many. And the Individual Churches
are before the Association or Connection of these individuals. And therefore
though in its essence and the existence of that essence the universal Church be
before a particular Church (that is, men are Christians before they are
particular Church Members;) yet in its Order, and the existence of that Order,
it cannot be said so: nor yet can it fitly be said that thus the Particular is
before the universal. For the first particular Church and the universal Church
were all one (when the Gospel extended as yet no further) And it was simul and
semel an ordered universal and particular Church: (but yet not qu^ universal)
But now, all the Universal Church is not Ordered at all into particular
Churches: and therefore all the Church universal cannot be brought thus into
the Question. But for all those parts of the universal Church that are thus
Congregate (which should be all that have opportunity) they are considerable,
either as distinct Congregations independent; and so they are all in order of
nature together (supposing them existent:) Or else as Connexed and Asso^iated
for Communion of Churches, or otherwise related to each other: And thus many
Churches are after the Individuals and ^he single Church is the Ecclesia prima
as to all Church forms of Order; and Associations are but Ecclesiae ortae,
arising from a combination o^ relation or Communion of many of these.

Sect. 20. The fourth part of the Ministerial work is about particular Churches
Congregate, as we are Pastors of them. And in this they subserve Christ in all
the parts of his office.

1. Under his Prophetical office, Mat. 28.20. Heb. 2.3, 4* 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
they are to Teach the Churches to observe all things whatsoever he has
commanded them: and deliver and open to them that Holy doctrine which they have
received from the Apostles that sealed it by Miracles, and delivered it to the
Church. And as in Christ's name to persuade and exhort men to duty, opening to
them the benefit, and the danger of neglect.

Jam 5.14. Acts 2.41, 42. and 4.35. 1 Cor. 11.23. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. Acts
20.28. 2 Cor. 5.11. 1 Timothy 5.17, 20, 22, 24. 2 Cor. 2.10. Mat. 18.18.
2. Under Christ's Priestly office they are to stand between God and the People,
and to enquire of God for them, and speak to God on their behalf and in their
name, and to receive their Public Oblations to God, and to offer up the
sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving on their behalf, and to celebrate the
Commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; and in his name to
deliever his Body and Blood, and Sealed Covenant, and benefits to the Church.

3. Under his Kingly office (a Paternal Kingdom) they are to Proclaim his Laws,
and Command obedience in his Name, and to Rule or Govern all the flock, as
Overseers of it, and to reprove, admonish, censure and cast out the obstinately
impenitent, and confirm the weak, and approve of Professions and Confessions of
Penitents, and to Absolve them, by delivering them pardon of their sin, in the
name of Christ.

Sect. 21. 14. This work must be done for the ends mentioned in the Definition.
To his own Safety, Comfort, and Reward, it is necessary that those Ends be
sincerely intended. For the comfort and Satisfaction of the Church and the
validity of the Ordinances (Sacraments especially) to their spiritual benefit,
it is necessary that these ends be professed to be intended by him; and that
they be really intended by themselves.

Sect. 22. 15. By this the Popish case may be resolved, Whether the Intention
of the Priest be necessary to the Validity and success of Sacraments? The
reality of the Priests Intention is not necessary to the Validity of them to
the people: For then no ordinance performed by an hypocrite were Valid; nor
could any man know when they are Valid and when not. But that they may be such
administrations, as he may comfortably answer for to God, his sincere Intention
is Necessary. And that they be such as the People are bound to submit to, it is
necessary that he profess a sincere Intention: For if he purposely Baptize a
man ludicrously in professed jest or scorn, or not with a seeming intent of
true Baptizing, it is to be taken as a Nullity and the thing to be done again.
And that the ordinances may be blessed and effectual to the Receiver upon
Promise from God, it is necessary that the Receiver have a true intent of
receiving them to the ends that God has appointed them. Thus and no further is
Intention necessary to the validity of the Ordinance and to the success.

The particular ends I shall not further speak of, as having been longer
already then I intended on the Definition.

Sect. 23. But the principal thing that I would desire you to observe, in order
to the decision of our controversy, hence, is that the Ministry is first
considerable as a Work and Service, and that the Power is but a Power to be a
servant to all, and to do the work. And therefore that the first Question is,
Whether the great burden and labor of Ministerial service may be laid on any
man without Ordination by such as our English Prelates? Or whether all men are
discharged from this labor and service on whom such Prelates do not Impose it?
If Magistrates, Presbyters and People conspire to call an able man to the work
and service of the Lord, whether he be justified for refusing it, what ever the
Church suffer by it, merely because the Prelates called him not?

Sect. 24. Though the forementioned works do all belong to the Office of the
Ministry, yet there must be Opportunity and a particular Call to the exercise
of them, before a man is actually obliged to perform the several acts. And
therefore it was not without sense and reason that in Ordination the Bishop
said to the Ordained [ Take thou authority to Read or to preach the word of
God, when thou shall be threunto lawfully called] Not that another call of
Authority is necessary to state them in the office, or to oblige them to the
Duty in General: But we must in the invitation of people, or their consent to
hear us, or other such advantageous accidents, prudently discern when and where
we have a Call to speak and exercise any act of our Ministry. Even as a
Licensed Physician must have a particular Call by his Patients before he
exercise his skill. This call to a particular act, is nothing else but an
intimation or signification of the will of God, that hic and nunc we should
perform such a work: which is done by Providence causing a concurrence of such
inviting Circumstances that may persuade a prudent man that it is seasonable.

Sect. 25. A man that is in general thus obliged by his office to do all the
formentioned works of the Ministry, (that is, when he has a particular call to
each) may yet in particular never be obliged to some of these works, but may be
called to spend his life in some other part of the Ministry, and yet be a
complete Minister, and have the obligation and Power to all, upon supposition
of a particular Call; and not be guilty of negligence in omitting those other
parts. One man man may live only among Infidels, and uncalled ones, and so be
obliged only to Preach the Gospel to them in order to Conversion, and may die
before he sees any ready to be baptized: Another may be taken up in Preaching
and Baptizing, and Congregating the Converted, and never be called to Pastoral
Rule of a particular Church. Another may live in a Congregated Church where
there is no use for the Discipling-Converting-Preaching of the Gospel, and so
may have nothing to do but to Oversee that particular Church and Guide them in
holy Worship. And in the same Church if one Ministers parts are more for
Public preaching, and another more for Private instruction, and acts of
Guidance and Worship; if one be best in expounding, and another in lively
application; they may lawfully and ^itly divide the work between them: and it
shall not be imputed to them for unfaithfulnss and negligence that one
forbeare^h what the other does. For we have our gifts to the Churches
edification* Thus Paul says he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the
Go^pel: Not that it was not in his Commission, and a work of his office: but
quoad exercitium he had seldom a second particular Call to exercise it, being
taken up with that Preaching of the Gospel, and settling and confirming
Churches which to him was a greater work.

Sect. 26. This Ministry before des^r^bed (whether you call it Episcopatum,
Sacerdotium, Presbyteratum, or what else is fit) is but one and the same Order
(for Deacons are not the Ministers defined by us:) It is not distinguished into
various Species: Even the Patrons of Prelacy, yea the Schoolmen and other
Papists themselves, do ordinarily confess, that a Prelate and Presbyter differ
not Ordine, but only Gradu. So that it is not another office that they ascribe
to Prelates, but only a more eminent Degree in the same Office. And therefore
they themselves affirm, that in Officio the Power of Ordination is in both
alike (the office being the same) But that for the honor of the Degree of
Prelacy, for the unity of the Church, Presbyters are hindered from the Exercise
of that Ordination, which yet is in their Power and Office

Sect. 27. As far as Ordination is a part of the Ministerial Work it is
comprised in the forementioned acts, [ of Congregating, Teaching, Ruling, etc.]
and therefore is not left out of the Definition, as it is a duty of the office:
though it be not exp^essed among the Efficient causes, for the reason above
mentioned: and because I am now more distinctly to treat of it by it self, and
to give you fu^ther reasons hereof in the explication of the Nature and Ends of
this Ordination.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature and Ends of Ordination.
Sect: 1. THat we may know how far the Ordination in question is necessary to
the Ministry, and whether the want of it prove a Nullity, we must first enquire
what goes to the laying of the Foundation of this Relation, and how many things
concur in the efficiency, and among the rest, what it is that the Ordainers
have to do as their proper part; and what are the reasons of their Power and
Work.

Sect. 2. As all that deserve the name of men, are agreed that there is no
Power in the world but from God the Absolute Sovereign, and first Cause of
Power: so all that deserve the name of Christians are agreed that there is no
Church Power but what is from Christ the head and Sovereign King of the Church.

Sect. 3. As the will of God is the Cause of all things; And no thing but the
Signification of it is necessary to the conveying of mere Rights: So in the
making a man a Minister of the Gopel, there needs no other principal
efficient cause then the Will of Jesus Christ; nor any other Instrumental
Efficient, but what is of use to the signifying of his Will: So that it is but
in the nature of signs that they are Necessary. No more therefore is of
Absolute Necessity, but what is so necessary to signify his will. If Christ's
will may be signified without Ordination, a man may be a Minister without it:
(Though in other respects he may be culpable in his entrance, by crossing the
will of Christ concerning his duty in the manner of his proceedings.)

Sect. 4. There is considerable in the Ministry, 1. Beneficium. 2. Officium. 1.
The Gospel, pardon, salvation-Ordinances are those great Benefits to the sons
of men, which the Ministry is to be a means of conveying to them: And is it
self a Benefit as it is the means of these Benefits. In this respect the
Ministry is a Gift of Christ to the Church, and his Donation is the necessary
act for their Ministration. But of this gift the Church is the subject. He
gives Pastors to his Church. 2. But in conjunction with the Churches Mercies,
the Minister himself also partakes of mercy: It is a double Benefit to him to
be both receptive with them of the blessing of the Gospel, and to be
isntrumental for them in the conveyance, and to be so much exercised in so
sweet and honorable, though flesh-displeasing and endangering work. As in
giving Alms, the giver is the double receiver; and in all works for God, the
greatest Duties are the greatest Benefits; so is it here. And thus the making
of a Minister is a Donation or act of bounty to himself. Christ gives to us
the Office of the Ministry, as he gives us in that office to the Church. As a
Commanders place in an Army is a place of Trust and Honor and Reward, and so
the matter of a gift, though the work be to fight and venture life.

Sect. 5. The Duty of the Minister is caused by an Obligation; and that is the
part of a Precept of Christ: And thus Christ's command to us to do his work does
make Ministers.

Sect. 6. From the work which the Ministers are to perform, and the command of
Obedience laid upon the people, arises their duty, in submission to him, and
Reception of his Ministerial work; And in Relation to them that are to obey
him, his office is a superior Teaching Ruling Power, and so is to be caused by
Commission from Christ, as the fountain of Power that is to command both Pastor
and People.

Sect. 7. So that the Ministry consisting of Duty, Benefit, and Power, (or
Authority,) it is caused by Preceptive Obligation, by Liberal Donation, and by
Commission. But the last is but compounded of the two first, or a result from
them. The Command of God to Paul, e. g. to Preach and do the other works of the
Ministry, does of it self give him Authority to do them. And Gods command to
the People to hear and submit, does concur to make it a Power as to them. And
the Nature and ends of the work commanded are such as prove it a Benefit to the
Church; and consequentially to the Minister himself. So that all is
comprehended in the very imposition of the Duty: By commanding us to preach the
word, we are Autho^ized to do it, and by Doing it we are a Benefit to the
Church, by bringing them the Gospel and its Benefits.

Sect. 8. Our Principal work therefore is to find out, on whom Christ imposes
the Duties of Church Ministration: And by what signs of his will, the person
himself and the Church may be assured that it is the Will of Christ, that this
man shall undertake the doing of these works.

Sect. 9. And therefore let us more distinctly enquire, 1. What is to be
signified in order to a Ministers Call; and 2. How Christ does signify his
will about the several parts; and so we shall see what is left for Ordination
to do, when we see what is already done, or undone.

Sect. 10. 1. It must be determined or signified that A Ministry there must be.
2. And what their Work and Power shall be. 3. And what the Peoples Relation and
duty toward them shall be. 4. What men shall be Ministers, and how qualified.
5. And how it shall be discerned by themselves and others which are the men
that Christ intends.

Sect. 11. Now let us consider 1 What Christ has done already in Scripture, 2.
And what he does by Providence, toward the determination of these things. And
1. In the Scripture he has already determined of these things, or signified
that it is his Will, 1. That there be a standing Ministry in the Church to the
end of the world: 2. That their work shall be to preach the Gospel, Baptize,
Congregate Churches, Govern them, ad^inister the Eucharist, etc. as
aforementioned. 3. He has left them Rules or Canons for the directing them
(in all things of constant universal necessity) in the performance of these
works. 4. He has described the persons whom he will have thus employed, both
by the Qualifications necessary to their Being, and to the Well-being of their
Ministration. 5. He has made it the Duty of such qualified persons to desire
the work, and to seek it in case of need to the Church. 6. He has made it the
Duty of the people to desire such Pastors, and to seek for such and choose them
or consent to the choice. 7. He has made it the Duty of the present Overseers
of the Church to Call such to the work, and Approve them, and Invest them in
the office (which three acts (...) are called Ordination, but specially the
last.) 8. He has made i^ the Duty of Magistrates to encourage and protect
them, and in some cases to command them to the work, and set them in the office
by their Authority. All these particulars are determined of already in the Laws
of Christ, and none of them left to the power of men.

Sect. 12. The ordainers therefore have nothing to do to judge 1. Whether the
Gospel shall be preached or no, whether Churches shall be Congregate or no,
whether they shall be taught or governed or no? and Sacraments administered or
no? 2. Nor whether there shall be a Ministry or no Ministry? 3. Nor how far (as
to the Matter of their work and power) their office shall extend, and of what
Species it shall be? 4. Nor whether the Scripture shall be their constant
universal Canon? 5. Nor whether such qualified persons as God has described,
are only to be admitted, or not. 6. Nor whether it shall be the duty of such
qualified persons to seek the office? or the Duty of the People to seek and
choose such, or of Pastors to ordain such? or of Magistrates to promote such
and put them on? None of this is the Ordainers work.

Sect. 13. If therefore any man on what pretense soever, shall either determine
that the Gospel shall not be preached, nor the Disciples Baptized, the Baptized
Congregated, the Congregations governed, the Sacraments administered, etc. or
that there shall be no Ministers to do those works; or if any man Determine
that which will infer any of these; or if he pretend to a Power of suspending
or excluding them, by his Non-approbation, or not-authorizing them; he is no
more to be obeyed and regarded in any of this Usurpation, then I were if I
should make a Law, that no King shall reign but by my nomination, approbation
or Coronation. And if any man under pretense of Ordaining, do set up a man that
wants the Qualifications which Christ has made necessary to the Being of the
Ministry, his Ordination is Null, as being without Power, and against that Will
of Christ that only can give Power. And so of the rest of the particulars
forementioned: Where the Law has already determined, they have nothing to do
but obey it. And though the miscarriages of a man in his own calling do not
always nullify his acts, yet all that he does quite out of the line of his
Office are Nullities.

Sect. 14. We see then that all that the Law has left to the Ordainer is but
this: In General, to Discern and judge of the person that is Qualified
according to the Description of the Law; and particularly to call him out to
the work, if he need excitement, and to Try and Approve him, before he be
admitted, and to Invest him, or solemnize his admittance, at his entry. So that
the sum of all is, but to find out the qualified person, because he is not
named by the Law.

Sect. 15. And even in this the Ordainers are not the only Discerners or
Judges; but the person himself, the People and the Magistrates, have all the
forementioned parts in the work. And God himself goes before them all, and by
providence frequently points them out the man whom they are bound to choose,
Ordain, accept and submit unto: and that by these particular acts.

Sect. 16. 1. As God does plainly describe the persons in the word, so he does
Qualify them accordingly by his Gifts: and that of three sorts: Even, his
special Graces (necessary so far as was before mentioned) Ministerial Abilities
of Knowledge and utterance, and a desire after the work, for its ends. 2. God
uses to qualify so small a number thus, compared with his Churches
Mecessities, that whether they should be Ministers (in general) or not, is
seldom matter of controversy to prudent men, or at least a doubt that is more
easy to decide. 3. God uses by Providence to give some one man, by advantage
of parts, acquaintance, opportunity, interest, etc. a special fitness for one
place and people above other men, and so to facilitate the decision. 4. God
uses to stir up the hearts of the Church to choose or consent to the person
thus qualified. 5. And he uses to stir up desires or consent in the heart of
the person to be the Pastor of that particular flock. 6. And he uses often times
to procure him Liberty, if not some call from the Magistrate. 7. And also to
remove impediments in his way. 8. And to assist ordainers in discerning the
qualifications of the person, when the work comes to their hands. All this God
does providentially.

Sect. 17. By this much it appears, that the Ordainers do not give the power
as from themselves to others; nor does it pass through their hands. They are
but the occasions, and the Instruments of Inauguration or solemn possession,
when their interposition is due. It is the standing Act of Christ in his Law
that gives the Power immediately, I say immediately, as without any mediate
receiving and conveying cause, that is directly efficient of the Power it self,
though not so Immediately as to exclude all Preparations, and perfecting
Instruments, accidental causes and other means. As in case of Marriage, it is
the woman's consent that is of Necessity to the designation of the Person that
shall be her husband. But it is not her Consent that properly gives him the
power of an husband over her. For that is done by God himself, in that Law by
which he constituteth the husband to be head of the wife, and determines in
specie of his power, which one determination immediately conferreth the power
on all individual persons, when once they are chosen and named: so that the
Elector of the person does but prepare and dispose him to receive the power,
and not give it. He does but open the door and let men in to the Ministry, and
not give it. Its one thing to bring the person to the Pool that heals, that
he may be the man that first shall enter: and its another thing to heal him:
Its one thing to Judge of the person that shall receive the Power immediately
from God, and another thing to give it him our selves.

Sect. 18. Its thus in the case of Magistrates Power, in which men's interest
has ever been more discernable to the world and beyond controversy then in
the power of Ministers. Though here there be a certain specification that
depends on the will of man, yet the Power it self is immediately from God,
and men do but choose the person that shall receive it, and present him to God,
and solemnly inaugurate him. And for my part, I think I shall never consent to
any side that will needs give more to men (whether Presbyters, Prelates, or
people) in making a Minister, then in making a King. All power is of God; the
powers that be are ordained of God.

Sect. 19. If any doubt of this (as I perceive by many writings, they do) I
shall, to spare the labor of a Digression, refer them to the copious
unanswerable labors of abundance of Protestants that have written in England
for the Royal Power: But instead of more, let them but read Spalatensis, and
Saravia and Bilson, and rest satisfied, or confute them before they expect any
more from me.

Sect. 20. As in the making of Bailiffs for our Corporations, either the
people, or the Burgesses, have the power of choosing, and the Steward or
Recorder has the power of swearing him, and performing the Ceremonies: and yet
none of these confer the power, but only design the person, who receives the
power from the Prince alone, by the Charter of the Cities or Towns, as his
Instrument: so is it in the ordaining of Ministers. The People may choose, and
the Pastors may invest, but its God only by the Gospel Charter that confers the
power from himself.

Sect. 21. Hence it is pla^n that the Argument is vain that's commonly used by
the Prelates, from Nemo dat quod non habet. For it falsely supposes that the
Ordainers are the givers of Power (the master-error in their frame.) Christ
has it, and Christ gives it. Men give it not, though some of them have it:
For they have it only to use and not to give. When the People choose a King,
they give him not the Power, but God gives it to the man whom the people
choose. When our Corporations choose their Bailiff, the choosers give him not
the Power; for they had it not themselves; but they determine of the man that
immediately from the Princes Charter shall receive it: Nor does the Recorder or
Steward give it Primarily, but only Instrumentaliter and perfective by a
Ceremonial inauguration. So the People give not Pastors the Power: Nor the
Ordainers, but only complementally.

Sect. 22. From what is aforesaid also it appears, that the work of the
Ministry is founded first in the Law of nature it self, which upon supposition
of man's misery and his recovery by Christ, and the Promise and means appointed
for application, requires every man that has Ability and Opportunity, to do
his best in the Order appointed him by God, to save men's souls by proclaiming
the Gospel, and using Gods appointed means, for the great and blessed Ends that
are before us.

Sect. 23. Hence it also appears that Gods first command (partly in Nature
and partly in the Gospel) is that [ The work shall be done, the Gospel shall be
preached, Churches gathered and governed, Sacraments administered:] and that the
Precept de ordine is but secundary and subservien^ to this. And if at any time,
alterations should make Ordination impossible, it will not follow that the duty
Ordered cease to be duty, or the precept to oblige.

Sect. 24. The Scriptures name not the man that shall be a Pastor, yet when it
has described him it commands the Described person duly to seek admittance,
and commands the People, ordainers and Magistrates to [ Choose and Appoint
these men to the Ministerial work.] Now these Precepts contain in each of them
two distinct determinations of Christ. The first is [ that such men be
Ministers.] The second is [ that they offer themselves to the office, and that
they be Accepted and Ordained.] For the first is employed in the latter. If the
Sovereign Power make a Law, that there shall be Physicians licensed by a
College of Physicians to Practice in this Common-wealth] and describe the
persons that shall be licensed; This plainly first concludes that such persons
shall be Physicians, and but secondarily de ordine that thus they shall be
licensed: so that if the College should License a company of utterly
insufficient men, and murderers that seek men's death, or should refuse to
License the persons qualified according to Law, they may themselves be
punished, and the qualified persons may act as Authorized by that Law, which
^indeth quoad materiam, and is by the College (and not not by them) frustrate
quoad ordi^em. So is it in this case in hand.

Sect. 25. Hence it appears that [Ordination is one means conjunct with
diverse others, for the Designation of right Qualified persons, described in the
Law of Christ) for the reception and exercise of the Ministerial office. And
that the ends of it are 1. To take care that the office fail not: and therefore
to call out fit men to accept it, if modesty or impediments hinder them from
offering themselves, or the people from nominating them. 2. To Judge in all
ordinary cases of the fitness of persons to the office, and whether they are
such as Scripture describes and calls out. 3. And to solemnize their
Admittance, by such an investiture, as when Possession of a House is given by a
Ministerial tradition of a Key; or Possession of Land by Ministerial delivery
of a twig and a turf, or as a Soldier is listed, a King Crowned, Marriage
Solemnized, after consent and Title, in order to a more solemn obligation, and
plenary possession; such is our Ordination.

Sect. 26. Hence it appears that as the Ordainers are not appointed to Judge
whether the Church shall have Ordinances and Ministers, or not (no more then to
judge whether we shall have a Christ and heaven, or not:) but who shall be the
man; so it is not to the Being of the Ministry simply, and in all Cases that
Ordination is necessary, but to the safe being and order of admittance, that
the Church be not damnified by intruders.

Sect. 27. Ordination therefore is Gods orderly and ordinary means of a Regular
admittance; and to be sought and used where it may be had (as the solemnizing
of Marriage.) And it is a sin to neglect it wilfully, and so it is usually
necessary necessitate Praecepti, and Necessitate medii ad ordinem and been
esse. But it is not of absolute Necessity Necessitate medii ad esse Ministerii,
or to the Validity or Success of our office and Ministrations to the Church;
nor in cases of necessity, when it cannot be had, is it necessary necessitate
praecepti neither. This is the plain truth.

Sect. 28. There are great and weighty Reasons of Christ's committing Ordination
to Pastors. 1. Because they are most Able to judge of men's fitness, when the
People may be ignorant of it. 2. Because they are men doubly Devoted to the
Church and work of God themselves, and (...) may be supposed (regularly) to
have the greatest (...) and most impartial respect to the Church and cause of
God 3. And they must (regularly) be supposed to be men of greatest piety and
and holiness (or else they are not well chosen.) 4. And they being fewer, are
fitter to keep Unity, when the people are usually divided in their choice. 5.
And if every man should enter the Ministry of himself that will judge himself
fit, and can but get a people to accept him, most certainly the worst would be
often forwardest to men, (before they are sent,) and for want of humility would
think themselves fittest (the common case of the Proud and Ignorant) and the
People would be too commonly poisoned by heretical smooth-tongue'd men; or more
commonly (...) please and undo themselves, by choosing them that have most
interest in them, by friends or acquaintance, and them that will most please
and humor them, and instead of being their Teachers and Rulers, would be
taught and ruled by them, and do as they would have them. Order is of great
moment to preserve the very being of the Societies ordered, and to attain their
well-being. God is not the God of Confusion but of Order, which in all the
Churches must be maintained: No man therefore should neglect Ordination without
necessity: And these that so neglect it, should be disowned by the Churches,
unless they show sufficient cause.

CHAP. III. Ordination is not of Necessity to the being of the Ministry.
Sect. 1. HAving showed what the Ministry is, and what Ordination is, and how
the work is imposed on us, and the Power conferred, I may now come up to the
point undertaken, to show the sin of them that Nullify all our Ministers
calling and administrations, except of such as are ordained by the English
Prelates. And for the fuller performance of this task, I shall do it in these
parts. 1. I shall show that Ordination it self by man is not of Necessity to
the being of a Minister. 2. I shall show that much less is an uninterrupted
succession of Regular Ordination (such as either Scripture or Church Canons
count valid) of Necessity to the being of Church or Ministry. 3. I shall show,
that much less is an Ordination by such as our English Bishops necessary to the
Being of the Ministry. 4. I shall show that yet much less is an Ordination by
such Bishops rebus sic stantibus, as now things go, of necessity to the being
of the Ministry. 5. I shall show that without all these pretenses of necessity
for a Presbyterian Ordination, the present way of Ordination by this and other
Reformed* Churches is agreeable to the Holy Scripture, and the custom of the
Ancient Church, and the postulata of our chief opposers. 6. I shall then show
the greatness of their sin that would Nullify our Ministry and
administrations. 7. And yet I shall show the greatness of their sin that oppose
or wilfully neglect Ordination. 8. And lastly I shall return to my former
subject, and show yet how far I could wish the Episcopal Brethren accommodated,
and propound somewhat for a Peace.

Sect. 2. I shall be much briefer on all these, then evidence would invite me
to be, because I apprehend the most of them to be of no great necessity to our
cause, we having enough without them, and lest men should think that we need
such Mediums more then we do; and because of my exceeding scarcity of time
which forces me to do all hastily.

And for the first that [ Humane Ordination is not of Absolute Necessity to the
Being of the Ministry] I argue as follows. Of this Voctius has written at
large de desperata causa Papatus, to which I refer the Reader.
Arg. 1. If the Necessity of Ordination may cease (as to single persons) and
the Necessity of Ministration continue (or if the obligations to each are thus
separable) then is not Ordination of Necessity to the Being of the Ministry.
But the Antedent is true: which I shall prove by parts (for the consequence is
past all doubt, nor will any I suppose deny it.)

Sect. 3. That the obligation to be Ordained may cease to some persons, I prove
by instances in certain cases. And 1. In case of a man's distance from any that
should Ordain him. As if one or many Christians were cast upon the Coasts of
any Indian Heathen or Mohammedan Nation, as many have been. There is no
ordination Possible: and therefore not necessary or due. And to return for it
to the Christian part of the world, may be as impossible: and if not, yet
unlawful by reason of delay.

Sect. 4. And 2. In case of the great Necessity of the People that cannot bear
the absence of such as are able to teach them so long as while he travaileth
many hundred or thousand miles for Ordination; As Basil in another case writes
to the Bishops of the West, that if one of them (the Eastern Bishops) should
but leave their Churches for a very small time, much more for a journey into
the West, they must give up their Churches to the Wolves to be undone before
they return; And this case is ordinary abroad.

Sect. 5. And 3. That in case by Civil wars or enmity among Princes, men be
unable to travail from one of their Countries into the other for an Ordination
(which else oftimes cannot be had) so the Turks and Persians, and the Indian
Mogol, and the Tartarians and many other Princes, by such wars may make such
passage an impossible thing: Nor is it like they would suffer their subjects to
go into the enemies country.

Sect. 6. And 4. in case that Princes (Infidels or others) should persecute
Ordination to the Death: I do not find that it were a Duty to be ordained, if
it would cost all men that seek it their lives, and so made them incapable of
the Ends of Ordination: (For the dead preach not) If we were all forbid to
preach on pain of death, I know we should not forbear, unless our places were
so supplied, that men's souls were not apparently endangered by our omission.
But he that may preach without Ordination, can scarce prove it a duty to seek
Ordination when it would cost him his life. Or if he will plead it in Paper, he
would soon be satisfied in trial.

Sect. 7. And 5. In case that the Generality of Bishops within our reach turn
Heretics, (as in many parts of the East in the Arrian revolt, when scarce
seven Bishops remained Orthodox) Or in case of a National Apostacy, as in the
Kingdoms of Nubia, Tenduc, and many more that by the conquest of Infidels have
revolted.

Sect. 8. And 6 Ordination is no duty in case that Bishops confederate to
impose any unlawful oaths or other Conditions on all that they will ordain. As
the Oath of the Roman Prelates containing diverse falsehoods and unlawful
passages does make all Roman Ordination utterly impious and unlawful to be
received; and therefore not necessary.

Sect. 9. And 7. In case that Bishops themselves (whom those that we now speak
to do suppose to have the whole Power of Ordination) should either have a
des^gn to corrupt the Church, and ordain only the unworthy, and keep out such
as the Necessities of the Church requires, or set up a destructive faction, or
by negligence or any other cause should refuse to ordain such as should be
ordained; In all these cases Ordination is impossible to them.

Sect. 10. And 8. In case that death cut off all the Bishops within our reach,
or that the remnant be by sickness, or banishment or imprisonment hindered, or
by danger affrighted to deny Ordination, or by any such means become in
accessible, Ordination must here fail.

Sect. 11. And 9 In case that Bishops through contention are unknown, as
Bellarmine confesses it has been at Rome, that the wisest could not tell
which was Pope: Especially if withal both parties seem to be such as are not
to be submitted to, Ordination fails.

Sect. 12. And 10. In case of Prophetical immediate calls from God, which many
had of old, and God has not bound himself from the like again, though none
have reason to expect it, and none should rashly presume of it: In all these
ten cases Ordination fails.

Sect 13. And that it does so, needs no proof: the Instances prove it
themselves. Briefly 1. Nemo tenetur ad impossible: But in many of these cases
Ordination is Impossible: therefore, etc.

Sect. 14. And 2. Nemo tenetur ad inhonestum: No man is bound to sin: For Turpe
est impossible in Law. But in many of these cases or all, is plainly sin:
therefore etc.

Sect. 20. And 3 Cessante fine cessat obligatio. The means are for the end: But
in many, if not all these cases, Cessat finis, and ratio medii: therefore
cessat obligatio.

Sect. 21. And 4. Cessante materia cessat obligatio. But here aliquando cessat
materia: As in case of the Apostasy, death, banishment, concealment of Bishops,
therefore, etc. --

Sect. 22. And now I am next to prove that when the Obligation to Ordination
cease, yet the Obligation to Ministerial Offices cease not, but such must
be done.

And 1. I prove it hence, because the obligations of the common Law of Nature
cease not upon the cessation of a point of Order: But if the Ministerial works
should cease, the Obligations of the Law of Nature must cease. -- Here I have
two points to prove. 1. That the Law of Nature (supposing the work of
Redemption already wrought; and the Gospel and Ordinances established) obliges
men that are able and have Opportunity to do the work of Ministers. 2. And that
this Law is not ceased when Ordination cease.

Sect 23. The Law of Nature prohibits cruelty, and requires Charity, and to
show mercy to men in greatest Necessities according to our ability: But to
suspend the exercise of the Ministerial office, were the greatest cruelty,
where there is Ability and opportunity to exercise it: and to exercise it is
the greatest work of Mercy in all the World. Nature teaches us to do good to
all m^n while we have time, and to save them with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, and to love our neighbors as our selves; and therefore to see a man, yea
a town and Country and many Countries, lie in sin and in a state of misery,
under the Wrath and Curse of God, so that they will certainly be damned if they
die in that condition, and yet to be silent, and not Preach the Gospel to them,
nor call them home to the state of life, this is the greatest cruelty in the
world, except the tempting and driving them to hell. To let the precious things
of the Gospel lie by unrevealed, even Christ and pardon and holiness, and
eternal life, and the communion of Saints, and all the Church Ordinances, and
withal to suffer the Devil to go away with all these souls, and Christ to lose
the honor that his grace might have by their conversion, certainly this in it
self considered is incomparably more cruelty to men, then to cut their throats,
or knock them on the head, as such: and as great an injury to God as by
omission can be done. I need not plead this argument with a man that has not
much unmand himself, much less with a Christian. For the one is taught of God
by nature, to save men out of a lesser fire then Hell, and a lesser pain then
everlasting torment, to the utmost of his power: And the other is taught of God
to love his brother and his neighbor as himself. If the Love of God dwell not
in him that sees his brother in corporal need, and shuts up the bowels of
his compassions from him; how then does the love of God dwell in him, that
sees his brother in a state of damnation, Cursed by the Law, an enemy to God,
and within a step of everlasting death and desperation, and yet refuses to
afford him the help that he has at hand, and all because he is not ordained?

Sect. 24. Let this be considered of, as in any lower case. If a man see
another fall down in the streets, Fit autem missio aut per Deum mediante etc.
aut per Deum mediante superiorum authoritate, etc. Fit rursus nonnunquam and
ipsa necessitatis lege; quando non aliter posset fidei seu morum veritas
inviolata servari; Ubi verum est illud, Pasce fame morientem: si non Pavisti,
Occidisti. Voetius.
shall he refuse to take him up, because he is no Physician? If the Country be
infected with the Plague, and you have a Sovereign medicine that will certainly
cure it with all that will be ruled, will you let them all perish, rather then
apply it to them, because you are not a Physician, and that when the Physicians
are not to be had? If you see the poor naked, may no one make them clothes but
a Tailor? If you see the enemy at the Walls, will you not give the City
warning, because you are not a Watchman, or on the Guard? If a Commander die
in fight, any man that is next may take his place in case of Necessity. Will
you see the field lost for a point of Order, because you will not do the work
of a Commander? A hundred such cases may be put, in which its plain, that the
substance of the work in which men can do a great and necessary good, is of the
Law of Nature, though the regulating of them in point of order is often from
Positive Laws: but the Cessation of the obligation of the Positives about
Order, does not disoblige us from the common Law of Nature: For then it should
allow us to lay by humanity.

Sect. 25. To this some may say, that [ Its true we may preach in such cases,
but not as Ministers, but as private men: and we may baptize as private men in
Necessity: but we may do nothing that is proper to the Ministry] To this I
answer. God has not made the Consecration of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, nor yet the Governing of the Church, the only proper acts of the
Ministry. To preach the word as a constant service, to which we are separated,
or wholly give up our selves, and to baptize ordinarily, and to congregate the
Disciples, and to Teach and Lead them in Gods worship, are all as proper to the
Ministry as the other. And these are works that men's eternal happiness lies
on. If you would have an able gifted Christian in China, Tartary, Indostan, or
such places, (supposing he have opportunity) to speak but occasionally as
private men, and not to speak to Assemblies, and wholly give up himself to the
work, and gather Churches, and set a foot all Church Ordinances among them, you
would have him unnaturally cruel to men's souls. And if you would have him give
up himself to these works, and yet not be a Minister, you speak contradictions.
For what is the office of a Minister, but [ a state of Obligation aod power to
exercise the Ministe^ial acts?] As its nothing else to be a Physician,
supposing abilites, but to be obliged and empowered to do the work of a
Physitian] The works of the Ministry are of Necessity to the salvation of men's
souls; Though here and there one may be saved without them by privater means,
yet that's nothing to all the rest: It is the salvation of Towns and Contreyes
that we speak of. I count him not a man, that had rather they were all damned,
then saved by an unordained man.

Sect. 26. The End of Ordination cease not, when Ordination fails: the
Ministerial works and the benefits to be thereby conveyed, are the Ends of
Ordination: therefore they cease not. This is so plain that I perceive not that
it needs explication or proof.

Sect. 27. Nature and Scripture teach us, that Ceremonies give place to the
substance, and matters of mere Order give place to the Duty ordered; and that
Moral Natural duties cease not when mere Positives cease: But such is the case
before us. Ordination is the ordering of the work: If that fail, and the work
cannot be rightly Ordered, it follows not that it must be cast off, or forborne.
On this account Christ justified his Disciples for plucking ears of Corn on the
Sabbath day. Necessity put an end to the Duty of Sabbath keeping; but the duty
of preserving their lives continued. On this account he justifies his own
healing on the Sabbath day; sending them to study the great rule. Go learn what
this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifi^e:] So here, he will have Mercy
to souls and Countries, rather then Ordination: On this account he says, that
[ The Priests in the Temple break the Sabbath and are blameless] and he tells
them [ what David did when he was hungry, and they that were with him, how he
eat the shewbread, which (out of Necessity) was not lawful for him to eat, but
only for the Priests] and yet he sinned not therein.

Sect. 28. Moreover, the Church it self is not to cease upon the ceasing of
Ordination, nor to hang upon the will of Prelates. Christ has ^ot put it in
the power of Prelates, to deny him a Church in any countries of the world. For
he has first determined that particular Churches shall be (and that
determination cease not,) and but secondly that they shall have Pastors thus
ordained: He is not to lose his Churches at the pleasures of an envious or
negligent man: But so it would be if Pastor must cease when Ordination cease:
For though without Pastors there may be communities of Christians, which are
parts of the universal Church, yet there can be no Organized Political
Churches. For 1. Such Churches consist essentially of the Directing or Ruling
Part, and the Ruled Part) (as a Republic does.) 2. Such Churches are Christian
Associatio^s for Communion in such Church Ordinances which without a Pastor
cannot (ordinarily at least) be administered: And therefore without a Pastor the
Society is not capable of the End, and therefore not of the form or name;
(though it be a Church in the fore-granted sense.) Nay indeed, if any should
upon necessity do the Ministerial work to the Church, and say he did it as a
Private man, it were indeed but to become a Minister pro tempore, under the
name of a private man. If Paul had not his Power to destruction but to
Edification, neither have Prelates: And therefore the Acts are null by which
they would destroy the Church. Their Power of Ordering it (such as they have)
occasionally enableth them to disorder it (that is, If they miss in their own
work, we may submit:) but they have no authority to destroy it, or do any thing
that plainly conduces thereunto.

Sect. 29. The ceasing of Ordination in any place, will not either disoblige
the people from Gods public Worship, Word, Prayer, Praise, Sacraments; Neither
will it destroy their Right to the Ordinances of God in Church communion. But
this it should do, if it should exclude a Ministry; therefore, etc. -- The
Major is proved, 1. In that the Precept for such Public worship, is before the
precept for the right ordering of it. He that commands the Order, supposes
the thing ordered. 2. The precept for public worship, is much in the Law of
Nature and therefore indispensable: and it is about the great and Necessary
duties that the honor of Gods add saving of men, and preservation of the
Church lies on: It is a standing Law to be observed till the coming of Christ.
And the Rights of the Church in the excellent Benefits of Public Ordinances
and Church order, is better founded then to depend on the Will of ungodly
Prelates. If Prince and Parliament fa^l, and all the Governors turn enemies to
a Commonwealth, it has the means of Preservation of it self from ruin lest
in its own hands; or if the Commonwealth be destroyed, the Community has the
Power of self-preservation, and of forming a Commonwealth again to that end.
The life and being of States, specially of men's eternal happiness, is not to
hang upon so slender a peg as the corrupt will of a few Superiors, and the
mutable modes and circumstances of Government; nor a Necessary End to be wholly
laid upon an uncertain and often unnecessary means. The children lose not their
Right to Food and Raiment, nor are to be suffered to famish, when ever the
Steward falls out with them, or falls asleep, or loses the Keys. Another
servant should rather break open the doors, and more thanks he shall have of
the Father of the family, then if he had let them perish, for fear of
transgressing the bounds of his calling. If incest (that capital disorder in
procreation) were no incest, no crime, but a duty, to the Sons and daughters of
Adam in case of Necessity (because Order is for the End and thing ordered) then
much more is a disordered preservation of the Church and saving of souls and
serving of God, a duty, and indeed at that time, no disorder at all.

Sect. 30. 7. Moreover, if the failing of Ordination, should deprive the world
of the preaching of the word, or the Churches of the great and necessary
benefits of Church Ordinances and Communion, then one man (yea thousands)
should suffer (and that in the greatest matters) for the sin and wilfulness of
others, and must lie down under such suffering, lest he should disorderly
redress it. But the consequent is against all Justice and Reason: Therefore the
Antecedent is so to.

Sect. 31. In a word, it is so horrid a conclusion, against Nature, and the
Gospel, and Christian sense, that the honor of God, the f^uits of Redemption,
the being of the Church, the salvation or comfort of men's souls, must all be at
the Prelates mercy, that a considerate Christian cannot (when he is himself)
believe it: that it should be in the power of heretical, malicious, or idle
Prelates to deny God his honor, and Christ the fruit of all his sufferings,
and Saints their Comforts, and sinners their salvation, and this when the
remedy is before us, and that it is the will of God that all these evils
should be chosen before the evil of an unordained Ministry; this is an utterly
incredible thing.

Sect. 32. Argument 2. Another Argument may be this: If there may be all things
essential to the Ministry without humane Ordination, then this Ordination is
not of Necessity to its Essence; But the Antecedent is true; therefore so is
the consequent. That there be a people qualified to receive a Pastor, and
persons qualified to be made Pastors, and that God has already determined in
his Law that Pastors there shall be, and how they shall be qualified is past
all dispute: So that nothing remains to be done by man (Ordainers, Magistrates
or People) but to determine who is the man that Christ describes in his Law,
and would have to be the Pastors of such a flock, or a Minister of the Gospel,
and then to solemnize his entrance by an Investiture. And now I shall prove
that a man may be a Minister without the Ordainers part in these.

Sect. 33. If the will of Christ may be known without Ordination, that this man
should be the Pastor of such a People, or a Minister of the Gospel, then may a
man be a Minister without Ordination. But the will of Christ may be known, etc.
ergo. --

Sect. 34. Nothing needs proof but the Antecedent (For it is but the
signification of the will of Christ that conferreth the Power, and imposes the
Duty;) And that his will is sometime signified concerning the individual person
without Ordination, is apparent hence: 1. The Description of such as Christ
would have to preach the Gospel, is very plain in his holy Canons (in the
Scripture.) 2. His Gifts are frequently so eminent in several persons, as may
remove all just occasion of doubting, both from the persons themselves and
others. 3. Their suitableness to a People by interest, acquaintance, etc. may
be as notable. 4. The Peoples common and strong affection to them, and theirs
to the People, may be added to all these. 5. There may be no Competitor at all;
or none regardable or comparable; and so no controversy. 6 The Necessities of
the People may be so great and visible, that he and they may see that they are
in danger of being undone, and the Church in danger of a very great loss or
hurt, if he deny to be their Pastor. 7. The Magistrate also may call and
command him to the work. 8. The People and he may consent and they may
unanimously choose him, and he Accept their choice. And in all these the will
of Christ is easily discerned, that this is the person whom he would have to
undertake the Ministry.

Sect. 35. For 1. Where ^^ere are so many evident signs of his Wills and
Characters agreeing to the description in the Law, there the will of Christ man
be discerned, and it may be known that this is the described person. But these
are here supposed (o^ enough of these:) And indeed it is no very strange thing
for all or almost all these to co^cur, where there are persons of excellent
qualifications.

Sect. 36. And 2. Where there is no Controversy, or room for a Controversy,
the determination may be made without a Judge: (The Principal reason and use of
Ordainers is, that there may be standing Judges of the fitness of men, to
prevent the hurt of the Church by the withdrawing of the Worthy, and the
intrusion of the unworthy:) But here is no Controversy, or place for
Controversy: therefore, etc. --

Sect. 37. But I suppose some will say that [ Though the Approbation of the
Ordainers be not always of Necessity: because the person may be easily known
without them; yet their Investing the person with the Power i^ of Necessity,
because without that he is but a person fit for the Office, but cannot receive
it till some authorized person shall deliver it] Because the great mistake is
involved in this objection, I shall answer it fully.

Sect. 38. The Law it self is it that directly gives the Power, and Imposes
the Duty, when the person is once determined of that falls under it: There
needs no more but the signification of the W^ll of Christ, to confer the Power
or Benefit, or impose the Duty. As an act of Oblivion pardons all the
described persons; and an Act that imposes any burden or office upon every man
of such or such an estate or parts, does immediately by it self oblige the
persons; though some Judges or others may be appointed to call out the persons,
and see to the execution (who do not thereby impose the duty) so is it in this
case. Gods Law can Authorize and oblige without an Ordainer sometimes.

Sect. 39. The Investiture performed in Ordination by man, is not the first
Obligation or Collation of the Power, but only the solemnization of what was
done before. And therefore though it be necessitate praecepti a duty, and
ordinarily necessary to Church Order and preservation, yet is it not necessary
to the Being of the Ministerial Office or Power.

Sect. 40. And this will be made apparent, 1. From the common nature of all
such subsequential Investitures and inaugurations, which are necessary to full
possession and exercise of Power sometimes, but not to the first being of it,
nor to the exercise neither in cases of Necessity, when the Investiture cannot
conveniently be had.

Sect. 41. Ordination (as to the Investing act) is no otherwise necessary to
the Ministry, then Coronation to a King, or listing to a Soldier, or solemn
investiture and taking his Oath to a Judge, or other Magistrate, etc. But these
are only the solemn entrance upon Possession and exercise of Power, supposing a
sufficient Title antecedent; and in cases of Necessity, may be unnecessary
themselves; and therefore so is it here as a like case.

Sect. 42. 2. If want of Investiture in cases of Necessity, will not excuse the
determinate person from the burden of the Ministerial work, then will it not
prove him destitute of the Ministerial Authority: (For every man has Authority
to do his Duty, in that he is obliged to it;) But the Antecedent is plain; If
once I know by certain signs, that I am a man that Christ requires to be
employed in his work, I durst not totally forbear it, in a case of such
exceeding moment, for want of the regular admittance, when it cannot be had;
while I know that the work is the End, and the Ordination is but the means; and
the means may promote the end, but must not be pleaded against the End, nor to
destroy it; it being indeed no Means, when it is against the end. Ordination is
for the Ministry, and the Ministerial Office for the Work, and the Work for
Gods honor and men's salvation: And therefore God must be served, and men must
be saved, and the Ministry to those ends must be used, whether there be
Ordination to be had or not. Necessity may be laid upon us, without Ordination,
and then woe to us if we preach not the Gospel. The Law can make Duty without
an Ordainer.

Sect. 43. If this were not so, a lazy person that is Able for the Ministry,
might by pleasing or bribing the Ordainers, be exempted from abundance of duty,
and escape the danger of Guilt and Judgment upon his Omission. And truly the
burden is so great to flesh and blood, if men be faithful in their Office, the
labor so uncessant, the people so unconstant, ungrateful and discouraging; the
worldly honors and riches so tempting which may b^ had in a secular life, with
the study and cost that fits men for the Ministry, and the ene^ies of our work
and us a^e so many and malicious, and times of persecution so frequent and
unwelcome, that if it were but in the Prelates power to exempt all men at their
pleasure, from all the trouble and care and danger and sufferings of the
Ministry, they would have abundance of Solicitors and Suitors for a
dispensation? especially where the Love of God and his Church were not very
strong to prevail against temptations (for this would free them from all fear.)

Sect. 44. 3. If a man and woman may be truly husband and Wife without a solemn
Marriage, then a Minister and People may be truly conjoined in their Relations
and Church State without his solemn Ordination. For these are very near of a
Nature. A private Contract between themselves may truly make them Husband and
Wife: and then the standing Law of God conveyeth to the man his Power, and
obliges him and the woman to their duties, without any Instrumental
investiture: And yet if there be opportunity it is not lawful for any to live
together in this relation, without the investiture of Solemn Matrimony, for
Order sake, and to prevent the fornication and bastardy, that could not be
avoided if Marriage be not Ordinarily public. Just so it is a very great sin
to neglect Ordination ordinarily, and where it may be had, and tends to the
bastardy of the Ministry, and of Churches, and soon would most be illegitimate
if that course were taken. And yet if Pastor and People go together without
Ordination, upon private Contract, in case of Necessity, it is lawful: And if
there be no Necessity, it is sinful, but yet does not Null the Baptism, and
other Ministerial administrations of any such person, to the Church of Christ,
or the upright members.

Sect. 45. 4. If a man may be a true Christian without Baptism, and have Christ
and pardon and Justification and eternal life without it; then may a man be a
true Minister without Ordination. For no man can reasonably plead that
Ordination is more necessary to a Minister then Baptism to a Christian. Even
the Papists that make a Sacrament of it, and ascribe to it an indelible
Character, must needs set it somewhat lower then Baptism. Baptizing is commonly
called our Christening, as that in some sort makes us Christians. And yet for
all that the true use of Baptism is but to solemnize the Marriage between
Christ and us, and to Invest and inaugurate them in a state of Christianity
solemnly, that were indeed Christians before. And the Papists themselves
confess that when a man first repents and believes (with a faith formata
Charitate) he is pardoned, and in a State of Salvation before Baptism, and
shall be saved upon the mere Votum Baptismi, if in case of Necessity he die
without it (Though the partial Proctors will damn the infants for want of
Baptism, that never refused it, when they save the parents that have ^ut the
desire.) No doubt but Constantine, and many other, that upon mistake deferred
their Baptism, were nevertheless Christians; and judged so by the Church both
then and now. And yet to neglect it wilfully were no small sin. So if in our
case, men want Ordination, they may be really Ministers, and their
Ministrations Valid; but it is their very great sin, if their wilful neglect
be the cause that they are not Ordained.

Sect. 46. As Baptism is the open badge of a Christian, so Ordination is the
open badge of a Minister: and therefore though a man may be a Christian before
God without Baptism, yet Ordinarily he is not a Christian before the Church
without Baptism, till he have by some equivalent Profession given them
satisfaction: And therefore if I knew men to be utterly unbaptized, I would not
at first have Communion with them as Christians. But if they could manifest to
me that Necessity forbad them, or if it were any mistake and scruple of their
consciences that hindered them from the outwa^d Ordinance, and they had without
that Ordinance made as public and bold a profession of Christianity, and
satisfactorily declared themselves to be Christians by other means, I would
then own them as Christians, though with a disowning and reprehension of their
error; Even so would I do by a Minister: I would not own him as a Minister
unordained, unless he either showed a Necessity that was the Cause, or else (if
it were his weakness and mistake) did manifest by his abilities and fidelity
and the consent and acceptance of the Church, that he were truly called: And if
he did so, I would own him, though with a disowning and reproof of his mistake,
and omission of so great a duty.

Sect. 47. 5. There is not a word of God to be found that makes Ordination of
absolute Necessity to the being of the Min^stry: therefore it is not so to be
esteemed. The examples of Scripture show it to the regular way, and therefore
Ordinarily a duty: but they show not that there is no other way.

Sect. 48. Object. It is sufficient that no other way is revealed; and
therefore till you find another in Scripture, this must be taken for the only
way. Answ. 1. Scripture is the Rule of our Right performance of all duties: We
cannot imagine that in the Rule there should be the least defect; and therefore
no precept or imitable pattern of sin in the smallest matter is there to be
found. And yet it follows not that every sin does Nullify a Calling, because
there is no Scripture warrant for that sin. All that will follow is, that no
other way is innocent or warrantable: and that only when Necessity does not
warrant it. 2. I have showed already that there are other ways warranted in
some cases in the Scripture: And I shall show anon that as great omissions
nullify not the office.

Sect. 49. Object. But how shall they preach unless they be sent? says Paul,
Romans 10. Answ. But the question is, Whether no man be sent that have not humane
Ordination? The text does not affirm this. Let that be God^ Ordinary way: but
yet it follows not there is no other. If God send them however, they may
preach; as Edesius, Frumentius, Origin, and others did of old.

Sect. 50. Argument 3. He that has the Talents of Ministerial Abilities, is
bound to improve them to the service of his Master and best advantage of the
Church: But such are many that cannot have Ordination: ergo -- Concerning the
Major, note that I say not that every man that is able is bound to be a
Minister, much less to enter upon the sacred function without Ordination: For
1. Some men that have Abilities may want liberty and opportunity to exercise
them. 2. Others that have Ministerial Abilities, may also have Abilities for
Magis^racy, Physic, Law, etc. and may live in a Country where the exercise of
the later is more Necessary and useful to the good of men, and the service of
God, then the exercise of the Ministry would be. For these men to be Ministers,
that either want opportunity, or may do God greater service other ways, is not
to improve their Talents to their Masters chiefest service: But still the
general obligation holds, to improve our Talents to the best advantage, and do
good to as many as we can, and work while it is day. And therefore 1. Such a
man is bound (if he be not otherwise called out first) to offer his service to
the Church and seek Ordination: And if he cannot have it upon just seeking, in
case of Necessity, he is to exercise his Talents without it: lest he be used as
the wicked slothful servant, that hid his Talent, Mat. 25.

Sect. 51. If this were not so, it would follow that the Gifts of God must be
in vain, and the Church suffer the loss of them at the pleasure of Ordainers:
and that the fixed universal Law that so severely binds all men, as good
Stewards to improve their Masters stock (their Time, abilities, interest,
opportunities) might be dispensed with at the Pleasure of Ordainers. And that
God has bound us to seek in vain, for Admittance to the exercise of the
Talents that he has endowed us with: and that even in the Necessities of the
Church. Which are not things to be granted.

Sect. 52. Object. By this doctrine you will induce disorder into the Church,
if all that are able must be Ministers when they are denied Ordination: For
then they will be the Judges of their own Abilities, and every brainsick proud
Opinionist, will think that there is a Necessity of his Preaching; and so we
shall have confusion, and Ordination will be made contemptible by Pretenses of
Necessity!

Sect. 53. Answ. 1. God will not have the Necessities of men's souls neglected,
nor allow us to let men go quietly to damnation, nor have his Churches ruined,
for fear of occasioning the disorders of other men. Its better that men be
disorderly saved, then orderly damned: and that the Church be dissorderly
preserved, then orderly destroyed! God will not alllow us to suffer every Thief
and Murderer to rob or kill our neighbors, for fear lest by defending them, we
occasion men to neglect the Magistrate: Nor will he allow us to let men perish
in their sickness, if we can help them, for fear of encouraging the ignorant to
turn Physicians. 2. There is no part of Gods service that can be used, without
occasion of sin to the perverse: Christ himself is the fall as well as the
rising of many; and is a stumbling stone and Rock of offense: and yet not for
that to be denied. Luke 2.34. 1 Pet. 2.^, 7 8.
There is no just and reasonable cause of men's abuse in the doctrine which I
here express. 3. True Necessity will excuse and Justify the unordained before
God, for exercising their Abilities to his service. But pretended counterfeit
necessity will not Justify any; And the final judgment is at hand, when all
things shall be set strait, and true Necessity and counterfeit shall be
discerned. 4. Until that day, things will be in some disorder in this world,
because there is sin the world, which is the disorder. But our Remedies are
these, 1. To teach men their duties truly, and not to lead them into one evil
to prevent another, much less to a mischief destructive to men's souls, to
prevent disorder. 2. The Magistrate has the sword of justice in his hand, to
restrain false pretenders of Necessity; and in order thereto, it is he, and not
the pretender that shall be judge. And 3. The Churches have the Power of
casting the pretenders (if the case deserve it) out of their communion; and in
order thereto, it is not he but they that will be Judges. And other remedies we
have none till the last day.

Sect. 54. Quest. But what would you have men do that think there is a
Necessity of their labors, and that they have Ministerial abilities? Answ. 1.
I would have them lay by pride and selfishness, and pass judgment on their own
Abilities in Humility and self-denial. If their Corruptions are so strong that
they cannot (that is, they will not) do this, that's long of themselves. 2. They
must not pretend a Necessity where is none. 3. They must offer themselves to
the Trial of the Pastors of the Church that best know them. 4. If in the
judgment of the godly able Pastors that know them, they are unfit, and there
is no need of them, they must acquiesce in their judgment. For able Godly men
are not like to destroy the Church or envy help to the souls of men. 5. If they
have cause to suspect the Pastors of Corruption, and false judgment, let them
go to the other Pastors that are faithful. 6. If all about us were corrupt,
and their judgments not to be rested in, and the persons are assured of their
Ability for the Ministry, let them consider the State of the Church where they
are: And if they are sure (on Consultation with the wisest men) that there is a
Necessity, and their endeavors in the Ministry are like to prevent any notable
hurt, without a greater hurt, let them use them without Ordination, if they
cannot have it. But if they find that the Churches are so competently supplied
without them, that there is no Necessity, or none which they can supply without
doing more hurt by offense and disorder then good by their labors, let them
forbear at home, and go into some other Countries where there is greater need
(if they are fit there for the work.) if not, let them sit still.

Sect. 55. Argument 4. If unordained men may Baptize in case of Necessity, then
may they do other Ministerial works in case of Necessity: But the Antecedent is
the opinion of those that we now dispute against. And the Consequence is
grounded on a Parity of Reason: No man can show more for appropriating the
Eucharist, then Baptism to the Minister.

CHAP. IV. An uninterrupted Succession of Regular Ordination, is not Necessary.
Sect. 1. HAving proved the Non-necessity of Ordination it self to the Being of
the Ministry, Of this I desire the Reader, to peruse what is written by Voctius
de desperata Causa Papatus, l. 2. Sect. 2. c. 21. and passim.
and Validity of their administrations, I may be the shorter in most of the
rest, because they are sufficiently proved in this. If Ordination it self be
not of the Necessity which the adversaries do assert, then the Regularity of
Ordination cannot be of more Necessity then Ordination itself: Much less an
uninterrupted Succession of such Regular Ordination: Yet this also is asserted
by most that we have now to do with.

Sect. 2. By Regular Ordination, I mean in the sense of the adversaries
themselves, such as the Canons of the Church pronounce not Null, and such as by
the Canons was done by such as had Authority to do it: in special, by true
Bishops (even in their own sense.)

Sect. 3. And if the unin^errupted succession be not Necessary, then neither is
such Ordination at this present Necessary to the being of the Ministry: For if
any of our predecessors might be Ministers without it, others in the like case
may be so too. For we live under the same Law, and the Office is the same thing
now as it was then.

Sect. 4. Argument 1. If uninterrupted Regular Ordination of all our
Predecessors be Necessary to the Being of the Ministry, then no man can know
that he is truly a Minister of Christ. But the Consequent is false, and
intolerable; therefore so is the Antecedent.

Sect. 5. The truth of the Minor is apparent thus. 1. If we could not be sure
that we are true Ministers, then no man could with comfort seek the Minstry,
nor enter into upon it. For who can have encouragement to enter a calling when
he knows not whether indeed he enter upon it or not? and whether he engage not
himself in a course of sin, and be not guilty as Vzza of meddling with the Ark
unlawfully? especially in so great and tender a case where God is so exceeding
jealous.

Sect. 6. And 2. who can go on in the Calling of the Ministry, and comfortably
do the work, and bear the burden, that cannot know through all his life, or in
any administration, whether he be a Minister or a Usurper? What a damp must it
cast upon our spirits, in Prayer, Praise, administration of the Eucharist and
all public worship, (which should be performed with the greatest alacrity and
delight) when we remember that we are uncertain whether God have sent us, or
whether we are usurpers, that must one day hear, [ Who sent you? Whence had you
your Power? and who required this at your hands?

Sect. 7. And the Consequence of the Major (that we are all uncertain of our
Call and office, both Papists and Protestants) is most clear (in case of the
Necessity of such successive Ordination) For 1. No man ever did, to this day
demomstrate such a succession, for the Proof of his Ministry. Nor can all our
importunity prevail with Papists (Italians or French) to give us such a proof.
2. It is a thing impossible for any man now alive, to prove the Regular
Ordination of all his Predecessors, to the Apostles days, yea or any
Ordination at all. How can you tell that he that ordained you, did not
counterfeit himself to be Ordained? Or at least that he was not ordained by an
unordained man? or that his Predecessors were not so? It is a mere
impossibility for us to know any such thing; we have no Evidence to prove it:

Sect. 8. Object. But it is probable though not certain: for the Church
proceeds by such Rules, and takes the matter to be of so great weight, that
there is no probability that they would suffer any to go for Pastors or Bishops
that are unordained, in so great a case.

Answ. 1. All this is no certainty: and therefore no proof: and no satisfaction
to the mind of a Minister, in the forementioned doubts. 2. Yea we have so great
reason to be suspicious in the case that we cannot conclude that we have so
much as a probab^ly.

Sect. 9. For, 1. We know that there is so much selfishness and corruption in
man as is like enough to draw them to deceit. Ordainers may be bribed to
consecrate or ordain the incapable, and the Ordained or Consecrated may be
tempted to seek it in their incapacity; and many may be drawn to pretend that
they were Ordained or Consecrated when it was no such matter. And so there is
not so much a a Probability.

Sect. 10. 2. And we know that there were so many heresies abroad, and still
have been, and so much faction and Schism in the Church: that we cannot be sure
that these might not interrupt the succession, or that they drew not our
predecessors to counterfeit a Consecration or Ordination when they had none, or
none that was regular.

Sect. 11. 3. And we know our selves that the thing has been too usual. When I
was young, I lived in a village that had but about twenty houses. And among
these there were five that went out into the Ministry. One was an Old Reader
whose Original we could not reach. Another was his son, whose self^Ordination
was much suspected: The other three had Letters of Orders, two of them
suspected to be drawn up and forged by him, and one that was suspected to
Ordain himself. One of them, or two at last were proved to have counterfeit
Orders, when they had continued many years in the Ministry. So that this is no
rare thing.

Sect. 12. Among so many temptations that in so many ages since the Apostles
days, have befallen so many men, as our predecessors in the Ministry, or the
Bishops predecessors have been, it were a wonder if all of them should escape
the snare: So that we have reason to take it for a thing improbable, that the
succession has not been interrupted.

Sect. 13. And we know that in several ages of the Church the Prelates and
Priests have been so vile, that in reason we could expect no better from men so
vicious, then forgery and abuse, he that reads what Gildas and others say of
the British, and what even Baronius, much more Espencaeus, Cornelius Mus. and
others say of the Romanists; yea he that knows but what state the Bishops and
Priests have been in and yet continue in, in our own days, will never think it
an improbable thing that some of our predecessors should be guilty either of
Simony or other vice that made them incapable, or should be mere usurpers under
the name of Bishops and Ministers of Christ.

Sect. 14. Argument 2. If uninterrupted Regular Ordination of all our
Predecessors be Necessary to the Being of the Ministry, then can no Bishop or
Pastors whatsoever comfortably Ordain: For who dare lay his hand on the head of
another, and pretend to deliver him authority, in the name of Christ, that has
no assurance (nor probability neither) that he has any Commission from Christ
to do it? But the Consequent will be disowned by those that dispute against us?
therefore so should the Antecedent be also.

Sect. 15. Argument 3. If there be a Necessity of an uninterrupted succession
of true Regular Ordination, then no man can know of the Church that he is a
member of, or of any other Church on earth, that it is a true Church. (By a
Church I mean not a Community, but a Society: not a company of private
Christians living together as Christians neighbors, but a Politic Church
consisting of Pastor and people associated for the use of public Ordinances
and Communion therein:) But the consequent is false; -- etc.

Sect. 16. The Major, or consequence is certain: For no man can know that the
Church is a true Political Organized Church, that knows not that the Pastor of
it is a true Minister of Christ. Because the Pastor is an Essential
constitutive part of the Church in this acceptance. And I have proved already
that the truth of the Ministry cannot be known upon the Opponents terms. And
for the Minor, I think almost all Church members will grant it me. For though
they are ready enough to accuse others, yet they all take their own Churches
for true, and will be offended with any that question or deny it.

Sect. 17. Argument 4. If there be a Necessity of an unin^errupted succession
of true Ordination, then cannot the Church or any Christian in it, know whether
they have any true Ministerial administrations, whether in Sacraments or other
Ordinances. For he that cannot know that he has a Minister, cannot know that
he has the administration of a Minister) But the consequent is untrue, and
against the comfort of all Christians, and the honor of Christ, and is indeed
the very doctrine of the Infidels and Papists, that call themselves Seekers
among us.

Sect. 18. Argument 5. If the Churches and each member of them are bound to
submit to the Ministry of their Pastors without knowing that they are regularly
ordained, or that they have an uninterrupted succession of such Ordination,
then are they quo ad Ecclesiam, true Pastors to them, and their administrations
valid, though without Ordination or such a succession. But the Antecedent is
true, and granted by all that now we have to deal with. Though they will not
grant a known unordained man is to be taken for a Minister, or one whose
succession had a known intercision; Yet they will grant that if the Nullity be
unknown, it freeth not the people from the obligation to their Pastors.

Sect. 19. Bellarmine (lib 3. de Eccles. c. 10.) was so stalled with these
difficulties that he leaves it as a thing that we cannot b^ resolved of; that
our Pastors have indeed [ Potestatem Ordinis and Iurisdictionis] that is, that
they are true Pastors. And he says that [ Non habemus certitudinem nisi
Moralem, quod illi sint vere Episcopi.] But when he should prove it to us that
there is a Moral Certainty, he leaves us to seek and gives us not so much as a
ground to conjecture at any probability.

Sect. 20. But he says that we may know that [ some Pastors at least are true:
or else God had forsaken his Church.] A^sw. But what the better are we for
this, if we know not, which they are that are the true Pastors, nor cannot
possibly come to know it?

Sect 21. But he says that [ Quod Christi locum tenent, and quod debemus illi^
obedientiam may be known: and thereupon he says tha^ Certe sumus certitudi^^
infallibili quod isti quos videmus sine very Episcopi and Pastores nostri: Nam
ad hoc non r^quiritur, nec fides nec Character Ordinis, nec legitima Electio,
sed solum ut habeantur pro talibus ab Ecclesia.] From all this you may note 1.
That they are very Episcopi and Pastores nostri, that were never ordained, if
they are but reputed such by the Church, 2. That we may know this by infallible
Certainty, 3. And that we owe them obedience as such. So that as to the Church
they are true Pastors without Ordination, and consequen^ly to the Church a
succession is unnecessary.

Sect. 22. Yet of such Usurpers he says [ Eos quidem non esse in se veros
Episcopos, tamen donec pro talibus habentur ab Ecclesia, deberi illis
obedientiam, cum conscientia etiam erro^^a obliget.] So that they are not very
Episcopi in se: and yet they are very Episcopi and Pastores nostri, if
Bellarmine say true; And the words have some truth in them, understood
according to the distinction which I before gave, Chap. 1. Sect. 5, 6. He has
no such Call as will save himself from the penalty o^ usurpation (if he
knowingly be an usurper) but he has such a Call as shall oblige the Church to
obey him as their Bishop or Pastor.

Sect. 23 But his reason (Cum conscientia etiam erronea obliget] is a deceit;
and neither the only, nor the chie^ reason, no^ any reason. Not the only nor
chief reason; because the obligation arises from God, and that is the
greatest. Not any reason; 1. Because indeed it is not an Erroneous Conscience,
that tells many people that their usurping Bishops or Pastors are to be obeyed
as true Ministers. For as it is terminated on the Pastors act or state, it is
no act of Conscience at all* and therefore no error of conscience. For
conscience is the knowledge of our own affairs. And as it is terminated on our
own Duty of obeying them, it is not Erroneous; but right; For it is the will of
God, that for order sake we obey both Magistrates and Pastors that are settled
in Possession, if they rule us according to the Laws of Christ; at least, if we
do not know the Nullity o^ their call. 2. And its false that an Erroneous
Conscience binds, that is, makes us a Duty; For at the same instant it is it
self ^ sin and we are bound to depose it, and change (...), and renounce the
e^ror. It does but entangle a man in a Necessity of sinning till it be laid by.
But it is God only that can make our duty, and cause such an obligation.

Sect. 24. From the adversaries Concessions then an uninterrupted succession,
or present true Ordination is not of Necessity to the being of the Ministry,
Church or Ordinances quoad Ecclesiam: for the Church is bound to obey the
usurpers, and that as long as they are taken for true Pastors. Which is as much
as most Churches will desire in the case.

Sect. 25. And the consequence is easily proved: For where God obliges his
Churches to the obedience of Pastors (though usurpers) and to the use of
Ordinances and their Ministration, there will he bless the Ministry and those
Ordinances (to the innocents, that are not guilty of his usurpation) and that
obey God herein. And consequently the Ordinances shall not be Nullities to
them. God would never set his servants upon the use of a means which is but a
Nullity; nor will he command them to a duty, which he will blast to them when
he has done without their fault. Its none of the Churches fault that the
Bishop or Pastor is an usurper, wh^le they cannot know it, and that any of his
Predecessors were usurpers since the Apostles days. And therefore where God
imposes duty on the Church and prescribes means, (as Baptism, Prayer, the
Lords Supper, Church Government etc.) it is certain that he will not blast it,
but bless it to (...) obedient, nor punish the Church so for the secret sin of
I know not who, committed I know not where nor when, perhaps a thousand years
ago.

Sect. 26. Argument 6. As other actions of usurpers are not Nullities to the
innocent Church, so neither is their Ordinanation: and consequently, those that
are Ordained by usurpers, may be true Ministers. If their Baptizing, Preaching,
Praises, Consecration and administration of the Eucharist, binding and loosing,
be not Nullities, it follows undenyably on the same account, that their
Ordinations are not Nullities: and consequently, that they are true Ministers
whom they ordain; and succession of a more regular Ordination is not of
Necessity, to the Ministry, Church or Ordinances.

Sect. 27. Argument 7. If such uninterrupted succession be not Necessary to be
Known, then is it not Necessary to the Being of the Ministry or Validity of
Ordinances administered; But such a succession is not Necessary to be known:
therefore -- The Consequence of the Major is plain, because the Being or
Nullity of Office and administrations, had never been treated off by God to
men, nor had it been revealed, or a thing regardable, but that we may know it:
Nor does it otherwise attain its ends. And that it is not necessary to be
known, I further prove.

Sect. 28. If this succession must be known, then either to the Pastor, or to
the Church, or both: but none of these: therefore -- 1. If it must be known
only to the Pastor, then it is not Necessary as to the Church. And yet it is
not Necessary to be known to the Pastor himself neither. For (as is showed) its
impossible for him to know it, so much as by a Moral Certainty. His
Predecessors and their Ordinations were strange to him. 2. Not to the Church.
For it is not possible for them to know it: Nor likely that they should know as
much as the true Ordination of their present Pastor according to the Prelatical
way, when it is done so far out of their sight.

Sect. 29. If the foresaid uninterrupted succession be necessary to the being
of our Ministry, or Churches or Ordinances, then is it incumbent on all that
will prove the truth of their Ministry, Churches or Ordinances, to prove the
said succession. But that is not true; for then none (as is aforesaid) could
prove any of them. Either it is meet that we be able to Prove the truth of our
Ministry, Churches and administrations, or not. If not, then why do the
adversaries call us to it? If yea: then no man among the Churches in Europe (on
their grounds) has any proof; and therefore must not pretend to the Ministry,
Churches or Ordinances, but we must all turn Seekers to day, and Infidels to
morrow, by this device.

Sect. 30. Argument 8. The Ministry of the Priests and Levities before the
incarnation of Christ, and in his time, was not Null, though they wanted as
much or more then such a succession of right Ordination: therefore it is so
still with the Gospel Ministry. The Antecedent I shall more fully manifest
nearer to the end: Only now observe, that when Abiathar was put out by Solom^n;
and when such as were not of the line or Genealogy of the Priests, were put as
polluted persons from the Priesthood ( Neh. 7.64, 65. and 13 29, 30. Ezra
2.62.) yet were not any of their administrations taken to have been Null.

Sect. 31. Argument 9. If the Ministration or Governing acts of Usurping
Princes may be Valid, and there need no proof of an uninterrupted succession to
prove the validity, then is it so also in the Ministry: But the Antecedent is
certain; therefore, etc. The Validity of the consequence from the parity of
Reason I shall manifest anon.

Sect. 32. Argument 10 If an uninterrupted Succession of Canonical or true
Ordination be Necessary to the Being of the Church, Ministry and Ordinances,
then Rome and England have lost their Ministry, Churches, and Ordinances. But
the Consequent will be denied by the adversaries; therefore so also must the
Antecedent, if they regard their standing.

Sect. 33. Though this be the Argument that I have the greatest advantage to
press the adversary with, yet because I have made it good already in two or
three other writings (in my Key for Catholics, and my Safe Religion, and
Christian Concord) I shall say but little of it now. But briefly this may
suffice: 1. For the Church of Rome, if either Heresy, Infidelity, Sodomie,
Adultery, Murder, Simony, violent intrusion, ignorance, impiety, want of due
election, or of due consecration, or plurality of Popes at once, can prove an
interruption of their succession, I have showed them already where its proved;
But if none of these prove it, we are safe our selves.

Sect. 34 But Grotius (in Discus. Apolog. Rivet.) pleads for them, that if any
intercision have been made at Rome, it has been made up from other Churches.]
Answ. 1. That is not proved, but nakedly affirmed. 2. Nor will it serve the
Papists turn, that must have all Churches hold from Rome and her succession,
and Rome from none, nor to be patcht up from their succession. 3. De facto the
contrary is certain: For 1. Those other held their Ministry as from the
universal Headship of the Pope; and therefore had themselves their
interruptions in the former interruptions of Rome (as being but her members:)
and therefore were not capable themselves of repairing of her breaches, 2. The
successors of the illegitimate Popes (such as deposed Eugenius, etc.) and men
as bad as they, have continued the succession: And the Bishops that were
consecrated by power received from the illegitimate Popes, were the only
persons that were the repairers of the breach. And yet the Pope will hardly
yield that he receives his power from any of these. 3 There have been greater
defects in the succession then this of Consecration, even of due Election,
Capacity, yea of an office it self which Christ will own. The Vicechristship of
the Pope is no office of Christ's planting.

Sect. 35. And 2 For the English Prelates, as they are unable to prove their
uninterrupted succession, so the interruption is proved, in that they derived
and held their Power from the Vicechrist of Rome, and that qua talis, for so
many ages. This was their own profession: and all that they did was as his
Ministers by his Authority, which was none.

Sect. 36. Object. But this nulled not the true Authority which they received
from the Pope or Prelates as Prelates. Answ. The Pope was incapable of giving
them Authority (and whether the Prelates as such were so too, we shall enquire
anon.) And though I grant that (where the person was fit) there was yet a
Ministry Valid to the Church (and perhaps to themselves in the main) yet that
is because Canonical Ordination is not of Necessity to the Being of the
Ministry; (but by other means they might be then Ministers, though this
corruption was conjunct, that they received their Power imaginarily from R^me)
but that the said Canonical succession was interrupted, by this Papal tenure,
and many a delinquency, is nevertheless sure, and sufficient to enforce the
Argument as to them that now are our adversaries. But so much shall suffice for
the Non-necessity of this succession of a true and Regular Ordination.

CHAP. V. Ordination by such as the English Prelates, not Necessary to the
Being of the Ministry.
Sect. 1. I Have made this work unnecessary by the two former Chapters: For if
no Ordination be of Necessity to the Being of the Ministry, nor an
uninterrupted Succession Necessary, then doubtless an Ordination by these
Prelates in Specie is not Necessary at present, or as to succession. But yet ex
abundati I add.

Sect. 2. Argument 1. Ad hominem, I may well argue from the Concession of the
English Prelates themselves and their most zealous adherents; And their
judgments were 1. That such a succession as aforesaid of right Ordination was
not of Necessity; And for this they that write against, the Papists do commonly
and confidently dispute.

Sect. 3. And 2. They maintained that the Protestant Churches that had no
Bishops were true Churches, and their Ministers true Ministers, and so of their
administrations. This was so common with them that I do not think a dissenting
vote can be found, from the first Reformation, till about the preparations for
the Spanish match or little before.

Sect. 4. I have in my Christian Concord cited at large the words of many, and
the places of the writings of more, as 1. Dr. Field, 2. Bishop Downam, 3.
Bishop Jewel, 4. Saravia, 5. Bishop Alley, 6. Bishop Pilkinton, 7. Bishop
Bridges, 8. Bishop Bilson, 9. Alexander Nowel, 10. Grotius (their friend then)
11, Mr. Chysenhal, 12. The Lord Digby, 13. Bishop Davenant, 14. Bishop
Prideaux, 15. Bishop Andrews, 16. Chillingworth, 17. (To which I now add)
Bishop Brom^all* (of Schism) 18. Dr. Fern, 19. Dr. Steward (in his answer to
Fountains letter (these of the later, or present sort) 20. And Bishop Usher
(whose judgment of it is lately published by Dr. Bernard at his own desire)
21. And Mr. Mason (in a Book of of purpose for justification of the Reformed
Churches) has largely pleaded this cause. 22. And Dr. Bernard says that Dr.
Overall was judged not only to consent to that Book, but to have a hand in it.
23. And no wonder when even Bancroft himself (the violentest of all the enemies
of them called Puritans in those times) is said by Spotswood (there recited by
Dr. Bernard) to be of the same mind, and to give it as his judgment, that the
Scotch Ministers (then to be Consecrated Bishops) were not to be reordained,
because the Ordination of Presbyters was valid.

Sect. 5. These Novel Prelatical persons then, that so far dissent frrom the
whole stream of the Ancient Bishops and their adherents, have little reason to
expect that we should regard their judgment above the judgment of the English
Clergy, and the judgment of all the Reformed Churches. If they can give us
such Reasons as should conquer our modesty, and persuade us to condemn the
judgment of the Plelates and Clergy of England* and all other Churches of the
Protestants, and adhere to a few new men of yesterday, that dare scarcely open
the face of their own opinions: we shall bow to their Reasons when we discern
them: But they must not expect that their Authority shall so far prevail.

Sect. 6. And indeed I think the most of this cause is carried on in the dark:
What Books have they written to prove our Ordination Null? and by what
Scripture Reasons do they prove it? The task lies on them to prove this
Nullity, if they would be Regarded in their reproaches of the Churches of
Christ. And they are not of such excessive Modesty, and backwardness to divulge
their accusations, but sure we might by this time have expected more then one
volume from them, to have proved us, No Ministers and Churchess if they could
have done it. And till they do it; their whsperings are not to be credited

Sect. 7. Argument 2. If that sort of Prelacy that was exercised in England was
not necessary it self, yea if it were sinful, and tended to the subversion or
exceeding hurt of the Churches; then is there no Necessity of Ordination by
such a Prelacy. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the consequent. The
Antecedent has been proved at large in the foregoing Disputation. Such a
Prelacy as consists in the undertaking of an impossible task, even for one
man t^ be the only Governor of all the souls in many hundred Parishes,
exercising it also by Lay men, and in the needful parts, not exercising it all
all* a Prelacy not chosen by the Presbyters whom they Govern; yea suspending or
degrading ^he Presbyters of all those Churches, as to the governing part of
the^^ office, and guilty of the rest of the evils before mentioned, is not only
it self unnecessary, but sinful, and a disease of the Church which all good men
should do the best they can to cure. And therefore the effects of this disease
can be no more Necessary to our Ministry, then the bur^ing of a fever, or
swelling of a Tympany, is necessary to the body.

Sect. 8. No Bishops are Necessary but such as were in Scriture times: But
there were none such as the late English Bishops in Scripture times: Therefore
the English Bishop^ are not necessary. He that denies the Major, must go
further in denying the sufficiency of Scripture* then I find the Papists
ordinarily to do: For they will be loath to affirm that any office is of
Necessity to the Being of the Church or of Presbyters, that is not to be found
in Scripture, or that was not then in Being: Therefore so far we are secure.

Sect. 9. And for the Minor, I prove it thus. If the English Bishops were
neither such as the unfixed General Ministers, nor such as the fixed Bishops of
particular Churches, then were they not such as were in Scripture times. But
they were neither such as the unfixed General Ministers, nor such as the fixed
Bishops of particular Churches: therefore, etc.

Sect. 10. Bes^des these two sorts of Ministers, there are no more in the New
Testament. (And these a^e diversified but by the exercise of their office, so
far as they were ordinary Ministers to continue.) The unfixed Ministers
(whether Apostles* Evangel^sts or Prophets) were ^uch as had no special charge
of any one Church as their Diocese, but were to do their best for the Church in
general, and follow the direction and call of the Holy Ghost for the exercising
of their Ministry. But its known to all that our Engsish Bishops were not such.
They were no ambulatory itinerant Preachers: they went not about to plant
Churches, and confirm and direct such as they had planted: but were fixed to a
City, and had every one their Diocese, which was their proper charge (but Oh
how they discharged their undertaking!)

Sect. 11. Object. The Apostles might agree among them selves to divide their
Provinces, and did accordingly, James being Bishop of Jerusalem, Peter of Rome,
etc. Answ. No doubt but common reason would teach them when they were sent to
preach the Gospel to all the world, to disperse themselves, and not be
preaching all in a place, to the disadvantage of their work: But 1. Its one
thing to travail several ways, and so divide themselves as itinerants; and
another thing to divide the Churches among them, as their several Diocesses to
which they should be fixed* Which they never did, for ought is proved. 2. And
its one thing prudently to disperse themselves for their labor, an^ another
thing to claim a special power over a Circuit or Diocese as their charge,
excluding a like charge and power of others. So far as any man, Apostle or
other, was the Father of souls by their conversion, they owned him a special
honor and love, which the Apostles themselves did sometimes claim: But this
was nothing to a peculiar Diocese or Province. For in the same City (a
Jerusalem) some might be converted by one Apostle, and some by another. And if
a Presbyter convert them, I think the adversaries will not therefore make them
his D^ocess, not give him there an Episcopal Power, much less above Apostles in
that place. Nor was this the Rule that Diocesses could be bounded by, as now
they are taken.

Sect. 12. Nor do we find in Scripture the least intimation that the Apostles
were fixed Diocesan Bishops, but much to the contrary. 1. In that it was not
consistent with the General charge, and work that Christ had laid upon them to
go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: How would this
stand with fixing in a peculiar Diocese?

Sect. 13. And 2. We find them answering their Commission in their practice,
going abroad and preaching and planting Churches, and sometimes visi^ing them
in their passage, but not s^tling on them as their Diocesses; but going
further, if they had opportunity, to do the like for other places. Yea they
planted Bishops in the several Cities and Churches which they had gathered to
Christ. Though Paul staid three years at Ephesus and other adjacent parts of
Asia, yet did not all that abode prove it his peculiar Diocese: (And yes its
hard to find again so long an abode of Paul or any Apostle in one place.)
Elders that were Bishops we find at Ephesus, Acts 20. and some say Timothy was
their Bishop, and some say John the Apostle was their Bishop: but its clear
that it was no peculiar Diocese of Paul.

Sect. 14. And 3. We still find that there were more then one of these general
itinerant Ministers in a Place, or at least that no one excluded others from
having equal power with him in his Province, where ever he came. Barnabas,
Silas, Titus, Timotheus, Epaphroditus, and many more were fellow laborers with
Paul in the same Diocese or Province, and not as fixed Bishops or Presbyters
under him, but as General Ministers as well as he. We never read that he said
to any of the false Apostles that sought his contempt [This is my Diocese, what
have ^ou to do to play the Bishop in another man's Diocese?] Much less did he
ever plead such a Power, against Peter, Barnabas or any Apostolical Minister:
Nor that James pleaded any such prerogative at Jerusalem.

Sect. 15. And therefore though we reverence Eusebius and other Ancients, that
tell us of some Apostles Diocesses, we take them not as infallible reporters,
and have reason in these points partly to deny them credit from the word of
God. The Churches that were planted by any Apostle, or where an Apostle was
longest resident, were like enough to reckon the series of their Pastors from
him: For the founder of a Church is a Pastor of it, though not a fixed Pastor,
taking it as his peculiar charge, but delivering it into the hands of such: And
in this sense we have great reason to understand the Catalogues of the Ancients
and their affirmations that Apostles were Bishops of the Churches. For Pastors
they were: but so that they had no peculiar Diocese, but still went on in
planting and gathering and confirming Churches: Whereas the Bishops that were
settled by them (and are said to succeed them had) their single Churches which
were their peculiar charge; They had but one such charge or Church, when the
Apostles that lead in the Catalogues had many; and yet none so as to be limited
to them. And why have we not the Diocese of Paul and John, and Matthew and
Thomas, and the rest of the twelve, mentioned, as well of Peter and James? Or
if Paul had any, it seems he was compartner with Peter in the same City
(contrary to the Canons that requires that there be but one Bishop in a City.)

Sect. 16. Its clear then that the English Bishops were not such Apostolical
unfixed Bishops as the Itinerants of the first age were. And yet if they were,
I shall show in the next Argument that its nothing to their advantage; because
Archbishops are nothing to our question. And that they were not such as the
fixed Bishops of Scripture times, I am next to prove.

Sect. 17. The fixed Bishops in the Scripture times had but a single
Congregation, or particular Church for their Pastoral Charge: But our English
Bishops had many (if not many hundred) such Churches for their charge:
therefore our English Bishope were not of the same sort with those in
Scripture. The Major I have proved in the former Disputation. The Minor needs
no proof, as being known to all that know England.

Sect. 18. And 2. The fixed Bishops in the Scripture times had no Presbyters,
at least, of other particular Churches under them, (They Governed not any
Presbyters that had other associated Congregations for public Worship.) But
the English Bishops had the Presbyters of other Churches under them (perhaps of
hundreds:) therefore they are not such as the Scripture Bishops were. There is
much difference between a Governor of People and a Governor of Pastors;
Episcopus gregis, and Episcopus Episcoporum, is not all one. None of us says,
Cyprian in Council. Carthagin. calls himself, or takes himself to be Episcopum
Episcoporum. No fixed Bishops in Scripture times were the Pastors of Pastors,
as least, of other Churches.

Sect. 19. This I suppose I may take as granted de facto from the Reverend
Divine whom I have cited in the foregoing Disputation, that says ( Annotat. in
Art. 11.) that [ Although this Title of (...) Elders, have been also extended
to a second order in the Church; and now i^ only in use for them, under the
name of Presbyters; yet in the Scripture-times it belonged principally, if not
alone to Bishops; there being no Evidence that any of that second Order were
then instituted; though soon after, before the writing (...) ^gnatius Epistles,
there were such instituted in all Churches] So that he grants that de facto
there were then no Presbyters but Bishops, and that they were not instituted:
and therefore Bishops had no such Presbyters to Govern; nor any Churches but a
single Congregation: For one Bishop could guide but one Congation at once in
public worship; and there could be no Worshipping Congregations (in the sense
that now we speak of) without some Presbyter to guide them in performance of
the worship.

Sect. 20. So says the same Learned man, Dissertat. 4. de Episcop. page 208,
209. [ in quibus plures absque dubio Episcopi ^uere, nullique adhuc quos hodie
dicimus Presbyteri And therefore he also concludes that the Churches we^e then
Governed by Bishops assisted by Deacons without Presbyters, instancing in the
case of the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 6. and alleging the words of Clem.
Roman. (...), etc. (How Grotius was confident that Clemens was against their
Episcopacy, (showed before) To the same purpose he cites the words of Clemens
Alexandrinus in Eusebius. of John the Apostle* concluding [ Ex ^is ratio constat
quare sine Pres^yterorum mentione intervenient^, Episcopis Diaconi immediate
adjiciantur, quia scilicet in singulis Macedoniae civitatibus, quam vis
Episcopus esset, nondum Presbyteri constituti sunt; Diaconis tantum (...)
ubique Episcopis adjunctis] Dissertat. 4 cap. 10. Sect. 19, 20, 21. So also
cap. 11. Sect. 2. and alibi passim.

Sect. 21. Object. But though de facto there were no Bishop^ ^uling Presbyters
then, nor ruling any more then a single Worsh^p^ing Church, yet it was the
Intention of the Apostles that they should afterward enlarge their Diocese,
and take the care of many Churches, and that they should ordain that so^t of
subject Presbyters that were not instituted in Scripture-times. Answ. Do you
prove the secret Intention of the Apostles to be for such a Mutation, and then
we shall be satisfied in that. But till then it is enough to us that we have
the same Government that de facto was set up by the Apostles, and exercised in
Scripture times. And that its granted us that the office was not then
instituted which we deny: For it is the office of such subject Presbyters
having no Power of Ordination that we deny.

Sect. 22. Object. But though in Scripture times there were no Bishops over
many Churches and Presbyters, yet there were Archbishops that were over many.
Answ. Because this objection contains their strength, I shall answer it the
more fully. And 1. If there were no subject Presbyters in those times, then
Archbishops could rule none. But there were none such, as is granted:
therefore, etc. And what proof is there of Archbishops then?

Sect. 23. Their first proof is from the Apostles: But they will never prove
that they were fixed Bishops or Archbishops. I have proved the contrary before.
But such an itinerant Episcopacy as the Apostles had (laying by their
extraordinaries) for my part I think should be continued to the world and to
the Church (of which after.)

Another of their proofs is from Timothy and Titus ^ who, thy say, were
Archbishops. But there is full evidence that Timothy and Titus were not fixed
Bishops or Archbishops, but Itinerant Evangelists, that did as the Apostles
did, even plant and settle Churches, and then go further, and do the like. See
and consider but the proofs of this in Prins unbishoping of Timothy and Titus.
Such Planters and Itinerants were pro tempore the Bishops of every Church where
they came, (yet so as another might the next week be Bishop of the same Church,
and another the next week after him, yea three or four or more at once, as they
should come into the place) And therefore many Churches as well as Ephesus and
Creet its like might have begun their Catalogue with Timothy and Titus: and
many a one besides Rome might have begun their Catalogue with Peter and Paul.

Sect. 24. Another of their proofs is of the Angels of the seven Churches which
they say were Archbishops. But how do they prove it? Because those Churches or
some of them were planted in chief Cities, and therefore the Bishops were
Metropolitans. But how prove they the consequence? By their strong imagination
and affirmation. The Orders of the Empire had not then such connection and
proportion, and correspondency with the Orders of the Church. Let them give us
any Valid proof that the Bishop of a Metropolis had then (in Scripture times)
the Bishops of other Cities under him, as the Governor of them, and we shall
thank them for such unexpected light. But presumption must not go for proofs.
They were much later times that afforded occasion for such contentions as that
of Basil and Anthymius, (Whether the bounds of their Episcopal Jurisdiction
should change as the Emperors changed the State of the Provinces?) Let them
prove that these Asian Angels had the Bishops of other Churches, and the
Churches themselves under their jurisdiction, and then they have done something.

Sect. 25. But if there were any pre-eminence of Metropolilitans near these
times, it cannot be proved to be any more then an honorary Primacy: to be
Episcopus primae sedis, but not a Governor of the rest. How else could Cyprian
truly say (even so long after) as is before alleged, that none of them was a
Bishop of Bishops, nor imposed on others, but all were left free to their own
consciences, as being accountable only to God?

Sect. 26. Yea the Reverend Author above mentioned shows ( D^ssertat. de
Episcop. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 9, 10, and alibi) that there were in those times
more Bishops then one in a City, though not in una Ecclesia aut Coe^u. And the
like has Grotius often. So that a City had often then more Churches then one, and
those Churches had their several Bishops: and neither of these Bishops was the
Governor of the other, or his Congregation: much less of the remoter Churches
and Bishops of other Cities. And this they think to have been the case of Peter
and Paul at Rome, yea and of their immediate successors there. And so in other
places ( Lege Dissert. 5 c, 1.)

Sect. 27. When the great Gregory Thaumaturgus was made Bishop of Neocaesarea,
he had but seventeen Christians in his City; and when he had increased them by
extraordinary successes, yet we find not that he had so much as a Presbyter
under him. And if he had, its not likely that Musonius, his first and chief
entertainer, would have been made but his Deacon, and be the only man to
accompany him and comfort him in his retirement in the persecution, and that no
Presbyter should be mentioned: which shows that Bishops then were such as they
were in Scripture-times (at least in most places) and had not many Churches
with their Presbyters subject to them, as D^oc^san Bishops have. And when
Comana, a small place not far off him, received the faith, Gregory Ordained
Alexander the Colliar) their Bishop, over another single Congreg^tion, and did
not keep them under his own Pastoral charge and Government: Vid. Greg. Nys^n in
vita Thaumat.)

Sect. 28. But because that our D^ocesan Bishops are such as the Archbishops
that first assumed the Government of many Churches, and because we shall hardly
drive many from their presumption, that Timothy and Titus were Archbishops
(besides the Apostles,) I shall now let that supposition stand; and make it my
next Argument that,

(Argument 3.) Ordination by Archbishops is not necessary to the Being of
Ministers or Churches. Arg. 3.
Our English Bishops were indeed Archbishops: therefore Ordination by them is
not Necessary -- ] It is not the Name, but the office that is pleaded Necessary.

Sect. 29. And for the Major, I think it will not be denied. All that I have to
do with, Protestants and Papists, do grant the Validity of Ordination by
Bishops. And for the Minor, it is easily proved. The Bishops that are the
Governors of many Churches and their Bishops, are Archbishops. The Bishops of
England were the Governors of many Churches with their Bishops: therefore they
were Archbishops. The Major will be granted. And for the Minor I prove it by
parts: 1. That they were (by undertaking) the Governors of many Churches. 2.
And of many Bishops.

Sect. 30. He that is the Governor over many Congregations of Christians
associated for the public Worship of God and holy communion and Edification,
under their Proper Pastors, is the Governor of many Churches. But such were
our English Bishops: therefore, etc. That such Societies as are here defined
are true Churches, is a truth so clear, that no enemy of the Churches is is
able to gainsay with any show of Scripture or reason, they being such Churches
as are described in the Scriptures. And 2. That our Ministers were true
Pastors, if any will deny, (as the Papists and Separatists do) I shall have
occasion to say more to them anon.

Sect. 31. Argument 4. If Ordination by such as the English Bishops be of
Necessity to the Ministry and Churches, then was there no true Ministry and
Churches in the Scripture times, nor in many years after: But the consequent is
false; therefore so is the Antecedent. The reason of the Consequence is because
there were no such Bishops in those times; and this is already proved, they
being neither the Itinerant Apostolical sort of Bishops* nor the fixed Pastors
of particular Churches; besides which there were no other.

Sect. 32. Argument 5. If Ordination by such as the English Prelates be
Necessary to the Being of the Ministry and Churches, then none of the
Protestants that have not such Prelates (which is almost all) are true Churches
or have true Ministers: But the Consequent is false: therefore so is the
Antecedent. Of this I shall say more anon.

Sect. 33. If none of the Protestants Churches that have not such Bishops are
true Churches, and have not a true Ministry, then neither Roman, Greek,
Armenian, Ethiopian, etc. or almost any through the world are true Churches:
For they are defective in some greater matters, and chargeable with greater
errors then these. But the Consequent is false; therefore so is the Antecedent.
He that denies all these to be true Churches, denies the Catholic Church:
And he that denies the Catholic Church, is next to the denying of Christ.

Sect. 34. Having thus proved that there is no necessity of Ordination by such
as the English Prelates, I have withal proved that men are not therefore ever
the less Ministers, because they have not their Ordination, nor our Churches or
Ordinances ever the more to be disowned.

Sect. 35. Yet where there is no other Ordination to be had, it may be a duty
to submit to theirs: Not as they are Episcopi exortes (as even Grotius calls
them) or of this species; but as they are Pastors of the Church,
notwithstanding such superfluities and usurpations.

Sect. 36. It is not the duty therefore, but the sin, of any man that was
Ordained by such Prelates to a lawful office, to disclaim and renounce that
Ordination (as some do.) For it is not every irregularity that nullifieth it:
There may be many modal circumstantials, or accidental miscarriages that may
not Null the the substance of the Ordination it self.

Sect. 37. Yet it must be concluded, that we may not be wilfully guilty of any
sin in the modes or accidents: But that may be a sin in the Ordainer, which the
Ordained may not be guilty of, as doing nothing that signifies an approbation
of it, but perhaps disowning it.

Sect. 38. If we have been guilty of submitting to a corrupt ordination, as to
the accidents, we must disown and repent of the sinful mode and accidents,
though not of the Ordination it self in substance. As we must bewail the
errors and infirmities of our preaching, prayer, and other holy duties,
without renouncing the duty it self, which is of God, and to be owned.

Sect. 39. As to the Question of some, Whether a man may be twice Ordained, in
case he suspect his first Ordination: I answer, 1. You must distinguish between
a General Ordination to the office of the Ministry, and a special Ordination to
a particular Church. (As the licensing of a Physician; and the settling him over
a City or Hospital) The first may be done but once, in case it be truly done:
but the second may be done as often as we remove to particular Churches: Though
yet both may be done at once, at our first Ordination; they are still two
things; Even as Baptizing a man into Member-ship of the universal Church, and
taking him into a particular Church. Its not like that the separation and
Imposition of hands on Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.2, 3. was to their first
Apostleship.

Sect. 40. If a man have weighty reasons to doubt of his first Ordination, his
safest way is to renew it, as is usual in Baptim, with a [ Si non Baptizatus
es Baptizo te] If thou be not Ordained I Ordain thee. This can have no danger
in such a case.

CHAP. VI. Ordination at this time, by English Prelates especially, is
unnecessary.
Sect. 1. BEsides what is said against the Necessity of such Prelatical
Ordination in it self, I conceive that more may be said against it as things
now stand from several accidental reasons, which make it not only unnecessary
but sinful, to the most.

Sect. 2 As 1. The Obligation that was upon us from the Law of the Land, is
taken off (which with the Prelates themselves is no small argument when it was
for them) So that we are no further now obliged, then they can prove us so from
Scrip^u^e Evidence; and how little that is, I have showed before. The English
Prel^cy is taken down by the Law of the Land: we are left at Liberty from
humane Obligations at least.

Sect. 3. If any man say, that it is an unlawful power that has made those
Laws by which Prela^ical Government is taken down. I answer, 1. It is such a
Power as they obey themselves, and therefore they may permit others to obey it.
They hold their estate^ and lives under it, and are protected and ruled by it;
and profe^s submission and obedience, for the generality of them. And when
another Species of Government was up, that commanded (...) to ^ake an
engagement, to be true to the Government as (...) without a King and House of
Lords, when our (...) refused that Engagement as unlawful, the generality of
the contrary minded took it (even all that I was acquainted with, that were put
upon it) So that I may take it for granted that they judge the power which they
obey themselves, to be obeyed by others.

Sect. 4. And 2. I would be glad to hear from them any regardable proof that
those that Governed when Paul wrote the 13th Chapter to the Romans had any
better Title to their Government; Let them review their own late writings on
that subject, and they may have arguments enough that are Valid ad hominem at
least.

Sect. 5. The Laws of the Land do make the Acts even of an Usurper Valid while
he is in possession, and make it treason to them that do against him that which
is treason if it were against a lawful Prince: and therefore if we granted
them what they here affirm, it would be no advantage to their cause. Subjects
must look at the present Governors with peaceable subjection: For if they be
left to try their Princes titles, and suspend obedience upon their single
opinions, you know what will follow.

Sect. 6. And 3. It will be hard to prove that many a Prince that has ruled in
England, had a better Title: Its known that many of their Titles were naught;
And yet their Laws are Valid still, or were so to Posterity. And how can they
convey a better title to their Heirs then they had themselves? If you say that
the Consent of the People gave them a better, I must return that if that will
serve, the people in Parliaments (more then one) and in their real subjection,
have consented to this. But this is a subject that requires much more to be
said of it, or nothing at all: and therefore I shall take up here, with this
little which he present cause makes necessary.

Sect. 7. And I may add a further Reason; that we are not only disobliged by
the Laws from former Prelacy, but we are obliged against it. The Rulers have
deposed and forbidden it, And in lawful things it is a duty to obey our
Governors. And that the demolishing of the Prelacy, is a lawful thing (in it
self considered: For I meddle not with the manner at this time.) I have said
enough before to prove. It has been usual for Princes to decase bad Priests,
and heretical or contentious Bishops, and to correct disorders, and restrain
usurpations of Prelates among themselves. And if any such thing be now done by
our present Governors, I know not any thing of that necessity in the English
Species of Prelacy, as will warrant us to d^sobey them.

Sect. 8. And it is a thing that is inconsistent with the Peace and Unity of
these Churches: Which is another reason. For 1. We have seen the ill effects of
it (which I am not willing to open to the worst) 2. And the multitude of the
most conscientious people are against it. 3. And the generality of the most
conscionable faithful Ministers are against it; So that it could not be
restored, without the apparent ruin of these Churches. 4. And a Learned
Reverend Assembly of Divines, chosen out of the several Counties by a
Parliament, were against it. 5. And many Parliaments have been against it. 5.
And the generality of their adherents in the two Nations, that then lived in
their Power, have taken a Solemn Covenant against it. Not against all
Episcopacy, but against the English sort of Prelacie. So that it cannot be
restored, without incomparably much more hurt, then the continuance of it would
have done good, and without setting all these Churches on a flame: So far is it
now from being a likely means of Unity or Peace among us.

Sect. 9. And if yet they plead the obligation of the ancient Laws (which is
most insisted on by many) I must by way of just excuse, remember them of one
thing, which its like they do not forget: that if those Laws are still in force
to oblige us to seek Ordination from the Prelates, and to Authorize the
Prelates to Ordain, notwithstanding the Laws of later Powers that have repealed
them, then it must needs follow that those later Powers are taken for no
Powers: and consequently that the same Laws do oblige the Prelates to put the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, as to some other Power, upon the O^dained
before they lay hands upon them, and oblige the Ordained to take those Oaths,
as well as to be so Ordained. For if they be yet of force in one, they are of
(...) in both. And so no man can be Ordained by you (...) guilty of that which
the present Laws make (...) forfeiting his life: which I know nothing in the
(...) him to do.

(...) think I may conclude that it is your own judgment, that men should
rather forbear your Ordination, then hazard their lives, or violate the present
Laws, because when a Declaration or Order came forth not long ago, prohibiting
men of your persuasion that had been sequestered to Preach or Administer
Sacraments, the generality of you presently obeyed it, and some wrote for the
forbearance that they practiced. And if an Ordained man should obey the present
power, by forbearing to preach and administer Sacraments, or may forbear these
to escape a temporal danger; much more may men do so about your sort of
Ordination.

Sect. 11. Moreover 4. We shall be guilty of a fixed Schism among the Refo^^ed
Church^s, and of making the healing of our breaches impossible, if by our
compliance we own your dividing Principle, that [No other are true Ministers or
Churches but such as have your Manner of Ordination] For by this Rule all the
Ministers in these and other Protestant Nations must be degraded, or taken for
no Ministers, and all the Churches for no true Churches (though perhaps they
may be confessed Christian Communities,) Nor the Ordinances and administrations
true. And do you think these are likely terms for Peace? Will they ever be
yielded to by so many Churches? Or is it a desirable thing? Should Rome be so
much gratified? And our Churches ruined? and the souls of millions cast away,
and sacrificed to your opinions, or Peace? While your Prelacy pretended to no
more, but to be the best sort of Government, and your Church to be the best of
Churches, we could submit to you in all things that were not flatly sinful: But
when you will be the only Churches, and unchurch all others, even the most
flourishing Churches for knowledge and holiness, and when you must be the only
Ministers, and others must be none, unless they will be Ordained by you; this
is enough to put a sober man to a stand, whether he shall not be guilty of
notorious schism, by complying with so schismatical a principle, if he subject
himself voluntarily to a Prelacy that has such principles and pretenses, and
to an Ordination that is administered on these grounds and terms. This was not
the ground, nor these the principles of the former English Prelates: and
therefore we were more capable of subjection to them or Communion with them. We
could have lived in their Communion and in the Communion of the rest of the
Protestant Churches that have no Prelacy. But if by innovation, you have made
such a change, as that we must separate from all the Reformed Churches and
Ministers that have not your kind of Ordination, if we will be your subjects or
be Ordained by you according to your grounds, its time for us to look about us,
that we escape that separation and schism, that you would lead us into and
engage us in by your way of Ordination.

Sect. 12. Among your selves there are many that affirm that if the Pope would
have been content with his old Patriarchal Power, and principium unitatis, or
primacy of Order, and wave his last four hundred years determinations, or at
least not obtrude them on other Churches (as Bishop Bromhall speaks) they could
have held communion with him, that now cannot; If Rome would have been content
to be a Member of the Catholic Church, though pretendedly the noblest, they
could have owned it: But when it will be The Catholic Church, and separate it
self from all the rest, unchurching all that are not subject to them, and
united in their Government, they then drive us further from Communion with
them. Imitate them not in any degree in this Notorious schi^m and separation.
Be contented to be Ministers and Churches; and tell not Christ, he has none
but you, and such as you; and tell not Satan, that the Kingdom of Christ is
thus cut short, to the honor or rejoicing of his adversary.

Sect. 13. It was not so ridiculous as sad to me, to read in Mr. T. Ps.
Self-revenger against Mr. Barlee, page 37. and Ordination called a [Notorious
Comoe Tragedy, equally sad and ridiculous, which he and others lately acted in
Daintry Church, entitled by the Actors, An Ordination of Ministers, but by
many of the Spectators, An Ordination of Lay-Preachers to be Lay-preachers
still, and (without repentance) for ever incapable of the Priesthood, by being
Ordained by such Priests as were incapable of Ordaining.] Thus Mr. P.

Sect. 14. And it seems he was of the same judgment, (whoever he was) that
would have abused Bishop Usher, by giving out that he told him, that [ as for
Holland, he questioned if there was a Church among them, or not, or words fully
to that Purpose] Against which abuse of the Dr. the Bishop was fain to
vindicate himself, See page 124, 125. Of his Posthumous Judgment.

Sect. 15. Moreover, 5. We know not of almost any Bishops in England, by whom
men may be Ordained. Four or five Reverend Learned men of that degree are
commonly said to survive among us (whom we much honor and value for their
worth) But as these are so distant, and their residence to the most unknown, so
the rest (if there be any) are known to very few at all, that I can hear of:
Its famed that many Bishops there are; but we know it not to be true, nor know
not who they be: and therefore it cannot well be expected, that their
Ordination should be sought. If they reveal not themselves and their Authority,
and do not so much as once command or claim obedience from the generality of
Ministers, how can they expect to be obeyed? If they plead the danger of
persecution, I answer, 1. What Persecution do they suffer that are known (above
others of their way?) 2. If that will excuse them (when we never heard of any
that suffered the loss of a penny for being known to be a Bishop, since the
Wars were ended) then it seems, they take the Being of the Ministry and
Churches to be but of small moment, that are not worthy their hazard in a
manifestation of their power: And if this excuse them from appearing, it must
needs in reason excuse others from knowing them, obeying them, and submitting
to them.

Sect. 16. And when they shall declare themselves to be our Bishops, they must
in all reason expect that the proof of it as well as the naked affirmation, be
desired by us. For we must not take every man for a Bishop that says he is so.
They must show us according to the Canons that the Clergy of the Diocese
lawfully Elected them, and Bishops Consecrated them; which are transactions
that we are strangers to. If they take the secret Election of six or seven or
very few in a Diocese, to be current, because the rest are supposed to be
incapable by Schism; 1. Then they show themselves so exceedingly unjust as to
be unmeet for Government, if they will upon their secret presumptions, and
unproved suppositions, cut off or censure so many parts of the Clergy, without
ever accusing them, or calling them to speak for themselves, or he^ring their
Defense. 2. And if upon such presumptuous Censures you make your selves Bishops
besides the Canons, you cannot expect obedience from those that you thus
separate from, and censure unheard.

Sect. 17. Its known that the English Bishops (as Grotius himself affirms)
were chosen by the King according to the custom here, the Chapter being shadows
in the business: And if the King may make Bishops, he may make Presbyters; and
then Ordination is unnecessary. But if you say that the Consecrators make them
Bishops, and not the Kings Election, then Rome had many Bishops at once, when
ever three or four Popes were consecrated at once (which marrs all succession
thence dirived,) and then if some Bishops consecrate one, and some another,
both are true Bishops of one Diocese, and many Pastors may be thus Ordained to
one Church.

Sect. 18. And it concerns us before we become their subjects, to have some
credible Evidence that they are so Orthodox, as to be capable of the place. And
the rather because that some that are suspected to be Bishops (how truly I know
not) have given cause of some suspicion: Either by writing against Original
sin, or by owning Grotius's Religion, (which what it was I have showed
elsewhere,) or by unchurching the Protestant Churches, and Nullifying their
Ministry that have not their kind of Ordination, while they take the Roman
Ordination to be Valid, and their Church and Ministry to be true, with other
such like.

Sect. 19. And 6. If we should now, when better may be had, subject our selves
to the Ordination and Government of the abolished Prelacy, we should choose a
more corrupt way of administration, and prefer it to a more warrantable way:
(That this way is corrupt, is proved in the former Disputation. That a way more
warrantable may be had, I shall prove anon.) Though submission to a faulty way
in some cases of Necessity is excusable, yet when we have our choice, the case
is altered.

Sect. 20. And a tender Conscience has very great reason to fear lest by such
voluntrary subjection, they should incur moreover this double guilt: 1. Of all
the hurt that this corrupt sort of Episcopacy did, before the abolition. 2. And
of all the hurt that it might do again if it were introduced: which is neither
small, nor uncertain: He that has seen the fruits that it brought forth but
for a few years before the abolition, and weighs the arguments brought against
it, methinks should fear to be the restorer of it.

Sect. 21. If any man (as Mr. Thorndike and others do) shall write for a more
regular sort of Episcopacy, its one thing to find a tolerable Bishop in his
Book, and another thing to find him existent in England: For we know not of any
New sort of Regulated Episcopacy planted: and therefore must suppose that it is
the Old sort that is in being. Let them bring their Moderate forms into
existence, and then its like that many may be more inclined to submit to their
Ordination: but their moderate principles having not yet made us any Moderate
Episcopacy, I see not how we should be ever the more obliged for them to submit
to the Old: but rather are the more justified in disowning it, when their own
reformed model is against it.

CHAP. VII. The Ordination used now in England and in other Protestant
Churches, is Valid, and agreeable to Scripture and the Practice of the Ancient
Church.
Sect. 1. HAving already proved that the late English Bishops Ordination is not
of necessity; (...) etc. Read their words.
it is satisfactory without any more ado, to them that would nullify our
Ministry and Churches that have not their Ordination. But because we may meet
with other adversaries, and because in a case of so much weight, we should walk
in the clearest light that we can attain, for the satisfaction of our own
Consciences, I shall further prove the Validity of our Ordination, and the
truth of our Call, and Minstry, and Churches.

Sect. 2. Argument 1. The Ordination is Valid which is performed by such
Bishops as were instituted and existent in Scriture times. But our Ordination
(used in England and other refo^med Churches) is performed by such Bishops as
were institut^d and existent in Sc^^pture times: the refore such Ordination is
Valid.

The Major will not be denied (being ^^derstood with a supposition of other
requisites that are not now in controversy:) For those that we have to deal
with do grant, that such Bishops as are mentioned, Acts 20. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
Phil. 1.1. and in other passages of Scripture, had the power of Ordination, and
that it belonged not only to the Apostles and Evangelists, and (such as they
call) Archbishops; but that the fixed Bishops of particular Churches had it.

Sect. 3. The Minor I prove thus (that our Ordination is by Scripture Bishops.)
The Scripture Bishops were the Pastors of Particular Churches, having no
Presbyters subject to them. Most of our Ordainers are such Pastors: therefore
most of our Ordainers are Scripture Bishops.

Sect 4. The Major is asserted at large by the foresaid (...) Dr. H. H. Annot.
in Art. 11. b. p. 407. Where he shows (...) though this title of (...) Elders
have been also (...) second Order in the Church, and is now only in use for
them, under (...) name of Presbyters, yet in the Scripture times, it belonged
princ^pally if not only to Bishops, there being no evidence that any of (...)
second order were then instituted -- ] So that the Scripture Bishops were the
Pastors of single Churches having no Presbyters under them; for there were no
inferior Presbyters (that had not the Power of Ordination) instituted in those
times. This therefore may be taken as a granted truth.

Sect. 5. And that our Ordainers are such, is commonly known: 1. They are
Pastors: (it is but few of the Prelates that denied this:) They are Mr. T. P.
calls himself Rector of Brington.
Rectors of the People, and have the Pastoral charge of souls. 2. They are
Pastors of Particular Churches. 3. They have (for the most part at least) no
subject or inferior Presbyters under them: therefore they are Scripture
Bishops.

Sect. 6. Object. The difference lies in another point: The Scripture Bishops
had the Power of Ordination: Your Pastors have not the Power of Ordination:
thereefore they are not the same. Answ. That is the thing in Question. I am
proving that they have the power of Ordination, thus: In Scripture times all
single Pastors of single Churches had the Power of Ordination, there being no
other instituted: But our Ordainers are the single Pastors of single Churches,
(and of Christ's institution:) therefore they have the Power of Ordination. If
the Pastors now are denied to be such as were instituted in Scripture times, 1.
Let them show who did institute them, and by what authority. 2. The sole
Pastors of particular Churches were institu^ed in Scripture times: But such are
ours in question, therefore, etc.

Sect. 7. There is no sort of Pastors lawful in the Church but what were
instituted in Scripture times: But the sort of Pastors now in question are
lawful in the Church: therefore they were instituted in Scripture times: The
Minor will be granted us of all those that were Ordained by Prelates: They
would not Ordain men to an office which they thought unlawful. The Major is
proved thus: No sort of Pastors are lawful in the Church but such of whom we
may have sufficient evidence that they were instituted by Christ or his
Apostles: But we can have sufficient evidence of none but such as were
instituted in Scripture times, that they were instituted by Christ or his
Apostles: therefore no other sort is lawful. The Major is proved in that none
but Christ and such as he committed it to, have power to institute new Holy
Offices for Worship in the Church; But Christ has committed this to none but
Apostles (if to them,) therefore, etc. Whether Apostles themselves did make any
such new Office, I will not now dispute; but if they did, 1. It was by that
special Authority which no man since the planting of the Churches by them can
lay claim to, or prove that they have. 2. And it was by that extraordinary
guidance and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which none can manifest to have
been since that time communicated.

Sect. 8. Moreover, if there were a Power of instituting new Offices in the
Church since Scripture times, it was either in a Pope, in Councils, or in
single Pastors. But it was in none of these: not in a Pope; for there was no
such Creature of long time after, much less with this authority: Not in a
Council: For 1. None such was used: 2. None such is proved. 3. Else they should
have it still. Not in every Bishop, as will be easily granted.

Sect. 9. If such a Power of instituting New Church-Offices were after
Scripture times in the Church, then it is ceased since, or continues still;
Not ceased since. For 1. The Powers or officers then l^^t continue still;
therefore their authority continues still. 2. There is no proof that any such
temporary power was given to any since Scripture times. Nor does any such
continue still; Otherwise men might still make us more New Offices, and so we
should not know when we have done, nor should we need to look into Scripture
for Christ's will, but to the will of men.

Sect. 10. Argument 2. No men since Scripture times had power to change the
Institutions of Christ and the Apostles, by taking down the sort of Pastors by
them established; and setting up another sort in their stead. But if there be
lawful Pastors of particular Churches that have not power of Ordination, then
men had power to make such a change. For the sort of Pastors then instituted
were such as had but one Church, and were themselves personally to guide that
Church in actual Worship, and had the power of Ordination, and there was no
subject Presbyters, nor no single Pastors that had not the Power of Ordination:
All single Pastors of particular Churches had that Po^er then: But all, or
almost all such single Pastors of particular Churches are by the Dissenters
supposed to be without that Power now: Therefore it is by them supposed that
Christ's form of Church Government and sort of Officers are changed, and
consequently that men had power to change them, for they suppose it lawfully
done.

Sect. 11. Argument 3. The Pastors of City Churches may ordain (especially the
sole or chief Pastors:) Many of our present Ordainers are the Pastors of City
Churches (and the sole or chief Pastors in some Places:) therefore they may
Ordain. The Major is proved from the doctrine of the Dissenters, which is, that
every City Church should have a Bishop, and that every Bishop is the chief (and
sometimes only) Pastor of a City Church. If they say that yet every Pastor
(though the sole Pastor) of a City Church is not a Bishop. I answer, that then
they will infer the same power of changing Scripture Institutions, which I
mentioned, and disproved before. Let them prove such a Power if they can.

Sect. 12. The Minor is undeniable, and seen de facto, that many of our
Ordainers are such Pastors of City Churches, and that of two sorts: some of
such Cities as have both the Name and Nature of Cities: And some of such Cities
as have truly the nature, but in our English custom of speech have not the
name: such as are all Corporations, in the several Market Towns of England.

Sect. 13. Argument 4. Those Pastors that have Presbyters under them, have
power of Ordination: But very many English Pastors at this day have Presbyters
under them: therefore they have Power of O^dination: By Presbyters I mean not
men of another office, but gradually inferior in the sa^e office. The Major is
proved ad hominem from the Concessions of the Dissenters: For (though I rarely
meet in their disputations for Bishops, with any Definition of a Bishop, yet)
This is it that they most commonly give us as the Essential difference of a
Bishop, that he is one that is over Presbyters. Yea this ag^eeth with their
higher sort of Bishops that they say were in the Church in Ignatius days, when
subject Presbyters were instituted: and therefore those Pastors may ordain that
are of that higher sort of Bishops.

Sect. 14. The Minor is notorious: Many of our Pastors in Market Towns and
other large Parishes have a curate with them, in the same Congregation, and one
or two or more Curates at several Chapels of ease, that are in the Parish. And
these are under them 1. De facto, being chosen and brought in by them, Ruled by
them, and paid by them and removed by them. 2. De jure, the Bishops and Laws of
the Land allowed this.

Sect. 15. Argument 5. The stated or fixed President of a Presbytery may
Ordain (with his fellow Presbyters) But many of our Parish Pastors are the
fixed Presidents of Presbyteries: therefore they may ordain. The Major I take
for granted by all that stand to the Ordinary descriptions of a Bishop: For the
stated President of a Presbytery, is not only a Bishop, in the judgment of
Forbes, Bishop Hall, Bishop Usher and such other, but is indeed the Primitive
Bishop in their judgment, and such a Bishop in whom they would rest satisfied,
and do propose such for the Churches Peace*

Sect. 16. And the Minor is notorious: For 1. In the most of our ordered
Churches there is a Presbytery of Ruling Ecclesiastic Elders. 2. In many
there are diverse preaching Presbyters (which may satisfy them that are against
mere ruling Elders) as I showed before. And if these be not inferior to the
chief Pastor in Ecclesiastical Degree, yet they are his Compresbyters, and he
is (in all Parishes that I know where Curates or Assistants are) their stated
President or Moderator, so that we have in all such Congregations (according to
the doctrine of the Bishops themselves) not only such Bishops as were in the
Apostles days when there was no subject Presbyters, but also such Bishops as
were in Ignatius days, when the fixed President or Bishop had many Presbyters,
to whom he was the President or Moderator.

Sect. 17. Yea if you will make his Negative voice Essential to a Bishop (which
Moderate Episcopal men deny) yet commonly this agrees to such Parish Bishops
as have Curates under them: For in the Presbytery they have ordinarily a
Negative Voice.

Sect. 18. Yea where there are no such Presbyteries with a President, it is yet
enough to prove him a Bishop, that he has Deacons under him, or but one
Deacon: says Dr. H H. Annotat. in Act. 11. b. [When the Gospel was first
preached by the Apostles, and but few converted, they ordained in every City
and Region, no more but a Bishop, and one or more Deacons to attend him, there
being at the present so small store out of which to take more, and so small
need of Ordaining more -- ]

Sect. 19. Argument 6. The Moderator or President of many Pastors of particular
Churches assembled, may Ordain, and his Ordination is Valid. But such a
Moderator or President is ordinarily or frequently One in our Ordinations:
therefore they are Valid. The Major is granted by many of the Dissenters, and
all their principles, I think, do infer it: For such a one is a Bishop, not
only of the Apostolical institution: Nor only such as was in Ignatius days, but
such an Archbishop as next afterward sprung up. When it is not only one Church
and its Presbyters that are under him, but the Presbyters (or Bishops) of many
Churches that he is Moderator or President of, methinks those that are for the
highest Prelacy, should not deny the Validity of his Ordination.

Sect. 20. But two things will be here objected: The one is, that he was not
consecrated to this Presidency or* Moderatorship, by Bishops. To which I
answer, 1. That Consecration is not of Necessity to such a Bishop according to
the principles of Episcopal Divines; it being no new Office or Order that they
are exalted to, but a new Degree; Ordination (which was received when they were
made Presbyters) may suffice, and is not to be iterated. 2. The Election of the
Presbyters served (as Hi^rom testifyeth) in the Church of Alexandria: therefore
it may serve now: (of which more anon.) 3. He is chosen by true Bishops, as is
showed.

Sect. 21. The other Objection is, that our Presidents are but pro tempore, and
therefore are not Bishops. To which I answer, 1. That in some Places they are
for a long time, and in some for an uncertain time. Dr. Twiss was Moderator of
the Synod at Westminster, for many years together, even durante vita; and Mr.
H^rle after him was long Moderator: The London Province has a President for
many months; even from one Assembly to another. 2. I never yet met with an
Episcopal Divine that maintained that it was essential to a Bishop, to be such
du^rante vita: I am sure it is not commonly asserted. If a man be made the
Bishop of such or such a Diocese, for one and twenty years, or for seven years,
it will be said to be irregular; but I know none of them that have averred it
to be so great an Error as nullifieth his Power and administrations. And if it
may stand with the Being of Episcopacy to be limited to seven years, then also
to be limited to seven months, or seven weeks, or days: Especially when (as
usually with us) they fix no time at the first Election, but leave it to the
liberty of the next Assembly to continue or to end his power. Let them prove
that affirm it, that duration for life is essential to a Bishop.

Sect. 22. Argument. 7. Where all these forementioned qualifications of the
Ordainer do concur, ( viz. 1. That he be the Pastor of a particular Church, and
the chief Pastor of it, and the Pastor of a City Church, and have Deacons and
Presbyters under him, and be the fixed President of a Presbytery, and the
Moderator or President of a larger Presbytery of the Pastors of many
Churches,) there (according to the principles, even of the r^gider sort of
Dissenters) the Ordination is valid: But all these forementioned qualifications
do frequently concur to some of our present Ordainers in England: therefore
even according to the more rigid Dissenters, their Ordination is Valid: The
premises are so plain that they need no confirmation.

Sect. 23. Argument 8. Ordination by a Presbytery is Valid. But in England and
other Reformed Churches we have Ordination by a Presbytery: therefore our
Ordination is Valid. The Major is proved from 1. Tim. 4.14. [ Neglect not the
gift that is in thee which was given the^ by Prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Pres-Presbyterie. Also from Act. 13.1, 2, 3. They were the
Prophets and Teachers of the Church of Antioch that imposed hands on Barnabas
and Saul, (whether it were for their first Ordination to the Office, or only
for a particular Mission, I now dispute not.) The Church of Antioch had not
many Prelates, if any: but they had many Prophets and Teachers, and these and
none but these are mentioned as the Ordainers. As for them that say these were
the Bishops of many Churches of Syria, when the Text says they all belonged to
this Church of Antioch, they may by such presumptuous contradictions of
Scripture say much, but prove little.

Sect. 24. As for them that grant us, that there were no subject Presbyters
instituted in Scripture-times, and so expound the Presbytery here to be only
Apostles and Bishops of the higher order, I have showed already, that they
yield us the Cause: though I must add, that we can own no new sor^ of
Presbytery, not instituted by Christ or his Apostles. But for them that think
that Prelates with subject Presbyters were existent in those times, they
commonly expound this Text of Ordination by such subject Presbyters, with
others of a Superior rank or degree, together* Now, as to our use, it is
sufficient, that hence we prove that a Presbytery may ordain: and that
undeniably a Presbytery consisted of Presbyters, and so that Presbyters may
ordain. This is commonly granted us, from this Text. That which is said against
us by them that grant it, is, that Presbyters did Ordain, but not alone, but
with the Bishops.

Sect. 25. But, 1. if this were proved, its nothing against us: for if
Presbyters with Bishops have power to O^dain, then it is not a work that is
without the reach of their Office, but that which belongs to them: and
therefore if they could prove it irregular for them to Ordain without a Bishop,
yet would they not prove it Null. Otherwise they might prove it Null, if a
Bishop Ordain without a Presbytery, because according to this Objection they
must concur* 2. But indeed, they prove not that any above Presbyters did concur
in Timothies Ordination, whatever probability they may show for it. And till
they prove it, we must hold so much as is proved and granted.

Sect. 26. As for 2 Timothy 1.6. it is no certain proof of it. It may be
Imposition of hands in Confirmation, or for the first giving of the Holy Ghost
after Baptism (ordinarily used by the Apostles) that is there spoken of: which
also seems probable, by the Apostles annexing it to Timothies Faith, in which
he succeeded his Mother and Grandmother; and to the following effects of [ the
Spirit of Power, and of Love, and of a sound mind,] which are the fruits of
Confirming Grace: admonishing him, that he be not ashamed of the Testimony of
our Lord which is also the fruit of Confirmation. However the p^ob^bility go,
they can give us no certainty, that Paul or any Apostle had an hand in the
Ordination here spoken of: when the Text says that it was [ with the laying on
of the hands of the Presb^terie] we must judge of the office by the name: and
therefore 1. we are sure that there were Presbyters. 2. And if there were also
any of an higher rank, the Phrase encourages us to believe, that it was as
Presbyters, that they imposed hands in Ordination.

Sect. 27. Argument 9. If Bishops and Presbyters (as commonly distinguished) do
differ only Gradu, non Ordine, in Degree and not in Order, (that is, as being
not of a distinct office, but of a more honorable Degree in the same office)
then is the Ordination of Presbyters valid, though without a Bishop (of that
higher Degree) But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent. The
Antecedent is maintained by abundance of the Papists themselves; much more by
Protestants. The reason of the Consequence is, because ad ordinem pertinet
ordinar^. Being of the same office, they may do the same work. This A^gument
Bishop Usher gave me to prove that the Ordination of mere Presbyters without a
Prelate is valid, when I asked him his Judgment of it.

Sect. 28. Argument 10. If the Prelates and the Laws they went by did allow and
require mere Presbyters to Ordain, then must they grant us that they have the
Power of Ordination: But the Antecedent is true, as is well known in the Laws,
and common Practice of the Prelates in Ordaining: diverse Presbyters laid on
hands together with the Bishop: and it was not the Bishop but his Chaplain
commonly that examined and approved: usually the Bishop came forth, and laid
his hands on men that he never saw before, or spoke to, but took them as he
found them presented to him by his Chaplain: so that Presbyters Ordained as
well as he, and therefore had power to Ordain.

Sect. 29. If it be Objected that they had no power to Ordain without a Bishop:
I answer, 1. Nor a Bishop quoad exercitium, without them, according to our Laws
and Customs, at least ^^^ually. 2. Ordaining with a Bishop proves them to be
Ordainers; and that it is a work that belongs to the order or office of a
Presbyter: or else he might not do it at all, any more then Deacons, or
Chancellors, etc. may. And if it be but the work of a Presbyters office, it is
not a Nullity, if Presbyters do it without a Prelate, if you could prove it an
irregularity.

Sect. 30. Argument 11. If the Ordination of the English ^relates be valid,
then much more is the Ordination of Presbyters, (as in England and other
Reformed Churches is in use.) But the Ordination of English Prelates is valid,
(I am sure in the judgment of them that we dispute against:) therefore so is
the Ordination of English Presbyters much more.

Sect. 31. The reason of the Consequence is, because the English Prelates are
more unlike the Bishops that were fixed by Apostolical Institution or
Ordination, then the English Presbyters are, as I have showed at large in the
former Disputation: the Scripture Bishops were the single Pastors of single
Churches, personally guiding them in the worship of God, and governing them in
presence, and teaching them by their own mouths, visiting their sick,
administering Sacraments, etc. And such are the English Presbyters: But such are
not the late English Prelates that were the Governors of an hundred Churches,
and did not personally teach them, guide them in worship, govern them in
presence, and deliver them the Sacraments, but were absent from them all save
one Congregation. These were unliker to the Scripture fixed Bishops, described
by Dr. H. H. then our Presbyters are: therefore if they may derive from them a
Power of Ordination, or from the ^aw that instituted them; then Presbyters may
do so much more.

Sect. 32. Argument 12. If the Ordination of Papist Bishops be valid, much more
is the Ordination of English Pre^byters so: but the Antecedent is true, in the
judgment of those against whom we dispute: therefore the Consequent must be
granted by them on that supposition.

Sect. 33. The reason of the Consequence is, because the Popish Bishops are
more unlike to the Scripture Bishops, and more u^capable of ordaining, then the
Presbyters of the Reformed Churches are. For 1. The Papist Prelates profess to
receive their Power from a Vice-christ, at least quoad exercitium, and media
conserendi, which Protestant Presbyters do not. 2. The Papist Bishops profess
themselves Pastors of a new Catholic Church* which is headed by the Papacy as
an essential part; and which Christ will not own (as such:) But so do not the
Protestant Presbyters. 3. The Papist Prelates Ordain men to the false Office of
turning Bread into the Body of Christ by the way of Transubstantiation, in
their Consecration, and offering it as a Sacrifice for the quick and dead, and
delivering this as the very Body of Christ, and not Bread to the Communicants,
and persuading them that it is such, and holding and carrying it to be
Worshipped by them with Divine Worship, and the like: But the Protestant
Presbyters are Ordained, and do Ordain others, to that true Office of a
Presbyter or Pastor, or Bishop which Christ has instituted. 4. The Papist
Prelates have abundance of false doctrines, and practices in Worship, which the
Protestant Presbyters have not. 5. And they have no more to show for a Power of
Ordination, then our Presbyters have: so that these with many the like
considerations, will prove, that if the Papists Ordination be Valid, that of
the Protestant Churches by Presbyters is so much more. And doubtless, they that
plead for a succession from the Papist Prelates, do hold their Ordination Valid.

Sect. 34. Argument 13. If the Protestant Churches that have no Prelates be
true Churches (in a Political sense,) and the Ordinances among them valid, and
to be owned and received, then are the Pastors of those Churches true Pastors,
though they have no Ordination but by Presbyters. But the Antecedent is true:
therefore so is the Consequent. The reason of the Consequence is clear, and
granted by them that we have now to do with: Because the Pastors are essential
to the Church as Political, and the said Ordinances of Public worship, (as the
Lords Supper,) and Government, cannot be allowable without them, nor such as
the people should submit to or receive. This therefore we may take as granted.

Sect. 35. And for the Minor, that the Protestant Churches are true Churches
that have no Prelates. 1. There are so few of them that have Prelates, that he
that will unchurch all the rest, I suppose (when he plays his game above
board) would take it for an injury, to be accounted a Protestant himself. 2. If
the Churches of the West called Papists, and the Churches of Africa, Asia, and
America, be true Churches of Christ, and have true administrations, then (much
more confidently may we affirm that) the Protestants are so too. But the
Antecedent is maintained by those that we now dispute against, (excepting the
Papists, who yet maintain it as of their own Church) therefore, etc.

Sect. 36. The reason of the Consequence is, because the Papists, Greeks,
Armenians, Georgians, Syrians, Egyptians, Abasines, etc. have much more to be
said against them then we have: And if the lesser (or supposed) imperfection of
the Protestant Churches do unchurch them, (for wanting Prelates,) then the many
great, and real defects of the other Churches will unchurch them much more.
Especially this holds as to the Church of Rome, which yet is taken by the
Dissenters to be a true Church, and by some of them, at least, denied to be the
seat of Antichrist. Their Vicechrist and usurping head, and all the Ministry
that hold by him, afford us other kind of Arguments against their Church, then
want of Prelates can afford them or others against our Churches.

Sect 37. And if any will deny the Antecedent so far as to unchurch all the
Churches in the world, that are more defective then the Protestants, he will
blot out of his Creed the Article of the Catholic Church, and being a Seeker
or next one to day, is like to be an Infidel ere long, as I shall further show,
when I speak of the sinfulness of such.

Sect. 38. Argument 14. If the Administrations of a Usurping Presbyter to an
innocent people are Valid (and not Nullities,) then the Ordination of an
Usurping Ordainer to an Innocent expectant, is Valid: (and consequently the
Ordination of Presbyters is Valid, if they were Usurpers, as they are unjustly
said to be.) But the administrations of usurping Presbyters to an Innocent
people are Valid: therefore, etc.

Sect. 39. The Antecedent is granted by Bellarmine himself (in the place before
cited) who says that no more is required to oblige the people to obey him, and
submit, then that he be reputed a Pastor: And all must say so, 1. That will not
rob the Innocent of the Benefit of Gods Ordinances, because of an usurpers
fault. 2. And that will not leave the people, almost commonly, in an utter
uncertainty, whom they should take for a Pastor and obey; and when the
Ordinances are Valid for their good.

Sect. 40. The Consequence is made good by the Parity of Reason that is in the
two cases. If usurpation cause not a Nullity, invalidity or unprofitableness in
one case, to the innocent receiver, no nor make it his sin to receive, no more
will it in the other: For there is no Reason for any such difference. Nay i^ it
be a duty to submit to an unknown usurper, in several cases, in receiving the
Sacraments, hearing, praying, etc. so is it a duty in such cases to receive
Ordination.

Sect. 41. Object. But the usurping Presbyter does nothing but what belongs
to the office of a Presbyter: but the usurping Ordainer does that which belongs
not to the office of a Presbyter: and therefore his action is a Nullity, as
being extra proprium forum.

Sect. 42. Answ. 1. It is proved before to belong to the office of a Presbyter
to Ordain: 2. But suppose it were not; yet the objection is vain: because it is
the office of a Bishop that the Ordaining Presbyter does pretend to, and which
you imagine that he does usurp. They say that subject Presbyters ( quoad
ordinem vel Officium) are no creatures of Gods appointment; and therefore they
renounce that Office; and claim that office which you call Episcopacy, and has
the Power of Ordination. The quarrel between us is not about mere Bishops (such
as Dr. H. H. describes as aforesaid) These are not denied: but the Parish
Ministers profess themselves such Bishops: But it is about the other sort of
Presbyters, subject to Bishops, that the quarrel is: For they say, that the
Church should have none such, and Dr. H. H. says there is no Evidence that any
such were instituted in Scripture times. Now as a pretended Presbyters
administrations are Valid to the innocent receiver of the Sacrament, so a
pretended Bishops administration in Ordination is as Valid to the innocent,
caeteris paribus.

Sect. 43. Argument 15. They that have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, have
the power of Ordination: But Parochial Pastors called Presbyters have the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: therefore they have the power of Ordination.

Sect. 44. The Minor is granted commonly by Papists and Protestants, as to some
of the Keys, but it is by many denied as to other. They say that every Pastor
has the Key of doctrine and of Order, but not the Key of Jurisdiction. But 1.
Christ gave the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven together and never divided them.
Therefore they are not to be divided. He did not give one Key to one, and
another to another, but all to the same men: And what God has joined together,
let no man put asunder. 2. The Apostles in delivering these Keys to others,
are never found to have separated them. For Subject Presbyters were not
instituted in Scripture-times: Therefore all that were then Ordained Presbyters
had all the Keys together, and so that of Jurisdiction (as it is called) with
the rest. 3. That Presbyters had the Key of Order, Cyprian Ep. 28. p 64. ad
Clerum de Gaio -- Desideras^is ut de Philumeno and Fortunato ^ypodiaconis, and
Favorino acoluthore s^ribam, cui rei non potui me solum judicem dire, cum multi
adhuc de clero absentes sint, nec locum suum vel sero repetendum putaverint,
and haec singulorum tractanda sit, and limanda before ratio; non tantum cum
collegis meis sed and cum plebe ipsa universa: How big was the Diocese then,
and how much the Bishop ruled alone, may be hence conjectured; and whether
Presbyters had any hand in ruling.

Why does Ignatius and Tertullian command them to be subject to the Presbyters
as to the Apostles of Christ, if they had not the Key of Government.


will prove that they may Ordain, as is aforesaid. 4. But that English
Presbyters had the Key of Jurisdiction is proved, 1. In that they were with the
Bishops to Ordain by Imposition of hands. 2. In that they were by the Book of
Ordination charged to administer Discipline: though this was disused, and the
Prelates frustrated their power.

Sect. 45. I shall recite the words of Reverend Usher for the proof of this,
Reduction of Episcopacy, etc. [By Order of the Church of England all Presbyters
are charged (in the Book of Ordination) to administer the Doctrine of
Sacraments and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as
this Realm has received the same; and that they might the better understand
what the Lord has commanded therein, the exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus is appointed to to be read unto them at the time of
their Ordination, Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, among whom
the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. to Rule the Congregation of God which
he has purchased with his blood. Of the many Elders who thus in common ruled
the Church of Ephesus, there was one President, whom our Savior in his Epistle
unto this Church in a peculiar manner styles the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus. And Ignatius in another Epistle written about twelve years after unto
the same Church, calls the Bishop thereof. Betwixt the Bishop and the
Presbytery of that Church, what an harmonious consent there was in the
ordering of the Church Government, the same Igna^i^^ does fully there declare,
by the Presbytery with St Paul, understanding the Community of the rest of the
Presbyters or Elders who then had a hand not only in the delivery of the
Doctrine and Sacraments, but also in the Administration of the Discipline of
Christ: For further proof of which we have that known Testimony of Tertullian
in his General Apology for Christians: ^n the Church are used exhortations,
chastisements and divine censure, for judgment is given with great advice as
among those who are certain they are in the sight of God; and it is the
chiefest foreshewing of the Judgment which is to come, if any man have so
offended that he be banished from the Community of Prayer, and of the Assembly,
and of all holy fellowship. The Presidents that bear rule therein are certain
approved Elders, who have obtained this honor not by Reward, but by good
report, who were no other (as he himself intimates) elsewhere, but those from
whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

For with the Bishop who was the chief President, (and therefore styled by the
same Tertullian in another place, summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the
rest of the dispensers of the Word and Sacraments joined in the common
Government of the Church; and therefore where in matters of Ecclesiastical
judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used the recieved form of gathering
together the Presbytery, of what persons that did consist, Cyprian
sufficiently declares, when he wishes him to read his Letters to the
flourishing Clergy which there did preside or rule with him. The presence of
the Clergy being thought so requisite in matters of Episcopal audience, that in
the fourth Council of Carthage it was concluded, That the Bishop might hear no
man's cause without the presence of the Clergy; and that otherwise the Bishops
sentence should be void, unless it were confirmed by the presence of the
Clergy: which we find also to be inserted into the Canons of Egbert, who was
Archbishop of York in the Saxon times, and afterward into the body of the
Canon Law it self.

True it is that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial Government has been
long disused, yet seeing it still professes that every Pastor has a right to
rule the Church (from whence the name of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of the exercise of that right
proceeds only from the custom now received in this Realm; no man can doubt
but by another Law of the Land, this hinderance may be well removed]



Sect. 46. And indeed the stream of Antiquity, and the Authors that are
principally rested on for Episcopacy, are full against them that deny the
Government of the people to the Presbyters; And it is the principal mischief of
the English Prelacy, thus to degrade (or quoad exercitium to suspend at least)
all the Presbyters from their office: Not as it is a denying them any part of
their honor (that's not to be much regarded;) but as it is a discharging them
of their work and burden, and consequently leaving the Churches ungoverned. And
for the Government of Presbyters themselves, in Cyprians days the Bishop did
not, could not, Ordain, or censure any Presbyter without his Clergy, and
Councils have decreed that so it should be. Yea and the plebs universa also was
consulted with by Cyprian.

Sect. 47. And now I come to the Major of my Arrgument, which I prove thus.
Either Ordination is an act of the exercise of the power of the Keys, or of
some other power: But of no other power: therefore of the Keys. If it be the
exercise of any other power, it is either of a secular power, or an
Ecclesiastic: but neither of these, therefore of no other. Not of another
Ecclesiastic power: for there is no Ecclesiastical power, (at least which
Ordination can be pretended to belong to) but the power of the Keys; not of a
secular power; for that belongs not to Ministers, nor is it here pretended.

Sect. 48. And I think it will appear that the power of Baptizing, and judging
who shall be taken for Christians, and who not, and the power of administering
the Eucharist and Eucharistical actions in the Church, is as great as this of
Ordination, especially supposing that a Presbytery must concur in this, and a
single Pesbyter may do the other. And therefore the one being granted them, the
other cannot be denied.

Sect. 49. Argument 16. If the administrations of the Priests and Teachers in
Christ's days among the Jews was Valid to the people, then the Ordination of
our Presbyteries, and the administrations of our Presbyters so ordained are
Valid to the people and receivers now: But the Antecedent is true: therefore so
is the Consequent. This Argument is managed so frequently and copiously by our
Ministers heretofore against the Separatists, that I shall need to say but
little of it.

Sect. 50. The Antecedent is proved easily from Scripture. Acts 13.27. and
15.21. show that Moses and the Prophets were read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day, and Luke 16.29. shows that it was the peoples duty to hear them,
Mat. 23.1, 2, 3. Then spoke Jesus to the Multitude and to his Disciples,
saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat: all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but do not ye after their
works: for they say and do not.] Mat. 8.4. Mark 1.44. Luke 16.29. But go thy
way, show thy self to the Priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things
which Moses commanded, etc. So that it was the peoples duty to hear, and submit
to the Teachers and the Priests.

Sect. 51. The reason of the Consequence is, because these Priests and Teachers
had not so good a Call as our Presbyters, to their Office, but were liable to
far more exceptions. The Priests were not of the line that God had by his Law
appointed to succeed in the Priesthood: the succession had long failed, as to
the just title of the Successors. The Priesthood was bought for money of the
Civil Powers: and instead of being the Priest for life, he was often changed
every year: chosen by a Pagan Prince, and by him displaced: and most think
there were two at once. The Scribes and Pharisees had abominably corrupted the
Law by their traditions and false expositions; and their Calling was much more
defective then ours: so that if they must pass yet for Ministers of God, and
their administrations be valid, then so must Presbyters and their
administrations be esteemed much more. I know we need not this odious
comparison of our Ministry with the Priests or Pharisees, but to show the
adver^^ries the odiousness of their accusations, and grossness of their (...)

(...) Presbyters may make a Bishop* (...) they may make a (...). But they may
make a Bishop: (...) they may make ((...) ordain) a Presbyter. The (...) of the
Major is proved thus. 1. They that may ^onfer (...) D^gree* may confer the
lower: the place of a Bishop is supposed the higher Degree, and the place of a
Presbyter the lower. 2. ^he Bishops themselves require more power in or to the
Consecration of a Bishop, then to the Ordination of a Minister, called a
Presbyter. The later may be done, according to their Canons, by one Bishop
(with assisting Presbyters,) but the former must have three Bishops at the
least.

Sect. 53. To this it is commonly answered, that Praecise the Ordination of a
Presbyter, is a greater work then the making of a Bishop* and therefore the
Major is denied. To which I reply. 1. I speak not of a Greater work, because
the word greater is ambiguous, and may signify the greater change in regard of
the Terminus a quo, which is not it that I intend. But the addition of an
higher degree of power, may require more power to the effecting it, then the
giving of the Lower degree, though the lower be praecise the greater change:
for the higher is the greater change as to the terminus ad quem; and as
Episcopacy comprehends or supposes Presbytery, so the power of making a
Bishop comprehends or supposes the power of Ordaining Presbyters. It may be
praecise, (or cum praecisione, as the Schoolmen speak) it may be a greater work
to make a beggar to be the chief Prince next to the King in a Kingdom: and yet
sin^ praecisione and in regard of the terminus ad quem it is a greater work to
make him afterward a King; and doubtless the addition of this Power requires
the Greater power to effect it.

Sect. 54. Otherwise, if the Dissenters will stand to their answer, we shall
from their own grounds infallibly overthrow their cause thus. It is a greater
work to Baptize then to Ordain or Confirm: therefore he that may Baptize, may
Ordain and Confirm. Just as making a Presbyter is cum praecisione, and in
respect to the terminus a quo, a greater work then Consecrating or making a
Bishop; so Baptizing is cum praecisione and in respect to the terminus a quo, a
far greater work then Ordination; the one making a Christian, and the other a
Minister of a Christian. See Aquil. in Scotel. in 4. sent. d. 7. q. 2. page
816. of Confirmation.

Sect. 55. It is only the Minor therefore that will hold dispute, which I prove
from the well known words of Hierom to Evagrius (which Bishop Usher told me he
alleged to King Charles at the Isle of Wight to this end, when he was asked by
him for an instance of Presbyters Ordaining) [ Quod autem postea unus electus
est, qui caeteris praepone^etur, in schismatis remedium factum est, ne
unusquisque ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. Nam and Alexandriae a
Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium, Episcopos, Presbyteri semper
unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant:
quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat: aut Diaconi eligant de se, quem
industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum vocent.] Presbyters then made the first
Bishops at Alexandria.

Sect. 56. To this it is answered, that it was only Election of Bishops that
Hierom ascribes to the Alexandrian Presbyters, and not Ordination of them; for
that was done by some other Bishops: and that it is Ordination that makes a man
a Bishop.

Sect. 57. To this I reply: 1. Hierom here undertakes to tell us, how Bishops
were made at Alexandria; but makes not the least mention of other Ordination
or Consecration, then these words express as done by the Presbyters: And
therefore till they prove it, we must take the affirmation of another
Ordination to be but the groundless presumption of the Assertors. 2. Hierom
does purposely bring this as an argument, to prove the identity first, and the
neerness afterward, of Bishops and Presbyters, that [ Presbyters made Bishops:]
which would have been no argument, if it was not Presbyters but Prelates that
made them, and if the Presbyters only chose them; for, 3. The people may choose
a Bishop, as well as the Presbyters, and ordinarily did it: and yet this
proves not that the people were near the Bishop in degree; that which the
people themselves may do, and frequently did, is not the only thing that Hierom
here ascribes to the Presbyters: but such is the Election of a Bishop:
therefore, etc. 4. It is the Original or first making of Prelates at Alexandria
that Hierom here speaks of* which he shows was from the Presbyters consent.
This appears plainly in his words (though some can make the plainest words to
signify what they would have them) For 1. He begins with a [ Presbyteris, id
est Episcop^s, Alphonsus a Castro does maintain that H^eroms opinion was indeed
the same that from his plain and frequent expressions we averr it to be, and
rebukes them that pretend the contrary.

Hector Boethius (before cited) says ( Sco^. Histor. l. 7. fol. 128. b.) that
Ante Palladium Populi suffrag^is ex Monachis and Culda^is pontifices
assumerentur. No Bishop then ordained them but Presbyters.

And Balaeus (Centur. 14. c. 6.) says [ Habebant antea Scoti suos Episcopos ac
Ministros ex verbi Divini Ministerio plebium suffragiis electos, prou^
Asianorum more fieri apud Britanaos videbant.


] and 2. proceeds from many scripture passages, to prove them in scripture
times the same: and that not only quoad nomen, but officium; for 3. When he had
done with the Testimonies of Saint John in his two Epistles, he immediately
adds [ Quod autem postea unus electus est, qui caeteris praeponeretur etc.]
where note, both that [ unus qui caeteris praeponeretur] is more then the bare
name: and also that [ Postea] refers to the date of John's Epistles, and
therefore he plainly averreth, that it was after John's Epistles, that [ one was
chosen to be before the rest.] 5. And to the Answer I further reply, that here
is all that was done, and all that was needful to be done, ascribed to the
Presbyters: For 1. They elected one. 2. They did in excelsiori gradu electum
collocare, place him in an higher degree, and 3. Episcopum nominabant: they
named him the Bishop (by way of excellency.) And if Election and placing him in
the Degree, and giving him peculiarly the name, be not Ordination, then
Ordination is but some Ceremony; for these contain the substance. 6. And Hierom
expressly resembles this action of the Presbyters to an Armies making an
Emperor or General; as if he had said, As the Army makes an Emperor
(Imperatorem faciat) so Presbyters made the Bishop: but the Army so made the
Emperor, that they left it not to another power to make him (and to them
only.) So that it is both [Making a B^shop] that is here ascribed to the
Presbyters, and [ such a making] as leaves him not unmade, to the making of
another. 7. And he resembles it to the making of an Archdeacon, supposing
that the Deacons do 1. Elect. 2. Judge of the person ( quem industrium
noverint.) 3. And give him the name (and Archi-diaconum vocent.) 8. And he
affirms this to be ( semper) the constant custom of the Alexandrian
Presbyters, till the days of Heraclas and Dionysius: intimating that then the
custom changed: but what custom was then changed? Not the Election of a Bishop
by the Presbyters, (with the people) for that continued long after: and
therefore it must be the Constitution, which afterward was done by Neighbor
Bishops in Consecration, but till then by the Election, Collocation, and
nomination of the Presbyters of that City-Church. 9. Having showed thus, that
Bishops and Presbyters were the same, and in the beginning called them by the
same name, he affirms that [ Omnes Apostolorum successores sunt] that is, All
these Bishops. 10. And he plainly affirms that the difference is made by Riches
and Poverty: He is the greater that is the richer, and he is the inferior that
is the poorer. [Potentia divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimior^m,
vel inferiorem Episcopum facit.] Let any impartial Reader peruse the Epistle it
self, and conside^ of these ten passages, and then believe if he can, either
that Hierom did imply that other Bishops made these Alexandrian Bishops, and
not the Presbyters, or that these Presbyters altered but the name, and gave not
the Bishop his new degree, or that this was not a thing that was now de novo in
remedium schismatis contrived or performed by them. There is evidence enough
against these conceits.

Sect. 58. And further, for them that think it was but the name that was now
changed, I would ask them these few Questions, (supposing them to be of their
mind, that tell us that Inferior Presbyters were not instituted in
Scripture-times, and that it was only Prelates that are called Bishops and
Presbyters in Scripture.) 1. Is it not strange, that when after
Scripture-times, a New Office was made, it should not have a new Name also; but
should have the same name with the old superior office? 2. And is it not
strange that both names of the superior Office (Bishop and Presbyter) should be
commonly given to the new inferior Office, at the first? 3. And strange that
the Church must afterward be put to change the names, and retrench or recall
the name of a Bishop from the new sort of Presbyters, and confine it to the
old, leaving (as old) the name of a Presbyter to the new inferior Office. 4.
And if in Scripture-times (in the days when John wrote his Epistles and
Revelation) the names of Bishop and Presbyter were both appropriated to
Prelates, there being no Inferior Presbyters then instituted; and yet from
Mark the Evangelist, the Alexandrian Presbyters brought back the name of a
Bishop to the Prelates, retaining the name Presbyter themselves, Quaero How
long time was there after the Institution of Inferior Presbyters, till the
regulating of their names, from the days of Mark? About thirty four years
backward. Mark dyed in the eighth year of Nero, and the Presbyters made Arianus
Bishop after his death, who continued twenty two years, even from the eighth of
Nero, to the fourth of Domitian, as Eusebius in Histor. Eccles. l. 2. cap* 23.
and lib. 3. cap. 12. and in Chronic. and Hieronym. in Catalog. and ex illis
Usher Annal. Vol. 2. ad an. Dom. 67. page 677. And Helvicus and others are near
the same time. And says Helvicus, John wrote the Revelations about the
fourteenth year of Domitian, and wrote his Gospel about the first year of his
Successor Nerva. So that Mark dyed about thirty six years (or thir^y four at
least) before John wrote his Gospel; so that here you have your choice,
whether you will believe, that subject Presbyters did regulate the names of
themselves and Bishops, and did elect (or make, Bishops thirty six years before
they were instituted themselves; or whether you will believe, that yet at the
death of Mark there were no inferior Presbyters at Alexandria, and so no
superior Bishops, for all this that Hierom does report.

Sect. 59. As for the Episcopal Divines that dissent from the Principle of the
forecited Learned Author (who says that there is no evidence that any of the
second sort of Presbyters were instituted in Scripture times) I need not deal
with them in th^s Disputation: for all of them that ever I yet met with, do
grant the validity of Presbyters Ordination, and the truth of the Reformed
Churches and their Ministry, and Ordinances: otherwise it were easy enough to
vindicate all these from them also, if they denied them.

Sect. 60. Argument 18. Ad hominem. If the late English Prelates had a lawful
call to their Prelacy, then much more have Ministers Ordained by Presbyters a
lawful call to their Ministry. But the Prelates say that they had a lawful
Call to their Prelacy: therefore, etc. The reason of the Consequence (which
only will be denied) is, 1. Because the Presbyters are Ordained to an Office
that is of Christ's Institution; but the Prelates are Consecrated to an Office
that is not of Christ's Institution, but against it, and against the light of
Nature (in taking on them the impossible Government of an hundred, or many
hundred Churches) as was showed in the former Disputation. 2. Because the
Prelates hold an uninterrupted Succession of Legitimate Ordination necessary to
the Being of their Prelacie (I mean, such as now we dispute against, hold this)
but so do not the Presbyters. The said dissenting Prelates are still upon their
N^mo dat quod non habet; which therefore we may urge upon them. And 1. They
cannot prove an uninterrupted Succession themselves, on whom it is incumbent,
according to their principles, if they will prove their Call. 2. We can prove
that they are the successors of such as claimed all their Power from the Roman
Vicechrist, and professed to receive it from him, and hold it of him as the
Catholic Head, and so that their Ordination comes from a seat that has had
many interruptions, and so had no power of Ordination, by their Rule: For when
the succession was so often and long interrupted, Nemo dat quod non habet: and
therefore all that followed must be usurpers and no Popes: and those that
received their Offices from them must be no Officers: But the Presbyters that
Ordain will give a better proof of their Call then this.

Sect. 61. Argument 19. Where the Office is of Gods Institution, and the
persons are endued with Ministerial abilitities, and are Orderly and duly
designed and separated to the Office of the sacred Ministry, there are true
Ministers, and Valid administrations. But all these are found in the Reformed
Churches that have Ordination without Prelates: therefore, etc. The Major is
undeniable, as containing a sufficient enumeration of all things necessary to
the Being of the Ministry.

Sect. 62. The Minor is proved by parts. 1. That the Offi^e of a Presbyter is
of divine institution, is confessed by most: And I suppose those that deny it
to be of Scripture ins^i^ution, will yet have it to be Divine: But if they deny
that, yet it suffices us, that it is the same officer that they call a Bishop,
and we a Presbyter; that is, the chief Pastor of a particular Church.

Sect. 63. 2. And that the persons are duly or competenly qualified for the
Ministry, nothing but Ignorance, Faction and Malic^, that ever I heard of, do
deny. (Supposing the humane frailties, that make us all insufficient gradually
for these things) The Ignorant that know not what the Ministerial
qualifications are, do judge as carnal interest leads them. The Factious rail
at all that be not of their mind. Grotius thought the opinions of the
Calvinists made them unfit materials for the Catholic Edifice that by his
Pacification he was about to frame. So do most other Sects, reject those as
unworthy that suit not with their minds. And malice (whether ^n^mated by
Heresy, Profaneness or Carnal interest) will easily find faults, and
unweariedly slander and reproach: But besides such I meet with none that dare
deny the competent abilities of these Ministers

Sect. 64. And 3. That the persons are Orderly and duly separated to the work
of the Ministry is thus proved. Where there is a separation to the Ministry by
mutual Consent of the person and the flock, and by the Magistrates authority,
and by the Approbation and Investiture of the fittest Ecclesiastical officers
that are to be had, there is an orderly and due separation to the Ministry; But
all this is to be found in the Ordination used in England and other Reformed
Churches, without Prelates: therefore etc. This proves not only the Validity of
their Ordination, but the full Regularity.

Sect. 65. God himself (as has been showed) does by his Law appoint the Office
of the Ministry, imposing the duty upon the person that shall be called, and
giving him his power, by that Law. And then there is nothing to be done, but to
detertermine of the person that is to receive this power and solemnly to put
him in Possession by Investiture. Now the principal part of the former work is
done also by God himself: by his Qualifying the person with his eminent Gifts*
and giving him opportunities and advantages for the Work. So that the people
and Odainers have no more to do, but to find out the man that God has thus
qualified, and to elect, approve and invest him; and usually he is easily found
out, as a candle in the night. So that the two great acts by which God makes
Ministers, is his Instituting Law that makes the office, and his Spiritual and
Natural Endowments given to the person; which the Church is but to find out,
and call into use and exercise. And therefore we may still truly say, that the
Holy Ghost makes Pastors or Overseers of the Church, as well as formerly he
did Act. 20.28.) because he gives them their Gifts, though not such Miraculous
Gifts as some then had; By his common Gifts of Knowledge and Utterance, and his
special Gifts of Grace, it is the spirit that still makes Ministers, and still
Christ gives Pastors to the Church.

Sect. 66. It is therefore to be noted that, Ephesians. 4.6, 7, 8, 11 the way of
Christ's giving officers to his Church is said to be by [ giving Gifts to men]
and the diversity of Offices is founded in the diversity of the Measure of
Grace, (or these Gifts) [ To every one of us is given Grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Therefore he says, Ascending on high he led
captivity (...), and gave Gifts to men ((...)) -- And he gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and T^^chers] So that giving
Gifts, and giving Apostles, Prophets* etc. are here made the same work of God:
Not that (...) and Approbation of these gifts is hereby made unnecessary, but
(...) this is Gods principal act by which ^e gives Pastors and Teachers to the
Church, and by which the Officers a^e distinguished. For the Church is to
discern and submit to those that are thus gifted; and to follow the Spirit, and
not either contra^ict or lead him. When God has thus gifted men, the main w^rk
is done, for making them Ministers (i^ withal he give t^em opportunities and
advantages for the work) and it is the Churches Duty ^o Own and Approve these
Gifts of God, and to do their parts to introduce the person: And if the
Ordainers refuse this, in case of Necessity, the gifted person is bound to
improve his Gifts without them. I say [ in case of Necessity] using the best
Order that is left.

Sect. 67. This being premised, I come to the Argument (. 64.) And the Major is
undeniable, because there are all things enumerated, that are Necessary to the
determination of the person qualified, that is to receive the power from Christ*

Sect. 68. And the Minor I prove by parts, 1. That our Ministry have usually
the peoples consent, is a known case that needs no proof: 2. So is it that they
have the Magistrates allowance, and his Authority appointing Approvers for
their Introduction, and allowing Ordination and commanding Ministerial Works.

Sect. 69. And doubtless the Magistrate himself has so much Authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs, that if he command a qualified person to preach the
Gospel, and command the people to receive him, I see not how either of them can
be allowed to disobey him: (Though yet the party ought also to have recourse to
Pastors for Ordination, and people for consent, where it may be done.) And
Grotius commends the saying of Musculus, that would have no Minister question
his Call, that being qualified, has the Christian Magistrates Commission. And
though this assertion need some limitations, yet it is apparent that
Magistrates power is great about the Offices of the Church. For Solomon put out
Abiathar from the Priesthood, and put Zadeck in his place, 1 Kings 2.27, 35.
David and the Captains of the host separated to Gods service those of the sons
of Asaph and of Heman and of Ieduthun who should Prophecy with Harps, etc. 1 Chronicles 16.4. And so did Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 8.14, 15. They were for the service of
the house of God, according to the Kings Order, 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 6. And methinks
those men should acknowledge this, that were wont to style the King [ In all
causes, and over all persons the supreme Head and Governor.]

Sect. 70. But 3. We have moreover in the Ordination of the Reformed Churches,
The approbation and solemn Investiture of the fittest Ecclesiastical Officers
that are to be had. And no more is requisite to an orderly Admission. There
being nothing for man to do, but to determine of the qualified person, and
present him to God to receive the power and obligation from his Law; it is
easy to discern, that where all these concur (the Peoples Election or Consent,
the Magistrates Authority, the determination of fit Ecclesiastical Officers,
and the qualification and consent of the person himself,) there needs no more
to the designation of the man. Nor has God tied the essence of the Church or
Ministry, to a certain formality, or to the interest or will of Prelates* nor
can any more ad ordinem be required, but that a qualified person do enter, by
the best and most Orderly way that is open to him in those times and places
where he is. And that we have the fittest Approvers and Ordainers, I prove.

Sect. 71. If the most of the Protestant Churches have no other Ecclesiastical
Officers to Ordain but Presbyters, then is it the most fit and orderly way to
enter into the Ministry in those Churches by their Ordination, and those
Presbyters are the fittest that are there to Ordain. But the Antecedent is a
known truth. If any in denial of the Consequence say, that the Churches should
rather be without Ministers then have Ordination by such, they are confuted by
what is said before.

Sect. 72. And if you say, that they should have Bishops, and it is their own
fault that they have not; I answer, Suppose that were a granted truth, it can
reach but to some that have the Rule: It is not the fault of every
Congregation, or expectant of the Ministry: It is not in their power to alter
Laws and forms of Government: and therefore they are bound to enter by the
fittest way that is open to them.

Sect. 73. Moreover, even in England; the Presbyteries are fitter for
Ordination then the present Bishops: (as to the Nation in general) therefore
the Ordination by Presbyteries is done by the fittest Ecclesiastical officers,
and is the most regular and desirable Ordination.

Sect. 74. I prove the Antecedent by comparing the Ordination of the
Presbyteries and the present Prelates. 1. I have before showed that the English
Prelacy is more unlike the Primitive Episcopacy, then our Parochial Presbytery
or Episcopacy is; and therefore has less reason to appropriate to themselves
the Power of Ordaining. 2. The Ordaining Presbyters are Many, and known
persons; and the Prelates few, and to the most (and except three or four, to
almost all that I am acquainted wi^h) unknown. 3. The Presbyters Ordain Openly
where all may be satisfied of the impartiality and Order of their proceedings:
But the Prelates Ordain in Private, where the same satisfaction is not given to
the Church. 4. Hereupon it is easy for any vagrant to counterfeit the Prelates
secret Orders, and say he was Ordained by them, when it is no such matter; and
who can disprove him? But the public Ordination of Presbyters is not so easily
pretended by such as have it not, and the pretense is easily discovered. 5. The
Prelates for ought I hear, are very few, and therefore few can have access to
them for Ordination: But Presbyteries are in most countries. 6. The Prelates,
as far as I can learn, Ordain Ministers without the peoples consent over whom
they are placed, and without giving them any notice of it before hand, that
they may put in their exceptions if they dissent: But the Presbyters ordinarily
require the consent of the people; or at least will hear the reasons of their
dissent. 7. The Presbyteries Ordain with the Magistrates allowance, and the
Prelates without and against them. Those therefore that are Ordained by
Prelates usually, stand on that foundation alone, and want the consent of
People and Magistrates; when those that are Ordained by Presbyteries have all.
8. Ordination by Prelates is now pleaded for on Schismatical grounds, and in
submitting to it, with many of them, we must seem to consent to their
Principles (that all other Ordination is Null, and the Churches are no true
Churches that are without it.) But Presbyteries Ordain not on such dividing
terms. 9. We hear not of near so much care in the Prelates Ordinations in these
or former times, as the Presbyteries; I could give some instances even of late
of the great difference, which I will not offend them with expressing. 10. Most
of them that we hear of, Ordain out of their own Diocesses, which is against
the ancient Canons of the Church. 11. Some of them by their Doctrines and their
Nullifying all the Reformed Churches and Ministry that have no Prelates, do
show us that if they had their will, they would yet make more lamentable
destructive work in the Church then the hottest persecutors of their late
predecessors did. For it is plain that they would have all the Ministers
disowned or cast out, that are not for the Prelacy. And what a case then would
this land (and others) be in? (Of which more anon.) So that we have reason to
fear that these are destroyers, and not faithful Pastors. I speak not of all,
but only of the guilty: For again I say, we very much Reverence such Learned,
Worthy men as Bishop Morton, Bishop Brownrigg, and some others yet surviving
are. 12. The Ordination by Prelates, as things now stand, endangereth men's
liberty in the exercise of the Ministry, by some things in the Manner which I
shall not mention. Review the rest that I said before in Cap. 5. and 6. and
then judge, Whether he that in these days is Ordained by a Learned Grave
Presbytery (and perhaps where a City Pastor is Moderator or President, and many
of the Ordainers are the fixed Presidents or Bishops of a Parochial Church,
having a Presbytery where they preside,) I say, Whether such be not separated
to the Ministry in the most orderly way that is now to be found existent? and
come not in at the door that God would have them to enter at.

Sect. 75. It is strange that those men (among the Papists) that allow of the
Cardinals choosing a Pope, and exercising so much Government as they do over
all the Christian world, and all this under the name of Presbyters of Rome,
should yet be against Ordination by such Presbyters as are indeed Parochial
Bishops, and accuse it to be a Nullity. I see not how these things cohere.

Sect. 76. But yet many Papists are more moderate in this* then those at home
that we now deal with. That Erasmus, Richardus Armachanus, Gui^el. Durantes,
and many more of them, were on our side in this point, is commonly known, and
manifested by abundance of our writers, some of them Bishops, and some
Episcopal Divines themselves.

Sect. 77. And diverse of their Schoolmen do maintain that the [ Ord^
Episcopalis non differt a Caracthere Sacerdotali, nisi sicut forma intensa a se
ipsa remissa] as Soncinas relates ( in 4. Sent. d. 25.) the sentence of
Paludanus, which Voetius recites.

And the same Soncinas, and Voetius after him do cite Aureolus, proving that
Gradus Episcopalis and Sacerdotum non sunt distinctae potestates, etc. Quia
Sacerdos authoritate Papae potest Sacerdotem instituere. Ergo non differunt
potestas Episcopalis and Sacerdotis, nisi sicut potestas impeditae and non
impedita: quae tamen est eadem. Antecedens probatur, quia omnis virtus activa,
non impedita, potest transfundere seipsam] To the same purpose Cusanus and many
more.

Sect. 78. Hence it is that Presbyters have of old had a place in Councils, yea
and a suffrage too: and the Council of Basil did decide and practice it: which
is allowed by many of the Papists. And hence it is that diverse of the Papists
do make Episcopal preheminency to be but of Ecclesiastical Institution.

Sect. 79. That the Chorepiscopi did ordain, and their Ordination was Valid,
though they were not accounted Bishops (any otherwise then our Parochial
Bishops are) is a thing that has been spoken of so often, and by so many, even
Bishops themselves, that I shall pass it by.

Sect. 80. And says Voetius, even among the Papists, the Abbots and such
regular Prelates that are no Bishops, and the Chapter of Canons may Ordain; yea
and exercise other acts of Jurisdiction, as excommunicating, etc. It is not
therefore proper to the Bishops.

Sect 81. It is therefore as Hierom speaks of Confirmation by a Bishop only, in
honorem Sacerdotii, a matter of Ecclesiastical institution for Order, and not
of Divine institution that Presbyters without Prelates should not Ordain: As
Leo first Bishop of Rome says (Epistol. 86. ad Episcop. Gall. and German.)
there are Quaedam Sacerdotibus Prohibita per Canones Ecclesiasticos, ut
Consecratio Presbyterorum and Diaconorum.] It is the Canons that forbid
Presbyters to Ordain, and not the Scriptures that never knew a Presbyter
without the power to Ordain.

Sect 82. Were there no Ordainers to do that office, or none but such as would
oblige us to sin, it were Gods regular way to enter by the Peoples choice and
the Magistrates authority without them, this being in such case the open door:
therefore it is more evidently Gods Regular way, when we have both these and
the best Ministerial Ordination besides, that is on good terms to be had. I do
not only here plead that such a Ministry is not Null (as I did before) but that
the entrance in such a case is not sinful.

Sect. 83. There being nothing left to men herein, but the due designation of
the person (before the reception of his power from God) the Peoples Election it
self may serve for that designation, where Ministerial Approbation is not to be
had. But the ordinary course, where Necessity does not prohibit us, is that all
three concur, viz. The Consent of the people, because we cannot Teach and Rule
them against their wills: 2. The Approbation of the Ministry, because they are
best able to judge of men's abilities. 3. The Allowance of the Magistrate, for
the orderly and advantageous exercise of our office. But the first is of the
greatest necessity of the three.

Sect. 84. That the people have power of Election, when just authority (Civil
or Ecclesiastical) does not suspend it or limit it, is so easily proved that it
is commonly confessed. Its well known that for many hundred years the people
had in most or many Churches the Choice of their Bishops or Pastors, or joined
with the Presbytery and Ordainers in the choice. Blondellus, Voetius and many
more have sufficiently proved this and other parts of the peoples interest, by
unanswerable evidence.

Sect. 85. Cyprian says that this is by Divine Ordination. Cyrian Epist. 11.
Plebi -- Contra Episcopatum meum, immo contra suffragium vestrum and Dei
judicium* etc.
Epist. 68. (edit Goulartii) p. 201. [ Propter quod plebs obsequens praeceptis
Dominicis, and Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare se debet, nec se
ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis sa^crificia miscere, quando ipsa maxim habeat
potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi: Quod and
ipsum videmus de Divina authortate descendere, ut Sacerdos plebe praesente, sub
omnium This is not the way of our Prelates Ordination. And th^s shew^th that
the Churches in (...) ^ays were not Diocesan, consisting o^ many particular
Churches: else all the people could not have been present, beholders and
consenters, at the Ordination of the Bishops.
oculis deligatur, and dignus atque idoneus publico judicio ac testimonio
comprobetur -- Coram omni Synagoga jubet Deus constitui Sacordotem, id est,
instruit and ostendit Ordinationes Sacerdotales non nisi sub populi assistentis
conscientia (...) oportere, ut plebe praesente vel detegantur malorum crimina,
vel bonorum merita praedicentur: and sit Ordinatio justa and legitima, quae
omnium suffragio and judicio fuerit examinata. Quod postea secundum Divina
Magisteria observatur in Actis Apostolorum quando de Ordinando in locum Judae
Episcopo Petrus ad plebem loquitur, surrexit inquit Petrus in medio discentium;
fuit autem turba in uno: Nec hoc in Episcoporum tantum and Sacerdotum, sed in
Diaconorum Ordinationibus observasse Apostolos animadvertimus, de quo and ipso
in Actis eorum scriptum est: Et convocaverunt, inquit illi duodecim totam
plebem discipulorum -- Quod utique idcirco tam diligenter and caute convoata
plebe tota gereb^tur, nequis ad altaris Ministerium, vel ad Sacerdotalem locum
indignu, obreperet. Ordinari enim nonnunquam indignos non secundum Dei
voluntatem, sed secundum humanam praesumptionem, and haec Deo displicere, quae
non veniant ex legitima and justa Ornatione, Deus ipse manifestat per Osee
Prophetam dicens, sibi ipsi constituerunt Regem, and non per^me. Propter quod
diligenter de traditione Divina and Apostolica observatione observandum est and
tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and fere Provincias universas tenetur, ut ad
Ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad eam plebem cui praepositus ordinatur,
Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur
plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime n^vit, and u^iuscujusque
actum de ejus conversatione perspexit. Still this shows, that the Churches of
Bishops were then no greater then that all might be personally present, and
fore-acquainted with his life.

Yea that it was the p^^ples duty no^ only to elect, but to reject, there is
more then Cyprian affirm: Euse^^us H^st. Eccl. l. 5. c. 18. out of Apol^onus
tells us that Alexander a M^ntan^st, being a thief* the Congregation of which
he was Pastor (so that was his Diocese) would not admit him.

(...) 11. (...) -- Secundum (...) and (...) de (...)


Quod and apud vos factum videmus in Sabini collegae nostri ordinatione, ut de
universae fraternitatis suffragio and de Episcoporum qui in praesentia
convenerant, quique de eo ad vos literas fecerant judicio, Episcopatus ei
deferretur, and manus ei in locum Basilidis imponeretur.] And so he goes on to
show that even the Bishop of Romes restoring of Basilides, was not valid to
rescind the foresaid Ordination of Sabinus, which was thus made by the Bishops
on the peoples suffrages. And yet our Diocesans have, alas, too commonly thrust
on the people against their consent, such unworthy persons, as of whom we may
say as Cyprian (ibid.) of these, [ Cumque alia multa sint and gravia delicta
quibus Basilides and Martialis implicati tenentur; frusta tales Episcopatum
sibi usurpare co^antur, cum manifestum sit ejusmodi homines nec Ecclesiae
Christi posse praeesse, nec Deo sacrificia offerre debere.] I have cited these
words at large, because they are full and plain to show us the practice of
those times, and are the words of an African Syrod, and not of Cyprian alone,
and show that then the People had the chiefest hand in the Election or
designation of the person, which is it that I have now to prove.

Sect. 86 Pamelius himself while he seeks to hide the shame of their Prelates
Ordination, from the light of these passages of Cyprian, does yet confess and
say, [ Non negamus veterem Electionis Episcoporum ritum, quo plebe praesente,
immo and suffragiis plebis eligi solent. Nam in Africa illum observatum constat
ex electione Eradii Successoris D. Augustini, Const^ntin^ in his (...) to the
(...) tells them that [in the election of their Bishops all men should freely
deliver their opinion, and the general suffrage of all should be equally
considered; because Ec^lesiastical Honors should be obtained and conferred
w^^^out (...) and di^cord -- ] (...) 3 (...)
de quo extat Epistola ejus 120. In Gracia aetate Chrysostom. ex lib. 3. de
Sacer. In Hi^pa^is ex hoc Cyprian^ loco, and Isidor. lib. de Officiis. In
Galliis, ex Epist^l. Celestin. Pap. 2. Romae, ex iis quae supradiximus, Epist
ad Ant^n Vbique etiam alibi ex Epist. Leonis 87, Et perdurasse eam
consuetudinem ad Gregor. 1. usq ex ejus Epistolis: immo and ad tempora usque
Caroli and Ludovici Imperatorum, ex 1. lib. Capitulorum eorundem satis
constat.] This full confession from the mouth of an adversary, may save me the
labor of many more allegations concerning the judgment and practice of the
ancients.

Sect. 87. He that would see more may find enough in Vo^tius de Desparata causa
Papatus lib. 2. c. 12. Sect 2. and passim. And in Blondel. de jure plebis: and
Goulartius on the foresaid notes of Pamelius on Cyprian, p. 205 Among others he
there cites those known Canons of the Carthage Councils, three and four out of
Gratian [Nullus ordinetur clericus nisi probatus, vel examine Episcoporum, vel
populi testimonio] Et. [Episcopus sine concilio clericorum suorum clericos non
ordinet, it^ ut civium conn ventiam and testimonium quaerat] (What and where is
that Clergy without whose Council our Prelates Ordain not; and that people
whose suff^ages they require?) And says Goula tius, Observanda est Car^li ut
and Ludovici Constitutio [Sacrerum Camnum non ignari, ut Dei nimine sacrosancta
Eccl^sia suo liberius patiatur honor, assensum Ordini Ecclesiastico praebemus,
ut Episcopi per Electionem Cleri and p^puli, secundum statu^a Canonum
eligantur.] Its certain then that the people were sometime the sole choosers,
and the Pastors the approvers; and sometime the People and the Pastors joint
Electors; and sometime the Pastors chose, but forced none on the people,
against or without their Consent (as Pamelius confesses) till Popular tumults,
divisions, and other reasons occasioned the change of this ancient Custom. And
therefore it is most certain, that an Election by the people may be a valid
determination of the person.

Sect. 88. And the person being once sufficiently determined of, the power and
obligation does fall upon him immediately from God; so that were it not that
the Pastors Approbation is part of the Determination, there would be nothing
left for Ordination, but the solemnizing of their entrance by Investiture,
which is not essential to the Ministerial Office, but ad been ^ss^, makes to a
complete and orderly possession, where it may be had, and where it cannot,
Election may suffice.

Sect. 89. Voetius, de Desperata causa Papatus, lib. 2. sect. 2 cap. 20. does
by seven Arguments prove against Iansenius, Electionem tribuere Ministerium:
and esse proprie ejus fundamentum. The first Argument is from the Definition of
Election: the second from the Canon Law, which gives a Bishop his power before
Consecration, and gives the Pope a power of governing the Church before he is
inthroned or Consecrated. The third is a similibus, in Oeconom^e and Policy:
the foundation of marriage union is mutual Consent, and not Solemnization.
Coronation (says he) does not make a King (he means, not fundamentally, but
compleatively,) but hereditary Succession or Election. He may well be a King
without Coronation, as (says he) the custom is in Castile, Portugal, etc. The
King of France depends not pro jure regni on the Archbishop of Rhemes, but
says Barclay, has the right and honor of a King before his Coronation. An
elect Emperor governs before his Coronation. Quoad potestatem administrandi
regni (Galli^i) unctio and Coronatio nihil addunt inquit Commentator sanctionis
pragmat. fol. 4. His fourth Argument is from the nature of all Relations, quae
posito fundamento and termino, in subjecto dicuntur existere: atqui
Solemnizatio, seu Consecratio, seu Ordinatio, seu Investitura ((...) v^cant
patres Graeci) illa externa quam nos confirmationem dicimus, neque est
fundamentum, neque terminus Ministerii, aut Ministri; sed legitima electio and
(...) Ecclesiae est fundamentum Ministerii, and ista vel illa particularis
Ecclesia est terminus, in quo est correlatum Oves seu discipuli, ad quod
refertur relatum Doctoris seu Pastoris. (Though some of this need explication
and limitation, yet its worthy consideration.) His fifth Argument is from the
Confessions of the Adversaries, citing Sylvest. Prieras, Immanuel Sa,
Onuphrius, Navarrus, yea Bellarmine and Pope Nicola^, who maintain that [ In
summo Pontifice p^st Electionem nulla alia requiritur confirmatio; quia statim
ut electus est suscipit administrationem. And to this agrees their Practice,
who at the Council of Trent had many Bishops merely Elect, and Elect Cardinals
are admitted to Elect a Pope. His sixth Argument is [ Quod Consecratio seu
Investitura potest ab^sse aliquo in Casu: Electio autem nunquam: ergo
fundamentum Ministerii seu potestatis Ecclesiasticae est Electio and non
Consecratio; which he endeavors to confirm. My opinion of the fundamentum
potestatis, I have expressed in my Christian Concord othrrwise: but yet I
consent, as is there expressed, to the Necessity of the peoples Consent to our
Office.

Sect. 90. Argument 20. If those in the Reformed Churches that are Ordained by
Presbyters, have as good a call to the Ministerial Office, as the Princes of
the Nations (yea any one of them) have to their Sovereignty or Power, then are
they true Ministers of Christ, and their administrations valid to the Churches,
and their Ministry to be received. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is
the Consequent. And I prove them both.

Sect. 91. The Secular power will be granted, as to the most (at least) of
Christian Princes and other Sovereigns: when the Holy Ghost commands
subjection to the Higher Powers, even when they are Heathen, and come in as
Ne^o did, Romans 13. we may well take it for granted that Christian Magistrates,
that have no better title then he, are such as we must be subject to: even
those that have not so lawful an entrance, as may justify their possession, or
free them from the guilt of flat Usurpation, before God, may yet ^e such while
they are in possession, as we must be subject to for Conscience sake* and all
their administrations are ^s valid to the innocent subjects, as if they had as
good a title as the best. They that deny this, must overthrow almost all the
Commonwealth's on Earth, and turn Subjection into Rebellion.

Sect. 92. The Consequence then is proved from the parity of Reason, in both
(...)* The title of such Princes is so far good, as that subjection is due to
them, and their Government valid: our title to the Ministry is at least as good
as theirs: therefore submission or obedience is due to us, and our
administrations valid to the Church. And that our title is as good as theirs,
will appear by a due comparison.

Sect. 93. 1. God is equally the Author of our Office, and of theirs. He that
appointed the Magistrate to Rule by force, appointed the Ministry to Teach, and
Guide, and Worship publicly before the Church. There is no Power but of God:
even Magistrates could have none, unless it were given them from above. 2.
Usurpation therefore is a sin in Magistrates as well as Ministers. And there is
the same reason, why it should invalidate their actions, as ours, if we were
guilty of it. 3. The Dissenters rule [ Nemo dat quod non habet] concerns the
Magistrate as much as the Minister, and somewhat more. A man may do more in
works of service to others without a special Office, then in Magisterial
Government. Magistracy is a Relation that must have a foundation or efficient
cause, as well as Ministry. If a Giver that himself has the Power given, is
necessary to make Ministers, then also to make Magistrate, (which yet is false
in both, if you speak of humane Donation to the Sovereign) The effect can no
more be without a cause in them then in us. 4. I^ the Election or Consent of
the people be enough to make a Magistrate, or to be the foundation or donation
(as they suppose) of his authority, then much more may the election or consent
of the people, with the approbation and investiture by Presbyters, and
allowance of the Magistrate, prove those in question to be true Ministers. 5.
No Prince on earth that ever ^ heard of, can prove any thing like an
uninterrupted succession of legitimate Princes from a Predecessor immediately
authorized by God. If Hereditary Princes that are the Successors of Usurpers
are not to be obeyed, it will be hard to find an Hereditary Prince that is to
be obeyed: so that their case is worse then the case of Ministers.

Sect. 94. For, though 1. No Pastors on Earth can prove an uninterrupted
Succession of persons lawfully Ordained. 2. Nor is it necessary to prove a
Local succession; because God has not tied his Church to Towns or Countries,
and a Church and Pastor that are banished into another Land, may there be the
same Church and Pastor, though in and of another place: yet 1. We have a
succession of possession in the Office itself. 2. And a succession of actual
Ordination in great probability: no man can prove against us that we receive
our Ministry from any that were not actually Ordained. Yet this much is not
Necessary to our Office.

Sect. 95. Object. But Christ has tied the Office of the Ministry to a
legitimate Ordination; but he has not tied the Magistracy to a lawful Title.
Answ. Here are two falsehoods barely affirmed, or employed. One is that a just
Title is less necessary to the Magistrate then the Minister; when the Reason of
both is the same. Title is the foundation of Right. Magistracy is a Right of
Governing. No Relation can be without its Foundation. The other is, that God
has tied the Office of the Ministry to a legitimate Ordination. This is
unproved, and I have proved the contrary before. It is our Duty to enter by
Legitimate Ordination where it may be had; and thus we do. But if any of our
Predecessors (perhaps a thousand or five hundred years ago) did enter
otherwise, that does not invalidate our Ordination or Ministry, nor is it any
of our sin.

Sect. 96. As Ministers were at first Ordained by Imposition of hands, so Kings
were chosen by God, and (in the Church) anointed by a Prophet, or special
Officer of God; and sometime by the people (that is, by their suffrages
appointing it, or consenting to it) as appears, 1 Samuel 10.1. and 15.17. and
16.13. and 24.6. 2 Samuel 2.4, 7. and 5.3. and 12.7. and 19.10. 1 King. 1.45. and
5.1. 2 King. 11.12. and 23.30. 2 Chronicles. 22.7. so that there is as much in
Scripture for this manner of their investiture, as there is for Ministers
Ordination by imposition of hands; yet may they be Kings that have no such
Investiture; much less all their predecessors. We then that have a due
Investiture, may prove our Ministry, whatever our predecessors had.

Sect. 97. I come now to the Arguments of the adversaries of our Ministry,
which I need not stand long on, because they are few and scarce considerable,
and sufficiently answered in what is said. And first its said by a Learned man
( Diss^rta^. de Episcop. contra Blondel. Praemoni^. ad L^ctor. sect. 4.13.) [
Nos illud in hac disc^ptatione pro concesso positum cens^bimus, Nemin^m rect^
dare quod non habet: eumque aut e^s qui hac potestate indu^i nunquam fuerint
sine vi^latione aut sacrilegio qu^d^m sibi arrogare aut assumere aut aliis
aeque a Deo non vocatis, aut missis communicare neutiquam posse. [Illud hic
nobis unicum m^minisse sufficient, unumquemque in Anglicana Ecclesia ab
Epi^copis ordinatum Presbyterum, nulla ordinandi alios facultate (aut per se,
aut qua quolibet comparium caetu munitum) praeditum esse, nec igitur ^am sibi
rectius arrogare posse, quam si Diaconorum, immo Laicorum unus, aut plures,
tali potestate nullatenus induti, idem ausursint.] The sum is: Presbyters have
not this power* therefore they cannot give it.

Sect. 98. Answ. If the Argument run thus [ No man can give that which he has
not: Presbyters have not the Office of a Presbyter: therefore they cannot give
it.] I then deny the Minor: They are not Presbyters, if they have not the
Office of a Presbyter: that therefore which they have (to speak in the
Dissenters language) they may give.

Sect. 99. But if the Argument be this [ No man can give that which he has
not: Presbyters have not a power of Ordaining: therefore they cannot give a
power of Ordaining] I answer as follows. 1. We receive not our Office by the
Gift of man, whether Presbyters or Prelates. The Power is immediately from
Christ, and men do but open us the door, or determine of the person that shall
from Christ receive the power, and then put him solemnly into possession. It is
the first Error of the adversaries, to hold that this power is given by men as
first having it themselves. In the Popes case Bellarmine himself will grant us
this ( Respons. ad 7 Theolog. Venet. p. 246.232.) [ Saepe (inquit) jam dictum
est, Electionem Cardinalium non confer potestatem, sed designare tantummodo
personam, cui Deus potestatem tribuit.] And yet that [ In summo Pontifice post
electionem nulla alia requiritur confirmatio, quia statim ut electus est,
suscipit administrationem, ut declarat Nicol. Papa Can. in nomine, di^. 23.]
page 175. And of the Power of Princes, the Dissenters will grant it (for we
have it in their writings) that the Power is from God immediately, though the
people may elect the person. You will thrust out all Princes of the world by
this Argument, and say* [ No man gives that which he has not: the people have
not a Power of Government: therefore they cannot give it.] I would answer you
as here: God has the Power, and he gives it: but the people that have it not,
may design the person that shall receive it from God: as the Burgesses of a
Corporation may choose a Major or Bailiff to receive that power from the
Sovereign (by the Instrumentality of a Law or Charter) which they had not
themselves to use or give. And so a Presbytery (and sometime the people alone)
may design the person that shall receive the Office of the Ministry from God,
though they had it not themselves to use or give.

Sect. 100. Resp. 2. By this Argument and its supposition, none are true
Ministers that are Ordained by Prelates: for they have not the Power of the
Ministry to Give, but only to Use: no Ordination is a Giving of the Power,
save only by way of ^nvestiture, which supposes a Title and Right before, and
is not of absolute necessity to the Possession: for in several cases it may be
without it.

Sect. 101. Respons. 3. A man may Instrumentally give or deliver both Right and
Investiture in that which he has not himself, nor ever had. Your servant may
by your appointment, deliver a Lease, a Deed of Gift, a Key, or twig and turf,
for Possession of house and lands, though he never had house or lands or
possession himself. It is sufficient that the Donor have it, that sends him.

Sect. 102. Resp. 4. Presbyters have the Power of Presbyters, or the
Ministerial Office: and if they can give that (which certainly they have,) then
they can give a Power of Ordaining other Presbyters. For to Ordain others, is
no more then they do themselves in giving the Power or Office which they have:
therefore if they may do it, those that they give their Power to may do it;
that is, may also give others that power which they have.

Sect. 103. But as to our case in hand, it suffices that we prove, that
Presbyters may give others the Office of Presbyters; whether this Office
contain a Power of Ordaining, is another Question, but soon dispatched, if this
be granted: because (as is said) to Ordain is nothing else but to invest others
with the Office or Power which we have our selves.

Sect. 104. Resp. 5. The Argument makes more against the Prelates Ordination,
on another account; because that (as is proved already) that Species of
Prelacie that was exercised in England (the sole Governors of an hundred or
two hundred Churches) is so far contrary to the Word of God, that we may boldly
conclude, that as such, they have no power to use or give: their very Office is
humane, and destructive of the true Pastoral Office: and therefore as such,
they have less pretense of Divine Authority, then Presbyters, whose Office is
of God. Yet do I not make their Ordination Null, because they were Presbyters
as well as Prelates, and also were in Possession of the place of Ordainers, and
had the Magistrates authority.

Sect. 105. Resp. 6. Presbytrrs have a Power of Ordaining: it is already
proved. And to your confirmation (where you say that the Bishops gave them no
such Power: therefore they have it not:) I answer: 1. I deny the Consequence.
God gave it them: therefore they have it without the Bishops gift. 2. If by [
Giving] you mean but an accidental Causation, or the action of a Causa sine qua
non, or a designation of the Person that shall receive it, then I deny the
Antecedent. The Prelates (and Electors) designed the person, and also invested
him solemnly in the Office, which contains this Power of Ordination which you
deny them.

Sect. 106. Obj. The Prelates expressed no such thing in their Ordination. Ans.
1. It being not the Prelates but Christ that makes the Office, we must not go
to the words of the Prelates, but of Christ to know what the Office is, though
we may go to the Prelates (while the work was in their hands) to know who the
person is. If a Prelate Consecrate a Prelate, and yet mention not particularly
the works that are pretended to belong to a Prelate, you will not think him
thereby restrained or disabled to those works. He that Crowns a King, and
they that choose him, though they name not the works of his Office and Power,
do thereby choose him to all those works that belong to a King. God has set
down in his Word, that the Husband shall be the Head or Governor of his Wife:
if now the woman shall choose a certain person to be her Husband, and the
Minister or Magistrate solemnize their Marriage, without any mention of such
Governing Power, the Power does nevertheless belong to the man; because God
has specified by his Law the Power of that Relation, and the man is Lawfully
put in the Relation that by the Law of God has such a Power: so is it in the
case in hand.

Sect. 107. But yet 2. I add, that the Prelates and the Laws of England gave to
Presbyters a Power of Ordination. For in all their Ordinations, the Presbyters
were to lay on hands with the Prelate (and did, in all Ordinations that I have
seen.) And if they actually imposed hands and so Ordained, it was an actual
profession to all that they were supposed to have the power of Ordination,
which they exercised.

Sect. 108. Obj. But they had no Power given them to do it without a Prelate.
Answ. 1. By Christ they had. 2. You may as well say, that Bishops have no Power
to Ordain, because they were not (ordinarily at least) to do it without the
Presbyters.

Sect. 109. Obj. Says the foresaid Learned Author ( Dissert. Praemonit. sect.
10.11.) [ Vnum illud lubens interrogarem, an Hieronymus, dum hic esset, and
Presbyteratu secundario fungeretur partiaria tantum indutus potestate,
praesente, sed spreto and insuper habito Episcopo, Diaconum aut Presbyterum
ordinare (aut Presbytero uni aut alteri adjunctus) recte potuerit? si
affirmetur, dicatur sodes, qua demum ratione ab eo dictum sit, Episcopum sola
ordinatione (and ergo ordinatione) a Presbytero disterminatum esse] sin
negetur, quomodo igitur Presbytero Anglicano, cui nullam, quae non Hieronymo
potestatem, etc. -- ] Answ. 1. This is none of our case in England: we Ordain
not, praesente sed spreto Episcopo: but most Countries know of no Bishop that
they have, but Presbyters. 2. Hierom might have Ordained with his
fellow-presbyters, according to the Laws of Christ, but not according to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, that then obtained, or bore sway. 3. Hierom plainly
tells you, that it is by Ecclesiastical appointment for the prevention of
schism, that Bishops were set up so far as to have this power more then
Presbyters, in the point of Ordination. 4. The English Presbyters are Parochial
Bishops, and have an Office of Christ's making, and not of the Prelates; and are
not under those Ecclesiastical Canons that restrained Hierom from the exercise
of this power. And therefore whereas it is added by this Learned Author [ Quid
huic dilemmati reponi, aut opponi possit, fateor equidem me non adeo Lynceum
esse ut perspiciam] he may see that he could scarce have set us an easier task
then to answer his dilemma.

Sect. 110. The second and their principal objection is, that We have no
precept or example in the Church for Presbyters Ordaining without Prelates:
therefore it is not to be done. Answ. 1. I told you before how Bishop Usher
told me he answered this Objection to King Charl^. viz. from the example of the
Church of Alexandria where Presbyters made Bishops, which is more.

Sect. 111. But 2. I answer, you have no example in Scripture or long after
that ever Prelates of the English sort, did ordain, nor any precept for it, nor
was such a Prelacy then known, as is proved; and therefore their Ordination
has less warrant then that by Pretbyters.

Sect. 112. And 3. I have told you before of Scripture warrant for Ordination
by a Presbytery, and also by the Teachers and other Officers of a single
Church, as was the Church of Antioch. Prove that there was any Bishop.

Sect. 113. Lastly, it is confessed by the Dissenters that such Presbyters or
Bishops as are mentioned, Act. 20. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1, etc. had power
of Ordination: But according to the judgment of most of the Fathers (that ever
I saw or heard of that interpret those texts) it is Presbyters that are meant
in all or some of those texts. It is granted us also by the Dissenters that the
chief or sole Pastors of single Churches in Scripture-times did ordain* and had
the power of Ordination: But the Presbyters of England, and other Protestant
Churches are the chief or sole Pastors of single Churches; therefore, etc.

Sect. 114. Object. 3. But the English Presbyters have broak their Oaths of
Canoical obedience, and therefore at least are schismatical. Answ. 1. Many
never took any such oath, to my knowledge: For my part I did not. 2. The
particular persons that are guilty must be accused: and neither must they be
judged before they speak for themselves, nor yet must others be condemned for
their sakes. In these parts, there is not one Presbyter I think of ten, who
differs from the Prelates about Ordination, that ever took that oath. And
therefore it is few that can be called Schismatics on that account. Yea 3. And
those few that did take that Oath, have few of them that I know of, done any
thing against the Prelates.

Sect. 115. Object. 4. The English Presbyters have pulled down the Prelates,
and rebelled against them, and therefore at least are guilty of Schism. Answ.
1. The guilty must be named and heard: their case is nothing to the rest. It is
not one often I think, perhaps of twenty, that can be proved guilty. 2. It was
not the Scripture Bishops that they Covenanted against or opposed: but only the
irregular English Prelacy before described: And the endeavor of reforming this
corrupted Pre^acy, and reducing it to the Primitive frame, is in it self no
schism.

Sect. 116. Object. 5. Ignatius commands them to obey the Bishops and do
nothing without them. Answ. 1. Ignatius also commands them to obey the
Presbyters as the Apostles of Christ, and to do nothing without them. 2. The
Bishops that Ignatius mentions were such as our Parish Bishops or Presbyters
are, that have a Presbytery to assist them: They were the chief Pastors of a
single Church, as is before proved out of Ignatius, and not the Pastors of
hundreds of Churches.

Sect. 117. I shall trouble the Reader with no more of their objections, seeing
by what is said already, he may be furnished to answer them all: but I shall
now leave it to his impartial sober consideration, whether I have not proved
the truth of our Ministry and of the Reformed Churches, and the Validity of our
administrations, and of our Ordination it self?

CHAP. VIII. The greatness of their sin that are now laboring to persuade the
People of the Nullity of our Ministry, Churches and administrations.
Even those Protestant Churches that have Superintendents are unchurched by
them too, for want of a true Ordination. For their Superintendents were
commonly ordained by mere Presbyters, or settled only by the Princes power. So
in Denmark, when their seven Bishops were deposed, seven Presbyters were
Ordained Superintendents by Johan. Bugenhagius Pomeranus a Presbyter of
Wittenberge in the Presence of the King and Senate at the chief Church in
Haffnia: See Vit. Bugenhagii in Melch. Ad^m. vit. Germ. Theolog. page 315.
Sect. 1. HAving laid so fair a ground for my application, I think it my duty to
take the freedom to tell those Reverend persons that oppose us in this point,
the Reasons why I dare not join with them, and the guilt that I am persuaded
they heap upon their own souls; Wherein I protest it is not mine intent to make
them odious, or cast disgrace upon them (for I do with great reluctance obey my
Conscience in the performance of this task:) but my intent is, if it be the
will of God to give success so far to these endeavors, 1. To humble them for
their great and heinous sin and save them from it; 2. And to save the Church
from the divisions and disturbances that is already caused by them and their
opinion; 3. However to discharge my Conscience and tell them plainly, what
frightneth me from their way.

Sect. 2. And 1. It seems to me (upon the grounds before expressed) that those
men that would Nullify all the Protestant Ministry, Churches and
administrations, that have not Prelates, are guilty of schism, and are plain
Separatists. They depart from truly Catholic principles. That man has not the
just Principles and Spirit of a Catholic, that can on such a pretense as this
degrade or nullify so many Learned, Godly Ministers, and unchurch so many
excellent Churches of Christ; they make a plain Schism, and separate from us on
as weak grounds as the ancient Separatists did, whom yet they account an odious
generation. And the writings of Paget, Ball, Bradshaw, Hildersham, Bernard, and
the rest that defend our Ministry and Churches against the old Separatists,
will serve in the main to defend them against these new ones, which therefore I
refer the Reader to peruse. Many of the same Arguments are as forcible against
this adversary.

Sect. 3. 2. And by this means they condemn themselves that have spoken so much
against the Separatists, calling them Brownists, Schismatics, and the like;
and now take up the cause (in the name) that in them they so condemned. Will
they turn Schismatics that have spoken against Schismatics so much?

Sect. 4. 3. By this means also they exceedingly wrong the Lord Jesus Christ,
by seeking to rob him of his inheritance: by telling him that his Churches are
none of his Churches, and his Ministers are none of his Ministers, and his
Ordinances are not his Ordinances indeed. Let them first prove that Christ has
renounced these Ministers, or unchurched or denied these Churches, or given
them a bill of divorce: and then let them speak their pleasure. But till then
they were best take heed what they do, lest they have not the thanks from
Christ which they expect.

Sect. 5. 4. They go against the plain commands of Christ, and examples of his
servants: Christ himself bid concerning such as cast out Devils in his name,
but followed him not [ Forbid him not; for there is no man that shall do a
Miracle in my name that can lightly speak evil of me: for he that is not
against us is on our part, Mark 9.37, 38, 39. He liked not their humor that
would have the substance of so good a work forbidden, for want of a due
circumstance, mode, or accident. He commands us to Pray the Lord of the
Harvest to send Laborers into his Harvest, because the Harvest is great, and
the Laborers are few: And these men would have multitudes of Laborers thrust
out, in the Necessity of the Churches. Paul rejoiced that Christ was Preached,
even by them that did it in strife and envy, thinking to add affliction to his
bonds. But these men would silence them that preach in sincere compassion of
men's souls. Moses would not forbid Edlad and Medad prophesying, but wished that
all the Lords people were Prophets. While men do good and not harm, or more
good then harm in the Church, I should see very good grounds, yea and Necessity
for it, before I should silence them, or be guilty of silencing them.

Sect. 6. 5. They manifest a great deal of selfishness and pride, that dare
thus consent to the injury of Christ, and the Church and souls of men, because
they may not bear that Rule which is according to their principles and spirits.
Self-denial would do much to cure this.

Sect. 7. 6. And yet they do as self-seekers commonly do, even seek after
misery and destruction to themselves. While they look (its like) at the honor,
and forget the work, they plead for such a load and burden, as is enough to
break the backs of many, even for the doing of a work that is so far beyond
their strength, that its a mere impossiblity: How can one man do the works
which Scripture lays on a Bishop, for a hundred or two hundred Churches? and
for thousands that he never sees or hears of?

Sect. 8. 7. And above all, I admire how the heart of a considerate Christian,
can be guilty of so great cruelty to the souls of men, as these men would be,
if they had their will, in the practice of their principles? What if all the
Churches that have no Prelates were unchurched? the Ministers cast out as no
true Ministers, or the people all prevailed with to forsake them, what would be
done for the thousands of the poor ignorant careless souls that are among us?
when all that all of us can do is too little, what would be done if so many and
such were laid aside? How many thousands were like to be damned, for want of
the means, that according to the ordinary way of God, might have procured their
conversion and Salvation?

Sect. 9. If they say, that others as good as they should possess the places: I
answer, they speak not to men of another world, but to their neighbors, that
well know that there are few to be had of tolerable worth to possess one place
of very many, if all that they oppose were cast out or forsaken. Do we not know
who and what men they are that you have to supply the room with?

Sect. 10. If they say that more obedient men would soon spring up, or many of
these would change their minds, if they were forced to it; I answer, 1. So many
would be unchanged as would be a greater loss to the Church (if it were
deprived of them) then ever Prelacy was like to repair. 2. And what should
become of poor souls the while your young ones are a training up? 3. And in all
ages after, the Church must lose all those that should dissent from your
opinion.

Sect. 11. If you say that, It is not your desire to silence all these
Preachers that you disown: I answer, How can that stand with your doctrine or
your practice? Your Doctrine is, that they are Laymen, and no true Ministers,
nor to be heard and submitted to as Ministers, nor Sacraments to be received
from them. And would you not have them then cast out? 2. Your practice is to
dissuade the people (especially the Gentry that are near you) to separate and
disown them accordingly; and it is done in many places. And would you not cast
them out, whom you would have forsaken?

Sect. 12. If you say, It is your desire that they should forsake their error
and obey you, and so be continued and not cast out: I answer, 1. But that is
not in your power to accomplish, nor have you reason to expect it. They are
willing to know the mind of God as well as you, and perhaps search as
diligently, and pray as hard as you; and yet they think that its you that are
in the wrong; you see that for many years the Reformed Churches have continued
in this mind: And it appears that if they will not turn to your opinion, you
would have them all cast out or forsaken. Christ shall have no servants, nor
the Church any Pastors that will not be in this of your Opinion.

Sect. 13. 8. Hereby also you would run into the guilt of a more grievous
persecution, when you have read so much in Scripture against persecutors, and
when you have heard of and seen the judgments of God let out upon them. It is
an easy matter for any Persecutor to call him that he would cast out, a
Schismatic, or Heretic, but it is not so easy to answer him that has said,
He that offends one of these little ones, it were better for him, etc. God
will not take up with fair pretenses or false accusations against his servants,
to justify your persecution.

Sect. 14. 9. Yea you would involve the people of the Land, and of other
Nations, in the guilt of your persecution; drawing them to join with you, in
casting out the faithful laborers from the Vineyard of the Lord. This is the
good you would do the people, to involve their Souls into so deplorable a state
of guilt.

Sect. 15. If you say, It is you that are persecuted, as I read some of you do:
I answer. 1. If it be so, you are the more unexcusable before God and man, that
even under your persecution, will cherish, defend and propagate such a doctrine
of persecution, as strikes at no less then the necks of all the Reformed
Ministers, and Churches that are not Prelatical, at one blow. 2. For my part, I
have often protested against any that shall hinder an able Godly Minister from
the service of Christ and the Church, if he be but one that is likely to do
more good then harm. But I never took it to be persecution to cast out
Drunkards, scandalous, negligent, insufficient men, where better may be had to
supply the place: no more then it is persecution to suppress an abusive
Alehouse, or restrain a thief from making thievery his trade. 3. The present
Governors do profess their readiness to approve and encourage in the Ministry
any Godly, able, diligent m^n that will but live peaceably toward the
Commonwealth. And I am acquainted with none (as far as I remember) of this
quality, that have not liberty to preach and exercise the Ministerial Office.
4. But if you think you are persecuted, because you may not Rule your Brethren,
and persecute others, and take upon you the sole Government of all the Churches
in a County, or more, we had rather bear your accusations, then poor souls
should bear the pains of Hell, by your neglect and persecution: if you are
persecuted when your hands are held from striking; what are your Brethren, that
cannot by your good will have leave laboriously to serve God in a low estate,
as the servants of all, and the Lords of none?

Sect. 16. 10 By this means also you show your selves impenitent in regard of
all the former persecutions that some of you and your predecessors have been
guilty of. Abundance of most Learned Godly men have been silenced, suspended,
and some of them persecuted to banishment, and some to death. The world has
had too few such men for exemplary abilities, diligence and holiness, as
Hildersham, Bradshaw, Bay^, Nicols, Brightman, Dod, Ball, Paget, Hering,
Langley, Parker, Sandford, Cartwright, Bates, Ames, Rogers, and abundance more,
that some suffered unto death, and some were silenced, some imprisoned, etc.
for not conforming to the Ceremonies: besides Eliot, Hooker, Cotton, Norton,
Cobbet, Davenant, Parker, Noyes, and all the rest that were driven to New
England; and besides Ward and all that were driven into Holland: and besides
the thousands of private Christians that were driven away with them: And
besides all the later more extensive persecution of such as were called
Conformable Puritans, for not reading the Book for dancing on the Lords day,
and for not ceasing to preach Lectures, or on the Evening of the Lords day, and
such like: All this I call to your mind, as the sin that should be lamented,
and heavily lamented, and not be owned, and drawn or continued on your own
heads by impenitencie; and how do you repent, that would do the like, and take
your selves to be persecuted, if your hands are tied that you may not do it?
For my own part, I must profess, I had rather be a Gally-slave, or
Chimney-sweeper, yea or the basest vermin, than be a Bishop with all this
guilt upon my soul, (to continue,) how light soever many make of it, and how
impenitently soever they justify themselves.

Sect. 17. 11. Yea more, after all the warnings you have had, in the ways and
ends of your predecessors, it seems that you would yet incomparably outstrip
the most of them in persecution, if you had your way. For few of them did
attempt, or make any motion, for degrading or denying most of the Protestant
Ministers in Europe, or such a number as in England and Scotland are not
Ordained by Prelates, and to unchurch all their Churches. This is far higher
then these before you.

Sect. 18. 12. And take heed lest continuing in such a sin, after both
prohibitions and judgments, you should be found fighters against God. If those
that despise the Ministers of Christ, despise Christ himself, what shall we
think of them that do it themselves, and teach men so to do, and have pleasure
in them that do it? Its fearful to draw near that forlorn Condition of the
Jews, 1 These. 2.15, 16. [ -- and have persecuted us: and they please not God,
and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they
might be saved, to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them to
the uttermost.]

Sect. 19. 13. It is apparent that your doctrine and practice tends to let in
the old ejected rabble of drunken, ignorant, ungodly persons into the
Ministry. (And what can be more odious to the most Holy God!) For if once you
cast out all those that have not Prelatical Ordination, or all that are against
it, (especially after a former Ordination,) you must take in such as these, and
with Jeroboam, make Priests of the vilest of the people, or else the places
must be vacant: for we know that there are not able godly men to be had of your
mind to supply the vacant places.

Sect. 20. 14. Your doctrine does tend to harden malignant wicked men in their
enmity against a faithful Ministry: and we see this unhappy success of it by
experience. Our doctrine is so much against the inclination and interest of the
flesh, and men are by corrupted nature at such an enmity to God, and all that
is truly Spiritual and Holy, that we have as many enemies as hearers, till
Grace do either restrain or change them. But when they have such an irritation
and encouragement as this, and that from men that would be reputed as Godly as
the best; then no wonder if they are hardened in their malignity. When we would
instruct them and mind them of their everlasting state, and help to prepare
them for their latter end; they are told by Learned men, that we are no
Ministers but Laymen and Schismatics, and that it is their sin to own us, or
receive the Ordinances of Christ from us as Ministers: and so the poor people
turn their backs on us, and on the Assemblies and Ordinances of God; and being
taught by wise and learned men to disown us and despise us, they follow their
drunkenness, and worldliness, and ungodlyness with greater security, and with
less remorse: for now they have a defensative against the galling doctrine of
those precise Preachers, that would not let them alone in their sin: they were
wont to be disturbed at least by Sermons, and sometime they purposed to return,
and were in the way of Grace, and in some hope: but now they are taught by
Learned Godly Divines to keep out of hearing, they can go on and sin in peace.

Sect. 21. 15. By this means also you rob God of his public worship: People
are taught to turn their backs on it: you teach them that it is better that God
have no public Ministerial worship at all, in Prayer, Praises, Sacraments,
etc. then that he should have it from any but Prelatical Ministers! O sacred
doctrine! And if you had your wills for the silencing or ejecting of all that
are not Ordained by Prelates, how many hundred Church-doors must be shut up in
the Christian world, or worse!

Sect. 22. 16. By this means all Impiety would be cherished and let loose. When
once the mouths of Ministers were stopped, the mouth of the swearer, and
curser, and railer, and scorner at Godliness would be open: and so would be the
mouth of the drunkard and glutton. If all that can be done, be so much too
little, as experience tells us, what a case would the Nations be in, and how
would iniquity abound, if Ministers were cast out?

Sect. 23. 17. Yea it might endanger the Churches, by the introduction of
Infidelity or Heathenism it self. For nothing is more natural as it were, to
corrupted man: and if once the Ministry be taken down, and they have none, or
those that are next to none, Infidelity and Atheism will soon spring up: And it
will be a more dangerous sort of Infidelity, then is among many of the open
Infidels, because it would be palliated with the name of Christianity, and
leave men further from conviction, then some that never heard of Christ.

Sect. 24. 18. And it is a temptation to Infidelity and Contempt of the Church
and Ministry, when men shall ^ee that one party of Christians does thus
unchurch another. They will think that they may boldly say that of us, which we
say of the another; one party unchurcheth all the Papists: these that we are
now speaking to, do unchurch all the Protestant Churches that are not
Prelatical. The Papists unchurch all but themselves, and so among them, they
leave Christ but a very small part of his inheritance.

Sect. 25. 19. Yea I fear that by Consequence (and too near and pla^n a
Consequence) they dissolve the Catholic Church it self. And if it be so, let
them judge whether their doctrine subvert not Christianity? I use no violence
for the inference. If want of Prelatical Ordination do Null the Protestant
Ministry and Churches, then it must needs follow that far greater defects (and
more against the vitals of the Church) will do as much to unchurch the
Romanists, the Greeks, Armenians, Syrians, Ethiopians, Egyptians, etc. But
alas, how easy is it to prove that all these have far greater defects then the
Presbyterian Protestant Churches! and so the whole must fall together.

Sect. 26. 20. By all these means they join with the Quakers, and Seekers, and
Drunkards in opposing the same Ministry that they oppose. You are no true
Ministers of Jesus Christ, say the Quakers, Seekers, and other Sects; so also
say these that now we are speaking of: and if they preach their doctrine, and
side with them against the servants of Christ, let them be afraid lest they
partake of their Spirit and Reward.

Sect. 27. 21. Their doctrine and practice tends to grieve the hearts of the
most experienced gracious souls. Should all the Ministers be cast out that are
not Prelatical, and the places supplied, as they m^st be in their stead, with
such as can be had, O what a day would it be to honest humble souls, that were
wont to delight themselves in the public worship of God, and to find
instruction, and admonition, and consolation suitable to their necessities! If
now they should have all turned to what the Doctrine of these men portends,
their souls would be as in a Wilderness, and famine would consume them, and
they would lament as David in his banishment, and the Jews in their captivity,
to think of the days that once they saw.

Sect. 28. 22. And does it not imply a great deal of unholiness and enmity to
Reformation, when men dare thus boldly unchurch the most of the Reformed
Churches, and pass such desperate nullifying censures on the most holy, able,
painful Ministers of the Gospel? O how many of them are studying, and watching
and praying for their people day and night, and teaching them publicly and
from house to house, and that sometimes with tears, willing to spend and be
spent fo their Salvation, not seeking theirs but them; and when they have done
all, they are reproached as no Ministers of Christ, and the people taught to
disown them and forsake them. Is this a sign of a son of God, that is tender of
his honor and interest? or of a Holy Gracious soul?

Sect. 29. 23. At least by this means the hands of Ministers are weakened in
their work, and their difficulties increased, and their hearts grieved, because
of their peoples misery. O if they could have but a free unprejudiced hearing
with poor sinners some good might be done! But they will not hear us, nor come
near us, or speak to us: Especially when they are taught to forsake us by such
men. I would not be the man that should thus add burden and grief to the
faithful Ministers of Christ, upon such an account, for all the Bishoprics on
earth.

Sect. 30. 24 They also distract the minds of Christians, when they hear men
thus degrading and unchurching one another; so that weak persons are perplexed,
and know not what to think nor what Church or Religion to be of: yea it is well
if many be not tempted hereby to be of no Religion at all: when they hear them
condemning one another.

Sect. 31. 25. These show too much formality and Ceremoniousness, when they so
much prefer their own opinon, about a circumstance, Ceremony or Mode, before
the very being of the Churches and Ministry, and the substance of worship it
self, and the Salvation of men souls: As if it were better for Churches to be
no Churches, then not Prelatical Churches: or for souls to be condemned, then
to be saved by men that are not Prelatical. I speak not these things to
exasperate them (though I can expect no better:) but in the grief of my soul
for the sad condition that they would bring men into.

Sect. 32. 26. They lay a very dangerous snare, to draw Ministers to be guilty
of casting off the work of God. Flesh and blood would be glad of a fair
pretense for so much liberty and ease. O how fain would it be unyoakt, and
leave this labourious, displeasing kind of life! And when such as these shall
persuade them that they are no Ministers, they may do much to gratify the
flesh. For some will say, I am at a loss, between both ways; I cannot see the
lawfulness of Prelacy: and yet they speak so confidently of the nullity of all
other callings, that I will forbear till I am better resolved Another will say,
I find my self to be no Minister, and therefore free from the Obligation to
Ministerial Offices; and I will take heed how I come under that yoke again,
till I have fuller resolution. Another will scruple being twice Ordained, and
so will think it safer to surcease. At least they tempt men to such
resolutions, that would discharge them from so hard a work.

Sect. 33. 27. By this means also they make the breaches that are among us to
be uncurable, and proclaim themselves utterly unreconcileable to the most of
the Protestant Churches. For if they will have no reconciliation or communion
with them, till they shall confess themselves no Churches, and cast off all
their Ministers, they may as well say flatly, they will have none at all. For
no reasonable man can imagine or expect that ever the Churches should yield to
these terms. When they are declared no Ministers or Churches, you cannot then
have Communion with them as Ministers or Churches.

Sect. 34. 28. And it is easy to see how much they befriend and encourage the
Papists in all this. Is it not enough that you have vindicated the Pope from
being the Antichrist, but you must also openly proclaim that Rome is a true
Church, their Priests true Priests, their Ordinances and Administrations Valid,
but all the Protestant Churches that are not Prelatical are indeed no Churches,
their Ministers no Ministers, etc. Who would not then be a Papist rather then a
member of such a Protestant Church? How can you more plainly invite men to turn
Papists, unless you would do it expressly and with open face? Or how could you
gratify Papists more?

Sect. 35. 29. And truly if all these evils were accompl^shed, the Ministers
forsaken, iniquity let loose, the Ordinances profaned by unworthy men, etc. we
could expect nothing but that the judgments of God should be poured out upon
us for our Apostasy: and that temporal plagues involuntary should accompany the
spiritual plagues that we have chosen! and that God should even forsake our
land, and make us a by word and an hissing to the Nations: and that his
judgments should write as upon our doors, This is the people that wilfully
cast out the Ministers and mercies of the Lord.

Sect. 36. 30. And if all this were but accomplished, in the Conclusion I may
be bold to ask, what would the Devil himself have more, except our damnation it
self? If he were to plead his own cause, and to speak for himself, would he not
say the very same as these Learned, Reverend Disputers do? would he not say to
all our graceless people, Hear not these Ministers: they are no true Ministers:
Ioyn not in Communion with their Churches, they are no true Churches? I doubt
not but he would say many of the same words, if he had leave to speak. And
should not a man of any fear be afraid, and a man of any piety be unwilling to
plead the very cause of Satan, and say as he would have them say, by accusing
so many famous Churches and Ministers, as being none indeed, and drawing the
people so to censure them and forsake them; This is no work for a Minister of
Christ.

Sect. 37. Besides what is here said, I desire those whom it does concern, that
are afraid of plunging themselves into the depth of guilt and horror, that they
will impartially read over my first sheet for the Ministry, which further shows
the aggravations of their sin that are now the opposers and reproachers of
them. Consider them, and take heed.

Sect. 38. But again I desire these Brethren to believe, that as it is none of
the Prelatical Divines that I here speak of* but those that thus nullify our
Church and Ministry, while they own the Ministry and Church of Rome; so it is
none of my desire to provoke even these, or injure them in the least degree:
But I could not in this sad condition of the Church, but propound these heinous
evils to their consideration, to provoke them to try, and to take heed lest
they should incur so great a load of guilt, while they think they are pleading
for Order in the Church. How can there be any charity to the Church, or to our
brethren in us, if we can see them in such a gulf of sin as this, and yet say
nothing to them, for fear of provoking them to displeasure?

Sect. 39. And I think it necessary that all young men that are cast by their
arguings into temptations of falling with them into the same transgressions,
should have the case laid open to them, that they may see their danger; and not
by the accusations of Schism be led into far greater real Schism, with so many
other sins as these.

Sect. 40. Yet is it not my intent to justify any disorders or miscarriages
that any have been guilty of in opposition to the Prelacie. And if they can
prove that I have been guilty of any such thing my self, I shall accept of
their reproof, and condemn my sin as soon as I can discern it. Only I must
crave that the usual way of presumption, affirmation, or bare names of crimes
be not supposed sufficient for Conviction, without proof, and before the cause
is heard. And also I do profess that for all that I have here said against the
English Prelacy, and though I earnestly desire it may never be restored, yet
were I to live under it again, I would live peaceably and submissively, being
obedient, and persuading others to obedience, in all things lawful.

CHAP. IX. The sinfulness of despising or neglecting Ordination.
Sect. 1. IT is a thing so common and hardly avoided, for men in opposing one
extreme, to seem to countenance the other and for men that are convinced of the
evil of one, to run into the other as the only truth, that I think it necessary
here to endeavor the prevention of this miscarriage: and having said so much
against the Necessity of Prelatical Ordination, and in some cases of any, I
shall next show the greatness of their sin that despise or neglect Ordination
when it may be had.

Sect. 2. For the right understanding of what is to be said, I must again
remember you, that though it be not at the Ordainers will to deprive the Church
of Ministers, and it is none of the Question which they have to resolve,
Whether the Church shall have Ministers or none (and therefore there may be
Ministers without them, if they would hinder or refuse;) And though it be not
the Question which is put to their decision, What kind of Ministers the Church
shall have (for that Christ has determined of;) nor yet what Qualifications
are necessary to them, (for that also Christ has already set down;) yet is it
a great and weighty case that is put to the decision of Ordainers, that is,
Whether this man be thus qualified as Christ has described and required in
Ministers? and whether he be the fittest person (or fit at least) for the
particular charge to which he is called? And the right determining of this
question is a thing that the Churches welfare does very much do depend upon.

Sect. 3. And therefore it is the decision of this one Question, that
Ministers, People and Magistrates themselves, must all contribute their powers
and endeavors too in their several places. All that they have to do is but to
see that the Churches have fit men, even such as are qualified as God
requires. The People must choose fit men: or consent to them when chosen for
them: The Pastors must try them, and Approve them, and only them that are fit:
The Magistrate must encourage, assist and defend fit men, and forbid such as
are intolerably unfit, and not permit them to abuse the name and Ordinances of
Christ, and wrong his Church.

Sect. 4. This treble guard at the door of the Church does much tend to its
security, and preservation from the great evils that intruders may introduce.
And each party of the three has a special interest which should make them
careful of the business. 1. The people have great reason to have a hand in it,
and to be careful: For it is their Souls for which their Overseers watch, and
their Salvation that is concerned in it. And he that will not trust his Son
with any Tutor without due choice, nor his state with every Lawyer, nor his
body with every Physician, no nor his land, or cattle with every servant, but
will choose the best, has reason to know upon whose care he trusts his soul.
For though it may be some excuse, it will be no justification of them that lie
in sin and misery, to say, Our Teachers did mislead us. For if the blind lead
the blind, it is both that fall into the ditch: And as Cyprian says (with the
rest of his Colleagues,) Epist. 68. ( alias Li. 1. Ep. 4.) [ Propter quod plena
diligentia, exploratione sincer^ oportet eos ad Sacerdotium delegi, quos a Deo
constet audiri. Nec sibi plebs blandiatur, quasi immunis esse a contagio
delicti possit cum Sacerdote peccatore communicans, and ad injustum atque
illicitum praepositi sui Episcopatum consensum suum commodans, etc. -- ]
Besides the work of the Ministry is Teaching and Persuasive, and the success is
only on the Willing: and seeing we can do nothing on them for their good
against their wills, or without their own Consent, it is needful therefore
that some way or other their Consent should be procured, unless we would
frustrate all our labor, and miss our end. And also, a Church is a Society
Voluntarily conjoined for holy Worship and Living: and therefore it is contrary
to the nature of it, that they should have Pastors, or be members and not
Consent.

Sect. 5. And 2. For the Magistrate, there is great reason that he have his
part also in the work: For the honor of God must be his End; the Law of God
his chiefest Rule; ^he Church of Christ his chiefest subjects; and the work of
Christ, his chifest care and business. And seeing he Rules from Christ, and by
Christ, and for Christ, it is necessary that he take care of the quality, and
entrance, and carriage of Ministers, on whom Christ's work and honor does so
much depend.

Sect. 6. Yet is there here a special difference between the works of these
several parties in admitting men into the Ministry. The proper or necessary
work of the people, is but to discern and consent: Whether they be the first
Electors, is a matter of indifferency in it self, and is sometime fit, and
sometime unfit. The Magistrates work is not to Ordain Ministers; but carefully
to Oversee the Ordainers and the People, that they put in none but worthy men:
And if he find that they miscarry, he is not (ordinarily at least) to take the
work upon him, and Ordain fitter men himself: but to correct them to whom the
work belongs, for their maladministration, and restrain them from misdoing,
and urge them by due means to do it better, or cause them to be displaced that
are unreformable, that better may be chosen in their stead, that will be
faithful.

Sect. 7. And 3. The reason of the Ministers interest in the work, I shall more
at large lay down anon. And though there be a possibility of frequent
differences arising, through disagreement of these three several parties, yet
Christ would rather use this treble guard for caution, then for the preventing
of division, lay open his Church to the injury of intruders.

Sect. 8. And remember again, that it is not in the Power of Magistrates,
Ordainers, People and all to make a Minister of Christ, of a man that wants
the Essential Qualifications: Ex qu^vis ligno non fit Mercurius. He that is not
qualified for the works Essential to a Minister, cannot by Ordination be made a
Minister: No more then the bare stamp can make current money of a piece of
lead, when the Law makes the Metal Essential to current Coin: And no more then
a license will make him a Schoolmaster that cannot read: or him a Pilot, that
knows not how to Rule the ship: says Cyprian ubi sup. [Sed enim desiderio huic
vestro, non tam nostra concilia, quam Divina praecepta respondent; quibus
jampridem mandatur voce caelesti, and Dei lege prescribitur, quos and quales
oporteat deservire altari, and Sacrificia Divina celebrare. (Here he cites
Scripture) Quae cum praedicta and manifesta sint nobis praeceptis Divinis
necesse est obsequia nostra deserviant: Nec personam in ejusmodi rebus
accipere, aut aliquid cuiquam largiri potest humana indulgentia ubi intercedit,
and legem tribuit Divina praescriptio.] God gives not men authority to
contradict his Law, or to Ordain a man incapable of Ordination; nor introduce
the form, where the matter is undisposed for it.

Sect. 9. Perhaps some will ask, What should be done, in case that these three
parties disagree: If the Magistrate would have one man, and the Ordainers
another, and the people a third, or if two of them go one way, and the third
another? To which I answer, There are many things that must be taken into
consideration for the right resolving of the case. Either the persons nominated
are equal or unequal: Either they are all capable, or some of them incapable:
Either the welfare of that Church depends on the choice: or else it may be
somewhat an indifferent case. ^. If there be but one Minister to be had, and
the Dissenters would have none, then it is past controversy, that the
Dissenters are to be disobeyed. 2. If one party would have a Godly, Able
Minister, and the other would have an incapable, intolerable person, then it is
past doubt, that the party that is for the worthy person ought to prevail, and
it is his duty to insist upon it, and the duty of the rest to yield to him. 3.
If any will make a controversy in this case where there is none, and say, [
You say this man is fittest, and I say the other man (that is incapable) is
fittest, and who shall be judge?] The party that is in the right must hold to
their duty, till they are persecuted from it, and appeal to God, who will judge
in equity. If a blind man say to a man that has his eyesight [ You say that
you see; and I say that I see; you say that it is day, and I say it is night;
who shall be believed?] It is not such words that will warrant a wise man to
renounce his eyesight. God will judge him to be in the right that is so
indeed. 4. But if really the several parties are for several Ministers that are
all tolerable, yet if there be any notable difference in their fitness, the
parties that are for the less fit, should yield to the party that is for the
more fit. If you say, They discern it not, I answer, that is their sin, which
will not justify them in a further sin, or excuse them from a duty. They might
discern, if they were not culpable, in so great a difference, at least whom
they are bound to take for the most fit. 5. But if there be no great
inequality, then these Rules should be observed. 1. The Magistrate should not
deny the people their Liberty of choice, nor the Ministers their Liberty in
Approbation or dissallowance: but only Oversee them all, that they faithfully
do their several duties. 2. The Ministers should not hinder the people from
their Choice, where both parties nominated are fit, but content themselves with
their proper work. 3. The People should not insist upon their choice, if the
Ministers to whom it belongs, do disallow the person, and take him to be
unmeet, and refuse to ordain him: because obedience in such cases is their
duty, and a duty that cannot tend to their loss: at least not to so much hurt
to them as the contrary irregular course may prove to the Church. 4. If
Magistrates or Ministers would make the first choice, and urge the people to
consent if the person be fit, it is the safest way for the people to obey and
consent, though it were better for the Rulers to give them more freedom in the
choice. 5. If a people be generally ignorant (in too great a measure,) and
addicted to unworthy men, or apt to divisions, etc. it is their safest way to
desire the Ministers to choose for them. Or if they will not do so, it is the
safest way for the Ministers to offer them a man: Yet so that Magistrates and
Ministers should expect their Consent, and not set any man over them as their
Pastor without consent some way procured. 6. But if they are no Church, but
unc^lled persons, and it be not a Pastor of a Church, but a Preacher to Convert
men, and sit them for a Church State, that is to be settled, then may the
Magistrate settle such a man, and force the people to hear him preach. 7. If
Necessity require not the contrary, the matter should be delayed, till
Magistrate* Ministers and people do agree. 8. The chosen Pastors should decide
the case themselves: They should not accept the place, and Consent, till all be
agreed, unless there be a Necessity. And if there be, then the greatest
necessity should most sway. If the Magistrate resist, he will forcibly
prohibit and hinder you from preaching. If the Ministers resist, they will
deny you the right hand of fellowship. If the people resist, they will not hear
nor join in worship nor obey. All these if possible should be avoided. The
Peoples consent (to a Pastor of a Church) is of Necessity. We cannot do the
work of Pastors without it. And therefore neither Magistrates or Ministers can
drive us on where this is wanting (unless it be only to seek it, or only to do
the work of Preachers to men without.) Unity and Communion with
Neighbour-Churches is so much to be desired, that nothing but Necessity can
warrant us to go on without it. And the Magistrates restraint is so great a
hinderance, that nothing but Necessity can warrant us to cast our selves upon
it. And therefore out of cases of Necessity, the Ministers nominated should not
consent till all agree: But in cases of Necessity, the souls of men and the
worship of God, must not be disregarded or neglected, though neighbour-Churches
or Ministers disown us, or Magistrates persecute us.

Sect. 10. Remember these Distinctions for the understanding of what follows.
1. Its one thing to be Approved, and another thing to be solemnly Invested.
Ordination consists of these two parts. 2. We must difference between
Ordination, by one Pastor, and by many. 3. Between Ordination by Pastors of the
same Church, or of many Churches. 4. Between Ordination by sufficient or
insufficient Ministers. 5. And between Ordnation by Neighbor Ministers or
Strangers. 6. And between Ordination by Divided Ministers, and Concordant. On
these premised I propose as follows.

Sect. 11. Prop. 1. Approbation by Ministers is ordinarily to be sought and
received by all that will enter into the Ministry. I gave some Reasons before,
Chap. 2. Which here I shall enlarge, by which the sinfulness of Neglecting this
Approbation may appear.

Sect. 12. Reas. 1. It is the way that God has appointed us in Holy Scripture,
and therefore to be followed. They that Ordained Elders or Bishops in the
Churches, did more then Approve them, but could do no less, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Timothy was ordained by the Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy
3.15. Paul gives Timothy the description of Bishops and Deacons, that he may
know how he ought to behave himself in the house of God, which is the Church,
etc. That is, that he may know whom to Approve of or Ordain, Tit. 1.5. Titus
was to Ordain Elders in every City, Acts 13.1, 2, 3. The Prophets and Teachers
in the Church at Antioch did separate Barnabas and Paul to the work, with
Fasting and Prayer, and imposition of hands. It was the Apostles that Ordained
them Elders in every Church, Acts 14.23. Suppose it must be read [by Suffrages]
as many would have it, that proves no more but that the People did consent:
But still it is Paul and Barnabas that Ordained them Elders, though with the
peoples suffrages, and it is they that are said to fast and pray in the next
words. Act. 6.3. Expressly shows that the People chose the Deacons, and the
Apostles ordained them [Look ye out among your selves seven men of honest
report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom whom we may appoint over this
business. But I shall cut short this part of my task, because so much is said
of it already by many that have written for Ordination, to whom I shall refer
you.

Sect. 13. Reas. 2. If there be not a standing regular way for Trying and
Approving such as enter into the Ministry, then men will be left to be their
own judges, and if they can but get the consent of any Congregation, will
presenty be Pastors. But this course would tend to the ruin or confusion of
the Church, as I shall manifest by evidence.

Sect. 14. 1. If all men may enter into the Ministry that will, upon their own
persuasion that they are fit, the most proud, self-conceited, worthless men
will be the readiest to go, and if they can get hearers, will most abound in
the Church; and the people will quickly have heaps of Teachers. For we all know
that many of the Ignorant are least acquainted with their ignorance: and
commonly the Proud have the highest thoughts of themselves, and think none so
fit to Teach and Rule as they. And what could be more to the shame and hazard
of the Church, then to have it taught and guided by such ignorant unworthy men?

Sect. 15. 2. Moreover, Humble men are so conscious of their weakness, and
sensible of the burden and greatness of the work, that they think themselves
unworthy, and therefore would draw back; and so by their forbearance would give
way to the foresaid proud intruders. And thus the Church would soon be
darkened, defiled, and brought low, if all men were their own judges.

Sect. 16. 3. Moreover, it is the common disposition of Erroneous and Heretical
persons to be exceeding zealous for the propagating of their errors, and
bringing as many as is possible to their mind. So that if all be left to
themselves, the most Heretical will run first, and carry their filth into the
house of God, and seduce and undo men instead of saving them.

Sect. 17. 4. By this means also the Covetous and sordid worldlings will crowd
in: and men will do by Preaching, as they do by Ale-selling, even make it their
last Trade when others fail: and he that breaks in any other Trade, if he have
but any volubility of speech, will presently turn Priest; till the Office and
Ordinances of God seem vile, and be abhorred by the people. This must be the
Consequent if all be left to their own judgment.

Sect. 18. 5. And it is too known a case, that the people will bid such persons
welcome, and so they will make a match. The erroneous and giddy party will have
such as are suitable to them. And the Covetous party will have him that will do
their work best cheap: if they will preach for nothing or for little, he shall
be a man for them, though he would lead them to perdition. If it be poison,
they'^ take it, if it cost them nothing. And many there be that will have their
own kindred or friends to make Priests of; and all that they have interest in
must join with them on the account of friendship. And the childish injudicious
sort of Christians will follow them that have the smoothest tongues, or best
opportunities and advantages to prevail with them. And so they will be tossed
up and down, and carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine, according to
the cunning slight and subtilty of men, by which they lie in wait to deceive.]
Ephesians. 4.14. And they will be carried about with diverse and strange doctrines,
Heb. 13.9.

Sect. 19. Reas. 3. And when the Ministry is thus corrupted (by making every
man judge of his own fitness) the Church will be corrupted, and degenerate into
a common state, and cease to be a Church (if Reformation do not stop the
gangrene.) For it commonly goes with the Church according to the quality of
the Ministry. An ignorant Ministry, and an ignorant people; an erroneous
Ministry, and an erring people; a scandalous Ministry, and a scandalous
people commonly go together. Like Priest, like people is the common case.

Sect. 20. Reas. 4. And by this means Christianity it self will be dishonored,
and seem to be but a common religion, and so but a deceit, to the great
dishonor of Jesus Christ; for the world will judge of him and his cause, by
the lives of them that teach it and profess it.

Sect. 21. Reas. 5. And by this means God will be provoked to depart from us,
and be avenged on us for our dishonouring him. If he would spew out of his
mouth lukewarm Laodicea, what would he do to such degenerate societies? If most
of the seven Churches, Rev. 2 and 3. had their warnings or threatenings for
smaller faults, what would such corruptions bring us to, but even to be plagued
or forsaken by the Lord?

Sect. 22. Reas. 6. If you should be men of ability and fitness for the work
your selves, that enter without Approbation and Ordination, yet others might be
encouraged by your example that are unfit: and if you once thus set open the
door, you know not how to keep out woolves and swine: all the persons before
described will take the opportunity, and say, Why may not we enter unordained,
as well as such and such?

Sect. 23. Reas. 7. By this means also you will leave many sober godly persons
unsatisfied in your Ministry, as not knowing whether they may own you as
Ministers or not: and how much you should do to avoid such offense, me thinks
you might perceive.

Sect. 24. Reas. 8. By this course also you will walk contrary to the Catholic
Church of Christ, and that in a cause where you cannot reasonably pretend any
necessity of so doing. Ever since Christ had a Ministry on earth, the constant
(ordinary) way of their admittance has been by Ministerial Ordination. If any
man despise this, and be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches
of God. Is it a design beseeming an humble man, a Christian, a sober man, to
find out a new way of making Ministers now in the end of the world? as if all
the Ministers from the Apostles days till now, had come in at a wrong door,
and wanted a true Calling? This is too near the making a New Ministry, and
that is too near the Making of a new Church: and that is too near the feigning of
a new Christ. The Church has many promises, that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it; that Christ will be with her Ministers to the end of the
world, they being given by him for the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying
of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, etc. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. And
therefore we must not easily believe, that the Ministry of the universal Church
have been falsely called or admitted until now, and you have found out a better
way at last.

Sect. 25. Reas. 9. You would bring that irrational confusion into the Church
of the living God, which is not to be introduced into the basest Commonwealth
or society in the world. You have more wit then to let all men play the
Physicians: but will first have them tried by men of their own Profession: or
else the lives of many may pay for your Licentiousness. You will have
Schoolmasters approved by them that have Learning, before you will commit your
children to their trust. And shall every man be a Teacher and Ruler that will
in the Church of Christ, as if it were the only confused contemptible Society
in the world? God is not the God of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the
Churches, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.33.

Sect. 26. Reas. 10. Do but consider how high, and holy, and honorable a
Calling it is to be a Minister of the Gospel* and then it will appear, that it
is horrible Profanation of Holy things, to suffer all that will, to invade it.
They are to be the Ambassadors of Christ, and speak as in his Name, and to be
Stewards of his Mysteries and Household, and to stand near him, as at his altar,
and to dispense his treasure, to magnify and praise his Name, and to
administer his holy Sacraments, etc. And should all that will, be taught to
usurp or invade such an holy Calling?

Sect. 27. Reas. 11. Consider also, how great a Trust it is that is committed
to all that are Ministers of the Gospel. The souls of men are committed to
them: the Mysteries of God, the precious promises and glad tidings of Salvation
are committed to them: the order and affairs of the house of God are committed
to them: those that are Christ's Sheep, his Jewels, his Friends, his Brethren,
his Spouse, his Members, and as the apple of his eye, are committed to them.
And is it suitable to so great a Trust, that men untryed, unapproved, that do
but think well of themselves, and their own doings, shall at their pleasure
take so great a charge? What man of honor and wit among you, will give every
man leave to be your Steward, that has but folly and pride enough to think
himself fit for it? and will not rather choose your Stewards your selves?

Sect. 28. Reas. 12. And is it not evidently notorious Cruelty to the souls of
men, to cast them upon every unworthy fellow that will but be impudent enough
to undertake the charge? Do you set so light by men's everlasting Joy or
Torment? You would not so contemptuously cast away men's lives: and will you so
contemptuously cast away their souls? And what a contempt is it of the blood of
Christ, that the purchase made by it should be thus neglected? You will look up
your money, and look to your goods, and take care of every groat of your
estates: and shall the souls of men, and the blood and the inheritance of
Christ be no more regarded? This is unjust.

Sect. 29. Reas. 13. Yea and it is a way of Cruelty to the men themselves, if
every man that is sick of self-conceit, or Pride, shall have leave to exercise
it, and run themselves into unspeakable guilt, by undertaking such works as
they are no way able for: Alas, have not these poor sinners trangressions
enough of their own already, but you must encourage them to draw the blood of
souls, and the sins of so many others upon their heads? O what a burden do they
take upon them* and what a dreadful danger do they run into? Had you faith and
any pity of souls, you would rather study to do your best, to prevent men's
destroying of themselves and others, and falling altogether into the ditch. I
know you will say, that you are guilty of no such thing: it is the saving, and not
the destroying of souls that you intend by being Ministers unordained: but your
intentions will not justify your cruel and destructive practices. Its plain
that you teach men by your doctrine and example to be their own judges of their
fitness for the Ministry, or to neglect the judgment of the Pastors of the
Church: and what better can this course produce?

Sect. 30. Reas. 14. Either you are fit for the Ministry, or unfit: if fit; why
should you be afraid of trial? He that does evil comes not to the light: it is
a sign of an ill cause that cannot endure a just trial. But if you are unfit,
is it not better to forbear?

Sect. 31. Reas. 15. Your very refusing of a trial does give the people
sufficient reason to question your call and fitness for the work, or your
humility at least: for humble men think meanlyer of themselves, then to judge
themselves meet for such great employments, when they have not the
encouragement of men that are more fit to judge: the good men of old were wont
to run away from a Bishopric, or Pastoral dignity in the sense of their
unfitness: so that the Bishops were fain to seek and send after them: and
Gregory of Neocesarea was Ordained by Phedimus when he was three days journey
from him, even against his will; and then charged by him in the name of Christ
to yield unto the Call. And what then shall we think of that sort of men, that
think themselves so good and worthy, as to run on their own heads, without due
approbation?

Sect. 32. Reas. 16. It is natural for man to be Partial in his own Cause:
insomuch as no law or equity will allow men to be witnesses or judges for
themselves in the smallest civil controversy: and shall they be judges of
themselves in so great a cause? Are not others more impartial?

Sect. 33. Reas. 17. You cast away your own encouragement and support, and
create vexation to your own Consciences. There are so many difficulties to be
conquered in this work, and so many sufferings to be endured, that if a man be
not clear that his Call was good, he is like to be left to great discomforts.
We have exceedi^g great labors to undergo: we have abundance of enemies and
impediments to strive with: we have many a scorn and unthankful return, and
perhaps imprisonment or death to undergo: we are our selves, alas, too weak and
insufficient, and must depend on God for daily helps. And with what confidence
can you expect his help, if you Call your selves, and enter not by his
Approbation? And how will you ever go through all this, and suffer so much with
Christian comfort, when you cannot say that you are sent of God, and have
nothing but your own overweening conceits of it? Could you but say, [I entered
by the way that God appointed, and was not my own Judge] you might have some
more boldness and confidence of Gods assistance.

Sect. 34. Reas. 18. The most that plead against Ordination, that are worthy
the name of sober Christians, do plead but against the Necessity of it, and
cannot deny it to be lawful: and should not all the reasons before mentioned
prevail with you to submit to a lawful thing?

Sect. 35. Reas. 19. And if it be thus undeniable, that men must not be their
own Judges, it will soon appear that Ministers are the standing Judges of men's
fitness for this work, because no other Judges are appointed to it, or capable
of it. It must be an ordinary stated way of Approbation, that can give us
satisfaction: for if God had left the case at large, for men to go to whom they
will, it would be all one as to go to none at all, but to be Judges themselves.
And if a standing way of Approbation must be acknowledged, let us enquire where
it is to be found: and look which way you will, and you shall find no other,
but this which is by men of the same Calling with them that are to be Ordained.

Sect. 36. For 1. Magistrates it cannot be: none that I know pretend to that.
Magistrates in most of the world are Infi^els: and therefore cannot there be
Ordainers: and none of them has the work committed to them by Christ, nor do
any that I know, assume it to themselves.

Sect. 37. And 2. The people it cannot be: For 1. No man can show a word of
precept or example for it; nor prove that ever God did give them such a power:
Consent or Election is all that can be pretended to by them. 2. It is a work
that they are commonly unable for: the Scholars may as well Try and Approve of
their Schoolmaster. We confess the People must by a judgment of discretion,
endeavor to find out the best they can: but if they had not helps, and if they
were also called to a judgment of direction and decision, what work would they
make? Do the Major vote, (or the Minor either) in most or almost any
Congregations, understand whether a man know the meaning of the Scripture, or
to be able to defend the truth, or whether he be Heretical or found in the
faith, etc.? God would not set men on a work that is thus beyond the line of
their Capacity. It is a thing not to be imagined, that they that call us to be
their Teachers, should already be common^y able to Judge whether we are sound
or unsound, and able to teach them or not: for this imports that they know
already as much as we (for wherein they are ignorant, they cannot judge of us.)
And if they know as much already, what need have they of our Teaching? 3. And
it is contrary to the subjection and inferiority of their Relation: they that
are commanded to learn and obey us as their Guides, may yet consent or choose
their Teachers, when Approved, or to be Approved by abler men; but they cannot
be imagined to be appointed by God to Ordain their own Overseers: this is a
most ungrounded fiction.

Sect. 38. Reas. 20. On the other side, it is the Pastors of the Church, and
only they that are fitted to be the standing Approvers or Ordainers, as will
appear in these particulars. 1. It is they that are justly supposed to be of
competent abilities to try a Minister. If here and there a Gentleman or other
person be able, that is a rarity, and therefore no standing way for the Church
in Ordaining Ministers can be gathered thence. 2. Ministers are doubly devoted
to God and to his Church: and therefore should have, and ordinarily have, the
tenderest care of the Church. 3. It is justly supposed that Ministers are
ordinarily the most pious and conscionable men that are to be had (or else they
are too blame that choose them to be Ministers) And therefore they may be
expected to be most faithful in the work. 4. And they are fewer, and have
lesser perverting interests, and therefore are like to be less divided in such
determinations, then the people that are so many, and of so many interests and
minds, that if it were not for the Moderation of Magistrates and Ministers,
they would almost everywhere be all to pieces, one being for one man, and
another for another; some for one of this mind and way, and some for one of
another; some for the Orthodox, and some for the Heretical. 5. Lastly, it is
Ministers, whose Office God has tied Ordination to, and who have time to wait
upon it as their duty: so that lay all this together, and I think the first
Proposition is proved, for the Necessity (ordinarily) of the Pastors
Approbation, and the sinfulness of neglecting it.

Sect. 39. Prop. 2. It is only the Pastors of one particular Church, but also
the Pastors of Neighbor chu^ches that hold Communion with that Church, that
should regularly Approve or Ordain Ministers: though I deny not but he may be a
Minister that has no Ordination but by the Pastors of a particular Church, yet
I conceive that this is not a regular course.

Sect. 40. My reasons are these. 1. Because if it be ordinarily tied to the
Pastors of the same Church only to Ordain, then it will be done ordinarily
without any Pastors at all. For most particular Churches in the world have but
one Pastor: and when he is dead, there is none left to Ordain; and therefore
others or none must do it in such cases.

Sect. 41. And 2. If there be one left, and all the power be left in him, the
welfare of the Church would run too great an hazard: if every man shall be
Ordained a Minister that can procure the Approbation of a single Pastor, the
Church will be subjected to most of the lamentable miseries before mentioned,
supposing that men were judges for themselves.

Sect. 42. And 3. We find in Scripture, that it was not the way appointed by
the Holy Ghost, for single Pastors to Ordain. The forecited Texts and examples
are a sufficient proof.

Sect. 43. If any say, that the Ruling Elders may concur, I answer. Though I
make no great matter of it, nor would not raise a contention about it, yet I
must say, that I never yet saw any satisfactory proof, that ever God did
institute such Elders as this Objection means, in the Church: that is, 1.
Such as are not Ordained, but come in by mere Election 2. And such as have the
Power of Discipline and Oversight without Authority to preach or administer the
Sacraments. I think these are but humane creatures; though I doubt not but
there may be such as Actually shall forbear preaching and administration of the
Sacraments, when some of their colleagus are fitter for it.

Sect. 44. But 2. If such an Office can be proved, I despair of seeing it
proved from Scripture, that they have authority to Ordain. 3. And how can they
have Authority, when most of them have not Ability? And I think it is supposed
that they have not Ability to Preach, in them that deny them Authority: and if
they want Ability to Preach, its two to one but they want Ability to Try and
Approve of Preachers. 4. And how come they to have Power to Ordain others, that
are not Ordained themselves, but are admitted upon bare Election? 5. And this
course would prostitute the Churches to unworthy men, as aforesaid.

Sect. 45. And 4. It is not a contemptible Consideration, that the chief Pastor
of every particular Church, has ever since the second Century at least, been
Ordained by the Pastors of other Churches. And how it was before, we have but
very defective Evidence, except so much as is left us in the Holy Scriptures,
of which we have spoke before.

Sect 46. And 5. The Church of Christ is a Chain of many links: a Society
united in Christ the Head, consisting as a Republike of many Corporations, or
as an Ac^demy of many Colleges: and a greater Union and Communion is requisite
among them, then among the parts of any other Society in the world. And
therefore seeing it is the duty of Neighbor Pastors and Churches, according to
their Capacity to hold Communion with that particular Church and its Pastors,
it seems reasonable, that they have some antecedent Cognizance and Approbation
of the persons that they are to hold Communion with.

Sect. 47. And 6. It is considerable also, that whoever is according to Christ's
institution Ordained a Minister of a particular Church, is withal (if not
before) Ordained a Minister simply; that is, one that may as a separated
Messenger of Christ, both preach for the Conversion of those without, and
gather Churches where there are none, and pro tempore do the Office of a
Minister, to any part of the Catholic Church, where he comes and has a Call.
And therefore as he is simply a Minister, and the Unconverted world, or the
Universal Church are the Objects of his Ministry, the Pastors or Members of
that particular Church where he is settled, have no more to do in Ordaining him
then any other. As a Corporation may choose their own Physician* Schoolmaster,
etc. but cannot do any more then other men, in Licensing a man to be in general
a Physician, Schoolmaster, etc. So may a Church choose who shall be their
Teacher, but not who shall be simply a Teacher or Minister of Christ, any more
then an other Church may do, that is further from him.

Sect. 48. And 7. It is also considerable, that it is the safest and most
satisfactory way to the Church and to the Minister himself, to have the
Approbation of many. And it may leave more scruple concerning our Call, when
one or two or a particular Church only do Approve us.

Sect. 49. And 8. It is granted in their writings by those that are for
Ordination by a particular Church only, that the Concurrence of more is Lawful:
and if Lawful, I leave it to Consideration, whether all the forementioned
accidents make it not so far convenient, as to be ordinarily a plain duty, and
to be preferred where it may be had.

Sect. 50. Yet do I not plead for Ordination by Neighbor Pasto^^, as from a
Governing Authority over that particular Church: but as from an interest in the
Church Universal, and all its Officers within their reach, and from an interest
of Communion with Neighbor Churches.

Sect. 51. And it is observable in Scripture, that the Itinerant Ministers,
that were fixed and appropriated to no particular Church, for continuance,
(such as the Apostles and Evangelists were, and Titus, Timothy, and such
others) had a Principal hand in the work of Ordination wherever they came. It
was they that Ordained Elders in every City, in every Church.

Sect. 52. Prop. 3. If any shall cull out two or three or more of the weakest
injudicious, facile Ministers, and procure them to Ordain him, his course is
irregular, and his call unsatisfactory, though the formal part be obtained to
the full. For it is not for mere formality, but to satsfie the person called,
and the Church, and to secure the Ministry and sacred works and souls of men,
from injury by Usurpers, that God has appointed the way of Ordination: And
therefore it is fraud, and not obedience, for any man so to use it, as to cheat
himsef and the Church with a formality, and frustrate the Ordinance, and miss
its ends.

Sect. 53. Prop. 4. If any man, avoiding the Orthodox and Unanimous Ministry,
shall apply himself for Ordination to some divided schismatical or heretical
persons, that will Approve him, and Ordain him, when the others would reject
him, this also, as the former, is fraud and self-deceit, and not obedience;
upon the last mentioned grounds. It is the basest treacherous kind of sinning,
to turn Gods Ordinances against himself, and to sin under the shelter and
pretense of an institution. By using the means in opposition to its end, they
make it no means, and use it not as a means at all. Though Pastors must Ordain,
yet is it not all kind of Pastors Ordination that should satisfy an honest
meaning man; but that which has the qualifications suited to the Rule and end.

Sect. 54. In such cases of unjust entrance, if the People sinfully comply, and
the man have possession, it may be the duty of some particular persons, that
cannot help it, (having done their own parts in disowning it) to submit, and
not therefore to separate from the Church, except in desperate extraordinary
cases (not now to be enumerated) And all the administrations of such a man
shall be not only Valid to the innocent, but without any scruple of conscience
may be used and received, with expectation of a promised blessing.

Sect. 55. But yet quoad debitum it is the Churches duty (except in Cases of
Necessity) to disown such intruders, and to suspect and suspend obedience, to
those that indirectly enter, (by a few ignorant, or schismatical Ordainers,
refusing the trial of the unanimous abler Orthodox Ministry) till they have
either persuaded the man to procure their Approbation, or have themselves
sought the Judgment of the said United Ministers concerning him. And seeing
all the Churches of Christ should be linkt and jointed together, and hold
communion and correspondency, according to their capacities, the Members of a
particular Church are bound in reason, and to those ends, to advise in such
suspicious cases with neighbor Churches, and not to receive a Pastor that
comes in by way of Discord, or that neglects or refuses the concordant way.
For he that enters in a divisive way, is like to govern them accordingly, and
still to shun the Communion of the Brethren.

Sect. 56. This Cyprian fully shows in the forementioned Ep. 68. p, 201.
persuading the people to shun the unworthy though they were Ordained by
Bishops, adding [ Ordinari nonnunquam indignos, non secundum Dei voluntatem,
sed secundum humanam praesumptionem; and haec Deo displicere, quae non veniant
ex legitima and justa Ordinatione, Deus ipse manifestat, etc. -- ] Necessity
may justify some things that otherwise would be irregularities: but when [ Per
urbes singulas (that is, in every Church) Ordinati sint Episcopi, in aetate
antiqui, in fide integri, in pressura probati, in persecutione proscripti, ille
super ^os creare alios pseudo-Episcopos audeat] this is a fact that the poeple
should disown. And [ Qui neque unitatem spiritus nec conjunctionem pacis
observat, and se ab Ecclesiae vinculo, atque a Sacerd^tum collegio separat,
Episcopo nec potestatem potest habere, nec honorem, qui Episcopatus nec
unitatem voluit tenere, nec pacem. Cyprian Epist. 52. ad Antonian.

Sect. 57. Prop. 5. Solemn Investiture is the last part of Ordination, by which
the man that by consent of the people and himself, and by the Pastors
Approbation, had received from Christ a Right to the Power and Honor, and
Privileges, and an Obligation to the Duties of the Office, is solemnly
introduced and put in Possession of the place.

Sect. 58. Though in some cases a man may exercise the Ministry upon the
foresaid Approbation and Election (which are most necessary) without this
solemn investiture, yet is it ordinarily a duty, and not to be neglected: And
the people should require the performance of it: I need not stand upon the
Proof: for it is proved before by what was said for Approbation, seeing they
have ever gone together. Though fundamentally he be a Christian that has
entered Covenant with Christ: yet before the Church he is Visibly no Christian
that has not been Baptized, or at least made open Profession of that Covenant.
Though fundamentally they are Husband and Wife that are contracted, or knit
together by private Consent; yet in foro Civili, in Law sense, and before men,
they must be solemnly married, or else they are judged fornicators. And should
any fantastical persons seek to cast by this public investiture or solemn
Marriage, as unnecessary, he would but let in common Whoredoms: The solemnity
or publication in such Cases is of great Necessity. And its much conducible to
the greater obligation of Pastor and people to be solemnly engaged together:
and to have solemn Prayer for Gods blessing, tends to their prosperity.

Sect. 59. When men are Ordained only to the Ministry in General, it may be
done in one place as well as another, (that is otherwise convenient.) But if
they are also Ordained to be Pastors of a Particular Church, it is the fittest
way by far, that they be Ordained in the face of the Church, that the people
and they may be mutually engaged, etc. Though yet this be not absolutely
necessary.

Sect. 60. And thus I have dispacht, with the brevity intended, this weighty
point, concluding with these two requests to my Brethren that shall peruse it:
1. That before they let out their displeasure against me for contradicting any
of their conceits, they would humbly, impartially, and with modest
self-suspicion, both study and pray over what they read, and not temerariously
rush into the battle as pre-engaged men. 2. That they will always keep the
faith and charity, and self-denial and tenderness of Christians upon their
hearts, and the great Ends and Interest of Christ and Christianity before their
eyes; and take heed how they venture upon any controverted points or practice,
as a Means that certainly contradicts the Spirit of Christianity, and the
great Ends (the Churches Unity, Peace and Holiness, etc.] which all true means
are appointed, and must be used to attain. And whereunto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things, Phil. 3.16.
Remembering that in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according to this Rule,
Peace be on them and Mercy, and on the Israel of God, Gal. 6.15, 16.

Finitur, May 19. 1658.
The Third DISPUTATION: FOR Such sorts of Episcopacy, or Disparity in Exercise
of the Ministry, as is Desirable or Conducible to the Peace and Reformation of
the Churches. By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1658.

AN Episcopacy Desirable for the Reformation, Preservation, and Peace of the
Churches.
CHAP. I. Of General unfixed Bishops or Ministers.
. 1. IT is but delusory dealing of them that make the world believe that the
question between the Prelatical Divines and the rest of the Reformed Churches,
is, Whether the Church should be Governed by Bishops? This is a thing that is
commonly granted: But the controversy is about the Species of Episcopacy: Not
whether Bishops, but what sort of Bishops should be the ordinary Governors of
the Church of Christ?

. 2. And therefore it is also very immethodical and unsatisfactory of most that
ever I read for Episcopacy, that plead only for Episcopacy in General, but
never once define that sort of Episcopacy which they plead for, but go away
with it as smoothly when the question is unstated, as if they understood
themselves, and others were capable of understanding them; and so they lose
their Learned labors.

. 3. I have already in the first Disputation told you among ten several sorts
of Episcopacy, which they be that I think desirable, and which I judge
tolerable, aad which intolerable. And I have there already given you the
Reasons why I judge such a general unfixed Bishop to be of standing use to the
Church and world, as here we are speaking of: and therefore I shall forbear
here the repeating of what is said already.

. 4. That the world and Church should still have such a General Itinerant
unfixed Ministry, as that was of the Apostles, Evangelists and others, having
there already proved, I have nothing to do more but to show the use of it, and
to answer the objections that some very learned Reverend Divines have used
against it.

. 5. The principal use of a general Ministry, is for the converting of the
unconverted world, and Baptizing them when converted, and Congregating their
Converts into Church order, and settling them under a fixed Government. And the
next use of them is, to have a Care, according to the extent of their capacity
and opporunities, of the Churches which they have thus Congregated and settled,
and which are settled by other Ministers.

. 6. Let it be remembered that we are not now disputing of the Name, but of the
Thing: It is not whether such an Officer of Christ be to be called an Apostle
or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or a Bishop, or a Presbyter: But whether
unfixed general Ministers, to gather Churches and settle them, and take the
care of many, without a special Pastoral charge of any one above the rest, were
appointed by Christ for continuance in his Church: This is it that I affirm,
and have already proved.

. 7. Nor yet is it any of our Question, Whether the difference between these
general unfixed Ministers and ordinary fixed Presbyters, be in point of
Authority or of exercise only. Whether they are two distinct Species of the
Ministry, or but one of the same Office in Specie, variously exercised: I have
given in my thoughts of this before, so far as I can yet reach: But if it be
granted that some should ordinarily exercise their office generally and
ambulatorily over many Churches, as others ordinarily must exercise it fixedly
in one particular Church, I shall not contend whether they are to be called One
Office or two: nor yet whether the fixed Minister may not extraordinarily upon
a special reason, do the same work as the itinerant Minister in the same way.
But Ministers there must be for both these work.

. 8. And that some should make the general work before mentioned their ordinary
business, and not take the pastoral Charge of any particular Church, I conceive
(besides the former proofs) is further manifest, 1. In that the work of
Converting Unbelievers, and bringing them into a fitness for Church Communion,
is the work that is to go first, and is the greatest work: Its the greatest in
weight (praecisively considered, and as to the terminus a quo of the change
that it effects:) and it is the greatest in regard of opposing difficulties:
the winning of a soul, which rejoices Angels, and rejoices Jesus Christ
himself, will have so much of Satan's malice to oppose it, and has so much
resistance in the heart of the sinner, that it requires the whole work (in
ordinary) of those Ministers that are specially called hereunto.

. 9. And 2. Withal it commonly falls out, that there are far greater numbers
to be converted, then to be Governed after Conversion: If it be not so in some
Countries (where the face of God has shined most effectually) yet in others,
and in most it is: even in the far greatest part of the world. O how many
millions of souls are there that perish for lack of knowledge, and know not for
want of teaching; and never heard of Jesus Christ in any likely manner to
prevail, in all their lives? Surely such multitudes of Miserable souls, yea
Nations, require Ministers wholly set upon this work.

. 10. And 3. It ordinarily falls out too, that the unconverted unbelieving part
of the world do live at a great distance from the Churches of Christ: and
therefore the same man that is Pastor of a Church has not opportunity to speak
to them. Or if they live in the same Country, they seldom meet in greatest
numbers in the same Assemblies: And therefore when the Pastor is upon his own
work, it is requisite that there be some to speak to the rest.

. 11. And yet I doubt not but as there are hypocrites in most Churches, and
among us many that by their ignorance, or impiety we have cause to judge to be
yet no Christians, are our Ordinary hearers, so the Pastors of the Churches may
and must endeavor their conversion, and much suit their preaching to the
condition of such souls. But yet those millions that in other parts of the
world (and perhaps in Ireland, Wales and the Highlands of Scotland, too many
such may be found) that neither know what Christianity is, nor are the Ordinary
hearers of a fixed Ministry, and live not within the reach of such, should have
a Converting Itinerant Ministry for themselves.

. 12. Moreover, 4. The Pastoral work is it self so great, and the charge that
we take of particular Churches, and our obligation to them so strict, that it
will usually it self take up the whole man, and will not allow a Pastor time
for the other work on those at a distance yet uncalled, without neglecting the
souls that he has undertaken to oversee.

. 13. And 5. For want of such general Ministers, the state of persons is in
some places confounded, and the world and the Church are thrust together, as if
there were no difference to be made. Because there are no Ministers known but
Pastors, therefore there are no People known but as Christians, where yet the
very knowledge of Christianity is too rare. Whereas if (where numbers and
distance make it necessary) the preparing Ministry had first done their part,
it would have prevented much dangerous confusion, and self-deceit that
follows hereupon in many places.

. 14. And 6. By the mistaken supposition, that such general or unfixed
Ministers are ceased, men have been drawn to set Laymen upon the greatest and
noblest work of the Ministry: and a conceit is hence risen among some, that
because this is not proper to the Pastors of a Church, therefore it is not a
Ministerial work, but the work of gifted Brethren: And hereupon uncalled men
are tempted to exercise it: and by laying aside the officers appointed hereunto
by Christ, the burden is cast on the weakest men.

. 15. Yea 7. By this means many Ministers themselves understanding not the
Nature and extent of their own Office, when they do but preach to any that are
not of the Church that they have charge of, imagine that they preach but as
mere Laymen; and if they preach for the Conversion of unbelievers, they
profess it to be no act of their office: which is an act that has more
inconveniences then I shall now express.

. 16. And 8. Which is worst of all, by supposing that no Ministers are now to
be appointed for the Conversion of Infidels, and gathering and planting
Churches, it is come to pass that the most necessary work in all the world is
neglected, cast off, and almost quite unknown in the world: except Mr. Eliots
and a few with him in New England, and some of the Jesuits and Friars in the
East Indies and America, who have been sent, or have adventured themselves for
the Converting of the Nations. Were it but known and considered, how much of
the Will of Jesus Christ is to be fulfilled by this most blessed work, Princes
would have studied it, and contributed their assistance; and many would have
been ready to have offered themselves to God for the work, when now it is
looked on as no part of our duty, not only because that sluggishness and
cowardice calls it impossible, and the adventure unreasonable; but also
because we think it was a work that was proper to Apostles and Evangelists; and
Ministers are now tied to their proper flock. And thus the poor unbelieving
world is left in their sin.

. 17. And 9. I doubt by this mistake and neglect we forfeit the benefit of that
special promise, in too great a measure. Mat. 28.20. and miss of that eminent
assistance and presence of Christ with our Ministry, that otherwise we might
expect. If we did go into the world, and preach the Gospel to the Nations
(having used our industry first to learn their languages,) we might expect that
Christ would always be with us to the end of the world, in a way of assistance
and owning of our Labors, answerable to our engagements for him, and service
to him. Were we deeplier engaged for Christ, and did with Peter cast our selves
into the Sea, or walk on the Waters at his Call, we should find Christ acting
as if he were answerably engaged for our indemnity, or at least for our eminent
encouragement and reward. If ever we might expect Miracles again, it would be
upon our engagement in the ancient work; though I know that even for this they
are now no more necessary, nor I think, promised.

. 18. And 10. We do hereby seem to accuse Christ unjustly of Mutability,
supposing that he had settled one sort of Ministry and Government in his Church
for one Age only, and then changed it for another, that is ever after to
continue alone. I know the extraordinary work of that age (to plant Churches by
new doctrine and Miracles, and reveal the new Articles of Faith and Practice in
Scripture to the world) did require such enablements thereto, which ordinary
works do not require: and therefore the Apostles, as immediately sent, and as
inditing Scriptures, and working Miracles, and Prophetically bringing new
Revelations, have no Successors. But the Apostles as preaching to the Nations,
and as planting Churches, and as settling them, and taking care of their
prosperity after they had planted them, and as exercising their Ministry
itinerantly, as not fixed to a special charge, thus they have Successors, the
work being ordinary, and such as should be done now as well as then; and must
continue while the necessity of it does continue.

. 19. There needs no other proof of this, then by observing that it was not
Apostles only, but all the Ministry at first, that was thus unfixed and
itinerant; and that the Apostles assumed such to their assistance, and employed
them all their days in this work.

. 20. The seventy Disciples as well as the Apostles were at first by Christ
sent forth in this Itinerant way, for the Conversion of the inhabitants of
Iudaea. And thus John the Baptist had preached before them. And after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, it was not only the Apostles, but it was they that
were scattered abroad, that went everywhere preaching the Word, Act. 8.4. And
who were these? [Act. 8.1. They were all scattered abroad throughout the
regions of Judaea and Samaria, except the Apostles.] And the Evangelists of
those times are confessed to have exercised this Itinerant Ministry: so did
Barnabas, Silas, Mark, Epaphroditus, Tychicus, Trophimus, Timothy, Titus, Luke,
and others ordinarily. It was the first and most ordinary way then of
exercising the Ministry.

. 21. And if we lived our selves in Heathen or Infidel Countries, we should be
soon taught by experience, that this must be still an ordinary work. For what
else is to be done till persons be converted and brought into the Church? They
must be made Disciples before they can be used as Disciples, and caught to
observe all things that Christ has commanded.

. 22. But against this it is objected, 1. That the Apostles were extraordinary
Officers, and therefore have no Successors. To which I answer, 1. That I have
before showed in what they were extraordinary, and in what not: in what they
have no Successors, and in what they have. As Apostles sent immediately by
Christ to Reveal a new doctrine, and confirm it by Miracles, they have no
Successors: but as general Ministers of Christ to convert souls, plant
Churches, and take a care of many, they have Successors; call them by what name
you please. 2. And what if the Apostles have no Successors? Had the seventy
Disciples none? Had Apollo, Titus, Timothy, Silas, Barnabas, etc. none? Had all
the Itinerant converting Ministers of those times none, that were not affixed
as Pastors to a particular Church?

. 23. Obj. 2. But at least in the extent of their charge the Apostles were
extraordinary, in that they were to preach the Gospel to all Nations. I answer;
in point of exercise, being furnished with tongues and Miracles for the work,
they were obliged to go further, or to more Nations then most particular
Ministers are now obliged to go: but that is not because we want Authority, if
we had ability and opportunity, but because we want ability and opportunity to
exercise our Office. The Apostles were not bound to go into every Nation of the
world, inclusively; but to avoid none, but go to all, that is, to as many as
they could. Otherwise they had sinned in not going to Mexico, Peru, Brasile,
the Philippine or Molucc^ Islands, to Iapon, China, etc. And it is our duty to
extend our Ministry for the Conversion of as many as we have Ability and
opportunity to do. That which was common to the planting and waetering Ministry
in the Apostles days, was not proper to the Apostles: but to go up and down
the world to Convert, and Baptize, and plant, and water Churches was then
common to such (as Apollo, Silas, etc.) therefore, etc.

. 24. Obj. 3. But (say others) the Apostles were not at last such unfixed
Ministers as you imagine, but fixed Diocesan Bishops. Peter was Bishop of
Antioch first, and of Rome after: Paul was Bishop of Rome: James of Jerusalem,
etc. -- Ans. That any Apostle was a fixed Bishop, taking on him durante vita
the special Pastoral charge of one particular Church or Diocese, as his
peculiar, is 1. Barely affirmed, and therefore not to be believed. 2. And is
contrary both to the tenor of their Commission, and the History of their
Ministrations. And 3. Is also contrary to Charity it self, and therefore is not
worthy of any credit. The Apostles were not so lazy or uncharitable, as to
affix themselves to Parishes or Diocesses, and leave the Nations of the world
in their unbelief; and to cease the work that they were first sent out upon,
before the necessity of it ceased. Peter and Paul were Bishops of Rome, as they
were of other Churches which they planted and watered, and no more: even as
Paul was Bishop of Ephesus, Philippi, Corinth, etc. And James was either no
Bishop of Jerusalem, or no Apostle (but as many think, another James.) Indeed
pro tempore not only an Apostle, but other Itinerant Ministers were Bishops of
the places where they came; that is, were Officers of Christ, that might
exercise any act of their Office (Teaching, Governing, administering Sacraments,
etc.) to any people that gave them a Call, or so far as opportunity and need
required. And so I doubt not but every Minister now may do in any Church on
earth. If he be invited to stay a day, or week, or month among them, and do the
work of a Minister, yea or if he be invited but to preach a Sermon to them, he
may do it, not as a private man, but as a Minister in general, and as their
Teacher or Pastor pro tempore, and ad hoc, that give him the invitation. For
though the first Call to the Ministry, separating us to the Gospel of God, do
give us our Authority in general to perform any Ministerial act; yet I have
before showed that a further Call is neeedfull for the particular exercise of
this power: and this is usually by the people: who may sometime call a man to
be their stated Pastor, and sometime but to exercise some one Pastoral act, or
else to exercise all but pro tempore, as there is need.

. 25. And by this means it came to pass that the line of Succession in many
Churches is drawn down from the Apostles, by Eusebius, Hierom, and other
ancient writers. Not because the Apostles were the stated fixed Bishops of
those Churches, as the Successors were; but because they first planted and
Governed them, and were their Bishops pro tempore till they had settled Bishops
over them; and then went and did the like by other places: so that one Apostle,
or Evangelist, or unfixed Minister, might be the root of Succession to many
Churches, even as many as they first planted: but their Successors had but one
Church.

. 26. Object. 4. But what use is there among us for such Ministers as these,
when all the Nations are Converted from Infidelity already? Answ. 1. If there
were no use of such with us, we must not forget the lamentable necessity of
them abroad in the world. 2. As I before said, experience of the ignorance and
unbelief of many about us in the best Parishes, does cause me easily to believe
that in Ireland, and part of Scotland, and Wales, and other places where settled
Ministers are few, such an Itinerant Ministry is of necessary use among us. 3.
But yet where there are settled Teachers enough, they may be spared: for if we
had Parishes that had not the knowledge of Christ, it is a greater work of
mercy to such a Parish, to settle a converting Teacher among them to fit them
for a Church State, that so they may have frequent Teaching, then to send them
but now and then a Sermon. But where Ministers are not so plentiful, it were a
great sin for an able man to confine himself to one Town or Parish, and neglect
the Country round about. 4. And also there is use for Itinerants to water and
take care of the Churches which are planted, as the Apostles and others
formerly did.

. 27. Concerning these unfixed Ministers, I add these following Propositions.
1. That such Ministers may not deprive the fixed Pastors of any of their Power:
they may not disable them from Governing their own Churches as fully as if
there were no Itinerant Ministers. If they are admitted pro tempore to assist
the Churches where they come, that will not enable them to hinder them, or
assume a Lordship or a Rule over the Pastors of the Churches.

. 28. 2. These Itinerant unfixed Ministers, are not so obliged to perpetual
motion, but that they may reside for a considerable time in a place, either for
the following on the work of Conversion, where they find a plenteous harvest,
or for settling Churches, or surpressing heresies or disorders, or because of
their own disability to travail. And thus Paul staid at and about Ephesus in
Asia three years, Act. 20.31. Their stay must be prudentially apportioned to
their work and opportunities.

. 29. 3. No Itinerant Minister can (of himself) exclude another from his
Province, and appropriate it to himself, and say, Here I will work alone, or
here I have greater Authority then you: nay it was usual for these Ministers to
go by companies, or more then one (as Paul and Barnabas, Paul and Silas, Paul
and Timothy, Titus, etc.) so that it was no man's Province or Diocese where they
came. For they that Convert Souls to Christ and not to themselves, and Baptize
into his name and not in their own, do know the greatness of the work and
burden, and therefore are glad of all the assistance they can get: when those
that do nothing, are the men that thrust others out of the Vineyard, and say,
This is my Diocese or Province; you have nothing to do to labor here.]

. 30. 4. Yet may there lawfully and fitly be a Prudential distribution or
division of their Provinces among such unfixed Converting Ministers: for to be
all together and go one way, must needs be a neglecting of most of the world,
and so not a wise or faithful performance of the work of Christ. And therefore
some should go one way, and some another, a^ may most promote the work.

. 31. And ordinarily it is most convenient, that there go more then one to the
same people, (and therefore they will not be like a fixed Diocesan Bishop) for
they have many ways need of mutual assistance: one would be oppressed with so
great a work, and have many disadvantages in the performances. Pau^ used not to
go alone.

. 32. The persons to be exercised in this ambulatory Ministration, may be
determined of, and their Provinces distributed any of these three ways, or all
together. 1. By the Judgment and Consent of Pastors. If many shall choose out
one, or two, or more, as ^it for such a work, the persons chosen have reason to
obey, unless they can prove, or know the Pastors to be mistaken, and to have
been misguided in their choice. The Prophets and Teachers of the Church at
Antioch must send or separate Saul and Barnabas, for the sp^cial work in which
the Holy Ghost would employ them, Act. 13.1, 2. which seems to me, to be but a
secondary Call to some special exercise of their former Office, one way rather
then another. Thus also by mutual agreement their Provinces may be allotted and
divided.

. 33. 2. By the Magistrates appointment and command also, may this be done.
Though he make not Ministers, yet may he do much in assigning them their
Provinces, Seats, and Stations: and it is our duty to obey his Commands in such
cases if they be not plainly destructive to the Church: much more if they are
beneficial to it.

. 34. 3. Also by a Ministers own discerning of a fit opportunity to do good,
either by the Magistrates bare permission, the peoples invitation, or their
willingness, or not opposing; or though they do oppose, yet some other
advantages for the work may be discerned, or Hopes at least. Now though the
Call of Ordination must be from the Pastors of the Church, and neither
Magistrates nor people can make us Ministers, yet the Call of Opportunity may
be from the people and Magistrate, more commonly then any. And he that is
already a Minister, needs not always another Call for the exercising of his
Ministry, save only this Call by Opportunity. He had his Authority by that Call
that placed him in the Office; which was done at first, and must be done but
once. But he has his Opportunity and station for the exercise of that
Authority by the people and Magistrates, and perhaps may receive it over and
over many times.

. 35. 5. This way of exercising the Ministry is not alike necessary in all
times and places; but with great variety; it is exceeding necessary in some
Countries, and not in others, but useful in some degree in most as I conceive.

. 36. If the Question be, whether such a Ministry be useful in these Dominions,
or not? I have answered before, that in some darker and necessitous parts,
where ignorance does reign, and Ministers (or able ones at least) are scarce,
there such a^ exercise of the Ministry is necessary: but in other parts it is
not of such necessity: yet much work there may be for such, or for those in the
next Chapter mentioned, in most Countries of them therefore I shall next speak.

CHAP. II. Of fixed Pastors that also participate in the work of the unfixed.
. 1. IT is not only the unfixed Ministers that may lawfully do the
fore-described work, but the fixed Pastors of particular Churches may take
their part of it; and ordinarily should do somewhat toward it: though not so
much as they that are wholly in it.

. 2. I shall here show you, 1. What such may do. 2. On what terms. 3. And then
I shall prove it. And 1. They may as Ministers of Christ, go abroad to preach
where there are many ignorant or ungodly people in order to their Conversion.
2. They may help to Congregate Believers into holy Societies, where it is not
already done. 3. They may Ordain them Elders in such Churches as they
Congregate. 4. They may often enquire after the welfare of the Neighbor
Churches, and go among them, and visit them, and strengthen them, and admonish
the Pastors to do their duties. 5. They may instruct and teach the Pastors in
public exercises. 6. They may exercise any acts of Worship or Discipline upon
the people of any particular Church, which gives them a due invitation
thereto. 7. They may publicly declare that they will avoid Communion with an
impious or heretical Church or Pastor.

. 3. But 2. As to the mode or terms, it should be thus performed. 1. No Pastor
of a single Church must leave his flock a day or hour without such necessary
business as may prove his Call to do so. We must not feign a Call when we have
none; or pretend necessities. He that knows his obligations to his particular
charge, and the work that is there to be done, methinks should not dare to be
stepping aside, unless he be sure it is to a greater work.

. 4. And 2. No Pastor of a Church should be busy to play the Bishop in another
man's Diocese, nor suspect or disparage the parts or labors of the proper
Pastor of that Church, till the sufferings or dangers of the Church do
evidently warrant him, and call him to assist them.

. 5. 3. No Minister of Christ should be so proud as to overvalue his own parts,
and thereupon obtrude himself where there is no need of him (though there might
be need of others) upon a conceit that he is fitter then other men to afford
assistance to his Brethren. When the case is really so, he may judge it so:
especially when his Colleagues or fellow Ministers judge so too, and desire him
to the work: but Pride must not send out Ministers.

. 6. 4. A Minister that has diverse fellow Presbyters at home, to teach and
guide that Church in his absence, may better go out on assisting works then
other men. And so may he that has help that while from Neighbor Presbyters,
or that has such a charge as may b^ar his absence for that time, without any
great or considerable loss.

. 7. 5. And a man that is commanded out by the Magistrate, who may make him a
Visiter of the Churches near him, may lawfully obey; when it would not have
been fit to have done it without such a command, or some equivalent motive.

. 8. 6. A man that is earnestly invited by Neighbour-Ministers or Churches,
that call out to him, Come and help us, may have comfort in his undertaking, if
he see a probability of doing greater good then if he denied them, and if they
give him satisfactory reasons of their Call.

. 9. 7. Men of extraordinary abilities, should make them as communicative and
useful to all as possibly they can: and may not so easily keep their
retirements, as the Weak may do.

. 10. 8. And lastly, No man should upon any of these pretenses usurp a Lordship
over his Brethren, nor take on him to be the stated Pastor of Pastors, or of
many Churches as his special Charge. It is one thing to do the common work of
Ministers abroad, by seeking men's Conversion, and the planting of Churches, or
else to afford assistance to many Churches for their preservation,
establishment or increase: and its another thing to take charge of these
Pastors and Churches, as the proper Bishop or Overseer of them. The former may
be done; but I know no warrant for the later.

. 11. That fixed Ministers may do all these forementioned works, with the
aforesaid Cautions, I shall briefly prove. 1. By some general Reasons, speaking
to the whole; and 2. By going over the particulars distinctly, and giving some
reason for each part.

. 12. And 1. It is certain that a Minister does not cease to be a Minister in
general, nor to be an Officer authorized to seek the Discipling of them
without, and Congregating them, by his becoming the Pastor of a particular
Church: therefore he may still do the common works of the Ministry where he
has a Call, as well as his Pastoral special work to them that he has taken
special care of. As the Physician of an Hospital or City may take care also of
other persons, and cure them, so he neglect not his charge.

. 13. 2. A Minister does not lay by his Relation or Obligations to the
unconverted world, nor to the Catholic Church, when he affixeth himself to a
special charge. And therefore he may do the work of his Relations and
Obligations, as aforesaid. Yea those works in some respects should be
preferred, because there is more of Christ's interest in the Universal Church,
or in many Churches then in one; and that work in which the most of our
ultimate End is attained, is the greatest work: that in which God is most
honored, the Church most edified, and most honor and advantage brought to the
Gospel and cause of Christ, should be preferred: But ordinarily these are more
promoted by the Communication of our help to many (as aforesaid) then by
confining it to one particular Church. The commonest good is the best.

. 14. 3. Oft-times the Necessity of such Communicative labors is so apparently
great, that it would be unmercifulness to the Churches or souls of men to
neglect them. As in case of Reforming and settling Churches (upon which Luther,
Melanchthon, Chytraeus, Bugenhagius, Pomeranus, Calvin, and others were so often
employed.) As also in case of resisting some destructive heresies: In which
case one able Disputant and prudent adviser, and person that has interest in
the people, may do good to thousands, even to many Countries, and more then
multitude^ of others could do. And God does not set up such lights to put under
a bushel, nor warrant any man to hide his talents; nor does he bestow
extraordinary gifts for ordinary sevice only, but would have them used to the
utmost advantage of his cause, and for the greatest good of souls.

. 15. 4. And it is not the taking up of another calling or Species of
Ministerial Office: For the Ministry is one office (distinct from that
inferior sort of Ministry of Deacons) and contains the power and obligation
of doing all this, when we have particular Calls: It is but the exercise of the
same office which we had before: We do but lay out our selves more in some
parts or acts of that office, then more retired Pastors do.

. 16. And 5. It belongs to the Magistrates to take care of the Church and the
right exercise of the gifts of their subject Ministers: and therefore if they
command one man more labor then another, even the Planting, or Visiting of
Churches, it is our Duty to obey them.

. 17. More particularly: 1. That a fixed Pastor may preach abroad among the
unconverted, I hope none will deny. It was the ancient custom of the fixed
Bishops, besides the feeding of their flocks, to labor the Conversion of all
the Countries about them that were unconverted: The example of Gregory of
Ne^cesarea may suffice, who found but seventeen Christians in the City, but
converted not only all that City (except seventeen) but also most of the
Countries about, and planted Churches, and ordained them Bishops. And so have
abundance others done, to the increase of the Church.

. 18. And 2. That fixed Bishops may congregate new Churches where there are
none, of such as they or others do convert, is in the foresaid constant
practice of the Pastors of the ancient Churches, put past doubt. But so, as
that they ought not to Congregate those Churches to themselves, and make
themselves the Bishops or Archbishops of them, when they have a special charge
already; but only settle them under Bishops of their own: And this is but by
directing them in their duties, and trying the person, and investing him that
is to be their Pastor. Whether one or more must do this work, I have spoken
already in the former Disputation.

. 19. 3. And that such as thus convert a people, or Congregate them, may
(according to the forementioned Rules) Ordain them Pastors, by the peoples
suffrages or Consent, is also sufficiently proved in that foregoing
disputation: and therefore may be here past by.

. 20. 4. And that such may take care of all the Churches within their reach, so
far as to do them what good they can, is plain in the L^w of Nature that
requires it; and in the general commands of the Gospel seconding the Law of
Nature; while we have time we must do good to all men; Especially to the
household of faith. And its plain in the Nature of the Catholic Church and of
its members, and in the nature of the work of Grace upon the soul. We are
taught of God to love one another: and the End of the Catholic Society is, (as
of all Societies) the common good, and the Glory of God: and the Nature of true
members is to have the same care one for another, that so there may be no
schism in the body, and that they all suffer and rejoice with one another, in
their hurts, and in their welfare, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. It is therefore lawful
for Pastors to improve their talents upon these common grounds.

. 21. 5. That such settled Pastors may Teach or Preach to one another, is a
thing not doubted of among us. For we commonly practice it at Lectures and
other meetings of Ministers, as formerly was usual at visitations, and
Convocations. And if it be lawful to teach Ministers, then also to do those
lesser things before and after mentioned. Yet do we not preach to one another
as Rulers over our Brethren, but as Ministers of Christ, and Helpers of them in
the work of grace. As when one Physician heals another, he does it as a
Physician, helping and advising a Brother in necessity: but when he cures one
of his Hospital, he does it as a Physician performing his trust to one of his
charge. So when a Pastor preaches to Pastors, he does it not as a private man,
but as a Pastor obliged to help his Brethren: But when he preaches to his
People, he does it as one that has the charge of their souls, and is their
guide to life everlasting.

. 22. 6. And that Pastors may exercise acts of Discipline and administer the
Sacraments to other Congregations, upon a sufficient Call, is evident from what
is said already. If they may Preach to the Pastors themselves, they may help to
Rule the flock: For, as is said, they cease not their Relation to the Church of
Christ in general, by being engaged to one Church in particular. If general
Ministers, such as Apostles, Evangelists, etc. might administer the Sacraments
where they came in Churches that were not any of their special charge above
others, then may other Ministers of Christ do it upon a sufficient Invitation,
though the Congregation be none of their special charge: And in so doing, they
act not as private men, nor yet as the stated Pastors of that flock, but as
Pastors, Assistant to the stated Pastors, and Ruling pro tempore the people
under them in that Assisting way: Even as a Physician helps another in his
Hospital, when he is desired, and the neither as a Private Ordinary man, nor as
Superior to the Physician of the Hospital, nor as the stated Physician of it
himself, but as the temporary assistant Physician of it. Or as a Schoolmaster
helps another in his School for a few days in Necessity, as his temporary
assistant.

. 23. 7. And upon the same grounds it will follow that one Church or Pastor on
just occasion may avoid Communion with another, and declare that they so
resolve to do; and this without usurping any Jurisdiction over them, it being
not the casting out or Excommunicating of a member of our charge, as the Rulers
of that Church, but the obeying of a plain command of the Holy Ghost, which
requires us to Avoid such, and have no company or Communion with them, and
with such no not to eat: And therefore it is a fond Argumentation of the
Papists, that would conclude their Pope to be Head and Governor, as far as
they find he ever did excommunicate.

. 24. He that doubts of any of this, must not first enquire, Whether a
Minister have so much Power, but first Whether he may be obliged to so much
work and suffering as his duty. And then he shall find that if there were no
special examples or commands, yet the general commands, which require us to do
good while we have time to all, to be the servants of all, and seek their
salvation, etc. do as certainly oblige us to particular duties, as if they were
named.

. 25. Object. That cannot be: For, a General command of doing good to all,
obliges not a Minister any more then another man: But it obliges not another
man to Preach, administer Sacraments, etc. therefore it obliges not a
Minister. Answ. To the Major I answer, that 1. It may oblige to more, where it
obliges not more, as to the Essence of the obligation. 2. The General command
obliges several men to several acts according to their several Abilities,
opportunities and capacities. If all be required to improve their Masters flock
or talents, yet all are not required to improve the same talents, because they
have not the same: But one has Riches to improve, and the general command
obliges him to improve that talent: And another has strength, another
interest and friends, another wit, and another learning, and every man is bound
to improve what he has, and not what he has not. The command of Doing good to
all does oblige a Physician to help to cure men, and a Magistrate to benefit
them by Government, and a Lawyer by Counsel for their estates, and a Minister
by the works of a Minister, for their salvation. If you should say that [ this
General command does bind a Magistrate, or a Physician no more then another
man: but it binds not another man to do good by Ruling or by Physic,
therefore neither does it bind them;] would not the fallacy be obvious? So is
it here.

. 26. It being proved that such Assistant Ministerial works may be performed by
a fixed Pastor to those about him, and within his reach, it will clearly follow
that convenient means may be used to bring this to performance, and help the
Churches to the actual benefit of such Assistance. And by the three
forementioned ways it may be done. As 1. If the Pastor and People of any
Neighbor Church, or the people alone, where there is no Church, do invite such
men to come and help them.

. 27. And 2. The Neighbor Pastors may agree together for the persuading of the
fittest men among them to undertake such Assistances: as is usual in the
settling of Lectures; and as in this County we have successfully for above these
two years used the help of four Itinerant Lecturers, that have taken their
several circuits, one Lords day in four, (which was every Lords day among them
all) to help their neighbors.

. 28. And if the Invitation of a People, or the Agreement of Pastors may do
this, no doubt then but the prudent Government of a Magistrate may do it. And
he may appoint Certain Pastors their bounds and Circuits, and appoint them to
afford convenient assistance to the Pastors and people within those bounds. And
thus he may make them Visitors of the Churches and Country about them, in which
visitation, they may Teach and do other Ministerial offices by Consent; and may
by the Magistrates command, take notice whether the Churches be duly
Constituted and Governed, and may acquaint the Magistrate how things are; and
may fraternally Reprove the Negligent Pastors and people where they come; And
also may provoke them to Reformation, both of Church-constitution and
Church-administrations; And these visitors may give notice to the neighbor
Churches, of such Pastors as they find unfit for the Ministry, that by consent
they may be disowned by the rest.

. 29. And though one Pastor have not of himself (as a Pastor) so much Power
over any of his Brethren, as to require him to come to him to give him an
account of his ways, yet 1. The Associated Pastors may desire him to appear
among them to give them satisfaction, when there is matter of offense: (For one
may better travail to many, then many to one.) And 2. The Magistrate may
lawfully command Ministers to appear before such Pastors as he has appointed
to be Visitors; and then it will be their duty in obedience to the Magistrates
command.

. 30. Yet Magistrates must take heed that they put not the sword into the hands
of Ministers, nor enable them with coercive power, by touching men's bodies or
estates: We do not only forbear to claim such a power, but we disclaim it, yea
and humbly and earnestly beseech the Princes and Senates of Christian
Commonwealths, that they would keep the sword in their own hands, and not put
it into the hands of any Ministers, and then we could better bear the claims
and usurpations, not only of Exorbitant or transcendent Prelates, but of the
Pope himself. Let them come unarmed, and have no weapon but spiritual, the word
of God, and then we shall less fear them. The Divisions, and tyranny, and
bloodshed through the Churches has been by trusting coercive Magisterial power
in the hands of Ministers of the Gospel. Though I confess I think it not a
thing unlawful in it self for a Minister to be a Magistrate also, yet I think
that nothing but necessity can warrant it; and so much as hinders him from
the work of his calling (which requires a whole man) without this Necessity,
is utterly unlawful. Were there a Country that had no other persons tolerably
fit, I doubt not but the same man that is a Minister or Pastor, might be a
Justice of Peace, Parliament man, or a Prince: But while there are others that
are capable of bearing these burdens, he is not worthy to be a Minister of the
Gospel, that would wish the least of them upon his shoulders. Either Magistracy
or Ministry is enough for one. Had the English Prelates been armed with none
but spiritual weapons, they had never appeared so terrible or so odious.

. 31. It seems a course that suiteth with the state of the present Churches
among us, to have in every County, three or four such able, faithful Pastors
to be by the Magistrate made Visitors of the rest, not giving them any power of
meddling with men's bodies or estates, but joining with them a Magistrate as a
Justice or Commissioner, that one may persuade, and the other constrain, as far
as the Sovereign Power shall think fit. This is not to set up any New office or
the least part of an office in the Church. As it is merely accidental to the
Being of a Physician, whether he be tied to a City, or to an Hospital, or to a
County, or to no place, but practice as he finds opportunity; these being but
the various modes of using the same The Jesuits and Friars do not take the
Generals or Governors of their Orders to be men of another Order, though they
have a Power of Ruling, and that Tyrannically.
Office and works; so may we truly say of the Ministry.

. 32. Yet is there no such Necessity of this appointment of Visitors or
Superintendents, or Assistants by the Magistrate, or by agreement of Ministers,
or any such course, as if the Being, or the welfare of the Church were laid
upon it. For without any such Elections or Appointments, the Graces and Gifts
of the Spirit of Christ will show themselves, and be communicative for the
Edification of the Churches. We see by common experience, that where no one man
is commanded or commended by the Magistrate to the care of many Churches, above
his brethren, yet some men are as diligent and faithful in doing good to all
within their reach, as if they had been chosen and nominated to the work. Many
able painful Ministers of Christ, that thirst for men's salvation, do go up and
down among the ignorant, or weak, and preach in season and out of season,
notwithstanding the burden of their particular flocks, which they faithfully
bear.

. 33. And the parts and graces of these men do win them audience and respect
where they come, without any Humane Authority to awe men. In almost all parts
of our Country we have either settled or movable Lectures: and when do we see
a thin Congregation before a lively rowsing Minister, or any man of great
ability in the work? No, but we see the Temples crowded; and find that the
people reverence and hearken to such men as these, in whom the Spirit of God
appears.

. 34. Yea and the Ministers themselves will consult with the Wise, and Love the
good, and learn of those that are ablest to teach them: and imitate the ablest
preachers as near as they can. So that I may truly say, that there is a certain
kind of Natural, or rather, spiritual Episcopacy everywhere exercised in the
Church. A great light that burns and shines above others, will draw the eyes
of many to it: and if it be set on a hill it will hardly be hid. Calvin was no
Prelate; and yet his Gifts procured him that Interest, by which he prevailed
more then Prelates for the conformity of the minds of many to his own. There is
scarce a Country but has some able judicious Minister, who has the Interest
of a Bishop with the rest; though he have no higher an office then themselves.
Gods Graces deserve and will procure respect. Even in Civil Councils, Courts,
Committees, we see that some one of leading parts, is the Head of the rest
though their authority be equal.

. 35. And indeed the conveniences and inconveniences are such on both sides,
that it is not an easy matter to determine, Whether appointed Visitors or
Superintendents, be more desirable then these Arbitrary Visitors that have the
Natural Episcopacy of Interest procured by their mere abilities. On the one
side, if Magistrates appoint such Visitors, the people, yea and many Ministers
will the more easily submit, and hear, and obey, and more unanimously concur,
then if we offer our assistance without any such appointment: That's the
convenience: But then here is the inconvenience: The Magistrate may choose an
unworthy man, and then he may be feared, but not honored nor loved; but
greater lights will be greater still, let the Magistrate set the lesser on
never so high a Candlestick: And then the Ministers and people will measure
their esteem of the man according to his worth, and that will irritate his
displeasure; For when he is lifted up he either looks to be valued by his
Height, and not his Light or Worth, or else that his Light should be judged of
by his Height. And as this will turn to heart-burnings and divisions, so the
esteem that is procured by humane Constitution, will be more humane, and
ordinarily less Divine then the calling and work of a Divine requires. On the
other side, if none be appointed by the Magistrate, but every man go forth in
the strength of his zeal and Abilities; we are like to be cast on many
disadvantages with carnal temporizing men, and to have less unity among our
selves: But then that unity, and peace, and respect, and success that we have
will be more voluntary and pure.

. 36. The best way then, if we could hit it, seems to be the joining of both
these together. To have such Magistrates as will appoint only the most
judicious, able, faithful Ministers to be Visitors of the Churches, that shall
go forth both in the strength of the Spirit of Christ, with eminency of gifts,
and also in the strength of the Magistrates Commission. But if this cannot be
attained, I shall not long for constituted Visitors or Superintendents; but
shall be content with the Holy Ghosts appointment.

. 37. It is therefore the most Christian course to lay no greater stress on
these modes and forms of Ministration then they will bear; and therefore to
live obediently and peaceably under either of them; obeying such Visitors as
are appointed by the Magistrate, and honoring the graces of the Spirit, where
there is no such appointment; and not to think the Church undone when our
conceits about such things are crossed.

CHAP. III. It is Lawful for the several Associations of Pastors to choose one
man to be their President, durante vita, if he continue fit.
1. I Come next to speak of a third sort of Ministry, which has a greater
resemblance to the ancient Episcopacy, then any of the rest: Yea indeed is the
same that was exercised about the second or third Century after Christ. And
that is, the fixed Presidents of the Presbyters of many Churches associated. In
the first settlement of Churches, there was either a single Pastor to a single
Church; or many Pastors, in equality, at least of Office: And whether from the
beginning or afterward only, one of them became the stated President, is very
uncertain: of which anon. But when the Churches increased in magnitude, and
many Congregations were gathered under one Presbytery, then that Presbytery
also had a stated President, as the Congregational Presbyteries perhaps had
before. And thus he was an Archbishop under the name of a Bishop, that awhile
before was either unknown, or else must needs be es^eemed an Archbishop.

. 2. That these men should take the Pastoral charge of many Churches, or that
they should suspend the Governing Power of the Presbyters, upon pretense of a
Presidency, or superiority, is I think, a matter not warrantable by the word of
God.

. 3. But that such Associations of the Pastors of many Churches should
ordinarily be, for the sake of Union and Communion; as also that it is lawful
for these Associatied Ministers to choose one among them to be their President,
is granted by all.

. 4. But all the question is, Whether these Presidents should be only pro
tempore, or durante vita, supposing that they forfeit not the trust? I shall
not say much of the point of convenience; but I affirm, that of it self it is
lawful to choose a President that shall be fixed durante vita, si tam diu been
se gesserit. Yea it is lawful now in England, as things stand.

. 5. And 1. It may suffice for the proof of this, that it is nowhere forbidden
in Nature or in Scripture; directly or by consequence: and therefore it is
lawful: Where there is no law, there is no transgression: They that say that
it is a thing forbidden, must prove it from some word of God; which I think,
they cannot do.

. 6. 2. If it be lawful to choose a fixed President for half a year, or a
year, or seven year, then is it lawful to choose and fix such a President for
life (on supposition still of a continued fitness) But it is lawful to choose
such a one for a year, or seven year: therefore also for life.

. 7. The Antecedent is granted by the Presbyterian, Congregational and Erastian
party, (which are all that I have now to do with:) For all these consented that
D. Twiss should be President of the Synod at Westminster, which was till his
death: or else was like to have been till the end; And so another after him.
And ordinarily the Provinces and Presbyteries choose a President till the next
Assembly. And I remember not that ever I heard any man speak against this
course.

. 8. And then the Consequence is clear, from the parity of Reasons: For 1.
Seven years in contracts is valued equal with the duration of a man's life. 2.
And no man can give a Reason to prove it Lawful to have a President seven
years, or a quarter of a year, that will not prove it Lawful in it self to
have a President during life. And Accidents must be weighed on both sides,
before you can prove it Accidentally evil: And if it be but so, it may be one
time good, if by accident it be another time bad. The weightiest accident must
preponderate.

. 9. 3. Order is a thing lawful in Church Assemblies and Affairs: the sta^ed
Presidency of one, is a stated Order in Church Assemblies: therefore it is
lawful that all things be done in Order, is commanded, 1 Cor. 14.40. And
therefore in general Order is a duty, which is more then to be Lawful. And
though the particular ways of Order may yet be comparatively indifferent, yet
are they Lawful, (...) the Genus is necessary.

. 10. And that this Presidency is a point of Church Order, is apparent in the
nature and use of the thing: and also in that it is commonly acknowledged a
matter of Order in all other societies or Assemblies, though but for the low
and common affairs of the world: in a Jury you will confess, that Order
requires that there be a Foreman: and in a College that there be a Master:
and that an Hospital, a School, and all Societies, have so much Order at least
as this, if not much more. And why is not that to be accounted Order in the
Church, that is so in all other societies?

. 11. 4* That which makes to the Unity of the Churches or Pastors (and is not
forbidden by Christ) is both lawful and desirable: But such is a stated
Presidency: therefore, etc. The Major is grounded 1. On nature it self, that
tells us how much of the strength, and beauty, and safety of the Church, and of
all societies does consist in Unity. The Minor is apparent in the Nature of the
thing: 1. That Presidency makes for Unity, is confessed by all the Churches that
use it to that end. 2. And the continuance of the same makes somewhat more for
Unity then a change would do: there being some danger of division in the new
elections: besides other and greater inconveniences.

. 12. 5. The person that is most fit ( Consideratis Consid^randis) should be
chosen President: But one and the same person ordinarily is most fit durante
vita: therefore one and the same person should be continued President. God does
not use to change his gifts at every monthly or quarterly Sessions of a
Classis or Provincial Synod. Either the President chosen was the fittest at the
time of his choice, or not: if he were not, he was ill chosen: if he were so
then, its like he is so still, at least for a long time. And a man's ability is
so great and considerable a qualification for every employment, that it must be
a very great accident on the other side that must allow us to choose a man that
is less able. A change cannot be made in most places, without the injury of the
Assembly and of their work. The worthiest person therefore may lawfully be
continued for the work sake.

. 13. 6. That way is lawful that conduces to the Reconciliation of dissenting
and contending Brethren (supposing it not forbidden by God.) But such is the
way of a stated Presidency, durante vita: therefore, etc. Though the Major be
past doubt, yet to make it more clear, consider, that it is 1. A Learned party
(as to many of them) with whom this Reconciliation is desired: and therefore
the more desirable. 2. That it is a numerous party: even the most of the
Catholic Church by far. All the Greek Church, the Armenian, Syrian, Abassine,
and all others that I hear of, except the Reformed, are for Prelacy: and among
the Reformed, England and Ireland had a Prelacy; and Denmark, Sweden, part of
Germany, Transylvania, have a superintendency as high as I am pleading for at
least. And certainly a Reconciliation, and as near a Union as well may be had,
with so great a part of the Church of Christ, is a thing not to be despised;
nor will not be by considerate moderate men.

. 14. And it is very considerable with me, that it is the future and not only
the present Peace of the Churches that we shall thus procure. For it is easy
to see that Episcopacy is neither such an upstart thing, nor defended by such
contemptible reasons, as that the Controversy is like to die with this age:
undoubtedly there will be a Learned and Godly party for it, while the world
endures; unless God make by Illumination or Revelation some wonderful change
on the Sons of men, that I think, few men do expect. And certainly we should do
the best we can to prevent a perpetual dissension in the Church. Were there not
one Prelatical man now alive, it were easy to foresee there would soon be more.

. 15. Ye^ do I not move, that any thing forbidden by God should be used, as a
means for Peace or Reconciliation with men. It is not to set up any Tyranny in
the Church, nor to introduce any new Office that Christ has not planted: it is
but the orderly disposal of the Officers and affairs of Christ, which is
pleaded for.

. 16. Object. But (some will say) your Minor yet is to be denied; for this is
not a way to Reconciliation. A stated Presidency will not please the Prelates
that have been used to the sole Jurisdiction of a whole County, and to sole
Ordination. Answ. 1. We know that the moderate will consent. 2. And some
further accommodation shall be offered anon; which may satisfy all that will
show themselves the Sons of Peace. 3. If we do our duty, the guilt will no
longer lie on us, but on the refusers of Peace: but till then, its as well on
us as on them.

. 17. 7. That which is lawfully practiced already by a Concurrence of
judgments, may lawfully be agreed on: But the Presidency (or more) of one man
in the Assemblies of Ministers, is in most places practiced (and that lawfully)
already: therefore, etc. There is few Associations, but some one man is so far
esteemed of by all, that they give him an actual or virtual Presidency, or
more: why then may they not agree expressly so to do?

. 18. 8. Lastly, The so common and so ancient practice of the Churches, should
move us to an inclination to reverence and imitation, as far as God does not
forbid us, and we have no sufficient reason to deter us: of which more anon.

. 19. Yet are not they to be justified that raise contentions for such a
Presidency, and lay the Churches Peace upon it. I see not yet but that it is a
thing in it self indifferent, whether a man be President a month, a year, or
for his life: and therefore I plead only for condescending in a case
indifferent, for the Churches peace: though accidentally order may make it more
desirable in one place: and jealousies, and prejudice, or danger of usurpation,
may make it less desirable in another place. But none should judge it necessary
or sinful of it self.

. 20. If you ask, What Power shall these stated Presidents have? I answer, 1.
None can deny, but that it is fit that in every Association of Churches, there
should be a certain way of Communication agreed on. And therefore that some one
should be chosen to receive such Letters or other matters that are to be
Communicated, and to send them, or notice of them unto all. This is a service,
and the power of doing such a service cannot be questionable while the service
is unquestionable.

. 21. 2. It is meet that some be appointed to acquaint the rest, as with
business, so with times and places of meeting: the nomination of such times and
places, or the acquainting others with them when agreed on, is a service that
none can justly question: and therefore the lawfulness of the power to do it,
may not be questioned.

. 22. Object. But what is this to Government? this is to make them Servants, and
not Governors. Answ. It is the more agreeable to the will of Christ, that will
have that kind of greatness sought among his Ministers, by being the servants
of all.

. 23. But 3. He may also be the stated Moderator of their Disputations and
Debates: this much I think will easily be granted them; and I am sure with some
(as I shall show anon) this much would seem satisfactory. The Principal
President or Master of a College is thought to have a convenient precedence or
superiority, though he have not a Negative voice. And why the President in an
Association of Pastors should have a greater Power, I see as yet neither
necessity nor reason.

. 24. But 4. If Peace cannot otherwise be obtained, the matter may be thus
accommodated, without violation of the Principles or Consciences of the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Congregational party. 1. Let it be agreed or
consented to, that no man be put to profess, that it is his judgment, that
Bishops should have as jure divino a Negative voice in Ordination. This was
never an Article of Faith: it is not necessary to be put among our Credenda. It
is only the Practice that is pretended to be necessary, and a submission to it.
Seeing therefore it is not to be numbered with the Credenda, but the agenda, let
Action without professed Belief suffice. 2. Yea on the same reasons, if any man
be of a Contrary judgment, and think himself bound to declare it modestly,
moderately, and peaceably, let him have liberty to declare it, so his practice
be peaceable. 3. This being premised, Let the President never Ordain, except in
case of necessity, but with the presence or consent of the Assembly of the
Associated Pastors. 4. And let the Pastors never Ordain any, except in cases of
Necessity, but when the President is there present, nor without his Consent.
And in Cases of Necessity (as if he would deprive the Churches of good
Ministers, or the like) the Episcopal men will yield it may be done.

. 25. If some think the President Must be one, and others only think he May be
one; it is reasonable, if we will have peace, that our May be yield to their
Must be. For so we yield but to what we confess lawful: but if they should
yield, it must be to what they judge to be sinful. If it be not lawful to hold
their Must, that is, that a Bishop has a Negative voice, yet is it lawful to
forbear de facto to Ordain till he be one, except it be in case of Necessity.

. 26. If in an Association there be a company of young or weak Ministers, and
one only man that is able to try him that is offered to the Ministry, as to his
skill in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, and his Philosophy, etc. is it not
lawful here for all the rest to consent that they will not Ordain any, except
in cases of Necessity, but when the foresaid able man is one? Who can doubt of
this? And if it be lawful in this case, it is much more lawful, when both the
ability of the said person, and the Peace of the Churches does require it: or
if it be but the last alone, I think it may well be yielded to.

. 27. But (the Episcopal men will object,) if every man shall have leave to
Believe and Profess a Parity of Ministers, the President will but be despised,
and this will be no way to Peace, but to Contention. Answ. You have but two
remedies for this, and tell us which of them you would use. The first is, to
force men by Club-law to subscribe to your Negative voice, or not to hold the
contrary: The second is, to cast them all out of the Communion of the Churches,
that are not in judgment for your Negative voice, though they be Moderate,
Peaceable, Godly men. And he that would have the first way taken, is a Tyrant,
and would be a Cruel Persecutor of his Brethren as good as himself. And he that
would take the second way, is both Tyrannous, and Schismatical, and far from a
Catholic peaceable disposition; and if all must be cast out or avoided by him,
that are not in such things of his opinion, he makes it impossible for the
Churches to have peace with him.

. 28. But they will further object: If in Necessity they shall Ordain without
the President, this Necessity will be ordinarily pretended; and so all your
offers will be in vain. Answ. Prevent that and other such inconveniences, by
producing your weightiest reasons, and persuading them; or by any lawful means:
but we must not have real Necessities neglected, and the Churches ruined, for
fear of men's unjust pretenses of a Necessity: that is but a sad Cure.

. 29. But on the other side it will be objected, This is but patching up a
peace. If I think that one man has no more right then another to a Negative
voice, why should I seem to grant it him by my practice? Answ. As when we come
to Heaven, and not till then, we shall have perfect Holiness; so when we come
to Heaven, and not till then, we shall have perfect Unity and Peace. But till
then, I shall take that which you call Patching, as my Duty, and our great
Benefit. If you think one man have not a Negative voice, we neither urge you to
say that he has, nor so much as to seem to own his claim. You shall have leave
in the public Register of the Association, to put it under your hand, that [
Not as owning the claim of the Presidents Negative voice, but as yielding in a
Lawful thing for Peace, you do Consent to forbear Ordaining any without him,
except in Cases of Necessity.] This you may do, without any show of
contradicting your Principles, and this is all that is desired.

. 30. Quest. And may we not for peace sake, grant them as much in point of
Jurisdiction, as of Ordination, and Consent to do nothing without Necessity,
but when the President is one, and does Consent? Answ. Either by Jurisdiction
you mean Law making, or Executive Government. The first belongs to none but
Christ, in the substance of his Worship; and the Circumstances no man may
Universally and Unchangeably determine of but pro re nata, according to
emergent occasions, the Magistrate may make Laws for them, and the Pastors may
make Agreements for Concord about them: but none should determine of them
without need: and therefore here is no work for Legislators (the Usurpers that
have grievously wronged the Church.) And for Executive Government, either it is
over the People, or over the Pastors. To give a Negative voice to the President
of an Association of the Pastors of many Churches, in Governing the People of a
single Church, is to set up a new Office (a fixed Pastor of many Churches) and
to overthrow Government, and introduce the noxious sort of Prelacy, which for
my part, I intend not to be guilty of. And for proper Government of the
Pastors, I know none but God and Magistrates that have that Power. Every
Bishop, says Cyprian, and the Council of Carthage, has Power of his own will,
and is responsible for his Actions to God, and none of us are Episcopi
Episcoporum, Bishops of Bishops. But there is a Communion among Pastors and
Churches to be exercised, and so an avoiding or rejecting from Communion: and
this some call (improperly) a Government. And in this, for my part, I should
consent, where peace does require it, that we will not agree upon the rejecting
of any Pastor of our Association (no more then to the Accepting or Ordaining of
them) without the President, but in cases of Necessity: and that just on the
terms expressed about Ordination.

. 31. As for instance, in a particular Church, there is a Communion to be held
among all the members, though none of them but the Officers are Governors of
the Church. And in many cases where the Peoples Consent is needful, its common
to stand to a Major vote: and so great a stress is laid on this, that by many
of the Congregational way the Government of the Church is said to be in the
Major vote of the people: and yet 1. This is indeed no Government that belongs
to them; but Consent to Communion or Exclusion; and 2. No Scripture does
require a Minor part to stand in all cases to the decision of a Major vote, nor
give a Major vote any Rule over the Consciences of the Minor part (show us this
voting power in Scripture) And yet 3. All agree,
that upon natural Reasons and General Rules of Scripture, the Churches are
allowed, yea obliged, in lawful things, for maintaining Unity and Peace, to
stand to the judgment of a Major vote, (in Cases that belong to them to vote
in) though there be no particular word for it in the Scripture: Even so
Associate Pastors have not a proper Government of one another, neither by
Presidents or Major votes, (though over the people they have,) but are all
under the Government of God and the Magistrate only. And yet they may in acts
of Consent about Communion or Non-communion with one another, prudentially
agree, to take the Consent of the President, or of the Major vote of Pastors,
or of both, where Peace, or Order, or Edification requires it: except in cases
of Necessity.

. 32. Quest. But what will you take for a Case of Necessity? which you will
except? Answ. 1. If the President be dead. 2. Or sick, or absent and cannot
come. 3. Or if he be malignant, and wilfully refuse to Consent that the Church
be well provided for, or Governed. 4. And withal supposing that without the
great hurt or hazard of the Churches, we cannot delay the business, till he be
one, or do Consent. 5. Especially if he be set in enmity against the welfare of
the Church: and by pretense of a suspending vote would destroy the Church, and
bring in unworthy hurtful persons or things. In all such Cases of Necessity,
its time to lay by our humane Rules for peace and Order.

. 33. Object. But who shall be judge of this Necessity? Answ. The Magistrate
only shall be the Compelling Judge. The people shall be the Discerning Judges:
the Pastors shall at least have as much power as the People: each of them shall
Discern, so far as they must obey and execute. And God only shall be the final
Judge.

. 34. Object. But this will but cause Divisions and Confusions; while the
President thinks one thing Necessary, and the Pastors another, and the People
another. Answ. I answered this before. Reason must not be cast by, and the
Churches ruined, and poison and destruction taken in, on pretense of such
inconveniences. If such a Case of difference fall out, each man will execute as
he discerns or judges, (being to answer for his own actions, and having none
that can undertake to answer for him) And when we all come to the Bar of God
for final Judgment, he that was in the right shall be justified, and he that
falsely pretended Necessity against duty shall bear the blame.

. 35. Object. But in the mean time, the Churches will be divided. Answ. 1. I
told you there is no more hope of ^ perfect Unity on earth, then of perfect
Holiness. 2. When two evils are before us, (though neither must be chosen; for
Evil is not an Object of choice, unless as seeming good, yet) the Greater Evil
must be first and most studiously repelled. And the deformity and destruction
of the Churches, and the casting out of the Gospel and Worship of God, is a
greater Evil then disorder about good actions, and differences about some
Circumstances of Necessary works.

. 36. All this that I have said about the Negative ( de facto, though not de
jure) that I would have Consented to for peace, I intend not to extend to those
Cases and Countries where peace requires it not, but rather the contrary:
much^less to encourage any to think such a Negative Necessary in it self. Some
things may be Lawfully granted that are unlawfully and upon mistake desired.

. 37. Lastly understand also, that when I speak of yielding to this Negative
voice in Ordination, to the President of such an Association, I intend not to
exclude the Presbytery of a particular Church (where it is sufficient) from
the said Power and exercise of Ordination: of which I am to speak, in the the
following Chapter, which is of the President of such a Presbytery.

CHAP. IV. It is Lawful for the Presbyters of a particular Church, to have a
fixed President, during life.
. 1. I Come now to the most Ancient fixed Bishop that the Church was acquainted
with, except the mere Episcopus Gregis, the Overseer of the flock; and that is,
A President of many Elders in one particular Church. The Diocesan Bishop was
long after this: The first Bishops (if you will call them so) in the Church
were the first mentioned Itinerant Bishops that were sent abroad to convert
souls and gather Churches, and afterward took care to water and confirm them.
The next sort of Bishops (and the first so called) were the fixed Pastors of
particular Churches, that cannot be proved to have any superiority over
Presbyters. The third sort of Bishops (in time, and the first fixed Bishops
that were superiors to other Pastors) were these Presidents of the
Presbyteries of particular Churches. And these are they that now we have to
speak of. And I shall prove that it is not unlawful to have such.

. 2. But first I must tell you what I mean; and show you that such may be had
among us. I have in one of the former Disputations, defined a particular
Church. It should ordinarily consist of no more then may hold personal
Communion together in Gods public Worship. But yet take notice, 1. That it
tends to the strength and honor of it, that it be not too small; but
consisting of as many as are well capable of the Ends. 2* And it is lawful for
these to have some other meeting places for part of the Church, besides the
principal place which is for the whole. Chapels of ease may lawfully be made
use of, for the benefit of the weak, and lame, and aged, that cannot always or
often come to the common Assembly. And where such Chapels are not, it is
lawful to make use of convenient houses. Yea if there were no Place to be had,
sufficiently capacious of a full Assembly, or else if persecution forbad them
to meet, it might still be but one Church, though the members met in several
houses ordinarily: as five hundred in one, and three hundred in another, or one
hundred only in several places, every one going to which house he pleased, and
having several Pastors that in Society and by Consent did guide them all. But
though somewhat disorderly may be born with in cases of Necessity; yet 1. As it
is Necessary to the Ends, and so to the Being of a particular Church that they
be a Society capable of personal Communion; and the personal Teaching, Guidance
and Oversight of the same Pastors, So 2. It is desirable, as much tending to
Order and Edification, that all of them that are able do frequently meet in one
Assembly, for the Worshipping of God with one heart and mouth. And this is the
Church I speak of.

3. It is not of Necessity to the Being of such a particular Church that it
have more Pastors then one: And when one only is the Pastor or Governor, that
one alone may do all the works of a Pastor or Governor (For what else is his
Office, but the state or Relation of a man obliged and authorized to do such
works?) The Learned Dr. H. H. thinks that the Apostles planted none in
Scripture times but single Pastors or Bishops (called also Presbyters) in every
Church, with Deacons under them, without any other Presbyters (subject or
assistant) over that Church. This I conceive cannot be proved, nor so much as
the probability of it; nay I think, at least a probability, if not a certainty
of the contrary may be proved, of some Churches. But yet it is most likely that
it was so with many Churches. And reason tells us, that the thing being in it
self indifferent, was suited by the Apostles to the state of the particular
Churches that they planted. A small Church might well have a single Pastor,
when a large Church, especially in times of persecution, when they must
assemble in several houses at once, required more. Some places might have many
persons fit for the Office, and some but one: Which cases must needs have some
Variety.

. 4. Where there are more Pastors in such a Church, then one, I know of no
Necessity that one should have any superiority over another: nor can I prove
that it was so from the beginning. Some Divines of the Prelatical Judgment
think that this was an Ordinance of the Apostles, at the first planting of such
Churches; Others of them think that it was of their appointment, but not
actually existent till after Scripture times. Others of them think, that as
Hierom says, it began when factions rose in the Church, not by Divine
Ordination, but Ecclesiastical agreement, for the preventing or cure of schism.

. 5. The first Church that we find it in, in History, is that of Alexandria.
And Alexandria was a place exceedingly given to sedition, tumults, and
divisions: the contentions between Cyril and Orestes, the murder of Hypatia by
Peter and his company, the assault made upon Orestes by Ammonius and the other
Nitrian Monks, and many such feats in the days of Theophilus, Dionysius, and
up to the beginning, do show what they were. And Socrates says of them
expressly, li. 7. cap. 13. that [ The people of Alexandria above all other men,
are given to Schism and contention; for if any quarrel arise at any time among
them, presently heinous and horrible offenses use to follow, and the tumult is
never appeased without great bloodshed.] such were the Alexandrians.

. 6. But yet it is certain that the Original of this custom, of setting up one
as President or chief Presbyter in a particular Church, cannot be found out, so
as to say, by whom and when it was first brought in. But if it began upon the
death of Mark at Alexandria* it must needs be long before the death of John the
Apostle, (in that Church, what ever other Churces did.) But it seems that there
was then a difference and indifferency in this point, and that other Churces
did not presently imitate the Churches of Alexandria and Rome herein. He that
reads Clemens Epistle to the Corinthians without partiality, I think will be of
Grotius mind (before cited, Epist. ad Gal. ad Bignon.) that Clemens knew not
any such Prelacy among the Corinthians, when he wrote that Epistle: And so we
may say of some other Witnesses and Churches in those times, and afterward in
many places.

. 7. It is not another Order of Ministers, or Office, that was in such Churches
distinct from the Presbyters that assisted them. Their Presidents or Eminent
Bishops were not made then Episcopi Episcoporum, vel Pastores Pastorum, as
having an Office of Teaching and Governing the other Pastors, as Pastors have
of teaching and Governing the flock. But they were only the chief Presbyters,
or chief Bishops or Pastors of that Church, as an Archdeacon is to the Deacons
when he is made such by their choice, as Hieroms comparison is ( ad Evagr.)

. 8. Nor is it lawful now, even in the smallest Parish, for any One to assume
such a superiority over any Presbyters (though such as have their maintenance
from him, and are chosen by him, and are called, his Curates) as if he were of
a Superior Order or Offi^o, and so the Governor of the other as his
inferiors.

. 9. But yet that a Primacy of degree, or Presidency, or stated Moderatorship
of one in such a Church and Presbytery, is lawful, I think with small labor
may be evinced. And 1. All the Arguments before used, for the Presidency of one
in an Association, will prove this Parochial Presidency with advantage.

. 10. 2. It is a thing that is constantly or very ordinarily practiced among us
already, with common approbation, or without contradiction, as far as I have
heard. Many places have one Minister only that is presented by the Patron; and
this one Pastor has diverse with him (or as the common saying is, Under him:)
If it be a great Congregation, many have a Curate or assistant in the Town with
them, and other Curates at Chapels that depend on that Town. Though there be
but one Chapel in this Parish where I live, yet this Church has three or four
Presbyters, and three or four Deacons. And the Law of the Land does give one
Minister only the Maintenance (called the Benefice) and the Power of the
Temple, and the calling of Assemblies, and the choice of Curates, whom he is to
maintain. And they that are chosen and maintained by him, must and will be
ruled by him; at least in all circumstantial things. It belongs not to them to
Rule even the People contrary to Gods word; nor in substantials to institute
new Ordinances of Worship: But in circumstantials which are left to humane
determination (as time, place, particulars of order, decency, etc.) no doubt
but the chief Pastors in each Parish, do exercise actually a Negative Vote, and
the Curates do nothing without their consent. So that this sort of Presidency
being common among us, without contradiction I may take it for granted that it
has the common consent. And if any allow not of so much as is commonly used,
yet a Presidency is a far lower thing.

. 11. 3. This sort of Presidency, (yea with such a Negative voice as in the
foregoing Chapter is granted) is usually grounded on Nature and the General
Rules of Scripture, and warranted by them. Nature teaches us, that the younger
and more ignorant and unlearned, should (proportionably) submit to the Elder
and Wiser, and in a sort be Ruled by them. And Scripture says the same, 1 Pet.
5.5. [ Ye younger submit your selves unto the Elder.] Even the aged Women
(that were no Officers) must teach the younger, Tit. 2.4. Now it common^ly
falls out that in every Parish that has many Minister, there is but one that
is aged, or grave, and that one commonly is more Learned and judicious then the
rest, who are usually some young unexercised men. Now in such cases. (which is
common) no man can deny that authority to age or Wisdom that is naturally due
to it, nor exempt the younger ignoranter men from that submission which
naturally they are bound to. Equality of Office may stand with inequality of
gifts and ag^, and consequently of duty.

. 12. 4. The good of the Church requires it that this disproportion of
Ministers gifts in one and the same Congregation should be the ordinary case
(And rules must be fitted to ordinary cases, rather then to extraordinary.) For
God does not (as we see by long and sad experience) bestow his excellent gifts
so commonly, as that one Church (ordinarily) should have many Learned able men:
There are but few that are of eminency for judgment and other Ministerial
abilities: Not one for many Parishes: If therefore many of these should be
placed together in one Church, it would be against the common good, and an
unjust ingrossment, and injurious unto others. Providence therefore by the
rarity of eminent parts, does teach us to make it the ordinary course, that in
every Congregation where there are many Pastors, some one of chiefest parts be
chosen to be standing Moderator of the rest.

. 13. 5. That which is lawful for Private men to do toward one another, is
lawful Prudentially for Pastors that are conscious of their own imperfection,
to do toward one that they think more able then themselves. But it is lawful
for Private men to be subject one to another in humility: therefore it is
lawful for such Pastors, 1 Pet. 5.5. [ Yea all of you be subject one to
another, and be clothed with humility] A voluntary subjection to another, in
lawful actions, is nowhere forbidden, but here commanded* and is a great part
of Christian self-denial: and therefore lawful.

. 14. 6. And it is a thing that depends so much on the Wisdom and will of
Presbyters, that no man can hinder it. I can make another Minister a Bishop to
me, whether other men will or not. Honor est in honorante. I can 1. In
judgment esteem him more able, yea or more authorized, then other men. 2. And
I can have recourse to him for advice. 3. And I can give him a Negative vote in
all my Ministerial Actions, so far as they are left to humane determination: I
can resolve to do nothing in such matters, but by his consent. And if I find
reason for this in his abilities, and my disabilities, it is Lawful. The thing
therefore being Lawful, and such as none can hinder me from, I see not why it
may not be made the matter of Consent, when the Churches Peace requires it.

. 15. 7. Moreover, as Divisions justly provoked the Churches at first to think
of such lawful means, for the cure; so our Divisions, or danger of them, do
make it as Necessary, or convenien^, now as then. We see to our shame, that in
most or many Congregations, Ministers that are equal or near to an equality in
parts and place, can hardly agree and live in Peace: but they are jealous of
one another, and envying each others esteem and interest (Though I confess this
is so odious a vice* that its an abominable shameful thing, that any Minister
of Christ should be tainted with it: but so it is* we cannot hide it.) And
therefore it is our ordinary course to have such a disparity of age, and parts,
and interests, that one may have the pre-eminence, and some rule, and the rest
be ruled by him.

. 16. 8. Lastly, the Antiquity and speedy Universality of this course, is a
strong argument to make men moderate in the point. For 1. It seems a most
improbable thing that all the Churches, or so many, should so suddenly take up
this Presidency, Prelacy, or Disparity without scruple or resistance, if it had
been against the Apostles minds. For it cannot be imagined that all these
Churches that were planted by the Apostles, or Apostolical men, and had seen
them and conversed with them, should be either utterly ignorant of their minds,
in such a matter of public practice, or else should be all so careless of
obeying their new received doctrine, as presently and unanimously to consent to
a change, or endure it without resistance. Would no Church or no persons in the
world, contend for the retention of the Apostolical institutions? Would no
Church hold their own, and bear witness against the corruption and innovations
of the rest? would no persons say, [ you go about to alter the frame of
Government newly planted among us by the Holy Ghost; It was not thus in the
days of Peter, or Paul, or John* and therefore we will have no change.] Th^s
see^s to me a thing incredible, that the whole Church should all at once almost
so suddenly and silently yield to such a change of Government. And I do not
think that any man can bring one testimony from all the volumes of Antiquity to
prove that ever Church or person resisted or disclaimed such a change, in the
times when it must be made, if ever it was made* that is, in the first or
second ages.

. 17. Yea 2. It is plain by the testimony of Hierom before mentioned and other
testimonies of antiquity, that in Alexandria, at least, this practice was used
in the days of the Apostles themselves. For they testify that from the days
of Mark the Evangelist till the days of Heroclas and Dionysius, the Presbyters
chose one from among them, and called him their Bishop. Now it is supposed by
the best Chronologers that Mark was slain about the sixty third year of our
Lord, and the tenth of Nero; and that Peter and Paul were put to death about
the sixty sixth of our Lord, and thirteenth of Nero, and that John the Apostle
died about the ninety eighth year of our Lord, and the first of Trajan, which
was about thirty five years after the death of Mark. Now I would leave it to
any man's impartial consideration, whether it be credible that the holy
Apostles, and all the Evangelists or Assistants of them, then alive, would have
suffered this innovation and corruption in the Church without a plain disowning
it and reproving it: Would they silently see their newly established Order
violated in their own days, and not so much as tell the Churches of the sin
and danger? Or if they had indeed done this, would none regard it, nor remember
i^, so much as to resist the sin? These things are incredible.

. 18. And I am confident if the judicious godly people had their choice, from
the experience of what is for their good, they would commonly choose a fixed
President or chief Pastor in every Church. Yea I see, that they will not
ordinarily endure that it should be otherwise. For when they find that God does
usually qualify one above the rest of their Teachers, they will hardly consent
that the rest have an equal power over them. I have seen even a sober unanimous
Godly people, refuse so much as to give their hands to an assistant Presbyter
whom yet they loved, honored and obeyed, though they were urged hard by him
that they preferred, and all from a loathness that there should be a parity. I
know not one Congregation to my remembrance, that has many Ministers, but
would have one be chief.

. 19. Object. But, (the Prelatical men will say) our Pari^shes are not capable
of this, because they have commonly but one Pastor, nor have maintenance for
more. Answ. 1. Though the gre^ter number have but one yet it is an ordinary
case to have two, or three, or more, where there are Chapels in the Parish,
and the Congregations great, as in Market Towns. And if ever we have Peace and
a settled faithful Magistrate that will do his part for the house of God, we
shall certainly have many Ministers in great Congregations: Or else they are
like to be left desolate; For Ministers will overrun them, for fear of
undertaking far more work then with their utmost pains they are able to perform.

. 20. And 2. There are few Congregations, I hope, of Godly people, but have
some private men in them that are fit to be Ordained Assistant Presbyters,
though not to govern a Church alone (without necessity) yet to assist a
Learned, judicious man, such as understand the body of Divinity, (as to the
great and necessary points*) and are able to pray and discourse as well as many
or most Ministers, and to exhort publicly in a case of need. He that would
imitate the example of the Primitive Church (at least in the second Century)
should Ordain such as these to be some of them Assistant Elders, and some of
them Deacons in every Church (that has such;) and let them not teach
publicly, when a more learned, able Pastor is at hand to do it; but let them
assist him in what they are fittest to perform; Yet let them not be Lay Elders:
but authorized to all Pastoral administrations, and of one and the same office
with the Pastor, though dividing the exercise and execution according to their
abilities and opportunities; and not coming in without Ordination, nor yet
taking up the Office only pro tempore. And thus every Parish, where are able
Godly men, may have a Presbytery and President.

. 21. Till then 3. It is granted by the Learned Dr. H. H. that it is not
necessary to the being of a Bishop that he have fellow Presbyters with him in
that Church: If he have but Deacons it may suffice. And this is easy to be had.

. 22. And indeed 1. The parts of many very able Christians, are too much buried
and lost as to the Church, for want of being drawn into more public use. 2.
And it is it that tempts them to run of themselves into the Ministry, or to
preach without Ordination. 3. And yet few of these are fit to be trusted with
the Preaching of the word, or guiding of a Church alone, no nor in equality
with others: for they would either corrupt the doctrine, or divide the Church.
But under the inspection and direction of a more Learned judicious man, as his
assistants, doing nothing against his mind, they might be very serviceable to
some Churches. And such a Bishop with such a Presbytery and Deacons (neither
Lay, nor usually very Learned) were the ancient fixed Governors of the
Churches, if I can understand antiquity.

CHAP. V. Objections against the Presidency forementioned, answered.
. 1. BUT it is not likely but all these motions will have Dissenters on both
sides; It were strange if in a divided age and place, and among a people
engaged in so many several parties, and that so deeply as now men are, there
should any healing remedy be propounded, that should not have abundance of
opposers: Most men are prejudiced and affected at their Education; or
opportunities, or parties, or several interest sway them. And therefore I
expect that most should reject all that I say, and some of them with much
reproach and scorn. Our disease were not so great and dangerous, if it could
but endure the remedy. But let us consider some of their Objections.

. 2. Object. 1. The unpeaceable men of the Prelatical way will say [ This is
but to turn a Bishop into a Parish Priest; and to make him the Ruler of a
Parish and a Curate or two, and in many places, of no Ministers at all: A fair
Promotion. It seems you would leave them but a name and shadow, and make them
to be contemptible.

. 3. Answ. 1. Remember that I grant you also the Presidency of Associations,
etc. which you may call an Archbishopric if you please. 2. Is it honor that
you contend for, or labor and service to the Church? If honor, you must get
it by being the servants of others, Its more then Dr. H. H. speaks of the
Primitive Bishops, that had no Presbyters under them but one or more Deacons.
and not by being Lords of the Clergy or heritage of God. If you are seeking
honor of men, and founding office^ in the Church, by such directors as
ambition, you are not the men that we can hope for Peace or Holiness from, and
therefore can have little treaty with you, but to lay by your wickedness. But
if it be service that you contend for, in order to the Churches good, try first
whether a Parish will not find you work enough. I have tried it, and find that
if I were ten men, I could find as much as I am able to do, in this one Parish.
Though I do as much as I am well able night and day, and have so many helpers,
yet it is so great a trouble to me, that my work and charge is quite too great
for me, that I have been often tempted to desert it, and go to a smaller place:
And nothing stays me but this consideration, that God requires no more then I
can do, and that its better do what I can then nothing: and that if I leave
them, the next is like to do no more. Could I but speak with each man in my
Parish by personal Instruction, once a month, or once a quarter, or half year,
it would put me into high expectations of making a very great change among
them, by this means: But when I am not able to speak to them past once a year,
or two years, I must needs fear lest the force of former words will be lost
before I come again. And yet must you needs have more work and service, and
more souls to answer for? To deal plainly and faithfully with you, Brethren,
impartial standers by conceive that its time for you rather to be more diligent
in a smaller charge, and to lament your negligence in your Parishes, and
publicly to bewail that you have by your idleness betrayed so many souls:
letting them alone in their ignorance and ungodliness, and commonly doing
little in your charges, but what you do at Church in public. Overseers think
that most of you are fitter for smaller charges rather then for greater. I
doubt this will offend many. But you were better use it to your Repentance and
Reformation, then your offense.

. 4. And 3. I pray you consider how your Passion and partiality makes you
contradict your selves. Do you not use to (...) the Presbyters, that they would
all be Bishops, and they would have a Bishop in every Parish, and so are
against Bishops, that they may be Bishops themselves? And what! is a Parish
Bishopric so great a prize for our Ambition, and yet is it so contemptible to
yours? Are we proud for seeking to be Parish Bishops, and do you take it as an
empty name or shadow? At least then confess hereafter, that your Pride is so
much greater, then ours, that the Mark of our Ambition is taken by you to be a
low dishonorable state.

. 5. And 4. I would entreat you impartially to try, whether the Primitive
Apostolic Episcopacy fixed in particular Churches were not a Parochial
Episcopacy? Try whether I have not proved it before? And if it were, will you
pretend to antiquity, and Apostolic institution, and yet despise the primitive
simplicity, and that which you confess was settled by the Apostles? Let the
Eldest carry it without any more ado.

. 6. And 5. At least say no more that you are for Episcopacy, and we against
it: when we are for Episcopacy as well as you. It is only your transcendent, or
exorbitant sort of Episcopacy that we are against. Say not still that we have
no Power of Ordination, because we are not Bishops; but because we are only
Bishops of one Church. Put the controversy truly as it is, Whether it be
lawful for the Bishop of one Church with his Prebytery to Ordain? Yea or
whether many such Associated may Ordain? Or rather, whether it be tied to the
Bishop of many Churches (as you would have it:) that is, Whether Ordination
belong to Archbishops only? Is not this the controversy?

. 7. And then 6. Why do you in your Definitions of Episcopacy (which you very
seldom and sparingly give us) require no more then a Parochial Episcopacy, and
yet now despise it as if it were no Episcopacy at all? Tell us plainly what you
mean by a Bishop? I thought you meant a Primus Presbyterorum, or at least, a
Ruler of People and Presbyters? And is not this to be found in a Parish Bishop,
as well as in a Bishop of many Parishes, or Churches? Change your Definition
from this day forward, if you must have a change of the thing defined, as it
seems you must.

. 8. And I wou^d know whether you can prove that it is Essential to a Bishop to
have more Churches or Parishes then one? Prove it if you are able. Was not
great Gregory of Naocesarea a Bishop with his seventeen souls? And was not
Alexander (the Colliar) whom he Ordained at Comana, a Bishop, though but of a
small Assembly? Do not some of you confess, that Bishops in Scripture-times had
no subject Presbyters, and consequently had but a single Congregation? If then
a Parish or Congregational Bishop were a true Bishop, why may he not be so
still?

. 9. Object. 2. But the Church under Christian Princes should not be conformed
to the model of the Church under persecution: Shall Bishops have no more power
and honor now then they had then? We see in Constantines days a change was
made. Must they be tied to a Parish now, because they were Bishops only of a
Parish in Scripture-times?

. 10. Answ. 1. We would not have them persecuted now, as they were then, nor
yet to want any due encouragement or assistance that a Christian Magistrate can
afford them. But yet we would have Gods Word to be our Rule, and Bishops to be
the same things now as then, and we would not have men make the prosperity of
the Church a pretense for altering the Ordinances or Institutions of Christ,
and making such changes as their conceits or ambitious minds incline them to.
We shall never have a Rule nor fixed certainty, if we may change things our
selves on such pretenses. Pretend not then to Antiquity, as you do.

. 11. And 2. I have in the former Disputation proved by many Reasons, that it
was not the mind of the Apostles themselves, that the Parochial or
Congregational Churches which they planted, should be changed into another sort
of Churches. Nor is there any reason for it, but against it, in the prosperity
of the Church, and piety of Magistrates. For 1. Pious Magistrates should help
to keep, and not to break Apostolical institutions. 2. And pious Magistrates
should further the good of the Church, and not hurt it to advance ambitious m^n.

. 12. For 3. Ministers are for the Churches, and therefore no change must be
made on such pretenses that is against the good of the Churches. If every
Parish or Congregation then, were meet to have a Bishop and Presbytery of
their own, why shall the Church be now so abused, as that a whole County shall
have but one Bishop and his Presbytery? If every Hospital or Town had a
Physician with his Apothecaries and Mates, in your Fathers days, would you be
their benefactors, by procuring that all the County shall have but one
Physician with his Apothecaries? Or if every School had a Schoolmaster in your
Forefathers days, will you say, there shall be but one in your days, in a
whole County? Do you thus think to honor Physicians and Schoolmasters, to the
ruin of the people and the Schools? So do you in your advancement of Bishops.
Upon my certain experience I dare affirm it, that every Parish of four or five
thousand souls, yea of a thousand souls, has need of such a Presbytery for
their Oversight. And is not he that has a County on his hands, like to do less
for this Town or Parish, then if he had no more then this? If your Bees swarm,
you will not keep them all still in an hive, nor think of enlarging the hive to
that end: but you will help the swarm to an hive of their own. If your Children
marry, you will rather settle them in Families of their own, then retain all
them and all their Children in the Family with your selves. So if a Bishop of
one Church should Convert all the Country, he should rather settle them in
several Churches, proportionable to their numbers and distances, then to call
them all his own Church.

. 13. Object. 3. But by this means the Church wou^d be p^stered with Bishops.
What a number of Bishops would you have, if every Parish Priest were a Bishop?
We read not of such numbers as this would procure, in the ancient times.

. 14. Answ. 1. I find where Christ commands us to pray the Lord of the
harvest to send forth Laborers (that is, more Laborers) into the harvest,
because of the greatness of the harvest. But I find not where ^e once requires
us to pray or wish that there may not be too many, for fear of pestering the
Church, or diminishing the honor of the Clergy. Men's purses, I warrant you,
will hinder the over-abounding of them; and Gods providence does not enrich too
many with abilities and willingness for the work. Do you undertake that they
shall not be too bad; and I dare undertake they will not be too many.

. 15. And 2. Is it not the felicity and glory of the Church which you object as
an inconvenience or reproach? O blessed time and place that has but enough that
are able and faithful* But I never knew, nor heard, nor read of the age that
had too many that were good and faithful in the work. Would you not have a
chief Schoolmaster in every School, or Town, for fear the Land should be
pestered or overwhelmed with Schoolmasters? Why how can there be too many,
when people will employ no more then they need? O miserable Church that has
such Bishops, that are afraid Gods vineyard should be furnished with laborers,
lest their greatness and honor should be diminished! Do you not see how many
thousand souls lie still in ignorance, presumption and security for all the
number of laborers that we have? And see you not that six parts of the world
are Infidels, and much for want of Teachers to instruct them? And yet are you
afraid that there will be too many? What could the enemy of the Church say
worse?

. 16. Object. We do not mean too many Teachers, but too many Bishops; that is,
too many Governors of the Church. Answ. 1. God knows no Governors
Ministerial but teachers: It seems you would have somewhat that you call
Government, and leave the labor of Teaching to others: As if you knew not that
it is they that are especially worthy of the double honor that labor in the
word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. Or as if you knew not that even the Government
of Pastors is mostly by teaching. 2. Government and Teaching go together, and
are both necessary to the Church; And the diminishing the number of Governors
and of Teachers is all one: As a Physician does Govern all his Patients in
order to their cure, and a Schoolmaster all his scholars in order to their
learning; so does a Pastor all his flock, in order to their sanctification and
salvation. And for the Government of the Ministers themselves, the number shall
be increased as little as may be. Parish Bishops will Govern but a few; and
therefore they can wrong but few, by their mis-government.

. 17. Object. 4. But by this means we shall have unworthy, raw, and ignorant
men made Bishops: What kind of Bishops shaell we have, if every Parish Priest
must be a Bishop? Some of them are boys, and some of them empty, silly souls
to make Bishops of.

. 18. Answ. I shall lay open the nakedness of this Objection also, so that it
shall be no shelter to domineering in the Church. 1. Awake the sparks of
humility that are in you, and tell us openly, whether you think your selves
more able worthy men to Govern a County, or a hundred Parishes, then such as we
are to Govern one? Though I have been many and many a time tempted with Jonas
to run away from the charge that is cast upon me, as a burden too heavy for me
to bear, and I know my self to be lamentably insufficient for it: yet I must
profess, that I am so proud as to think my self as able to be the Pastor or
Bishop of this Parish, as most Bishops in England, yea or any one of them, to
be the Pastor and Governor of a County, or an hundred or two hundred Parishes.
Were you humble, or did you dwell at home, or take an account of your own
abilities, when you reproach others as unable to be the Bishops of a Parish,
and think your selves able to be the Bishops of a Diocese and contend for it so
eagerly?

. 19. And 2. I further answer you: We will leave you not a rag of this
Objection to cover your nakedness. For if any Pastors or Parish Bishops be more
ignorant then others, and unfit to Teach and Rule their flocks without the
assistance, teaching or direction of more able me^, we all agree that its the
duty of such men to Learn while they are Teachers, and to be Ruled while they
are Rulers, by them that are wiser. For as is said, a Parity in regard of
office, does not deny a disparity of gifts and part^^ And we constantly hold,
that of men that are equal in regard of office, the younger and more ignorant
should learn of the aged that are more able and wise, and be Ruled by their
advice, as far as their insufficiency makes it necessary. And will not this
suffice?

. 20. And 3. If this suffice not, consider that Associated Pastors are linked
together, and do nothing in any weighty matters of common concernment (or of
private, wherein they need advice) without the help and directions of the rest.
And a young man may govern a Parish by the advice of a Presbytery and also of
Associated able Pastors, as well as such Bishops as we have had, have governed
a Diocese.

. 21. And yet 4. If all this suffice not, be it known to you that we endeavor
to have the best that can be got for every Parish: and Novices we will have
none, except in case of mere necessity: And we have an act for rejecting all
the insufficient, as well as the scandalous and negligent: and any of you may
be heard that will charge any among us with insufficiency. Sure I am we are
cleansing the Church of the insufficient and scandalous that the Prelates
brought in, as fast a we can: if any prove like them, that since are
introduced, we desire that they may speed no better. What side soever they be
on, we desire able faithful men, and desire the ejection of the insufficient
and unfaithful. And youth does not always prove insufficiency. Witness Timothy,
whose youth was not to be despised. At what age Origin and many more of old
began, is commonly known. Vigelius was Bishop at twenty years of age (the
Tridentine Bishop) We will promise you that we will have none so young to be
Parish Presbyters, as Rome has had some Popes and Cardinals and Archbishops
and Bishops. Nor shall any such ignorant insufficient men, I hope, be admitted,
as were commonly admitted by the Prelates.

. 22. Object. 5. But the Apostles and Evangelists had a larger circuit then a
Parish, and therefore so should their Successors have? Answ. I grant you that
they had a larger circuit, and that herein, and in their ordinary work they
have successors: And we consent that you shall be their Successors. Gird up
your loins, and travail about as far as you please, and preach the Gospel to as
many as will receive you (and sure the Apostles forced none) and convert as
many souls as you can, and direct them when you have done in the way of
Church Communion, and do all the good that you can in the world, and try
whether we will hinder you. Have you not liberty to do as the Apostles did? Be
ye servants of all, and seek to save all, and take on you thus the care of all
the Churches, and see who will forbid such an Episcopacy as this?

. 23. Object. 6. But it seems you would have none compelled to obey the
Bishops, but they only that are willing should do it: and so men shall have
liberty of conscience, and anarchy and parity and confusion will be brought
into the Church. Answ. 1. I would have none have liberty for any certain
impiety or sin: And yet I would have no sin punished beyond the measure of its
deserts. And I would not have preachers made no Preachers (unless the Church
may spare them) because their judgments are against Diocesan Bishops: and
therefore I would have none silenced or susspended for this. 2. And what is it
that you would have that's better? Would you have men forced to acknowledge and
submit to your Episcopacy? And how? Small penalties will not change men's
judgments, nor consciences. Silencing or death would deprive the Church of
their labors: and so we must lose our Teachers lest they disobey the Bishops.
If this be your cure, it disgraceth your cause. We desire not Prelacy at so
dear a rate. Its a sad order that destroys the duty ordered.

. 24. Object. But this is to take down all Church Government, if all shall have
what Government they list. Answ. 1. Was there no Church Government before the
days of Constantine the Emperor? 2. Do you pretend to antiquity, and fly from
the Ancient Government as none? You shall have the same means as all the
Bishops of the Church had for above three hundred years to bring men to your
obedience: and is that nothing with you? Why is it commonly maintained by us
all, that the Primitive state was that purest state, which after times should
strive to imitate, if yet it was so defective as you imagine? 3. And why have
you still pretended to such a power and excellent usefulness in the Prelatical
Government, if now you confess that it is but anarchy, and as bad as nothing,
without the inforcement of the Magistrate? What Magistrate forces men to obey
the Presbyteries now in England, Scotland, or many other places? 4. Yet it is
our desire, that the Magistrate will do his duty, and maintain order in the
Church, and hinder disorders, and all known sin: but so, as not to put his
sword into the hand or use it at the pleasure of every party that would be
lifted up. Let him prudently countenance that way of Government, that tends
most to the good of the Churches under his care; but not so as to persecute,
silence, or cast out, all such as are for a different form, in case where
difference is tolerable. 5. And in good sadness, is it not more prudent for the
Magistrate to keep the sword in his own hands if really it be the sword that
must do the work? If Episcopal Government can do so little without the
compulsion of the Magistrate, so that all the honor of the good effects
belongs to the sword, truly I think it prudence in him to do his part
himself, and leave Bishops to their part, that so he may have the honor that,
it seems, belongs unto his office, and the Bishop may not go away with it, nor
the Presbytery neither. Let the secular Bishop have the honor of all that
Order and unity that arises from compulsion: and good reason, when he must
have the labor, and run the hazard if he do it amiss: and let the
Ecclesiastical Bishops have the honor of all that order and unity that arises
from their management of the spiritual sword and Keys. 6. And lastly I answer,
that this is not the subject that you and we have to dispute of. It is
Ecclesiastical Government by Ministers, and not secular by Magistrates that is
our controversy. It is of the Power left by Christ to Pastors and not to
Princes.

. 25. Object. But at least those should be excommunicated that deny obedience
to their Bishops: that is a Power that is left in the Bishops themselves,
whether the Magistrate consent or not. Answ. 1. Excommunication is a sentence
that should fall on none but for such gross and heinous sin, if not also
obstinacy and impenitency in them, as is mentioned in Scripture: Using it in
cases of controversy and tolerable differences, is but a tearing and dividing
the Church. 2. We take it not for our duty to excommunicate you, because you
are for Diocesan Prelacy: therefore you should not take it for yours to
excommunicate others because they are against it. For 3. If your species of
Episcopacy be such as I have proved it, you have more need to repent and amend,
and ask forgiveness of God and men, then to excommunicate them that are not of
your opinion, and for your sin. 4. But if you take this to be your duty, who
has hindered you from it these twelve years? You had liberty, for ought I
know, to have discharged your consciences, and to have excommunicated us all.
5. But you might so easily see what was like to come of it, that it is no
wonder that you forbore. If such a Ministry and such a people as are now your
adherents (whose description I forbear) should execute your sentence, and cast
us and our adherents out of their communion, what contempt would it bring upon
you in England? The Alehouses would be shut up for the most part, against u^:
But that and the rest, would be easily born: I think this is not your way.

. 26. Object. 7. But what need you form us a new sort of Episcopacy? were we
not well enough before? Why did you pull down that which was well planted, and
now pretend to commend a better to us? We were well if you had let us alone.

. 27. Answ. 1. But We were not well, because you would not let us alone. The
Ministers that were silenced, and imprisoned, and banished, and the thousands
of people that were fain to follow them, and all those that were undone by your
prosecutions in England, were not well. But this is a small matter: The
ignorant Congregations that had ignorant and drunken guides, where Piety was
scorned as Puritanism, and impiety made a thing of nothing, and where Satan was
so commonly served; the many hundred Congregations in England that never knew
what true Discipline meant, nor never saw in all their lives, a drunkard,
oppressor, railer, blasphemer, either cast out, or penitently confess his sin,
before the Church, all these were not well, though you were well. 2. Whether we
were well before, I have showed in my first Disputation, and thither I refer
you. 3. And whether we have brought in a new Episcopacy, or only cast out a new
one, and desire to bring in the Old, we are content to put it to an equal
trial. We all concur in offering you this motion. Let the oldest stand, and
the newest be cast out.

. 28. Object. 8. Judge now by the effects: The Episcopacy which you blame, did
keep up Order and Unity in the Church: It kept under those weeds of heresy and
error that since sprung up: We had then no Quakers, nor Seekers, nor such other
Sects as now abound: This swarm of Errors shows which Government is best.

. 29. Answ. This is a gross fallacy, a non causa pro causa: to which I return
you my answer in these seven considerations. 1. You tell us of the good that
you think you did: but you tell us not of the hurt. I hope I love Divisions or
Heresies as little as ever a Bishop in England: and yet I must profess that I
had rather an hundred times, have things continue as they are with all our
swarms of heresies, then to be restored to their ancient pass. Our loss i^ as
great as Joseph's in being removed from the Prison to Pharaohs ungodly family: I
mean in spirituals (of seculars anon.) I know not of an Anabaptist, Separatist,
Quaker or any other Sectary in the Town that I live in, for all this noise;
unless you will take a few Infidels for Sectaries, or a few ignorant Papists,
or those of your own way. But on the other side, I hope there are many hundreds
that truly fear God, that formerly were drowned in ignorance and ungodliness.
The families that were wont to curse and swear and rail at Godliness, do now
worship God, and set up holy instructions, and cast out sin: and this is our
change: And in some measure, I have reason to believe that it is so in other
places also.

. 30. 2. The Errors of the times are many of them your own, and therefore you
exclaim against your selves. It is of your own selves that men arise, that
write against Original sin, and for Liberty of Prophesying, (which is more then
Liberty of Believing) and for a kind of Limbus Patrum and Infantum, and for
humane Satisfactions for sin to God, and for the Primacy of the Pope, and that
all our Protestant Churches are no Churches, or Ministers no Ministers, that
have not Prelatical Ordination, yea and a Succession of it; with many the like
(to say nothing of other Pelagian weeds.) It does not therefore become you to
reproach us with our swarms of Errors while you introduce them.

. 31. 3. There were Heresies and Sects even in the days of Prelacy. Had you
not then the Familists, the Grundle^onians, (such as Hacket, and Coppinger, and
Arthington) and the Anabaptists, and Separatists, and Antinomians, and Papists,
and such like? besides the contentions between the Arminians and Antiarminians*
and the contentions raised by Episcopacy it self, and the Ceremonies that it
upheld? Who were they that rose up against the Bishops, and pulled them down,
if there were Unity under them, as you pretend?

. 32. 4. The truth is, it was the Magistrate and not Episcopacy that kept that
Unity and Peace among us which we had; and that kept under Heresies so much as
they were kept under. Take not therefore the Magistrates honor to your selves.
Who would have attended your Courts, or submitted to your censures, had it not
been for fear of the Secular power? I think but few. You know the Heretics
themselves obeyed you not for Conscience sake. Nor would they have regarded
your Excommunication, if the Magistrate would have let them alone. If it was
the spiritual sword in your hands that kept out Heresies, why did you not keep
them out since, as well as then? You have the same power from Christ now as
ever you had. And I hope the fears of persecution will not hinder you from your
duty: especially when you can name so few that have suffered for exercising
Church Discipline by Episcopal power! at least this was no hinderance a few
years ago. For my part, I heartily wish you free from persecution, if you are
not. But again I tell you, that which I suppose you know; that as free a
Toleration of Prelacy in England as there is of Presbytery, were the likelyest
way to bring you into perpetual contempt. For we cannot but know, that besides
a few Civil engaged Gentlemen, Ministers, and others, your main body would
consist of those that for their notorious impiety, scandal or ignorance, are
thought unmeet for Church Communion by others: and that when you came to
exercise Discipline on them, they would hate you and fly from you as much as
ever they did from Puritans: and if you did indulge them, and not reform them
or cast them out, your Church would be the Contempt of the sober part of the
world* and your own sober members would quickly relinquish it for shame. For
[the Church of England] if you would needs be so called, would be taken for the
sink of all the other Churches in England. This is a clear and certain truth
that is easily discerned, without a Prophetic spirit: and the dishonor of all
this would reflect upon your Prelacy.

. 33. 5. And further, I answer your Objection; that it is not the insufficiency
of other Church Government in comparison of Prelacy, that was the inlet of our
Heresies and Divisions; but it was the Licentiousness of a time of war, when
all evil spirits are turned loose, and the subtilty of the Papists that have
taken advantage to spawn among us the Quakers, and Levellers, and Behemists,
and other Paracelsians, and the Seekers to confound and dishonor us if they
could, and to promote their cause. And in times of war, especially when such
changes in the Civil state ensue, and so many adversaries are watching to sow
tares, such things are common.

. 34. 6. And you cannot say, that it comes from the insufficiency of other
Government in comparison of yours, because you see no other Government settled
instead of yours, so far as to be seconded by the sword or secular power; no
nor so far as to have a word of command or persuasion to the people to obey it,
(except an Ordinance that in most places was hindered from execution:) nor is
there any one Government so much as owned alone by the Magistrate. Besides,
that the Civil power it self restrains not those that you speak of, as to the
most of them.

. 35. 7. Lastly, if you would compare your Prelacy with other Government,
compare them where the case is equal. Has not Presbytery in Scotland, and in
France (with much less help and countenance from the Magistrate) kept out
Heresies and divisions, as much at least, as ever Prelacy did? It is certain
that it has.

. 36. And yet I must add, that the multitude of Sects and Heresies that sprung
up in the first, and second, and third Ages, was no such dishonor to the form
of Government then used in the Church, as should encourage any man to dislike
or change it. If it was Prelacy that was used, then swarms of Sects and
Heresies may come in notwithstanding Prelacy (even in better hands then yours.)
But if it were not Prelacy that was then the Government, Heresies are no more a
shame to that Government now.

. 37. I know many Readers will think, that this writing that purposely comes
for Peace, should not be guilty of repeating and remembering the faults of
others, nor speak to them so plainly as is liker to exasperate then pacify.
But to these I say, 1. Their Objections which they insist on cannot be answered
but by this opening of the truth. And 2. The truth is, those men that own all
the abuses and persecutions of the late Prelates, and are impenitent as to
their guilt, and wish and would have the same again, are no fit materials for a
concordant frame. If their business be destroying, they will never well join
with us in building and in healing. Repentance is the best Ingredient in our
Salve. We consent to the same conditions that we propose, and will thank them
if they will help us to Repentance; especially of such sins as are destructive
to the Churches peace.

. 38. And the Godly Moderate Episcopal men do concur with us in the blaming of
the abuses of their party. Says that good and peaceable Bishop Hall in his
modest offer to the Assembly, page 3. [ I should be a flatterer of the times
past, if I should take upon me to justify or approve of all the carriages of
some, that have been entrusted with the Keys of Ecclesiastical Government: or
to blanch over the corruptions of Consistorial Officers: in both these there
was fault enough to ground both a Complaint and Reformation: and may that man
never prosper, that desires not an happy reformation of whatsoever has been,
or is amiss in the Church of God.]

. 39. Object. 9. But it is not only the abuses of Episcopacy, but the thing it
self that has been Covenanted against in England, and opposed: nor is it only
the English Prelacy, but all Episcopacy: and therefore your motion for another
species is like to find but small acceptance.

. 40. Answ. It is not true that all Episcopacy has been Covenanted against or
taken down in England. Nor is it true of any of the sorts of Episcopacy which I
have here mentioned. It was only that which was then existent that was taken
down, and only the English frame of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and the rest,
as here they Governed, that was Covenanted against. Of which I shall speak more
anon in answer to the Objections of others.

. 41. Object. 10. You have covetously seized on the Revenues of the Bishops,
and made your selves fat with their Possessions, and this was the prize that
you aimed at in taking them down. Answ. The world sees the falsehood of this
slander, in the open light; and therefore for your credit sake, you were best
recant it. England knows that the Bishops lands were sold, and given to the
Soldiers, and not to the Presbyters. It maintained the Army, and not the
Ministry. And that the Dean and Chapters lands is gone the same way, or the
like, to pay the debts of the State. And that Presbyters have none of them all,
save that here and there one that had about ten, or twenty* or thirty pound a
year* have somewhat in Augmentation, that the Churches may not be left to
Readers, and blind Guides, as they were in the Prelates days. I that have a
fuller maintenance then most in all the Country where I live, do receive but
about eighty pound and sometimes ninety pound per annum: and did I need to pull
down Prelacy for this?

. 42. I Come now to the Objections of the other side, who will be offended with
me for consenting for peace, to so much as I here do? And 1. Some will say,
that we are engaged against all Prelacy by Covenant, and therefore cannot yield
to so much as you do, without the guilt of perjury.

. 43. Answ. That this is utterly untrue, I thus demonstrate. 1. When the
Covenant was presented to the Assembly, with the bare name of [ Prelacy] joined
to Popery, many Grave and Reverend Divines desired that the word [ Prelacy]
might be explained, because it was not all Episcopacy that they were against.
And thereupon the following Concatenation in the parenthesis was given by way
of explication: in these words, [ that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending on that
Hierarchy.] By which it appears that it was only the English Hierarchy or
frame, that was Covenanted against: and that which was then existent, that was
taken down.

. 44. 2. When the house of Lords took the Covenant, Mr. Thomas Coleman that
gave it them, did so explain it and profess, that it was not their intent to
Covenant against all Episcopacy: and upon this explication it was taken: and
certainly the Parliament were most capable of giving us the due sense of it;
because it was they that did impose it.

. 45. 3. And it could not be all Episcopacy that was excluded, because a
Parochial Episcopacy was at the same time used and approved commonly here in
England.

. 46. 4. And in Scotland they had used the help of Visitors for the Reformation
of their Churches, committing the care of a County or large Circuit to some one
man, which was as high a sort of Episcopacy at least, as any I am pleading for.
Besides that they had Moderators in all their Synods, which were temporary
Bishops.

. 47. 5. Also the chief Divines of the late Assembly at Westminster, that
recommended the Covenant to the Nations, have professed their own judgments
for such a Moderate Episcopacy as I am here defending: and therefore they never
intended the exclusion of this by the Covenant.

. 48. Object. 2. By this we shall seem mutable, while we take down Episcopacy
one year, and set it up again the next. Answ. We desire not the setting up of
that which we have taken down: and therefore it is no mutability.

. 49. Object. 3. But this will prepare for the restoration of the old
Episcopacy. By such degrees it invaded the Church at first: and if we let in
the preparatory degree, the rest in time is like to follow; all that we can do
is little enough to keep it out.

. 50. Answ. 1. If we had no other work to do, we would do this as violently as
you desire: but we have the contrary extreme to take heed of and avoid; and the
Churches Peace, if it may be, to procure. 2. As we must not take down the
Ministry, lest it prepare men for Episcopacy, so neither must we be against any
profitable exercise of the Ministry, or desirable Order among them, for fear of
introducing Prelacy. 3. Nor is there any such danger of it, as is pretended: as
long as the Magistrate puts not the sword into their hands, and no man can be
subjected to them, but by his own Consent, what need we fear their
encroachments on our liberties. 4. It is not in your power to hinder the
Species of Episcopacy that is pleaded for, from being introduced: but only to
withold your own consent, and hinder peace and unity. For any Minister that
will, can esteem another his superior, and be ruled by him, and do nothing
without his consent: These are the actions of his own free will. 5. As long as
you are free from violence, if you find an evil or danger, you may draw back.

. 51. Object. 4. Have we not smarted by them late enough already? shall we so
soon be turning back to Egypt? Answ. That which you have smarted by, we desire
you not to turn back to; but that which is Apostolical, pure, and profitable to
the Church, and that's not Egypt.

. 52. Object. 5. You do all this for Peace with Episcopal Divines: and where is
there any of them that is worthy so studious a Pacification? Do they not
commonly own their former impieties and persecutions? (...) they not mere
formalists and enemies to practical Godliness? Would they not ruin the Church
and do as they have done, if they had power? Has God brought them down for
their own wickedness, and shall we set them up again?

. 53. An^w. 1. All are not such as you describe: Many of them are godly able
men, that desire and endeavor the good of the Church. 2. If there were none in
this age worthy of our communion; yet, if we will have a lasting peace, we must
extend the terms of it so far as to comprehend all that are fit for Communion.
And such we may easily know, there will be of this opinion throughout all ages.
3. And most of the Churches in the world being already for a higher Prelacy
then this, we should agree with them as far as well we may.

. 54. Object. 6. But the ^arliament have enacted in the settlement of the Civil
Government, that Popery and Prelacy shall not be tolerated. Answ. That is, the
English Prelacy excluded by the Covenant, and that, as it would be exercised by
violence, and forced upon dissenters. Its known what Prelacy was in England;
and they cannot rationally be interpreted to speak against any but what was
among us, and taken notice of under that name. You see the same Power allow a
Parochial Episcopacy, and also Approvers of all that are admitted to public
preaching; and you see they allow an Itinerant Ministry in Wales: and they join
Magistrates and Ministers for the ejecting of the insufficient Minister: and
they never forbad or hindered a stated Presidency, or any thing that I have
pleaded for: yea they continued a Moderator of the Assembly at Westminster for
many years, even to his death. And what fuller evidence would you have that it
is not any such Episcopacy whose liberty they exclude, under the name of
Prelacy? Only they would not have the Hierarchy by Law-Chancellors to govern
the Church, and that by force of the secular power annexed unto theirs: and so
they deny them Liberty to deprive all other men of their liberty. But this is
nothing to the matt^r in hand.

. 55. To conclude, let it be noted, in answer to all other objections, that the
Presidency, or pre-eminence pleaded for, does enable no man to do harm; but
only give themselves advantage to do good. They can hinder no man from
preaching, or praying or holy living, or improving his abilities to the good of
the Church: Nor can they Govern any man further then they have his own Consent.
All which being well considered, I may conclude that this much may be granted
in order to the healing and Reforming of the Churches.

CHAP. VI. The sum of the foregoing Propositions, and the Consistency of them
with the Principles of each party, and so their aptitude to Reconcile.
. 1. THE sum of all that I have propounded is, that though we cannot, we may
not embrace the Government by Prelacy, as lately exercised here in England (how
confidently soever some appropriate the title of the Church of England to the
adherents of that frame,) yet would we not have the Church ungoverned, nor
worse governed, nor will we refuse for peace such a kind of Episcpacy as is
tolerable in the Church. And there are four sorts of Exercise of the Ministry,
which if you please, you may call Episcopacy, which we shall not refuse when it
may conduce to Peace.

1. Parochial Bishops.
. 2. I. We shall consent that the Ancient Parochial Episcopacy be restored:
that is, that in every Parish that has a particular Church, there may be a
Pastor or Bishop settled to govern it, according to the word of God: And that he
may be the chief among the Presbyters of that Church, if there be any: And may
assume fit men to be assisting Presbyters to him, if there be such to be had.
If not, he may be content with Deacons. And these Parochial Bishops are most
ancient, and have the Power of Ordination.

. 3. Yet do we not so tie a Church to a Parish, but that in places where the
ignorance, infidelity, or impiety of the people, or the smalness of the
Parishes is such, as that there are not fit persons enough in a Parish to make
a convenient particular Church, it may be fit for two, or three, or four (in
necessity) Neighbor Parishes to join together, and to be formed into one
particular Church. The several Ministers keeping their stations, for the
teaching of the rest as Catechumens, but joining as one Presbytery, for
Governing of that one particular Church, that is Congregate among them. And
having one President, without whom nothing should be done in matters left to
humane determination. Yet so, that the Presbyters be not forced to this, but do
it freely.

. 4. II. 2. The stated Presidents of Associated Pastors.
We shall consent that these Parish Churches be Associate, and that in every
Market Town (or such convenient places as shall be agreed on) there may be
frequent meetings of the Pastors, for Communion and Correspondency; and that
one among them be their standing Moderator durante vita, or their President
(for so I would call him rather then Bishop, though we would leave men to use
what name they please) And to him should be committed the Communicating of
times and places of meeting, and other businesses and Correspondencies. And the
Moderating of the debates and disputations.

. 5. And for my part I would consent for peace that de facto no Ordination be
made in either of the foresaid Presbyteries, without the President, but in
cases of Necessity: so be it 1. That none be compelled to own any other
Principle of this Practice, then a Love of Peace; and none be compelled to
profess that he holds the President to have de jure a Negative voice: yea
that all have liberty to write down on what other Principles they thus yield,
that the Practice only may suffice for Peace.

. 6. III. We shall consent also, that one in a Deanery or Hundred, or other
convenient space, 3. A Visit^r of the neighbor Churches, and Countr^y.
may by the Magistrate be chosen a Visitor of the Churches and Country about
him; having Power only to take notice of the state of things, and gravely to
admonish the Pastors where they are negligent, and exhort the people, and
provoke them to Holiness, Reformation and Unity, only by persuasions from the
Word of God. Which is no more then any Minister may do that has opportunity:
only we desire the Magistrate to design a particular person to do it (requiring
Ministers and people to give him the meeting,) because that which is every man's
work is not so well done, as that which is specially committed to some. And we
desire that he may acquaint the Magistrate how things are.

These two to be in one man.
. 7. And to avoid the inconveniences of dividing these works, we are desirous
that these two last may meet in one man: and so he that is chosen by the
Pastors, the President of their Association, may be chosen his Visitor by the
Magistrate, and do both; which may be done by one in every Market Town (which
is truly a City in the ancient sense) and the circumjacent Villages. Yet this
we cannot make a standing Rule (that one man do both) because the Pastors must
choose their President, and the Magistrate his Visitor; and its possible they
may not always concur. But if the Magistrate will not choose such a Visitor,
the Pastors may. But then they can compel none to meet him or hear him.

. 8. IV. Besides these three (or two, whether you will) before mentioned, 4.
General unfixed Ministers.
we shall consent that there be a general sort of Ministers, such as the
Apostles, Evangelists, and others in those times were, that shall have no
special charge, but go up and down to preach the Gospel, and gather Churches
where there are none, and contribute the best assistance of their Abilities,
Interest and Authority for the reforming, confirming, and right ordering of
Churches. And if by the Magistrates Command, or Ministers consent there be one
of these assigned to each County, and so their Provinces prudentially
distinguished and limited, we shall not dissent. Yet we would have such but
where there is need.

. 9. V. Besides these four sorts of Bishops, we are all agreed on two sorts
more; 1. The Episcopi gregis, or Pastors of every Congregation, whether they
have any assistant Presbyters or no, or being themselves but such assistant
Presbyters. 2. The Magistrate, who is So Constanti^e calls himself a Bishop.
Eusebius. vit. Co^st. l. 4. c 24. And he made his Court a Church, and assembling
the people, did use to take, the holy Scriture, and deliver Divine
contemplations out of it, or else he would read the Common Prayers to the whole
Congregation, cap. 17. And it is plain that it was Constantine that kept the
Churches in Unity and Peace, when the Bishops else would have broken them to
pieces. And the Emperors frequently took down and set up Bishops at their
pleasure, especially in the Patriarchial Seats as Rome, Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria.
a secular Bishop, or a Governor of the Church by force. And we desire the
Magistrate to be a nursing Father to the Church, and do his duty, and to keep
the sword in his own hand; and for forcible deposing Ministers, or any
punishment on body or estate, we desire no Bishops nor other Ministers may be
authorized thereto: But if Pastors exclude an unworthy Pastor from their
Communion, let the Magistrate only deprive him forcibly of his place and
maintenance, if he see cause. When the Council of Antioch had deposed Paulus
Samosatenus, he would not go out of the house: And all the Bishops in the
Council could not force him out, but were fain to procure the Heathen Emperor
Aurelian to do it. It lies as a blot on Cyril of Alexandria that he was the
first man that arrogated and exercised there a secular Coercive Power, under
the name of a Bishop of the Church.

. 10. There is enough in this much to satisfy any moderate honest men for
Church Government, and for the healing of our Divisions thereabout: And there
is nothing in this that is inconsistent with the Principles of the moderare of
any Party.

. 11. 1. That a Church organized, called by some Ecclesia prima, should be no
greater then I have mentioned, is not contradictory to the Principles of the
Episcopal, Presbyterians, Congregationall or Erastian. Indeed the two first
say, that it may be bigger: but none of them say, It must be bigger. The
Presbyterians instances of the Church of Jerusalem (which s^rued to the
highest, cannot be proved near half so great as some of our Parishes*) and such
other Churches, are but for the may be, and not for the must be. And therefore
if they be peaceable, this will make no breach.

. 12. 2. That Parochial Churches and Associations have fixed Presidents, is
nothing contrary to any of their Principles, as far as I am able to discern
them.

. 13. 3. That Pastors may be lawfully appointed to visit and help the Country
and the neighbor Churches, and exhort them to their duty, and give the
Magistrate information of their state, is a thing that none can justly blame,
any more then preaching a Lecture among them. Nor do I know any party that is
against it, (of these four.)

. 14. And 4. That there may be more General Ministers to gather, and take care
of many Churches, I think none of them will deny. Sure the ^tinerant Ministers
in Wales will not: Nor yet that these may have their Provinces distinguished.
If I could imagine which of all these sorts would be denied, I would more fully
prove it, yea and prove it consistent with the Principles of each party; but
till then its vain.

. 15. The only point that I remember, like to be questioned, is, the consenting
to forbear Ordination in several Presbyteries, till the President be one,
except in case of Nec^ssity: And nothing is here questionable, that I observe,
but only Whether it be consistent with the Principles of the Congregational
party, seeing they would have all Ordination to be by the Elders of their own
Church, and where there are none, that it be done by the people without Elders.
To which I answer, 1. That we here grant them that a Congregational Presbytery
with their President may ordain an Elder for that Congregation. 2. The Moderate
Congregational men do grant us that the Elders or Pastors of other Churches may
lawfully be called to assist them in Ordination, though they think it be not
necessary. It is not therefore against their Principles to do so. For sure they
may do a Lawful thing, especially when the Churches Peace does lie so much upon
it as here it does.

. 16. I conclude therefore that here are healing Principles brought to your
hands, if you have but healing inclinations to receive them. Here is a
sufficient remedy for our Divisions, upon the account of Church Government, if
you have but hearts to entertain them, and apply them. But if some on one side
will adhere to all their former excesses and abuses, and continue impenitent,
unchurching the best of the Protestant Churches that are not Prelatical (while
they unchurch not the Church of Rome:) And if others on the other side will
stiffly refuse to yield in things that cannot be denied to be lawful, yea and
convenient for the Churches, and set more by all their own conceits then by the
Peace of Brethren, and consequently the prosperity of the Church, we must leave
the care of all to God, and content our selves that we have done our duty.

CHAP. VII. Some instances to prove that moderate men will agree upon the
foregoing terms.
. 1. LEST any think that it is a hopeless work that I have motioned, and the
parties will not agree upon these terms, I shall shall next prove to you that
the godly and moderate of each party, are agreed already (at least the
Episcopal and Presbyterians, and I think the rest:) and that its in Practice
more then Principles that we disagree.

. 2. I. I will begin with the Episcopal Divines, of whom there ate two parties,
differing much more from one another, then the one of them does from the
Presbyterians. The ancient Bishops and the moderate of late, did maintain the
Validity of Ordination by Presbyters, and own the Reformed Churches that had
other, supposing their Episcopacy useful to the perfection or well being of a
Church, but not necessary to the being of it. And this sort of men (who also
agree with us in doctrine) we could quickly be reconciled with. But of late
years there are many Episcopal Divines sprung up, that embracing the Doctrine
called Arminianism, do withal deny the Being of the Ministry and Churches that
want Prelatical ordination: and with these there is no hope of concord, because
they will have it on no other terms then renouncing our Churches and Ministry,
and being again ordained by them, and thus coming wholly over to them. These
separate from us, and pretend that our Churches have no true Worship (wondrous
audacity,) and our Ministers are no true Ministers, and call the Church into
private houses (as D. Hide expressly in his [Christ and his Church] in the
beginning of the Preface; and many others.) Of whom I spoke before.

. 3. That the ancient English Bishops that hold to the doctrine of the Church
of England, and are peaceable men, are easily agreed with us, I first prove
from the example of Reverend Bishop Hall. In his Peacemaker he has these
words, [ Page 46, 47, 48, 49. The Divisions of the Church are either General
betwixt our Church and the other Reformed; or special with those within the
bosom of our own Church; both which require several considerations. For the
former, blessed be God, there is no difference in any essential matter betwixt
the Church of England and her Sisters of the Reformation: We accord in every
point of Christian Doctrine without least the variation. (N B.) Their public
Confessions and ours, are sufficient convictions to the world, of our full and
absolute agreement; the only difference is in the form of outward
administration: Wherein also we are so far agreed, as that we all profess this
form not to be essential to the being of a Church (N. B.) though much importing
the well or better being of it, according to our several apprehensions thereof;
and that we do all retain a reverent and loving opinion of each other in our
own several ways: not seeing any reason why so poor a diversity should work
any alienation of affection in us, one toward another: But withal, nothing
hinders but that we may come yet closer to one another, if both may resolve to
meet in that Primitive Government (whereby it is meet we should both be
regulated) universally agreed on by all antiquity; wherein all things were
ordered and transacted by the Consent of the Presbytery, moderated by one
constant President thereof: the Primacy and perpetual practice whereof no man
can doubt of that has but seen the writings of Clemens and Ignatius,
and has gone along with the History of those primitive times -- We may well
rest in the judgment of Mr. John Camero, the Learned Divine, be it spoke
without envy, that the Church of Scotland has afforded in this last age:
[Nullus est dubitandi, locus, etc. There is no doubt at all says he, but that
Timothy was chosen by the College of the Presbyters, to be the President of
them, and that not without some authority over the rest, but yet such as have
the due bounds and limits] And that this was a leading case, and common to
other Churches, was never denied by any author. Words may not break square,
where the things are agreed. If the name of a Bishop displease, let them call
this man a Moderator, a President, a Superintendent, an Overseer; Only for the
fixedness or change of this person, let the ancient and universal practice of
Gods Church be thought worthy to oversway. And if in this one point (N. B.) (
wherein the distance it so narrow, we could condescend to each other all other
circumstances and appendances of varying practices or (...), might without any
difficulty be accorded. But if there must be a difference of judgment in these
matters of outward Policy, why should not our hearts be still one? why should
such a diversity be of Power to endanger the dissolving of the bond of
brotherhood? May we have the grace but to follow the truth in Love, we shall in
these several tracts overtake her happily in the end, and find^ her embracing
of Peace, and crowning us with blessedness] So far Bishop Hall; so that you see
that only the fixing of the Moderator or President will satisfy such as he:
and so with him and such as he, for my part I am fully agreed already.

. 4. And here by the way, because there are so many Episcopal separatists of
late, that hazard the souls of their partial followers, and because the right
habituating of the mind with Peace is an excellent help to a sound
understanding, and the escaping the errors and heinous sins that Faction
engages too many in, I therefore make it my request to all that read these
lines, but soberly to read over that And Mr. Buroughs Irenico^.
one Book of Bishop Halls, called the Peacemaker, once or twice: which if I
could procure, I think I should do much to the Peace of these Churches, and to
the good of many endangered souls, that by passionate and factious leaders are
misguided.

. 5. The same Reverend man in his Humble Remonstrance has these words, Page
29, 30* 31. [ The second is intended to raise envy against us, as the
uncharitable censurers and condemners of those Reformed Churches abroad, which
differ from our Government: wherein we do justly complain of a slanderous
aspersion cast upon us: We love and honor those Sister Churches, as the dear
spouse of Christ; we bless God for them; and we do heartily wish unto them that
happiness in the Partnership of our admin^stration, which I doubt not but they
do no less heartily wish unto themselves, Good words you will perhaps say; but
what is all this fair complement, if our act condemn them? For if Episcopacy
stand by Divine right, what becomes of these Churches that want it? Ma^ice and
ignorance are met together in this unjust aggravati^n: 1. Our position is only
affirmative, implying the justifiableness and holiness of an Episcopal calling,
without any further implication: Next, when we speak of Divine right, we mean
not an express Law of God requiring it upon the absolute Necessity of the Being
of a Church (what hindrances soever may interpose) but a Divine institution
warranting it where it is, and ^equiring it where it may be had. Every Church
therefore which is capable of this form of Government, both may and ought to
aff^ct it -- but those particular Churches to whom this power and faculty is
denied, lose nothing of the true essence of a Church, though they miss some
thing of their glory and perefection -- And page 32. [ Our form of Government
-- differs little from their own, save in the perpetuity of their ((...))
Moderatorship, and the exclusion of that Lay-Presbyterie which never till this
age had footing in the Christian Church.] -- And Page 41, 42. [ Alas my
Brethren, while we do fully agree in all these, and all other Doctrinal and
Practical points of Religion, why will you be so uncharitable, as by these
frivolous and causeless Divisions to ^end the seamless coat of Christ? It it a
Title, or a Retinue, or a Ceremony, a Garment, or a Color, or an Organ Pipe,
that can make us a different Church, whiles we preach and profess the same
saving truth, whiles we desire (as you profess to do) to walk conscionably with
our God according to that one Rule of the Royal Law of our Maker, whiles we
oppose one and the same common enemy, whiles we unfeignedly endeavor to hold
the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of Peace? -- For us, we make no difference
at all (in the right and interest of the Church) betwixt Clergy and Laity,
betwixt the Clergy and Laity of one part and of another: we are all your true
Brethren; we are one with you, both in heart and brain, and hope to meet you in
the same heaven: but if ye will needs be otherwise minded* we can but bewail
the Churches misery and your sin. -- ] You hear how this good Bishop was far
from a separation.

. 6. How contrary to this, is the foresaid writing of Dr. Hide (which I
instance in, because it is come new to my hand) who stigmatizeth the front of
his book with the brand of separation, and that of one of the most rigid and
unreasonable kinds. Thus he begins, [When Conscientious Ministers cannot
associate in the Church, and Conscientious Christians cannot go to Church; and
Customary Christians go thither, either to little purpose, because to no true
worship, or to great shame, because to no true Ministers, it is fit the Church
should come to private houses] -- Does he not begin very wisely and charitably?
What could the most Schismatical Papist say more? What! no true worship! no
true Ministers! and but Customary Christians that come thither? Yes, and that is
not all: he pursues it with an exprobration, that we are fallen from our
Religion, (p. 4.) and yet that is not all: he adds, [Here seems yet to be a very
bad certainty of their Religion; and how can there be a better Certainty of
their salvation? unless (that we may gratify their singularity more then our
own veracity) we will say, There may be a company of good Christians out of the
Communion of Saints, or a Communion of Saints out of Christ's Catholic Church.]
Should we laugh or weep at such a man as this? What! no communion of Saints,
but with the separating party of the Prelates? Unhappy we that live in England,
and can meet with so small a number of these Saints. Is the Catholic Church
confined to this party? and Salvation to this Chunch? Transcendent Papal
arrogance! Its well that these Prelates are not the only Key-keepers of heaven!
for we see how we should then be used. I must tell this Dr. and all of his
mind, that it is an easier way to Heaven, then we dare hope to come thither by,
to join our selves to their separating Communion of Saints, and live as the
most that we are acquainted with, that are of that Saint-like Communion. He had
been better have talked at these rates to men of another Age or Nation, then to
us that see the lives of their adherents. We never changed our Religion nor our
Church. What if he read his prayers, and I say mine without book; or what if he
pray in white, and I in black? or what if he kneel in receiving the Eucharist,
and I sit or stand? or what if he use the Cross in baptism, and I baptize no
better then the Apostles did without it; do these or such like make us to be of
two Religions? Do I change my Religion, if I read with a pair of spectacles, or
if I look toward the South or West, rather then the East etc.? We see what
these men would make the Christian Religion to be. Were the Apostles no
Christians, because they had no kneeling at the Eucharist, nor Cross in
Baptism, nor Surplice, nor (at least our) Common Prayer Book, etc? Dare you say
they were no Christians? or yet that Christian Religion was one thing then, and
another thing now? And for our Churches, we do not only meet in the same
places, but we have the same doctrine, the same worship (in every part, though
he talk of our no true worship; as if Praying, Praising God, etc. were no true
worship:) the things changed were by the imposers and defenders (see Dr.
Burgess Rejoinder) professed to be no parts at all of worship, but mere
accidents; we have the same people, save here and there a few that separate by
yours and others seducement, and some vile ones that we cast out; we have
abundance of the same Ministers that we had. And yet must we have no worship,
Ministry, Communion of Saints, or Salvation, because we have only a Parochial
and not a Diocesan Episcopacy? Forsooth we have lost our Religion, and are all
lost men, because our Bishops have but single Parish-churches to oversee (which
they find a load as heavy as they can bear,) and we have not one Bishop to take
the Government of an hundred or two hundred Churches. At Rome he is a damned
man that believes not in the Pope: and is out of the Catholic Church, because
he is out of the subjection of the Pope: and with these men, we are lost men,
if we never so much believe in Christ, because we believe not in an Archbishop,
and are out of the Catholic Church and Communion of Saints, because we will
not be ruled by such Rulers as these. And what is all this, to such Counties as
this where I live, and most else in England that I hear of, that know of no
Bishop they have (and they rejected none,) nor does any come and command them
any Obedience? Must we be unchristened, unchurcht and damned, for not obeying,
when we have none to obey, or none that calls for our obedience? But I shall
let these men pass, and leave them in their separation, desiring that they had
Catholic spirits and principles. This much I have said to let men see, that
there is no possibility of our union with this sort that are resolved on a
separation; and that it is not these Novelists and Dividers, but the ancient
Episcopal party of England that we can easily agree with.

. 7. The next that I shall instance in, that was agreed with these Principles
of ours, is the late Reverend and Learned Bish^p Usher, of whose Concord with
us, I have two proofs. The one was his own profession to my self. The other is
his own writings, especially his Propositions given in to King Charles, now
printed* called [ The Reduction of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical
Government, received in the ancient Church] which consists of four
Propositions (having first proved that all Presbyters have the power of
Discipline and Church Government:) the first allows the single Rector of the
Parish to take notice of the scandalous, reprove, admonish, and debar them from
the Lords Table. The second is, that in every Rural D^anry, all the Pastors
within the Precinct, may by the Chorepiscopus or Suffragan, be every month
Assembled in a Synod, and according to the Major part of their voices, he
conclude all matters that shall be brought into debate before them, as
Excommunication etc. The third is, for a Diocesan Synod once or Twice a year,
where by the consent of the Major part of the Rectors, all things might be
concluded by the Bishop or Superintendent, call him whether you will, or in his
absence, by one of the suffragans, whom he deputes to be Moderator. The fourth
is for Provincial and National Synods in like sort.

. 8. And when I had perused these papers (in M. S.) I told him that yet one
thing was left out, that the Episcopal party would many of them stick at more
then he, and that is, a Negative voice in Ordination in the President, to which
and the rest I proposed this for accommodation in brief [1. Let every
particular or Parish Church have a Bishop and Presbyters to assist him, where
possibly they can be had. 2. Let all these Associate and their several
Associations have a stated President. 3. Let all men be at liberty for the
name, whether they will call him a Bishop, President, Moderator,
Superintendent, or the like. 4. And for the Negative voice in Ordination, let
all Ministers of the Ass^ciation agree that de facto they will not Ordain
without him, but in Cases of Necessity; but let every man be left free to his
own Principles on which he shall ground this practice, and not be bound to
consent, that de jure a Negative vote is due to the President.] These terms did
I propose to the Bishop for Accommodation, and entreated him to tell me plainly
his judgment, whether they are satisfactory and sufficient for the Episcopal
party to yield to for Peace and Communion? and his answer was this [ They are
sufficient, and mod^rate men will accept them, but others will not, as I have
tried: for many of them are offended with me for propounding such terms.] And
thus this Reverend Bishop and I were agreed for Peace in a quarter of an hour;
(the truth of which, I solemnly profess:) and so would all the Ministers and
Christians in England, if they were not either wiser or foolisher, honester or
dishonester then he and I. And this I leave on Record to Posterity, as a
testimony against the dividers and contenders of this age, [ That it was not
long of men of the temper and principles of this Reverend Archbishop and my
self, that the Episcopal party and their dissenting Brethren in England, were
not speedily and heartily agreed: for we actually did it.] To no honor of
mine, but to the honor of this peaceable man, and the shame of the unpeaceable
hinderers or refusers of our Reconciliation, let this testimony live, that
Posterity may know whom to blame for our Calamities; they all extol Peace when
they reject it and destroy it.

. 9 For a third witness of the Reconcileableness of the Moderate Episcopal
party on these terms, I may well produce Dr. Holdsworth; who subscribed these
same Propositions of Bishop Usher to the King: Dr. Holdsworth.
and therefore was a Consenter to the same way of Accommodation.

Dr. Forbs.
. 10. A fourth witness is Dr. Forbs of Scotland, who having written purposely a
Book called his Irenicon, for Accommodation on such terms, I need to say no
more of him, but refer you to the Book. I shall name no more of the Episcopal
party. These four are enough to my purpose.

. 11. That the Presbyterians (of England specially) are willing to close upon
these terms of a fixed Moderator, I prove, 1. By the professed Consent of that
Reverend Learned servant of Christ Mr. Thomas Gataker, a Member of the late
Assembly at Westminster, Gataker.
who has professed his judgment of this matter in a Book against Lilly. I
refer you to his own words, for brevity sake.

. 12. My next witness, and for brevity, many in one, shall be Mr. Geree, The
London P^^^ince*
and the Province of London, citing him in their Ius Divinum Ministerii, page
Append. 122. the words are these [ That the Ancient Fathers in the point of
Episcopacy, differ more from the high Prelatist th^n from the Presbyterian: for
the Presbyterians always have a President to guide their actions, which they
acknowledge may be perpetual durante vita modo se been gesserit; or temporary
to avoid inconvenience, which Bilson takes hold of as advantageous, because so
little discrepant, (as he says) from what he maintains.] See the rest there.

. 13. 3. Beza (the Leader against Prelacy) says, Beza
de grad. Minist. Evang. Instituti Divini est, ut in omni coetu Presbyterorum
unus sit qui ordine praeat and praesit reliquis. It is of Divine Institution
that in every Assembly of Presbyters, there be one that go before and be above
the rest.] And dividing Bishops into Divine, Humane, and Diabolical, he makes
the Humane tolerable Prelacy to be the fixed President.

. 14. 4. Calvin (who is accused for ejecting Episcopacy) besides what he writes
of it to Card Sadolet, Calvin. See also Dan. Colonius in his Disputat. ex
I^st^tut. Calv. l. 4. D^sp. 2.. 18.24.
says in his Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4.. 1. [ Ea cautione totam suam Oeconomiam
composuerunt (Ecclesiae veteris Episcopi) ad unicam illam Dei verbi normam, ut
facile videas nihil fere hac part habuisse a verbo Dei alienum.]. 2. [ Quibus
ergo docendi munus inju^ctum erat, eos omnes nominabant Presbyteros. Illi ex
suo numero in singulis civitatibus unum eligebant, cui specialiter dabant
titulum Episcopi: ne ex aequalitate, ut f^^ri solet, dissidia nascerentur.
Neque tamen sic honor and dignitate superior erat Episcopus, ut Dominium in
Collegas haberet: sed quas parts habet Consul in Senatu, ut referat de
negotiis, sententias roget, consulendo, monendo, hortando, aliis prae^at,
authoritate sua totam actionem regat; and quod decretum Communi Consilio
fuerit, exequatur: id munus sustinebat Episcopus in Presbyterorum coetu] and.
4. fine [Gubernationem sic constituti nonnulli Hierarchiam vocarunt, nomine (ut
mihi videtur) improprio, certe scripturis inusitato: Cavere enim voluit
spiritus sanctus, nequis principatum aut dominationem somniaret, quum de
Ecclesiae gubernatione agitur. Verum si rem, omisso vocabul^, intueamur (N. B.)
reperiemus veteres Episcopos non aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse
fingere ab ea quam Deus verbo suo praescripsit] This he writes after the
mention of Archbishops and Patriarcks, as well as of Bishops governing in
Synods.

. 15. Where by the way let me give you this observation, that Bishops Governing
but in Synods can have no other power of Government then the Synods themselves
have: But Synods themselves as such are not directly for Government, but for
Concord and Communion of Churches, and so consequently for well-governing the
several flocks: Nor has a Synod any Governing Power over a particular Pastor,
as being his superior appointed to that end: but only a Power of Consent or
Agreement: to which for unity, and communion sake, he is consequentially
obliged; not by Virtue of Gods Command, that requires us to obey the Higher
Power (for three Pastors are not made so the Rulers of one) but by virtue of
Gods commands that require us to do all things in Unity, and to maintain the
Peace and Conco^d of the Churches, and to avoid Divisions and discord.

. 16. If any think that this does too much favor the Congregational way, I
must tell him that it is so true and clear, that the Episcopal men that are
moderate acknowledge it. For instance: the Reverend Bishop Usher did, without
asking, of himself profess to me that it was his judgment [ that certainly
Councils or Synods are not for Government but for Unity, and that a Bish^p out
of Council has the same Governing Power as all the Council, though their vote
may bind him for Unity to consent.

. 17. This being so, it must needs follow that an Archbishop, or the President
of a National, Provincial, Diocesan, or Classical Assembly, or of any
Association of the Pastors of many Churches, has no superior Governing power
over the Parochial or Congregational Bishop of one Church; but only in
concurrence with the Synod, a Power of Determining by way of Agreement, such
points as he shall be obliged for Unity and Communion to consent to and
perform, if they be not contrary to the word of God. This evidently follows
from this Reverend Archbishops doctrine, and the truth.

. 18. And if any shall think that the Presbyterians will not yield that a
particular Church do ordinarily consist but of one full Congregation, I confute
them by producing their own Concessions: in the London Ministers Ius Divinum
Ministerii. Append. page 123. they plainly say, that [ The later (Bishops) were
Diocesan, the former (that is the Bishops of the first or ancient times) were
Bishops only of one Congregation] And page 82. they say [ These Angels were
Congregational,
not Diocesan: In the beginning of Christianity, the number of Believers, even
in the greatest Cities were so few, as that they might well meet, (...) in one
and the same place. And th^se were called, the Church of the City, and
therefore to ordain Elders (...) and (...), are all one in Scripture] Thus far
they yield to the Congregational men.

. 19. 5. One other witness of the Presbyterians readiness to accommodate on
these terms, I shall give, and no more, and that is Mr. Richard Vines, a man
that was most eminent for his management of the Presbyterian cause in the
Assembly, and at Vxbridge Treaty, and in the Isle of Wight; the Papers there
presented to the King are to be seen in Print. When we did set up our
Association in this County, I purposing to do nothing without advise, and
designing a hearty closure of all sober Godly men, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Congregational and Erastian: did consult first about it by Letters with Mr.
Vines, and in his answer to mine, he approved of the design, and thought our
distance very small, and yielded to a fixed Presidency, though not to a
Negative voice: (which I would have none forced to.) Because they are too long
to put into this section, I will adjoyn that part of his Letter that concerns
this subject, prefixing one that went next before it, against the selling of
the Church lands, that the Bishops may see how little such men as he consented
to it or liked it; and may take heed of charging them with Sacrilege.

. 20. Lastly the Erastians are known to be for Episcopacy it self, so be it, it
come in by the power of the Magistrate. And that nothing proposed crosses the
Principles of the Congregationall men, I have showed before: But whether really
we shall have their consent to a Peace upon these proposed terms, I know not;
because their writings that I have seen, do not meddle with the point, save
only one Congregational man, Mr. Giles Firmin, has newly written for this very
thing, in his Treatise of Schism against Dr. Owen, page 66, 67, 68. I desire
you to read the words to save me the labor of transcribing them. In which he
gives us to understand, that some of the Moderate Congregational Party, will
join with us in a Reconciliation on these terms: Whether many or all will do
so, I know not. Let their practice show whether they will be the first or the
last in the Healing of our Divisions. But if they refuse* we will not for that
refuse to Love them as Brethren, and study to perform our duty toward them: as
knowing that we suffer much more when we come short of our duty and love to
others, then when they come short of their duty and love to us.

Mr. Richard Vines his Letters before mentioned as a Testimony that the
Presbyterian Ministers are not against a fixed President, or that Episcopacy
which Bishop Hall, etc. would have been satisfied with.

Reverend Friend,
I Received your two last; and as for a Schoolmaster I shall do the best I can
to propound one to you, etc. As for your Question about Sacrilege, I am very
near you in present opinion. The point was never stated nor debated in the Isle
of Wight. I did for my part decline the dispute: for I could not maintain the
cause as on the Parliaments side: and because both I and others were unwilling,
it was never brought to any open debate: The Commissioners did argue it with
the King: but they went upon grounds of Law and Policy; and it was only about
Bishops Lands: for they then averred the continuance of D. and Chapiters Lands
to the use of the Church. Some deny that there is any sin of Sacrilege under
the Gospel: and if there be any, they agree not in the definition: Some hold an
alienation of Church goods in case of Necessity; and then make the Necessity
what and as extensive as they please. The most are of opinion that whiles the
Church lies so unprovided for, the donations are not alienable sine Sacrilegio.
If there were a surplusage above the competent maintenance, it were another
matter. Its clear enough that the D^nors wills are frustrated, and that their
General intention and the General use, viz. the maintenance of Gods worship and
Ministers, should stand, though the particular use might be superstitious. I
cited in my last Sermon before the Parliament (unprinted) a place touching
Sacrilege out of Mr. Hildersham on Psalm. 51. It did not please. You may find
the words in his book by the Index. If his description of it be true, then you
will still be of your own mind. I dare encourage no purchasers; but do desire
to have some more of your thoughts about it, and I shall return you mine: as I
do my thanks for your excellent and worthily esteemed Treatise which you
vouchsafed to prefix my name before: Sir, I have no more time or paper but to
subscribe my self

Your truly loving Friend R. Vines.
London, July 20.

Sir
THough I should have desired to have understood your thoughts about the point
of Sacrilege, that so I might have formed up my thoughts into some better
order and cleerer issue then I did in my la^t: yet to show unto you how much I
value this correspondence with you, I am willing to make some return to your
last. And first touching the Schoolmaster intended, etc. -- The Accommodation
you speak of is a great and a good work for the gaining into the work such
useful parts and interests as might very much heal the discord, and unite the
strength of men to oppose destructive ways, and in my opinion more feasible
with those men then any other, if they be moderate and godly: for we differ
with them rather about some pinacles of the Temple then the foundation er
abbuttresses thereof. I would not have much time sp^ut in a formula of doctrine
or worship: for we are not much distaxt in them and happily no more then with
one another: But I would have the agreement attempted in that very thing which
chiefly made the division, and that is Government; heal that breach and heal
all: there begin and therein labor all you can. What influence this may have
upon others I know not in this exulceration of men's minds: but the work speaks
it self g^od, and your reasons for the attempting of it are very considerable.
For the Assembly, you know, they can meddle with just nothing but what is sent
unto them by Parliament or one house thereof (as the order says) and for that
reason never took upon them to intermedle therein. What they do in such a
thing, must be done as private persons, and not as in the capacity of Assembly
men, except it come to them recommended by the Parliament. The great business
is to find a temperament in ordination and government, in both which the
exclusion or admittance of Presbyters ( dicis causa) for a shadow, was not
regular: and no doubt the Presbyters ought and may both teach and govern, as
men that must give account of souls. For that you say of every particular
Church having many Presbyters, it has been considered in our Assembly, and the
Scripture speaks fair for it, but then the Church and City was of one extent:
no Parishes or bounds assigned out to particular men (as now) but the Ministers
preached in circuitu or in common and stood in relation to the Churches as to
one Church, though meeting hapl^ in diverse houses or places (as is still the
manner of some Cities in the Low Countries.) If you will follow this model, you
must lay the City all into one Church particular, and the Villages half a dozen
of them into a Church: which is a business here in England of vast design and
consequence. And as for that you say of a Bishop over many Presbyters, not over
many Churches; I believe no such Bishops will please our men: but the notion as
you conceive it, has been and is the opinion of learned men. Grotius in his
commentary on the Acts in diverse places and particularly Cap. 17. says, that
as in every particular Synagogue (many of which was in some one City) there was
(...); such was the Primitive Bishop: and doubtless the first Bishops were over
the community of Presbyters as Presbyters in joint relation to one Church or
Region; which Region being upon the increase of believers, divided into more
Churches, and in after times those Churches assigned to particular men: yet he
the Bishop continued Bishop over them still. For that you say, he had a
Negative voice, that's more then ever I saw proved, or ever shall, I believe for
the first two hundred years; and yet I have labored to enquire into it. That
makes him Angelus princeps, not Angelus praeses at Dr. Reignolds says Calvin
denies that, and makes him Consul in Senatu. or as the Speaker in the house of
Parli^ment, which as I have heard that D. B. did say, was but to make him
foreman of the Jury. Take heed of yiedling a Negative voice. A^ touching the
Introduction of ruling Elders, such as are modelled out by Parliament, my
judgment is sufficiently known: I am of your judgment in the point. There
should be such Elders as have power to preach as well as rule: I say power; but
how that will be effected here I know not, except we could or would return to
the Primitive nature and constitution of particular Churches: and therefore it
must be helped by the combination of more Churches together into one as to the
matter of Government, and let them be still distinct as to Word and Sacraments.
That is the easiest way of accommodation that yet occurs to my thoughts. Sir I
fear I trouble you too long, but it is to show how much I value you and your
Letters to me: for which I thank you, and rest

Yours in the best bonds R. Vines.
September. 7.

THough Mr. Vines here yield not the Negative Voice to have been de facto in
the first or second age, nor to be de jure, yet he without any question yielded
to the stating of a President, durante vita, if he prove not unworthy, (which
was one chief point that I propounded to him.) And I make no doubt but he would
have yielded to a voluntary Consent of Presbyters de facto not to ordain
without the President, but in case of Necessity: But that I did not propound to
him. And the difficulties that are before us de facto in setting up a
Parochial Episcopacy which he mentions, I have cleared up already in these
papers, showing partly that the thing is already existent, and partly how more
fully to accomplish it. All would be easy, if Holy, Self-denying, Charitable
hearts were ready to entertain and put in execution the honest, healing
Principles that are before us, and obvious to an ordinary understanding: Or (if
still the Pastors will be contentious) if Holy, Peaceable Magistrates would
seriously take the work in hand, and drive on the sloathful and quarrelsome
Ministers to the performance of their duty.

The Episcopacy of the Protestant Churches in Poland.
ADrian. Regenvolscius Histor. Ecclesiast. Sclavonicar. Provinc. lib. 3. page
424.

N. B. Quoniam a prima Ecclesiarum in minoris Poloniae Provincia, R^formatione,
usu and consuetudine receptum est, ut e senioribus his^e omnium Districtuum,
quorum nomina 36. recensuimus, unus Primarius, sive in ordine Primus, qui vulgo
Superintendens Ecclesiarum min^ris Poloniae vocatur, Synodisque Provincialibus
praesidet; totius Synodi Provincialis authoritate, consensu ac suffragiis
eligatur, ac, non quidem per impositionem manuum, (propter evitandam Primatus
alicujus suspicionem, aut juris ac potestatis alicujus in caeteros seniores
speciem,) benedictione tantum, fraterna apprecatione, Officiorum quae hocce
concernunt munus praelectione, piisque totius Synodi precibus, Regiminis
duntaxat and Ordinis boni in Ecclesia Dei causa, inauguratur ad declaratur,
Nomina Primariorum ^orum Seniorum, sive Minor. Polon. Ecclesiarum
superintendium.] --

The Churches of the Bohemian Confess. called Vnitatis Fratrum, have among the
Pastors of the Churches, their Conseniors, and Seniors, and one President over
all. Id. Regen. Vols. p. 315. [Seniores sive superattendentes Ecclesiarum
Bohemicarum and Moravicarum, etc. -- plerumque e Consenioribus eliguntur, ac
per impositionem Manuum publicamque inaugurationem, in munus Senioratus
ordinantur ac consecrantur. Et longa consuetudine in Ecclesiis trium harum
provinciarum receptum est, ut e senioribus unus Primarius (sive in ordine
Primus) quem vulgo illi Praesidem vocant, non eligatur quidem, nec peculariter
Ordinetur, sed post decessum aliorum, ipso Ordinationis tempore prior succedat]

FINIS.
The Fourth DISPUTATION: Of a Form of LITURGY: How far it is Necessary,
Desirable, or Warrantable; In order to a Peace between the Parties that differ
herein, and too uncharitably prosecute their difference. By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1658.

Qu. Whether a stinted Liturgy, or form of Worship, be a desirable means for
the Peace of these Churches?
UNnecessary prolixity is not so acceptable to the Reader that loves both Truth
and time, but that I may take it for granted that you desire me to leave out
superfluities in this Dispute. 1. The Etymologists shall be better agreed among
themselves of the derivation of (...) and (...), before I will trouble you with
their judgments. But we are commonly agreed that (...) is often used for any
Ministration, but more strictly, and usually for a public Ministration, or any
work of public office; and yet more strictly from the Septuagint,
Ecclesiastic writers have almost confined it to Holy Ministration, or public
service or Worship of God. The several uses of the word in Scripture, and
profane and Ecclesiastic Writers, you may find in so many Lexicons at
pleasure, that I shall pass by the rest. Bellarmine does too grossly pretend
that when its applied absolutely to holy things, the word is taken always in
the New Testament, for a Ministration in sacrificing. A little observation may
confute that mistake. Nor is it agreeable either to Scripture or the use of the
Ancient Church, to call only Forms of public worship that are written, by the
name of a Liturgy. Whether it were Form, or no Form, Writren or not written,
Premeditated or extemporate, Words or Actions, all the Public holy
Ministration or service of God, was of old called The Churches Liturgy: And so
men may be for a Liturgy that are not for a Prayer Book. But latter times have
most used the word for those stinted forms, that some call Offices containing
both the Rubric or Directory, and the Form of words prescribed as the matter
of the service. And seeing that those that now we speak to, understand it in
this sense, we must speak as they do, while we are speaking to them.

2. Note that it is not any one part of Public Worship that we speak of alone,
either Prayer, Praise, or other part, but we speak of the whole frame, and
therefore of a Liturgy, or Prescribed words in General, because that is the
controversy that the times call us to decide.

That which I take to be the Truth, and useful to our Healing, I shall lay
down in these ten Propositions following.

Prop. 1. A stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful.

2. A stinted Liturgy in some parts of public holy service is ordinarily
necessary.

3. In the Parts where it is not of Necessity, it may not only be submitted to,
but desired when the Peace of the Church requires it.

4. There is so great d^fference between Ministers, and People, and Times, that
it may be convenient and eligible to some, at some times, and unfit and not
eligible to others, and at other times.

5. The Ministers and Churches that earnestly desire it, should not by the
Magistrate be generally or absolutely forbidden the use of a convenient
prescribed Liturgy.

6. To prescribe a frame of stinted service, or Prayer, etc. and lay a
Necessity, or the Peace of the Church upon it, and to punish, si^ence, suspend,
excommunicate, or reproach the able, peaceable, godly Ministers, or people that
(justly or unjustly) scruple the using of it, is so great a sin, that no
conscionable Ministers should attempt it, or desire it, nor any godly
Magistrate suffer it.

7. The safest way of composing such a Public Form, is to take it all, for
matter and words, out of the Holy Scriptures.

8. Yet is not this of such Necessity, but that we may join in it, or use it,
if the form of words be not from Scripture.

9. The matter of a common Liturgy, in which we expect any General Concord,
should not be any unnecessary things, much less things doubtful, or forbidden.

10. Forms of Public Prayer should not be constantly used by M^nisters that
are able to pray without them: and none else should be admitted ordinarily to
the Ministry, but such as are able competently to pray without such Forms;
unless in great Necessities of the Church.

These ten Propositions are the sum of all that I shall trouble you with,
which I shall now review, and prove in order.

Prop. 1. A Stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful.

This is thus proved:

Argument 1. That which is not directly or consequentially forbidden by God,
remains lawful: A stinted Liturgy is not directly or consequentially
forbidden by God: therefore it remains lawful.

The Major is undoubted, because nothing but a Prohibition can make a thing
unlawful. Sin is a transgression of a Law: Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression: And yet I have heard very Reverend men answer this, that it is
enough that it is not commanded, though not forbidden. Which is plainly to deny
both Scripture and Civil Principles. Precept makes Duty, or a Necessity ex
praecepto: Prohibitions make an action sinful, which is prohibited, as
Precepts prove an Omission sinful of the Duty commanded. But Licitum which is
between Duty and sin, is that which is neither commanded nor forbidden. And
such an act is not Actus Moralis, being neither good nor evil.

Here note these two things. 1. That though we say that a Liturgy is in it self
lawful, and that all things not forbidden are Lawful; yet in the actual
exercise hic and nunc, it will be hard to find one actual use of it, which is
not a duty, or a sin (For though I am not of their mind that think every act
both simply and respectively considered is a duty, or a sin (For 1. then every
act must be Actus Moralis, and so deliberate and chosen, which is not true; as
for instance, the winking of the eye, etc. 2. Then nothing were indifferent. 3.
Then every act must have a Reason for it. 4. And the Consciences of Christians
must be perpetually tormented: as e. g. to give a reason when I walk, why I set
the right foot forward before the left; or when two eggs of a bigness are
before me, why I take one rather then the other: these are not moral acts.) Yet
I must needs think that in the worship of God, its hard to imagine such a case,
in which the using of a Liturgy will do neither good nor harm: Or in which a
man cannot discern, whether it be like to do more good or harm: and so make it
the matter of election or refusal. And therefore as Paul makes Marriage
indifferent in it self, when its hard to find a case, in which it shall not be
a duty or a sin to particular persons, so say I of the point in question: and
yet possibly sometime such cases there may be. A man sometimes in Prudence may
find that constantly to use a form would be to him a sin, by reason of the ill
consequents, and so it would be constantly to disuse it: And therefore may find
himself bound (by accident) sometimes to use, and sometimes to disuse it: And
yet may see no reason at all, as to the particular day and hour, why he should
use or disuse it this day rather then another, or in the the Morning rather
then the Evening.

2. Note also that God being the supreme Lawgiver of the Church, having by
Moses given a Law to Israel, did in general command, Deuteronomy. 12.32. that they
should add nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom: And consequently, we may
conclude it prohibited under the Gospel; Nay indeed the very prohibition of
self-idolizing makes it a sin for any man to arrogate that Legislation which is
the Prerogative of God. For that were to deifie himself. And so this General
prohibition does make all unwarrantable Additions to be sinful, that is, all
Additions which God has not authorized men to make. But then, such additions
are not sinful formally, because not commanded, but because forbidden by the
General prohibition of [ not adding.]

Now for the Minor, that a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we need no other
proof then that no Prohibition can be produced. If it be prohibited, it is
either by some special Prohibition, or by the General prohibition of not
adding: But it is by neither of these, therefore not at all. Special
prohibition I never yet saw any produced. God has nowhere fo^bidden a form of
Prayer. And the General prohibition of not adding, extends not to it. For 1. It
is the Worship of God which is the matter that we are there forbidden to add:
But the Praying with a form, or without a form, as such, are neither of them
any part of the worship of God; nor so intended (as we now suppose) by them
that use it: It is but an indifferent Mode or Circumstance of Worship, and not
any part of Worship. 2. If Prayer with a form be an Addition to Gods Worship,
then so is praying without a form (for God only Commands Prayer, but neither
commands a form, nor that we forbear a form) But the Consequent is false, as
the Opponents will confess; therefore so is the Antecedent. 3. Undetermined
mutable Modes and Circumstances are none of the prohibited Additions, but left
to humane determination. But such is the form in question. God has bid us
Preach, but not told us whether we shall study a form of express words always
before hand, but left that to prudence: more instances will be added under the
next Argument; and therefore I shall now forbear them.

Argum. 2. The Prudential Determination of such Modes and Circumstances of
worship as God has left to humane Determinanation, is Lawful. Argum. 2.
A stinted form or Liturgy may be such a Determination; therefore a stinted
form or Liturgy may be (or is in it self) lawful.

The Major is past doubt, if the Hypothesis be first proved, that some modes
and circumstances of worship are left to humane Prudential Determination. And
that's easily proved thus.

Those Modes or Circumstances of worship which are Necessary in Genere, but
left undetermined of God in specie, are left by God to humane Prudential
Determination: (else an Impossibility should be necessary.) But many such there
are that are Necessary in Genere, but left undetermined of God in specie,
therefore many such are left to humane Prudential Determination.

The Minor is sufficiently proved by instances. God has made it our Duty to
Assemble for his Public Worship: But he has not told us in what place; nor in
what seats each person shall sit. Yet some place is necessary: and therefore it
is left to man's Determination: Nor has he tied us for weekly Lectures to any
one day; nor on the Lords day, to begin at any one certain hour: and yet some
day and hour is necessary; which therefore man must determine of. So God has
commanded us to read the Scriptures: But has not told us whether they shall be
printed or written; whether we shall read with Spectacles or without; what
Chapter we shall read on such or such a day; nor how much at a time; Minist^rs
must preach in season and out of season: But whether they must stand or sit, or
what text they shall preach on, or how long, and whether in a prepared form of
words or not, whether they shall use notes, or not, or use the Bible, or recite
texts by memory, etc. none of these things are determined by God; and therefore
are left to humane prudential determination. Abundance of such undetermined
circumstances may be enumerated about Singing, Praying, Sacraments and all
duties.

Now that the form of Liturgy is of this nature is manifest; God has bid us
Pray; but whether in fore-conceived words, or not, or whether in words of other
men's first conceiving or our own, or whether often in the same words or various,
and whether with a Book or without, these are no parts of Prayer at all, but
only such undetermined Circumstances or Modes as God has left to our
prudential Determination: And the forementioned Instances, about Reading,
Preaching Singing, etc. are as pertinent to our question as this of Prayer,
they being all parts of the Liturgy, or public service, as well as this.

Argum. 3. There are many express Examples in Scripture for forms of Gods
service: Argum. 3.
therefore they are unquestionably lawful. The Psalms of David were of common
use in the Synagogues and Temple-worship, and also in Private; and indicted to
such ends. Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sing Praise unto the Lord, with
the words of David and of Asaph the seer, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.* The 92. Psalm is
entitled [ A Psalm or song for the Sabbath day] Psalm. 102 is entitled, A Prayer
of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before
the Lord.] The rest were of ordinary public use. Psalms are Prayers and
Praises to God for the most part: and both as Prayers, and Praises, and as
Psalms, they are part of the Liturgy. 1 Chronicles. 16.7. [ On that day David
delivered first this Psalm, to thank the Lord, into the hands of Asaph and his
brethren.] The song of Moses is delivered in form, Exodus 15. And the Saints in
the Revelations 15.3. are said to sing the song of Moses, Numb. 10.35, 36.
there is an oft-repeated form of Moses prayer. There is a form for the people,
Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. Judge. 5. there is Deborahs Song in form. There is a form of
Prayer, Joel 2.17. Abundance more may be mentioned but for tediousness. I shall
now only add, 1. That the Lords Prayer is a form directed to God as in the
third person, and not to man only as a Directory for prayer in the second
person: it is not [ Pray to God your Father in Heaven that his Name may be
hallowed, his Kingdom come, etc.] But [ Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name, etc.] And it seems by the Disciples words that thus John
taught his Disciples to pray, Luke 11.1. So that we have in the Scripture the
mention of many set forms of service to God, which therefore we may well use.

Argum. 4. It is lawful to pray to God in the set words that we find in
Scripture: Argum. 4.
but so to pray (in the set words of Scripture) is a form; therefore a form is
Lawful.

I do not here plead example, as in the last Argument, but the Lawfulness of
praying in Scripture words. They that deny this, must be so singular and
unreasonable, as that there is no need of my confutation for the manifesting of
their error. And that it is to us a set form if we take it out of Scripture, as
well as if we compose it, or take it out of another Book, is past all question.
A multitude of the prayers of holy men are left on record in the Scripture,
beside those that were the prescribed forms of those times: He that will but
turn to his Concordance to the word [ O Lord] and then to all the cited Texts,
shall find many score, if not hundred Texts that recite the prayers of the
Saints; which when we use, we use a form, which we there find written.

Argum. 5. Christ has left us his Approbation of such forms: Argum. 5.
therefore we may use them.

His Approbation is proved, 1. By his owning and citing David's Psalms, Luke
20.42. and 24.44. etc. 2. By his using a Hymn with his Disciples at the
Passover or Eucharist, which we have great reason to think was a form that had
been of use among the Jews. But however, if Christ had newly then composed it,
yet was it a form to his Disciples. 3. By his thrice repeating the same words
in his own prayer. 4. By his teaching his Disciples a form, as John taught his.
5. By his never expressing the least disl^ke of the old Jewish custom of using
forms: nor does Scripture anywhere repeal it, or forbid it. 6. The Apostles
command the use of Psalms and Hymns, which cannot be ordinary in the Church
without forms. All this proves Christ's approbation.

Argum. 6.
Argum. 6. If it be lawful for the people to use a stinted form of words in
public prayer, then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors: but it is lawful
for the people: for the Pastors prayer (which they must pray over with him, and
not only hear it) is a stinted form to them, even as much as if he had learnt
it out of a Book. They are to follow him in his method and words, as if it were
a Book prayer.

Argum. 7. It is lawful to use a form in Preaching: therefore a stinted Liturgy
is lawful. Argum. 7.
1. Because preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the reason is the
same for prayer, as for that in the main. Now that studied formed Sermons are
lawful, is so commonly granted, that it shall save me the labor of proving it
(which were easy.)

Argum. 8. That which has been the practice of the Church in Scripture times,
Argum. 8.
and down to this day, and is yet the practice of almost all the Churches of
Christ on earth, is not like to be unlawful: bu^ such is the use of some
stinted forms of public service: therefore, etc. That it was so in the Jews
Church, and approved by Christ, I have showed. That it has been of ancient use
in the Church since Christ, and is at this day in use in Africa, Asia, Europe,
even among the Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Geneva, etc. is so well
known, that I think I need not stand to prove it: yea those few that seem to
disuse it, do yet use it, in Psalms, and other parts of worship, of which more
anon.

Prop. 2. Prop. 2.
A Stinted Liturgy in some parts of public holy service is ordinarily
necessary.

This Proposition is to be proved by instances, and the proof of the parts. The
parts where a set form is usually necessary, I shall enumerate: desiring you by
the way to understand, 1. That I speak not of an Absolute Necessity ad finem,
as if no other could be accepted; but a Necessity of Duty: it ought to be done,
as the best way. 2. That I say but [ ordinarily] as excepting some unusual
cases.

1. The Communication or revealation of the will of God to the Church by
Reading of the Holy Scriptures, is part of the public service of God. As Moses
and the Prophets were read every Sabbath day, so by parity of reason should the
Gospel; and Paul required the public reading of his Epistles, Act. 13.27. and
15.21. 2 Cor. 3.15. Luke 16.29. Col. 4.16. 1 These. 5.27. Rev. 1.3. But this
Reading of the Scriptures is the using of a set form in public service. For
they are the same words that we read from day to day, and usually Must read.

2. The Public Praising of God by singing of Palms, is a part of public
worship: and a most excellent part, not usually to be omitted. But this part of
worship is ordinarily to be used in a stinted form: because the gift of
composing Psalms ex tempore without a prepared form, is not usual in the
Church: and if it were so to one, it is not to the rest that must use this
worship. Had we not stinted forms of Psalms, we should have ill-favored work
in the Church.

3. Baptism is usually to be administered in a form of words: for Christ has
prescribed us a form, Matthew. 28.19. [ Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost] I think few sober men will think it
ordinarily meet to disuse this form.

4. The use of a form in the Consecration and Administration of the Lords
Supper (though not through the whole action) is ordinarily most fit: for Christ
has left us a form of words, Take ye, Eat ye, etc.] which are most exact, and
safe, and none can mend. And Paul recites his form, 1 Cor. 11. And small
alterations in the very words of Baptism, or Delivering the Lords Supper, may
easily corrupt the Ordinance in time.

5. The very Sacramental Elements and Actions are stinted forms of
Administration, which none may alter. As the washing with water, the breaking
of bread, and pouring out of wine, and giving them, and taking them, and eating
and drinking, etc. These are real forms, not to be changed, at least without
Necessity, if at all.

6. The Blessing of the people in the Name of the Lord, was done by a
prescribed form of old, Number. 6.23. and is usually to be done in a form still.
For in all these forementioned parts of worship, should we still use new
expressions, when so few and pertinent must be used, we should be put to disuse
the fittest, and use such as are less fit.

7. In our ordinary Preaching a form (not imposed, unless in cases of great
Necessity and unfitness, but) of our own premeditating, is usually fittest: I
think few men are so weak as to prefer (with most preachers) unprepared
Sermons, before those that have more of their care and study. And then at
least, the Text, Method, and somewhat of the words must be premeditated, if not
all.

8. Ordinarily there should be somewhat of a form in Public Confessions of the
Churches faith. For how else shall all concur? And it is a tender point to
admit of great or frequent mutations in: so that in Baptism, and at other
seasons when the Christian faith is to be openly professed by one, or more, or
all, a form that is exact, is usually meet to be retained; though in many
personal Cases, explicatory enlargements may do well.

9. If there be not a frequent use of many of the same words, and so somewhat
of a form, in Marriage, Confirmation, Absolution, Excommunication, the danger
will be more, then the benefit by mutation will be.

10. And with some Ministers (of whom anon) even in Prayer, especially about
the Sacraments, where there must be great exactness, and the matter ordinarily,
if not always the same, the ordinary use of a form may be the best and fittest
way.

In the most of these Cases 1. The Nature of the thing sufficiently proves the
ordinary fitness of a form. 2. The constant Practice of almost all Churches (if
not all) is for it: even they that scruple forms of Prayer, use constantly
forms of Praise, of Reading, of Sacraments, etc. 3. The rest are proved fittest
as aforesaid by the Apostles general Rules, 1 Cor. 14.26, 40. Let all things
be done to Edifying: and Let all things be done decently and in order. Now in
the cases before mentioned, the Edification of the Church (to say nothing of
Order) requires the ordinary use of forms.

Prop. 3. Prop. 3.
IN those parts of public worship where a form is not of ordinary necessity,
but only Lawful yet may it not only be submitted to, but desired, when the
Peace of the Church does accidentally require it.

This Proposition needs no proof, but only explication. For he is far from the
temper of a Christian that sets so light by the Peace of the Church, that he
would not use a Lawful means for the procurement of it, when Paul would become
all things to all men to save some, and would eat no flesh while he lived
rather then offend his weak brother.

But here you must take these cautions, lest you misunderstand this Proposition.

1. The Peace of the whole Church must be in our eye, before the peace of a
part; and of a great and more considerable part, rather then of a smaller,
caeteris paribus.

2. It is supposed that (besides the simple lawfulness of the thing) there be
also no other accidental inconveniences on the other side (that will follow
the use of a form) that is of sufficient moment to weigh down the argument from
the Churches Peace. For when a thing is only good or evil, (I mean, necessary
or sinful,) by Accident, and not in it self, we must consider which side has
the most weighty accidents, and accordingly must choose or refuse it.

3. It is not the fullfilling of the humors of every unreasonable expectant,
or every proud Magisterial usurper that is the Peace of the Church, that now we
speak of: If a few proud men will hold no Peace with us, unless we will serve
God in their unnecessary forms, as if none had wit enough but they, to know in
what words the Churches should serve God: and all must speak but what they
teach them, it is not the humoring of these Proud usurpers that is the Peace
thus to be bought.

4. We must look to the future as well as the present Peace of the Churches:
And therefore if any will hold no Peace with us now, unless we will own some
formal Engine that is like to make hereafter more division then unity in the
Churches, (by laying the Unity or Peace of the Church on things that will not
bear it, and making things necessary, that are not necessary, nor to be made
so) in such cases, it is not our duty to betray the geneneral or future Peace
of the Church for our private or present Peace.

5. The desireableness of this Peace of the Church which we must seek, must be
much judged of by its tendency to the promo^ing of holiness, the saving of men's
souls, the furthering of the Gospel, and prosperity of the Church in spiritual
respects: For a Peace that undermineth and betrayeth these, is not desirable.
The means is to be valued by its tendency to the attainment of the End.

6. There is need therefore of very great prudence, to compare things with
things, for a man to know how to carry himself in such cases. For imprudent
oversights, or laying greatest stress on smallest things, and slighting
greater, will make men live in constant sin by abusing things indifferent.

But still the Proposition holds good with these cautions, that forms and such
like indifferent things are to be used or disused much with respect to the
Churches Peace.

Prop. 4. SO great is the difference between men and men, times and times,
Prop. 4.
that forms may be a duty to some men, and at some times, and a sin to other
men, and at other times.

As to private men in their families, it may be one man's duty to use a form, or
book, and another man's sin, so is it with Ministers also in the Assemblies.
Three distinctions (among others) are obvious, in which this is manifest.

1. Some Ministers are better able to perform Gods public worship (except in
the fore-excepted cases) without a form: and some are better able to do it by a
form.

2. Some Ministers have a People that are scrupulous of using forms, and some
have people that scruple the disusing them, and some have both sorts mixed.

3. Some Churches live under Magistrates that command a form, or with Churches
that unanimously agree on a form; and others live in times and places where
there is no such commands or Agreements* And according to these differences it
may be one man's duty, and another sin to use some forms.

1. Gods work should be done in the most edifying manner. Where Ministers are
able to perform the public prayers of the Church in the most profitable manner
without a form, there it is their duty to disuse a form, unless some other
greater accident preponderate. Still remember that for Psalms and other
fore-excepted parts, I take it for granted that ordinarily a form is necessary.
But our main question now is of Praying and Preaching, and that especially with
respect to one standing form that is not usually varied in Prayer, and an
imposed form, or composed by others, in Preaching. It should be the ordinary
case of the Church that Ministers should be able to do these without a constant
form of words, to the peoples greater edification. But yet it is not always so.
And where it is not, it is better for Ministers to use a form, then to do
worse, and dishonor the work of God, and wrong the Church by their erroneous
or over-rude defective management. I know the great objection will be, that
such men are not fit to be Ministers, and that its better to have none. But
this is sooner said then proved. I am far from desiring any man to undervalue
the precious mercy of an able Ministry, and from wishing for formalities and
reading Pastors instead of the learned able guides that we here enjoy. I hope I
should do or suffer as much as another to prevent so great a Calamity as an
ignorant, unable, or negligent Ministry. But yet I am fully satisfied of it,
that its better for the Church to have Readers then none.

1. Consider that there have been some very Learned able Divines (Doctors of
Divinity) that by age, or other decay of Memory, or natural impediments
disabling them from extemporate performances, cannot do any thing in the
worship of G^d without the help of Notes or books; or at least without
preparation for expressions; when yet upon preparation, and by convenient
helps, they excel many extemporate men.

2. The Necessities of the Church may require an allowance or toleration of
such as have not ability to compose extemporate Prayers, or Sermons, no nor to
prepare such upon deliberation neither, but merely read the Sermons and Prayers
composed by others. I know some will not believe that such should be Ministers;
But they would have them only read as private men, rather then the people
should have nothing: For they think that a man that cannot preach or pray is no
more capable of being a Minister, then a man that cannot command an Army is
capable of being a Commander, etc.

But 1. Let such brethren consider that there may be all abilities essentially
requisite to a Pastor, without the ability of praying or preaching without a
form (Though still I pray God to save us from a Necessity of such.) A man that
can Teach men the substance of the Christian Religion, and administer the
Sacraments, and Oversee and Govern the flock, has as much ability as is
necessary to the Being of a Pastor. But those may have all this that cannot
fitly preach or Pray without a form. They may be godly men, able in conference
to instruct the people in the substance of Religion, and to read the
Scriptures, and the Holy writings of godly men, and to administer Sacraments,
and prudently and diligently guide the people. And by the same rule as you will
conclude it better that ( e. g.) Wales, Ireland, etc. have private men to read
good books, rather then none, lest they turn heathens; I may also conclude that
it is better for them to have Churches and Pastors of this weaker sort, then to
have none, and leave their children unbaptized, and live without the
Sacraments, and Church Communion, and Government.

2. Consider I beseech you (which moves me more then any thing else) the state
of the Christian world. In Aethiopia, Syria, Armenia, Russia, Grecia, and
abundance of other Churches of Christ ^here are very few Preachers, but mere
Readers. And can any man think that it is best for all these Churches to be
without Ministers, and Sacraments, rather then to have such? O that God would
give them better* But till then I shall pray that he will continue these among
them, rather then leave them destitute. I know many godly judicious men, of
able parts for conference, that yet are unable to compose a Sermon (though if
they could, it were a form) that yet I am confident by Reading such Practical
Books as are now extant,
and by prudent oversight, might be tolerable Pastors for many a Congregation
in Wales, that now have none.

2. In a time and place where no obligation by Magistrates Commands, or
Churches Agreements is laid upon us for the use of forms, I am fully persuaded
we should make no more use of them, then Necessity compels us to do: But the
thing being lawful, the Command of a Magistrate, or the agreement of the
Churches may go far in moving us; And indeed must prevail with us, unless in
cases where there are weightier Accidents to weigh down on the other side. For
obedience and Agreement or Concord in Lawful things is our duty, where we have
not some greater reason to forbid it. There is much difference between men that
are left at liberty, and men that are bound by lawful Governors. Yea though
they do not well in commanding, yet may we be bound to obey, when the matter is
such as belongs to their jurisdiction, and not forbidden by God.

3. A man is also much to regard the minds of his people: not out of
man-pleasing disposition, but in order to their good. Prudence will tell us
which way is likest to attain our Ends. Food is to be fitted to men's tempers
and stomachs, and Physic, to their diseases. If a Church be so weak that they
cannot bear the disuse of forms, and others so weak that they cannot bear the
use of them, the Pastor must fit his practice to their Edification, till he can
bring them to a wiser judgment, that so they may receive that which indeed is
most fit to edify them. Prudence must guide us in the circumstantials of
worship, which are left to our Determination; that we may vary them as the
condition of our flock requires, to their good; (of which more anon:)

Prop. 5. THE Ministers and Churches that earnestly desire it, Prop. 5.
should not by the Magistrate be absolutely, and generally prohibited the use
of a convenient stinted Liturgy.

Note here that I speak not of the desires of any inconsiderable persons,
contrary to the desires of that whole Church. If a few ignorant or wilful
people should be eager for a form, when the Pastor is able and willing to
manage the work of God without it, and the Congregation professes that it
hinders their Edification (by what accident soever, I am not now
questioning,) it is fit that those unreasonable persons should be denied their
desires (in that Church) rather then the whole Congregation. Also if the
Magistrate should perceive that a whole Congregation, or many, or the Pastors
themselves are eager for some one particular form, out of a corrupt humor, and
in any ill design to the disturbance of the Churches Peace, or that they will
needs have an unlawful Form, that for matter is erroneous, or for manner
absurd, or apt to breed unreverence, or hinder Edification, the Magistrate
should prohibit this: Yet so, that Prudence and Moderation measure out his
penalties in such a sort, as that he Churches Edification be not hindered by
his over-rigorous correcting men's distempers.

But out of these and such like Cases, when it is mere weakness that causes
Pastors or people to be set upon a (lawful) form, The Magistrate ought not to
prohibit them by such restraints, as shall deprive them of the liberty of
worshipping God, or hinder their Edification.

The Reasons of this Proposition are these. 1. Because the thing being Lawful,
no Power should causelessly restrain men from the use of Lawful things. God
having left men to their Liberty, none should without great reason deprive them
of it.

2. The Magistrate should not hinder the Peoples Edification in the manner of
Gods worship: But in many places a stinted Liturgy is most for the peoples
Edification. Therefore* etc. Whether it be the Ministers weakness, or the
peoples, that makes it most useful to them, yet when the Magistrate cannot
cure that weakness, he must bear with them. It was the weakness of Nicodemus
that made him he could not bear the daylight, in coming to Christ; yea and
such a weakness, as showed, or was joined with an unregenerate state, and yet
Christ would rather teach him privately then not at all.

3. Where Consciences are scrupulous, and think it a sin to worship publicly
without a form, (though it be their error yet) the Governors are not to drive
them away from it; because then they will not publicly Worship God at all: And
no worship is worse then a lawful form of worship.

4. A Minister that is for the Necessity of a form (though erroneously) may be
in other respects so useful to the Church, that he should not be laid by and
lost to the Church for such a thing as this.

5. The use of some forms (as aforesaid) being necessary, and of other forms,
not only lawful, but of almost common reception through all the Churches on
earth, Governors should be very cautelous in denying men liberty in that which
almost all the Churches have Liberty in, and more; even that which is their
constant use.

Prop. 6. TO prescribe a Form of Prayer, Preaching (or other service where is
no Necessity of it) and to lay a Necessity on it, as to the thing it self, or
the Churches Peace, Prop. 6.
etc. and to punish, silence, suspend, ex^ommunicate, or reproach as
Schismatics, the able, godly, peaceable Ministers or People, that (justly or
unjustly) dare not use it, is so great a sin, that no Godly Ministers should
desire or attempt it, nor any godly Magistrate suffer it.

This was the great sin of the late Magistrates and Prelates in England; and it
is the main difference between their party and others at this day. The
Magistrate does not forbid men using a form or Liturgy (though they forbid one
particular Liturgy more strictly then I could wish:) But there is a very few of
these men that I know of, that can be contented with a Liberty of using it
themselves, if they may not have all others compelled to do as they do, and go
to God with the words that they have formed for them, or that are best in their
esteem. They must be all Schismatics that will not use their form, and the
Churches Peace must be laid upon it, and no man must be thought meet to preach
or pray that will not be of their opinion, but the ablest Pastors of the Church
must be silenced and cast by, if they will not use the Common Prayer. The
sinfulness of this practice shall be manifested in the next dispute more fully,
to which I reserve the most of my reasons against it: In the mean time let
these few be well considered.

1. It is a certain way to the Division of the Church: when men will lay its
Unity or Peace on that which will not bear it, they are the most desperate
disturbers and dividers of it. If one form of Prayer or Preaching had been
necessary to the Churches Unity or Peace, Christ or his Apostles might as
easily have composed it, as they did other necessaries. Nay experience tells
us, that it is not held necessary by men themselves: For the Romanists use one
or more forms: and the Grecians another, and the Ethiopians another* and so of
other Churches. In the Bibliotheca Patrum how many Liturgies have they given
us? And if no one of all these is necessary to all Churches, then not to any
one Church, further then accidents, and men's impositions make it necessary. And
no man should make that necessary, that is not some way necessary before. It is
easy to know that either the Form as such, or somewhat in the Form, is like to
be scrupled by some, even godly, able men: and so it will prove an engine of
division. The Church has been brought to that torn divided condition that it
is in, by this arrogance of domineering imposers, that must lay its Peace on
their unnecessary devices: and will not let us have unity in Christ and his
Institutions and peace upon his terms.

2. By this means the people will be involved in the guilt of bitter
contending, and hating all that conform not to their way, and uncharitably
reproaching them as schismatics, and consequently of disliking the very
doctrine that they preach, or hold, and the way they take; and thus if
uncharitableness, and all this sin, the offspring of it* be the way to Hell,
then you may see what a notable service they do to Satan, and how they ensnare
and undo men's souls, that make such forms of common Necessity to the Unity or
Peace of the Church.

3. By this means they will involve themselves and the Magistrate in the guilt
of persecution: For no better will it prove, even in many cases where the
refusers scruples are unjust.

4. By this means they will hinder the Edification of the Church. What if a
Minister have a Congregation that (suppose upon mistakes) do scruple these
forms, and by prejudice or weakness are hindered from serving God with
cheerfullness and profit, where they are used; must we be bound to deny them
that mode of worship which their weakness does require? and to force them to
that which will not down with them? Must a Physician be bound to give all his
Patients one kind of diet? What if it be wholesome? Will you say, If that will
not down with him, he shall have none: let him die? This is contrary to the end
of our office: we are commanded to do all to Edification, which this does
contradict.

5. It is contrary to the Office, Power and Trust of the particular Pastors of
the Church, to be thus compelled in variable things. As it is the office of a
Physician to judge what diet and physic to prescribe his Patients, and to vary
it as persons do vary in their tempers and diseases, and to vary it with the
same persons, as their condition changes and requires it: and as it would be
foolish Tyranny against the very office of the Physician to restrain him from
this exercise of his prudence by a Law, and to tie him to give one kind of food
or physic to all; so is it in our present case. What is a Pastor, but the
guide of a Congregation in the worship of God? etc. And if Magistrates and
Bishops take this work out of their hands by their unnecessary prescriptions,
they so far prohibit him to do the work of a Pastor. What a grief is it to a
Minister (that being in the place, and knowing the people, is the most
competent Judge what is fit for them) to be constrained by men that know not
the state of his flock, to cross their Edification, and to be forbidden to use
his prudence and due power for their spiritual good?

6. And what a sinful arrogant usurpation is this, for any man to be guilty of?
It is Christ that has given his Ministers their Power, and that for
Edification: and who is he that may presume to take it from them? If they are
unworthy to be Ministers, let them not be Ordained, or let them be degraded or
deposed. But if they must be Ministers, let them do the work of Ministers; lest
as he that despises them, despises Christ, so he that restrains them from
their duty, and depriveth them of the exercise of their power unjustly, be
found one that would arrogate an authority over Christ.

7. And what intolerable Pride is this, for a few Bishops to think so highly of
themselves, and so basely of their more ^udicious Brethren, as if no man must
speak to God but in their words? These forms of Prayer are conceived and
invented by some body. And why should the Co^ceiver think so highly of his own
understanding, as if he were fit to teach a whole Nation what they must daily
say to God? and why should he think so unworthily of all others in comparison
of himself, as if none but he (and his Companions in this usurpation) knew how
to pray or utter their minds, but by his dictates or prescriptions? Is this
Humility?

8. Moreover this Imposition of forms (as before described) does discover too
much Cruelty to the Church: when they had rather Ministers were cast aside, and
the people left in darkness, then Ministers should teach them, and worship God
with them, that will not tie themselves to the very words that they devise for
them. What abundance of ignorant, drunken Readers and other Ministers were
suffered in England, while the learned, godly, painful Ministers were cast out,
and silenced, or persecuted, because they would not conform to all the forms
and ceremonies imposed by the Bishops? And so how many thousand souls may we
think are gone to Hell, through the ignorance or ungodliness of their Guides,
as if their damnation were more desirable, then their salvation by the teaching
of Ministers that dare not use the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies? I know
they will say, that such Schismatical Preachers do more hurt by breaking the
Churches peace, then they do good by converting souls. But who was it that laid
these snares in their way? Who laid the Churches peace upon your inventions?
Had not the Church a sure Rule, and an happy order, and unity, and peace,
before your Common prayer Book or Ceremonies were born? Why must the Church
have no peace but upon such terms? Who made this Necessity, that all men must
be taken for intolerable schismatics that dare not stint themselves in the
public worship by your impositions? Will you not be confounded before God,
when these Questions must be answered? The Church might have kept both Peace
and her Pastors, if you had let all alone as the Apostles left it, and had not
turned the forms of your Devotions to be a snare for others.

9. And it is great unmercifulness to the Souls of particular men, when you
will drive them into such snares, and c^mpell them to go against their
consciences in indifferent things: what ever is not of faith is sin. And
whether they believe it good or bad, you will compel them to practice all that
you impose. Have you not Consciences your selves? Do you not know what it is
for a man to be driven against his Conscience? If not, you are no Christians:
and then no wonder if you want the Charity and compassion of Christians, and so
easily for nothing, abuse and injure the Christian cause.

10. And in thus doing, you deal unjustly, and do not as you would be done by.
You would have Liberty your selves now to use a Liturgy: And why should not
others have Liberty to disuse it? Either you take it for a thing Necessary in
it self, or for Indifferent. If as Necessary, then you are so much the more
arrogant and injurious to the Churches, and your usurpation is the more
intolerable, and you do much to Justify them that deprive you of your own
liberty: For I know no Liberty that you should have to make universal Laws for
the Church: or to make new duties by your own mere wills, or turn Indifferent
things into Necessary, and so to multiply our work, and burden, and danger; and
to silence, suspend or excommunicate all that dare not submit to your usurped
Dominion. But if you take it for a thing in it self Indifferent, whether we
pray in a Form of prescribed words, or not, then as we are content that you
have your Liberty on one part, you have as just cause to allow us our liberty
on the other, and to do as you would be done by.

11. And by these Impositions, you set up a New Office or Power in the Church,
Consisting of a New Legislation, and a Government of the Church by such new
humane Laws. We know no Lawgiver but 1. Christ as to universal Laws of standing
necessity to the Churches, in the matters of Salvation. And 2. Magistrates to
make bylaws under Christ for a just determination of those mutable
circumstances that ought to be determined by humane Prudence; and 3. The
Ministers or Pastors of particular Churches to direct and guide the people as
there is cause. As for Bishops or Councils, we know of no Legislative Power
that they have over their Brethren, though Agreements they may make, which may
be obligatory, 1. by consent, as other contracts, 2. and in order to unity,
where the case requires such Agreements. But to set up a New sort of
Jurisdiction in the Church, by Legislation to make Forms and Ceremonies
obligatory, and by Executions to punish Pastors that will not practice them, is
a dangerous device.

12. Lastly by this means you will harden the Papists, that by their Inventions
and Impositions have divided the Church, and been guilty of so much usurpation
and tyranny; For how can we condemn that in them that is practiced by our
selves? And though in number of Inventions and Impositions they exceed, yet it
is not well to concur with them in the kind of unnecessary Impositions, and so
far to Justify them in their injury to the Church.

If none of these or other Reasons will alloy the Imperious distemper of the
Proud, but they must needs by a usurped Legislation be making Indifferent
things become necessary to others, and domineer over men's Consciences, and the
Church of God, we must leave them to him, that being the Lord and Lawgiver of
the Church, is Jealous of his Prerogative, and abhors Idols, and will not
give his glory to another, and that delights to pull down the Proud, and
humble them that exalt themselves.

But yet how far an Agreement or voluntary Consent of the Churches is desirable
as to a Liturgy, I shall show more anon.

Prop. 7.
Prop. 7. THE safest way of composing a stinted Liturgy, is to take it all, or
as much as may be, for words as well as matter, out of the Holy Scriptures.

Reas. 1. This way is least liable to scruple, because all are satisfied of the
infallible Truth of Scripture, and the fitness of its expressions, that are not
like to be satisfied with man's. And it is a laudable disposition in the
Creature to prefer the words of God before all other, and therefore not to be
discouraged in any.

Reas. 2. This way tends most to the peace of the Church. All will unite in the
words of God, that will not unite in the forms and words of men. If they
understand not a word of God, yet knowing it to be true, they will not quarrel
with it, but submit: But if they understand not the words of men, they will be
ready to suspect them, and so to quarrel with them, and so the Churches peace
will be broken. Besides, the judgments of men being fallible, many will
suspect that its possible there may be some error in their forms, though we see
them not, and God should be worshipped in the surest way.

Reas. 3. There is no other words that may be preferred before the words of
God, or stand in Competition with them: and therefore me thinks this should
easily be decided.

Object. But the Scripture has not forms enough for all the Churches uses.
Answ. It has matter and words for such Forms. Without any additions, save only
terms of Connection, the sentences of holy Scripture may suffice the Church for
all its uses, as to forms.

Object. But men may speak untruths in Scripture words if they will, and by
misplacing and misapplying them, may make them speak what was never meant in
them. Answ. But 1. When they use no expository terms of their own, but merely
recite the words of Scripture, the perverting them will not be so easy or
common: And 2. When they have placed them how they please, the people are left
at liberty (...) to the sense they have in the (...) to what men's misplacing
(...) put upon them* when we professedly make our forms out of Gods word, we do
as it were tell the people that they must give each sentence its proper
interpretation as its meant in Scripture, because we pretend not to change it,
but to use it. But when its our own words that we compose our own imposed forms
in, the people are left more uncertain of the soundness. For the maker is the
Interpreter.

Object. But the Church has ancient venerable fo^ms already; and who may
presume to alter them?

Answ. 1. Has it any that are more Ancient or more venerable then the
Scripture? undoubtedly it has not; nor any but must stoop to Scripture. 2. All
that is in the words of Scripture, we are contented be continued (at least.) 3.
If it were lawful for the first devisers or compilers of these Forms, to make a
new Liturgy, when the Church had so many before, then is it lawful for others
to do the like. And if the compilers of the first of those Liturgies, might
make a new one in their own words, why may not others make a new one in the
Scripture words, that will be new only as to the connection of Sentences? 4. The
Church of Rome that is most for their forms, have yet so often innovated, that
they have no reason to condemn it in others.

Prop. 8.
Prop. 8. THough it be safest and most venerable in Scripture words, yet is not
this of so great necessity, but that we may lawfully use a Liturgy that is not
thus taken out of Scripture.

As long as the matter is agreeable to Scripture, it is more for Convenience,
then necessity, that the words be thence, as is easily proved.

1. In our Preaching we judge it lawful to speak words that are not in the
Scripture: therefore by parity of reason, we may do so in Prayer.

2. In our extempora^^ Prayers we judge it lawful to use our own words that
are (...) out of Scripture: therefore we (...)

(...) strange to Scripture language, that (...) Phrases may be more edifying
to (...)

4. Words are but to express our minds: If therefore our words are congruous
expressions of sound and well ordered conceptions, they are not only lawful*
but convenient. And therefore it is not warrantable for any man to quarrel with
expressions because they are not Scriptural, nor to scruple the use of
Liturgies, because the forms are not in the words of Scripture.

Prop. 9. THE matter of a common Liturgy in which we expect any general
Concord, prop. 9.
should not be any doubtful or unnecessary things.

1. It should impose no doubtful or unnecessary ceremonies, (of which I shall
speak by it self in the next Disputation.) 2. It should not restrain men
needlessly in things indifferent, by determining of mutable circumstances, as
time, place, gesture, vestures, words, etc. (Of which also in the next.) 3. It
should not make those things to be of general indispensable immutable
necessity, that are but sometimes necessary, or meet; but Pastors should have
their Liberty to vary them as there is occasion. 4. Much less should any thing
Materially dubious and uncertain be put in.

For God will be worshipped in knowledge and faith. And, as is said before, the
Church will be divided, and the Consciences of men ensnared, by laying so much
on unnecessary things. And therefore though such imposers pretend to a
perfecter Unity and Concord, then in a few Generals or Necessaries can be had,
yet they will find they miss their mark.

Prop. 10. HVmane Forms of public prayer, or other worship (excepting the
fore-excepted Necessary cases, as Psalms, etc. Prop. 10*
) should not be constantly used by Ministers, that have their liberty, and are
able to pray without them: Nor should any be ordinarily admitted into the
Ministry (except in the great necessities of the Church) that are not able to
pray without such forms.

In this Proposition are these considerable points employed, and expressed. 1.
That it is not unfit to have forms by the common Agreement of the Pastors, to
be used when its meet (as is before and after expressed.) There are few Nations
in the world, so well provided for with able Ministers, but that some places
must be supplied with men that have need of forms of Prayer, if not of
Preaching, composed by others. And therefore it is fittest that such should
have Forms that are Agreed on by all. And therefore I doubt not but when we
came newly out of Popery, and had not a full supply of preachers, it was a wise
and lawful course to compose a common form of Prayer. For, 1. It will be the
surest way to keep out unsoundness and abusive passages, when nothing is
allowed as a public form but what has obtained the common consent. 2. It will
be the way of fullest concord: when forms are necessary, there is more of
Concord in it, to have one ^that is approved sound) then to have as many as men
please. 3 The Churches may the better know whom to hold communion with in
Prayer, (though the Pastors may be unable to pray without forms) when they know
the substance of their Prayers. 4. The Magistrate may the better do his duty
and be responsible for the service that is offered to God, even by the weakest
Pastors, and see that Gods name be not abused. It is therefore desirable that a
Common Liturgy be extant.

2. And for the use of it, let these Rules contained in the Proposition be
observed.

1. ^et no man be ordained a Minister that is not able to Pray without a Form,
in such a manner as is not dishonorable to the worship of God, unless the
Necessity of the Churches shall require it. All friends of the Church will
agree to this, that the Church have the ablest Pastors that can be got.

2. But because it is not to be hoped for that all the Churches can be thus
supplied (at least in haste,) if the Or^^iners or Approvers shall appoint any
to the work in Wales or other necessitous places, that are not able competently
to administer Sacraments, etc. without a Form of Prayer, let them tie such to
use the Form Agreed on.

3. If they approve only of such as are able to do it without a form, but yet
so weakly (some of them) as is less to the Churches Edification, then the form
would be, let such be advised, sometimes to use the Form, and sometime to
forbear it, till they are more able.

4. And that it may be no dishonor to the public Form, that it is used only
by the weak, let the Ablest Ministers sometime use it, but with these cautions:
1. Let them not be compelled to it against their judgments, but persuaded. 2.
Let not the ablest use it so frequently as the weak, (unless their own
judgment require it.) Let the weaker use it ofter, and the Abler more seldom.

5. Let neither of them (that can competently worship God without it) use it
Constantly; but sometime use it, and sometime forbear it. And this is the main
point that I intend in this Proposition, and therefore shall now briefly give
my Reasons for.

Reas. 1. The constant use of forms (and so of Ceremonies and any Indifferent
things) does potently tend to persuade the people that they are matters of
Necessity, and not indifferent. All the words that you can use will not
satisfy them that it is indifferent, if you use it not Indifferently. We see
by experience the power of custom with the vulgar.

But you will say, What if they do overvalue it as necessary, what danger is in
that? I answer very much. 1. They will offer God a blind kind of service, while
they place his worship in that which is no part of worship (as forms are not,
as such) but an indifferent circumstance. 2. They will be hereby induced to
uncharitable censures of other Churches or persons that think otherwise, or
disuse those customs. 3. They will be strongly induced to rebel against their
Magistrates and Pastors, if they shall judge it meet to change those customs.
4. They will turn that stream of their zeal for these indifferent things, that
should be laid out on the matters of Necessity: and perhaps in vain will they
worship God, by an outside hypocritical worship, while they thus take up with
men's Traditions. 5. They will forsake Gods own Ordinances, when they cannot
have them clothed with their desired mode. All this we see in our days at
home. The most ignorant and ungodly do by hundreds and thousands, reject Church
discipline, and Sacraments, and many of them the Prayers and Assemblies
themselves, because they have not the Common Prayer, or because the Churches
kneel not at the Lords Supper in the act of Receiving, and such like. So that
it is a grievous plague to our peoples souls to be led into these mistakes, and
to think that Circumstances and things indifferent, are matters of Necessity.

And yet on the other side, lest the constant disuse of all convenient forms,
should lead the people into the contrary extreme, to think them all unlawful
(and so to be guilty of the like uncharitable censures and evils as aforesaid)
I think it safest, that the ablest men should sometime use them. And this
Indifferent use of them, will lead the people to indifferent thoughts of them,
and so they will not provoke God by blind worship, nor be so ready to fly in
the faces of their Ministers when they cross them herein, as now they are. For
example, what a stir have we if men may not kneel at the Sacrament, or if the
dead (in case of Ministers absence, or other hinderance) have not somewhat said
over them at the grave; and in some places, if Ministers go not in procession
in Rogation week, and many such like customs. If these were sometime used (in a
good and lawful way) it would keep men from mistaking them to be unlawful;
and if they were sometime disused, people would not take them as things
necessary, nor so hate and reproach both Ministers and brethren that neglect
them, or do not always humor them herein, yea or that were against them: nor
would men separate on these accounts.

Reas. 2. The constant use of Forms of Prayer depriveth people of their
Ministers gifts, and potently tends to work the people into a dull formality,
and to a mere outside heartless k^nd of service, Which is as great an enemy to
serious Devotion, and consequently to men's salvation, as almost any thing that's
to be found among professed Christians in the Church. How dangerously and
obstinately do such delude themselves, and think that they are as uprightly
religious as the best? and so refuse all the humbling convincing light that
should bring them to a change, and blindly misapply the promises to themselves,
and go on in mere presumption to the last: and all because they thus draw near
to God with their lips, and say over a form of words, when their hearts are far
from him, and they know not, or observe not what they say.

And that constancy in Forms does potently tend to this dead formality, we need
no other proof then experience. How hard does the best man find it to keep up
life and seriousness in the constant hearing or speaking of the same words? If
you say that it is our fault* I grant it: but it is an uncurable fault while we
are in the flesh: or at least its few that ever are very much cured of it, and
non wholly. There Is much also in nature it self to cause this. A man that
delights in Music is weary of it, if he have constantly the same instrument
and tune: or at least cannot possibly have that delight that Variety would
afford him. So is it in recreations, and often in diet, and other things. Novelty
affects: Variety pleases: Commonness dulleth us. And though we must not
therefore have a New God, or a New Christ, or a New Gospel (the fullness of
these affords the soul a daily variety: and also their perfect goodness is
such as leaves no need of a variety in kind,) yet is it meet that Ministers
should have a grateful variety of Manner, to keep up delight and desire in
their people. A sick stomach cannot take still the same Physic, nor the same
dish. I know that an ancient prudent man, especially the Learned Pastor
himself, that better comprehends what a form of words contains, can make a
much better use of forms, then younger Christians can do. But I think with all,
I am sure with the generality, (to whom we must have respect) a constant form
is a certain way to bring the Soul to a cold insensible formal worship.

And on the other side, if a form be Constantly disused, and people have no^
sometimes a recital of the same, again and again, it may tend to breed a
childish levity, and giddyness in Religion; as if it were not the matter, but
mere Novelty and variety that did please; And so it may also easily make
Hypocrites, who shall delude themselves with conceits that they delight in God
and in his word, when it is but in these novelties and varieties of expression,
that they are tickled and delighted; and their itching ears being pleased, they
think it proves a work of saving grace on the heart. And therefore to fix
Christians and make them sound, that they grow not wanton in Religion, and be
not as children carried up and down with variety of doctrine^ or of modes, I
think it would be useful to have a moderate seasonable use of some forms as to
the manner, as well as often to inculcate the same matter; Avoiding still that
constancy that tends to dull their appetites, and make them weary or formal in
the work.

Reas. 3. The constant use of a stinted Liturgy, or form of Prayer, does much
tend to the remisness and negligence of the Ministry. When they know that the
duty requires no exercise of their invention, and that before the Church they
may as well perform it with an unprepared as with a prepared mind, it will
strongly tempt them (and prevail too commonly) to neglect the stirring up of
their gifts, and the preparing of their minds. When they know that before men
they may (in Reading a Prayer) come off as well without any regard to their
hearts, as with the greatest seriousness of devotion, we must expect that most
should do accordingly: For we see that Ministers are men, and too many are
carried as well as others, with the stream of temptation. But those Prayers and
other duties that depend upon their parts, require preparation, or at least
some present care and diligence for the awakening of their hearts, and
excitation of their faculties.

Reas. 4. But the principal danger of a constant use of prescribed forms, is,
lest it should let in an unworthy Ministry into the Church. For though I had
rather have as weak Ministers as I before described, then none; yet it will be
very dangerous when such are tolerated because of Necessity, lest the
negligence of Ordainers and Approvers will take advantage of this, and pretend
necessity where there is none, or hearken to them that come with such
pretenses, and so undo the Church by an ignorant insufficient Ministry; so hard
is it for men to avoid one extreme without running into another. Now the utter
prohibition of stinted forms will prevent this, but not without an evil on the
other side. And therefore to avoid the evils on both sides, me thinks it would
be best to let such forms be used, but unconstantly, unless by men that will
lie under the dishonor of being able to do no better. And that dishonor will
hinder men from resting in them, and the frequent exercise of other men's gifts,
will awaken them to their duty, and the necessity of it will as well keep out
insufficient men as if there were no form at all. For an insufficient man can
no more perform the work once a day without a form, then twice a day. I shall
add no more Reasons, because they that write against forms of Prayer, though
they run too far, have said enough of the inconveniences. The motion that I
make being for a voluntary and an unconstant use of them, I must expect to meet
with objections on both sides, which I shall briefly answer.

Object. 1.
Object. 1. Those that are utterly against forms, will say that I am opening
under pretense of Peace and Liberty a way to let in an unlawful worship and a
lazy insufficient Ministry. To which I answ. 1. For them that take all forms to
be unlawful, I think them fitter for compassion then disputes, and judge their
reason to be as low as the Quakers that cry down the use of hour-glasses, and
sermon-notes, and preaching on a Text of Scripture. 2. And for the rest of the
objection, its answered before. The use of a Liturgy in the way described, will
not more Countenance a lazy insufficient ministry, nor hurt the Church, then if
there were none.

Object. 2. But what need is there of it? Object. 2.
Are we not well without it? why would you disturb our peace, to please the
adversaries? Answ. 1. We are not without a Liturgy, as shall be further showed,
and therefore you cannot say we are well without it. 2. Some young weak
Ministers (we must speak the truth) do wrong both Baptism and the Lords Supper
by many miscarriages, for want of further helps. 3. Wales and many parts of
England must be supplied with Forms, or be without, which is worse. 4. The
Consciences of many of those that you call adversaries (and I call Brethren)
must be indulged with the liberty of a convenient form, or else we shall not
walk charitably.

On the oth^^side it will be objected, by them that would have all men forced
to the constant u^e of forms, Object. 1.
1. that If we have not forms, men may vent what they please in prayer: some
rail in prayer, and some vent error, and some rebellion, etc. Answ. 1. This
Argument makes against all Prayer of Ministers, but what is prescribed. For if
you force them to a form, and yet give them leave with their Sermons to use
also either extemporate or formed Prayers of their own, they may as well vent
rebellion, heresy or malice in them, as if they had no Liturgy at all. And if
you would have Ministers use no prayer but what they read out of the imposed
books, for fear of these inconveniences, you will show your selves enemies to
the Church, and cure an inconvenience with a mischief. 2. And if men were
forbidden all prayer but by the Book, yet it is more easy to vent error or
malice in a Sermon. So that unless you tie them also to forbear preaching save
out of an imposed book, you are never the better. And if you would do so, you
are sorry helpers of the Church. 3. You have a better remedy then these at
hand. Put no such Insufficient men, or Heretics into the Ministry, that will
so abuse prayer: or if they be crept in, put them out again, and put better in
their places, that will not abuse it. If some Physicians kill men by ignorance
or malice, will you tie them all to go by a Book and give but one medicine, or
will you not rather cast out the unworthy, and license only abler men?

^^ject. 2.
Object. 2. But how can I Ioyn with a Minister in prayer, If I know not before
hand what he will say, when for ought I know he may pray blasphemy or heresy?

Answ. 1. By this objection, you take it to be unlawful to join with any
prayers at all, whether public or private, but what you know before: And so it
seems you think all prayer but what is by the book, unfit for any but a solitary
person. And if this be your mind, that your Book-Prayers must needs shut out
all others, blame not men so much to shut out your Book, when you so far
provoke them. 2. According to this Objection you must not send for the Minister
to pray with you when you are sick, or in trouble, unless he tie himself to
your Book. And why then may not another do it as well as he; or at least, the
sillyest man that can read as well as the most able? 3. It is the work of the
Minister, to be the peoples mouth in prayer to God, and therefore if he fail in
the manner of his own work, it is his sin, and not yours, and you may no more
refuse for that to join with him, then subjects may refuse to obey the
sovereign power because of some miscarriages, yea or to fight for them, and
defend them. 4. Your presence signifies not your consent to all that you hear
from a Minister: And your Heart is not to follow him in evil, but in good: and
therefore seeing you are at liberty, what cause of scruple have you? 5. It is
supposed that no man is ordinarily admitted, or tolerated in the Ministry, that
will so abuse prayer that men may not lawfully join with them. If they are
such, cast them out: If you cannot cast them out, if they are Heretics or
Blasphemers, come not near them. But if ^^ey are men fit for to be tolerated in
the Ministry, you have reason to trust them so far in their office, as not to
expect Heresies or Blasphemies from them, till you hear them: And if you hear
them guilty of such, after a First and Second admonition avoid them. But let
not wicked uncharitable censures be an argument against the worship of God. You
know not but a Physician may poison you, and yet you will choose the best you
can, and then trust your lives with him. You may much more do so by a Minister,
because you proceed not by so implicit a faith in the matters of your
Salvation. You may refuse any evil that the Minister offers.

Object. 3.
Object. 3. But many of them speak nonsense and unreverent words, and abuse Gods
worship. Answ. Get better in their stead, that are able to do Gods work in a
more suitable manner. But see that your quarrelsome capricious wits, do not
odiously aggravate imperfections, or make faults where there are none. And
remember that you have not Angels, but men to be your Pastors; and therefore
imperfections must be expected: But a blessi^g may accompany imperfect
administrations. But if People, Patron, and Ordainer will choose weak men, when
they may have better, they may thank themselves. A Common Prayer book will make
but an imperfect supply, instead of an able Minister: Though in some cases I am
for it, as aforesaid.

Object. 4. But prayer is a speaking to God: and therefore men should say
nothing but what is exactly weighed before hand. Object. 4.


Answ. 1. We grant all this. But men may weigh before hand the matter of their
requests, without preparing a form of words: or a man may fore-consider of his
words, without a Prayer Book. 2. Preaching is a speaking in Gods name, as
though God speak by us, and as Christ's ambassadors in his stead. 2 Cor. 5.19,
20. And to speak as in Christ's stead, and Gods name, requires as great
preparation, as to speak to God in the peoples name. It seems more, as it were
to represent Christ in speaking* then to speak to Christ while we represent but
the people. And therefore by this argument you should let no man preach
neither, but by a book prescribed. 3. God is not as man, that looks most at
oratory and fine words. It is an humble, contrite, faithful, honest heart that
he looks at: And where he sees this, with earnest desires, and that the matter
of Prayer is agreeable to his will, he will bear with many a homely word. One
Cold request, or the lest formality and dullness of affection, and carelessness
and disesteem of the mercy, is more odious with God, then a thousand
Barbarisms, and Solaecisms, and unhandsome words. Yet the tongue also should
carefully be looked to: but men should not mistake themselves, and think that
God judges by the outward appearance, and as man judges* 4. Still I say, get
Ministers that are able to do better if you have insufficient ones. A man on a
common prayer book is likelier to provoke God, by a careless, heartless,
customary service, and mere lip labor, let the the words be never so exact,
then another (that fears God) is like to provoke him by disorderly or
unhandsome words: Though both should be avoided.

Object. 5.
Object. 5. Our minds are not able to go along with a Min^ster on the sudden,
unless we knew what he will say before hand.

Answ. A diligent soul that marketh what is said, may with holy affections go
along with a Minister without knowing what he will say before hand. The
experience of Christians confuteth this objection. 2. And this would not only
plead for a form, but shut out all other prayer: which is sufficient to
disgrace it with any understanding man.

Object. 6.
Object. 6. The public Prayers of the Church are they that we must own by our
concurrence: His own conceived Prayers are but the Private Prayers of the
Minister. Answ. The Minister is a public person, and his prayers publicly
made for and in the Church, are as much the Public prayers of that Church as
if they were read out of an imposed Book: But indeed when many Churches Agree
in a form, that form may so far be called the Common Prayers of all those
Churches: but its no more the Public Prayers of any one Church then sudden
conceived prayer is. And when there is no form, yet the matter may be the
Common Prayer of all Churches.

Object. 7.
Object. 7. But what confusion will it ^ake in the Church if one Congregation
shall have a Form, and another none, and every man shall be left to do what he
list in Prayer?

Answ. This is the voice of that Ignorance, Pride, and Dividing usurpation that
has caused all the Schisms and troubles of the Church. Must the Churches have
no Peace but on your imposed terms? Must none be endured, but all cast out of
the Church of God that dare not say your forms of prayer, though they are as
wise and pious and peaceable as you? Nothing but Proud arrogance and
uncharitable cruelty will say so. 2. But if we must needs all Agree in the
manner of our Prayers, we must shut out all forms, and agree all to be without
them (which yet I consent not to.) For there is no one Form that you can expect
that all should agree in, that's of humane invention: Not but that we may well
do it: but it will not be. 3. How had the Church Unity before any of your forms
were known? 4. If it be no blemish for several Nations to have several Forms,
and manners, it is tolerable for several Congregations* 5. How did the Ancient
Churches maintain their Unity, when Liturgies were in use, and the variety was
so great as is commonly known? Many Churches had no singing of Psalms ( Vid.
Pamel. in Cyprian. de Orat. Dom. Not. 6.) Others used it by the whole
Assemblies (see Ball's Friendly Trial, page 60. citing the Authors that attest
it) Other Churches did use to sing by course, or two at a time. (See it proved
by Ball ibid. out of many witnesses.) This variety and much more consisted then
with Unity, and may do now, when forced uniformity will not. 6. We are all now
at Liberty what Gesture we will use in singing Psalms, etc. and is here any
discord hence arising? But men were forced to kneeling only in Receiving the
Lords Supper, and there came in discord. Men's fancies makes that seem confusion
that is no such thing. No more then that all that hear or pray, have not the
same colored clothes, complections, etc.

Object. 8. Object 8.
But should not men obey Authority in forms and m^^ters of indifferency? Answ.
They should, if they be indeed indifferent. But should Authority therefore
ensnare the Church with needless Impositions? All men will not be satisfied of
the Indifferency. I have heard many say that they would preach in a fools Cap
and Coat if authority command them. But is it therefore fit that Authority
should command it? All men will not judge it lawful to obey them in such
cases, and so there will be needless snares laid to entrap and divide men.

Object. 9. But antiquity is for set forms, and therefore Novelty, must not be
permitted to exclude them. Object. 9.


Answ. 1. Let Scripture be the Rule for deciding this, which is the chief
witness of Antiquity: and let the oldest way prevail. 2. Forms were at first
introduced in Variety, and not as necessary for the Churches Unity to Agree in
one: And they were left to the Pastors Liberty, and none were forced to any
forms of other men's composing. When Basil set up his New forms of Psalmodie and
other Worship, which the Church of Neocaesarea were so offended at, he did not
for all that impose it on them, but was content to use it in his Church at
Caesarea.

Object. 10. Object. 10.
No man can now say what is the worship of God among us, because there is no
Liturgy, but its mutable as every person pleases.

Answ. We have a Liturgy, and are agreed in all the parts of worship. To have
forms or no forms is no part of it, but a circumstance or mode.

THE sum is this; 1. We have already a stinted Liturgy. 1. A form of Doctrine
in Scripture, The sum.
2. Real forms in Sacraments 3. A verbal form in Baptizing, 4. A form in
delivering the Lords Supper. 5. A Creed (used at Baptism) as a form of
confession. 6. We Read the Psalms as Liturgical forms of praise and prayer.
Besides s^^ms of Catechisms.
7. We have forms of singing Psalms. 8. We have a form of blessing the people
in the End. 9. And of Excommunication (see the Government of the Church, etc.)
10. And of Absolution. 11. And of Marriage. 12. And Ministers preparation makes
much of their Sermons a form. 13. And they are at liberty to pray in a form if
they Please.

2. No more is necessary (of it self) unless (accidentally) Authority or Peace,
etc. require it.

3. If Peace, etc. require a form, let it be one, by common Agreement as near
as may be taken out of Scripture, even in words, and as much of the old as is
consistent with this Rule retained.

4. Let it not contain any doubtful or unnecessary things, but be as much
certain and necessary for the matter as may be.

5. Let none be forced to use it, but such as by Ordainers or Approvers, are
judged insufficient to worship God without it, and yet are allowed or Tolerated
in the Ministry.

6. Let no Tolerated Ministers be Absolutely forbidden to use it.

7. Let none be suffered to lay the Unity and Peace of the Church on it, and
suspend, excommunicate or reproach all that dissent from them in using or not
using it.

8. In times of Liberty, let none use it constantly (but the unable before
excepted.) But let the weaker use it of^^er, and the abler seldomer, yet
sometimes (voluntarily, and caeteris paribus, still looking to the state of
their flocks, and fitting all to their Edification.)

9. When Magistrates command it, or the Agreement of Pastors and Peace of the
Churches (though accidentally by men's infirmity) require it, let none refuse
the frequent use of lawful forms.

10. But let none desire or endeavor the introducing of any such Necessity of
this or any indifferent thing, that is not first Necessary by some considerable
antecedent occasion to the Edification of the Church.

This much will please the moderate, but not the self conceited.

FINIS.
The Fifth DISPUTATION: Of Humane CEREMONIES: Whether they are necessary, or
profitable to the Church, and how far they may be imposed or observed? By
Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1658.

Qu. Whether Humane Ceremonies be Necessary or Profitable to the Church?
CHAP. I. Distinctions and Propositions in order to the Decision.
. 1. THE discussion of the Controversy about the Etymology of the word [
Ceremony] is unnecessary to our ends, and would be more troublesome then
useful. Whether it be derived ab oppido Caere, or a carendo, or a Caritate, or
a Cerere, as several men's conjectures run, or rather as Scaliger and Martinius
think, from Cerus, which in veteri lingua erat sanctus; it suffices us that it
signifies a sacred rite. Servius says that all sacred things among the Greeks
were called (...), and among the Latins Ceremoniae: But by Ceremonies we mean
only external Rites or Orders in or about the worship of God. And by Humane, we
mean such as are devised and appointed to be used, by men, without any special
Revelation from God, or any extraordinary inspiration of his Spirit, by which
the institution might have been justly ascribed to God as the certain principal
cause.

. 2. There is so much ambiguity partly in the terms, and partly in the supposed
or employed passages that will rise before us in the dispute, that I judge it
necessary to make the way to the true decision of the controversy, and your
right understanding of it by these distinctions following, and then to lay down
the truth in certain Propositions.

. 3. Did. 1. We must distinguish between such Ceremonies as God has left to
humane determination in his worship, and such as he has not so left; but has
either 1. Expressly forbidden them in particular. 2. Or in a General prohibition
forbidden them, or 3. Has given no man authority to institute them. So great
difference is there between things that commonly go under the name of
Ceremonies, that they are not in this Controversy to be confounded, if we
would not lose the truth.

. 4. Did. 2. We must distinguish between Ceremonies commanded by man as in
Gods name, and by pretense of a Commission from him; and such as are only
commanded in men's own names, or at least on pretense of nothing but a General
Power.

. 5. Did. 3. We must distinguish between Ceremonies commanded by men as
necessary duties or means of worship, and such as are only commanded as
indifferent things.

. 6. Did. 4. We must distinguish between Ceremonies imposed by a Lawful
Magistrate, or Church Governors, and such as are imposed by usurpers, or men
without authority.

. 7. Did. 5. We must distinguish between Ceremonies imposed as Universally to
be practiced by all ages, or all people, in the Church at least, and such as
are imposed only on some one Congregation or Nation by their proper Governors,
and that as things mutable, that upon special occasion were taken up, and may
so be laid aside again.

. 8. Did. 6. We must distinguish between Ceremonies commanded as things
necessary to the being of the Church or Worship, or only necessary to the Order
and convenient administration, and better being of them (in the judgment of
the imposers.)

. 9. Did. 7. We must distinguish between the absolute command of Governors
imposing such ceremonies, upon grievous penalties, or without tolerations; and
the simple recommending them, or requiring them to be used with (expressed or
employed) exceptions.

. 10. Did. 8. We must very much difference the several Countries where such
things are imposed, and the several sorts of People on whom, and the several
seasons in which they are imposed, and thence foresee the effects or
consequents that are like to follow.

. 11. Did. 9. We must distinguish between the Commanding of such Ceremonies,
and the Obeying of such Commands. Its one thing to ask whether it be necessary,
profitable, or lawful to Impose them? and another whether it be necessary or
lawful to use them when commanded?

. 12. Did. 10. We must distinguish between that which is Necessary or
Profitable to the order or Peace of one Church or Nation: and that which is
necessary or profitable to the order, peace or unity of many Churches or
Nations, among themselves: or supposed to be so.

. 13. These Distinctions premised to remove ambiguity; I lay down that which I
conceive to be the truth in these Propositions following; which having
mentioned, I shall reassume and confirm such of them as seem of nearest
concernment to the Question.

. 14. Prop. 1. Such Ceremonies as God has wholly exempted from humane power to
determine of, or institute, or has given man no power to institute, are not
necessary, or profitable to the Church, nor may they lawfully be instituted by
man.

. 15. Prop. 2. In such unlawful Impositions, it is a great aggravation of the
sin, if men pretend that they are the Institutions of God, or that they have a
Commission from God to institute or impose them, when it is no such matter; and
so pretend them to be Divine.

. 16. Prop. 3. If things unlawful (either forbidden, or that want authority)
are commanded as indifferent, it is a sinful command, but if commanded as
parts of Gods Worship or necessary to the Being or well being of the Church, it
is an aggravation of the sin.

. 17. Prop. 4. Things indifferent, lawful and convenient, are sinfully
Commanded when they are pretended to be more necessary then they are, and as
such imposed.

. 18. Prop. 5. A thing convenient and profitable, is sinfully commanded* when
it is commanded on a greater penalty, then the nature and use of it does
require, and the common good will bear.

. 19. Prop. 6. It is not lawful to make any thing the subjects Duty by a
command, that is merely Indifferent, antecedently both in it self, and as
clothed with all accidents.

. 20. Prop. 7. Some things may be lawfully and profitably commanded at one time
and place, and to one sort of People, that may not be lawfully commanded at
another time, or to another people: no nor obeyed, if so commanded.

. 21. Prop. 8. Those Orders may be Profitable for the Peace of the Churches in
one Nation, or under the Government of one Prince, that are not necessary or
profitable in order to the unity or Peace of the Churches under diverse Princes.

. 22. Prop. 9. There is no mere humane Universal Sovereign Civil, or
Ecclesiastical over the Catholic Church, and therefore there is no power given
to any from God, to make Laws that shall universally bind the Catholic Church.

. 23. Prop. 10. If it be not our own Lawful Governors Civil or Ecclesiastical,
but Usurpers that command us, we are not therefore b^und to obey them, though
the things be lawful.

. 24. Prop. 11. The Commands of lawful Governors about lawful Ceremonies are
ordinarily to be understood with exceptions, though there be none expressed, as
that in certain cases it is not their will that such commands should bind us.

. 25. Prop. 12. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies, which may
lawfully, yea must in duty be used by the subject when they are commanded.

. 26. Prop. 13. Though they are not Commanded, nor called Necessary, but
professed to be indifferent, yet constantly to use Indifferent things, does
breed that custom which makes them to be taken as necessary by the people,
and usually does very much hurt.

. 27. Prop. 14. Yet certain things that are commonly called Ceremonies may
lawfully be used in the Church upon humane imposition, and when it is not
against the Law of God, no person should disobey the commands of their lawful
Governors, in such things.

. 28. Having laid together these Propositions, I shall review them, in a very
short explication and confirmation, and insist more largely on those of chief
concernment.

CHAP. II. Such Ceremonies as God has forbidden, or given man no Power to
institute, are not to be imposed on the Church, as profitable or lawful.
. 1. THAT some Ceremonies (things commonly so called) may Lawfully be
commanded, and some not, me thinks should easily be yielded. I meet with none
that are against all indeed, though some think the name [ Ceremony] unfitly
applied to those Circumstances which they consent to: And that any should think
that the wit and will of Ceremonie-makers has no bounds imposed by God, is
most unreasonable. All the business therefore is to know what God has
authorized Governors to institute, and what not?

. 2. And here they that claim a Power of introducing new Institutions, must
produce their Commission, and Prove their power if they expect obedience. For
we are not bound to obey every man that will tell us he has such Power.

. 3. For the right understanding of this, it must be supposed, as a Truth that
all Protestants are agreed in, that the written word of God is his law for the
government of the universal Church to the end of the world; and consequently
that it is sufficient in its kind, and to its use, and consequently that
nothing is to be introduced, that shall accuse that law of imperfection, or
which did belong to God himself to have imposed by his law. If we once forsake
the Scripture sufficiency (what ever the Papists or Infidels vainly say against
it,) we have nothing left in which we may agree.

. 4. God has already in his written Laws, instituted his public
worship-ordinances: and therefore he has done it perfectly: and therefore he
has not left it unto man to come after him and mend his work, by making other
ordinances of worship, as to the substance of them. He has given us one faith,
and no man may preach another, and one Baptism, and no man may institute
another: and so of the like. If any one bring another Gospel, though an Angel,
he is to be accursed, Gal. 1.7, 8.

. 5. Yet is it in the Power of man to determine of such Modes and Circumstances
as are necessary to the prrformance of that worship which God has instituted
in his word: And therefore lawful Governors may in such cases bind us by their
commands.

. 6. The things that are committed to humane determination, are such as are
commanded in general by God himself (either in Scripture or nature,) but are
left undetermined in specie, vel individuo: so that it is not a thing
indifferent, whether a choice or determination be made or not, but only whether
it be this or the other that is chosen by the determination. But where the
thing it self in genere is not necessary, or no humane election or
determination necessary, because God himself has determined of it already,
there men are not to meddle, as having no authority from God.

. 7. I shall first give some instances of the former sort (the Lawful
Ceremonies) and then name the latter (that are unlawful,) which I shall
afterward give my reasons against. And 1. It is left to humane determination
what place the Public assemblies shall be held in. God having commanded us to
frequent such assemblies, and not forsake them, does oblige us to some place in
general, and to a fit place. He that bids us preach, and hear, and pray, and
assemble to these ends, does plainly bid us, do this some where. It is
impossible to meet, and not in a Place. And in that he has not determined of
any place himself, he has left it to our reasons to determine of as occasion
shall require. God has not commanded to build a Temple in such a place rather
then another: or to go thither to worship rather then another place (but by
consequence and general directions:) nor has he determined what place the
Minister shall stand to preach in, or where all the people shall have their
seats. All these are but the circum^^^nces of a holy action, which are left to
humane prudence.

. 8. 2. It is left to man to determine of the Time of holy duties, except only
where God has determined of it already. As that the Lords day shall be the Day
for public holy Assemblies, is a thing that God himself has determined; and
here we have nothing to do but to discern his determinations and obey them. But
withal he has in General commanded us to preach in season and out of season,
and to Assemble frequently, on several great occasions: And here he has not
determined of the Time, but left it to humane prudence upon emergent occasions,
and according to their several cases, to determine of what hour on the Lords
day we shall begin; how long the Sermon shall be; what hour the Assembly shall
be dismissed: what days the Lords supper shall be administered, and how often: when
any shall be Baptized: what day the Lecture shall be on, or any more private
meetings for edification: what hour, or just how often men must pray in secret,
or with their families: these with the like are undetermined by God (and good
reason, as I shall show anon,) and left to our selves and to our Governors:
Some Time or other we are commanded by God himself to choose.

. 9. 3. It is left to the determination of humane Prudence, what Vtensils to
employ about the public worship of God. For these in General are commanded by
God, and so made necessary; as also in the nature of the thing. He that
commanded us to do the work, that is not to be done without convenient
Vtensils, does thereby command us virtually the use of instruments fit for the
work. What form and proportion the Temple where we meet shall have, is left to
men: whether we shall preach in a Pulpit? and what shall be its shape? where we
shall read? whether we shall Baptize in a River, or Pond, or Spring, or Font,
or Basin, and what materials, whether stone or Silver, or Pewter, etc. they be
made of? whether we shall receive the Lords supper at a Table, or in our seats,
and whether the Table shall be of wood or stone? whether it shall be round, or
long, or square? whether it shall stand in the East or West end of the Temple,
or the middle? whether it shall have rails, or no rails? whether the Bread be
of wheat or other convenient grain? what vessel the Bread shall be put in? and
what grape the wine shall be made of? and what vessel it shall stand in? and
be delivered in? whether a cup, or other like vessel? whether of silver, wood,
or pewter, etc? All these are left to humane prudence. In general, it is
necessary that some such utensils in each case there be: but the special sort
is left indifferent to our choice So also the Bibles themselves, whether they
be Printed, or Written, and in what hand, or color? Whether bound, or in a
Role? are things indifferent in themselves, and left to humane reason to
determine. The like may be said of other utensils of worship, necessary in
genere.

. 10. 4. God has not determined in what language the Scripture shall be read
or preached to such or such a congregation (though by the general Rule, that
all be done to edification, and that we speak to the understanding, there is
sufficient direction for it) But he that commands us to preach, implies that
we translate the Scripture, and preach and read in a language fittest for the
peoples edification. And if (as in many places of Wales) there be two languages
equally understood, we may indifferently choose that which we think most
agreeable to the general rules.

. 11. 5. The Scripture has commanded us in general to sing Psalms: but it
has not told us whether they shall be in R^thme, or Meeter, or in what tune we
shall sing them. These modes are left to humane Prudence to determine of.

. 12. 6. When there are diverse Translations of the Scripture in the same
language* or diverse versions of the Psalms in the same language (as in England,
here are the old version, the New England version, Mr. Rous's first, and his
second (or the Scots,) Mr. White's, Bishop Kings, Sands's, Mr. Bartons, etc.)
God has not told us which of all these we shall use, but given us general
directions, according to which our own Reason, or our Governors should make
choice.

. 13. 7. God has commanded us to Read the holy Scriptures, and to expound them
to the people, that they may understand and practice them: But he has not told
us what Book of Scripture, or what Chapter we shall read at such a day, or on
such or such occasions; nor yet what order we shall observe in Reading; whether
we shall begin the Scripture, and go on to the end; or whether we shall read
more frequently some subjects of greatest use, and which? These therefore are
left to humane prudence to determine of by general rules.

. 14. 8. Though God has commanded us to Read the Scripture, and to sing
Psalms, etc. yet has he not told us just how much we shall read at a time, or
sing at a time: and therefore this also is a matter left to humane
Determination.

. 15. 9. Though God has commanded us to Preach the Gospel, and told us what
to preach, and given us general Rules for our direction, yet has he not told
us what text, or subject we shall preach on such or such a day: nor yet what
Method we shall follow, there being various methods, suitable to several Texts
and people: It is left therefore to humane prudence to choose both Subject,
Text and Method.

. 16. 10. God that has commanded us to pray, and praise him, and preach, etc.
has not told us just what words we shall use in any of these holy exercises.
He has indeed given us the Lords Prayer, which is our Rule for matter, and
Method, and a lawful form for words: but he has not tied us to this only, nor
told us what words we shall use besides this: whether we shall use words long
before premeditated (called a form) or only such as are immediately or near
before our speaking premeditated, or in speaking, adapted to the matter in
hand? whether our premeditated prayers shall be expressed in our own words, or
such as are prescribed us by others? whether such forms shall be expressed in
Scripture words or not? whether we shall sing the Psalms of David, or compose
any Evangelical Hymns our selves? whether many Churches shall use one and the
same form of words, or various? whether our Sermons, and Catechisms, and
Confessions of faith, shall be a studied or prescribed form of words, or the
matter and method only studied? etc These, with many other such like, are left
by God, as things undetermined, that men may determine of them prudentially as
occasions require, according to his directions.

. 17. 11. He that has commanded us to express our minds in several cases
about his worship, (as in Confession of our sins, in Profession of our faith,
in choosing of our Pastors, in Consenting to the casting out, or taking in, or
restoring of members, in renewing promises of obedience, and the like) has
hereby made a Profession necessary in general, and so has made it our duty to
signify our Consent in all these cases, by some convenient sign: For man's mind
is not known to others, but by signs. But he has not tied us absolutely to any
particular sign. If a Confession of faith be read, and we are called to
signify our Consent, or if we are called to signify our Consent to be Church
members, or to be guided by our Pastors, or submit to Discipline; God has not
tied us in such Cases, whether we shall signify this Consent by speaking, or
by subscribing our names (Isa. 44.3, 4, 5.) or by lifting up the hand, or by
laying it on a Book, (as in swearing) or by standing up, or such like. A
sufficient signification or Profession of our minds is necessary; but the
special sign is left to our own, or our Governors determination. Of which I
shall speak more anon.

. 18. To this end, and on these terms was the sign of the Cross used heretofore
by Christians, and to this end they used standing in public worship every
Lords day (forbidding kneeling,) and afterward standing up at the Creed: as
also adoring with their faces toward the east, etc. They used these only as
significations of their own minds, instead of words; As the Prophets of old
were wont by other signs, as well as words to prophecy to the people. And as
Eusebius tells us how Constantine measured the length and breadth of a man on
the earth with his spear, to tell the Covetous how little must serve them (only
a grave place) after death. And I dare not condemn the Cautelous use of such
Professing signs as these: Though the tongue be the chief instrument, yet not
the only instrument to express the mind; and though words be the ordinary sign,
yet not the only sign. Dumb men must speak by other signs: And usually more
silent signs are fitter for Assemblies, to avoid disturbance: And sometimes
more Permanent signs (as subscription, or a stone or pillar of Remembrance, as
Josh. 24, etc.) are more desirable. And this is left to humane prudence.

. 19. And therefore I durst not have reproved any of the ancient Christians,
that used the sign of the Cross, merely as a Professing signal action, to show
to the Heathen and Jews about them, that they believed in a Crucified Christ,
and were not ashamed of his Cross. The occasional, indifferent use of this,
when it is merely to this end, I durst not have condemned. Nor will I now
condemn a man, that living among the enemies of a Crucified Christ, shall wear
a Cross in his hat, or on his breast, or set it on his doors, or other
convenient place, merely as a professing sign of his mind, to be but instead of
so many words, q. d. [ I thus profess my self the servant of a Crucified
Christ, of whom I am not ashamed.] Whether these things be fit or unfit, the
time, place, occasion, and other circumstances must show: but the Lawfulness I
dare not deny.

. 20. 12. He that has commanded us to celebrate the public worship, and to
preach, pray, praise God, etc. does imply in this command that we must do it in
some Gesture or other: For it is impossible otherwise to do it. But he has not
tied us to any one: In prayer we may kneel or stand: In singing Praises (and
Petitions) to God, we may kneel, stand, or sit: At the Lords Table, though we
have an exmaple of sitting at the celebrating and receiving that Sacrament, yet
no express command, nor a certain obligation. It is therefore left to humane
prudence, to order our gestures by the general Rules, of Order, Decency,
Edification, etc. in Preaching, Praying, Hearing, Singing, Receiving, etc. For
God has not tied us himself to any one particular gesture.

. 21. 13. God that has required us to celebrate his worship, does imply that
we must do it in a decent Habit: Nakedness is a shame: Clothing we must wear:
but he has not told us what it must be: Whether Linen or Woollen: whether
black or white: or of what shape and fashion; This therefore is left to humane
Prudence.

. 22. 14. God that has commanded us to celebrate his Praise and other public
worship, has left it to our Liberty and Prudence to make use of such Helps of
Nature, or of Art, as may most conduce to further our obedience, and stand in a
due subserviency to his institutions. As for instance: he that has commanded
us to study his word and works, has not prescribed me a certain Method for my
studies, nor told me what Languages or Sciences I shall learn, or first learn:
nor what Authors I shall read in Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, etc. It is
employed that in all I use the best helps, and in the best order that I can. So
he that bids me read the Scripture, has not tied me to read only a Printed, or
only a Written Bible; nor to read with spectacles or without. He that has
commanded me to Preach, has not told me whether I must write my Sermon before
or not: or use Notes for the help of my memory, or not; but has left these to
be determined as general Rules, and emergent accasions and circumstances shall
direct us. And he that has commanded us to preach and pray, has not told us
whether we shall use the help of a Book, or not: nor whether we shall use an
hourglass or a clock to measure our time by. He that has commanded us
cheerfully and joyfully to sing his Praises, has not told us whether we shall
use the meeter, or any melodious tune to help us: or whether we shall use or
not use a Musical Instrument: or the help of more Artificial singers, or
choristers? These are left to our reason to determine of, by general rules
which nature and Scripture have laid down.

. 23. 15. In Civil actions, that are Religious only finally, and by
Participation, and not any acts of special worship, it is lawful to use
Symbolical Rites, that are in their kind near of kin to Sacraments in their
kind, and may be called, Civil Sacraments: such (...) the sealing and delivery
of Indentures, or other Covenant writings: and the delivery of Possession of a
house by a Key, and of the Temple by a Book and Bel-rope, and of Land by a twig
and turf; and of Civil Government by a Crown, or Scepter, or Sword, etc. And
such is the use of a Ring in Marriage.

. 24. 16. Though God has commanded that certain persons thus and thus
qualified shall be elected and ordained Ministers of Christ, and separated to
the Gospel of God; yet has ^e not nominated the individual persons, but left
it to man to choose them, according to the directions that he has given them:
Prudence therefore is here the judge.

. 25. In all these cases, it is no usurpation, nor addition to the word or
institution of God, for man to determine: It is but an obeying of Gods
commands: All these are Necessary in their Genus, and commanded us of God, and
the Species (or individuals in the last case) no where by the word of God
determined of: so that if we must not determine of them our selves, the
Scripture should contradict it self, or oblige us to natural impossibilities.
Had God said, [Thou shall Pray, at some Time, Place, in some Habit, Gesture,
etc. but neither I, nor thou shall determine what,] this had been no better.

. 26. Most of these forementioned particulars, are but abusively or improperly
called Ceremonies, they being only the determination of Circumstances and
Modes, and subservient common helps, which are Religious only Relatively and by
Application, being in themselves but such common modifications as are necessary
in Civil and Common moral actions. Yet because the word [ Ceremonie] is an
equivocal, let them be so called.

. 27. Though all these things are left to humane Determination, and so are
Indifferent in themselves, before; yet may they become Accidentally Necessary
or unlawful. And though man must Determine of them, yet not as he list,
without a Rule: but by those sufficient General directions which God has given
in Scripture, and the End and Nature of the work. And to cross these directions
is a sin in him that does determine.

. 28. Though all these are left to humane Prudence, yet not always to the
Governors to be passed into Laws, and forced on the subjects. Most of the
points forementioned, ought not to be statedly determined by Law, but left to
him that is upon the place to determine of, according to variation of occasions
(of which anon.)

. 29. Yet if just Authority shall (injuriously) determine of them, it may be
the subjects duty to obey; except in some cases to be after mentioned; Because
they are not matters aliene to their Power, and without their line: but only
its an imprudent over-doing in a work that is belonging to them, in its manner
and season to be done.

. 30. Having showed you what man May determine of, in worship: I shall next
show you what he may not determine of: or what is exempted from his power. And
1. Some things as to the Substance. 2. Other things only as to the Manner, are
out of man's power.

. 31. 1. No man may bring a New Revelation, which he received not from God,
(whether it be about greater or smaller points,) and say to another, or
himself, This you or I are bound to believe, by a Divine faith: For nothing but
a Divine Revelation can be the material object of a Divine faith.

. 32. 2. And as far is it from the power of this man, to say [ I received not
this from God, but yet you are bound to believe it as from me, with a faith as
certain and confident, as a faith Divine.] For this were to equal man with God.

. 33. 3. And far is it from the power of man to obtrude at all upon another any
supernatural matters, and Command him to believe them, though but with a humane
faith, when he cannot prove that the things are committed to him, nor give men
an Evidence of their Credibility. He may not say [ Though God revealed not
these supernatural matters to me, yet has he given me Authority to command you
to believe them, or made it your duty to believe them, when I speak them,
though without Evidence of Credibility.] So that here are three sorts of things
about matters of Belief that man may not do. The first is, that he may not
Counterfeit a Divine Revelation: and the 2. is, he may not command men to
believe his lawful humane testimony, with a faith equal to Divine: and 3. he
may not command so much as a humane faith to supernatural assertions which he
had no authority to utter. I speak this about men's power in matters of faith,
as preparatory to that about worship.

. 34. In like sort, 1. Man may not say [ This God has commanded you in or
about his worship] when it is not so: For this were to belie God, and to add to
his Law, as if it said that which it does not say. Here none I hope will
gainsay me.

. 35. And 2. No man may of his own head Command any thing in or belonging to
the worship of God: but he must have either a Special or General warrant and
command from God himself to do it. Gods Law must either make the thing
Necessary in specie, and so leave man nothing about it but to second it by his
Law, and see it executed: or else Gods Law must make the thing Necessary in
genere, and so leave man to determine of the species (as is often said.) But
where neither of these are done by God, man has no Power for the imposing of
that thing.

. 36. More particularly, 1. God has not left it to the Power of man to add to
the ten commandments any universal precept for obedience. 2. Nor to add to the
Lords Prayer and other holy Scripture, any general article of request to God.
3. Nor to add any officers to his Church, that are strictly Divine, or for
Divine uses. 4. Nor to add any substantial ordinance of worship. 5. Nor to add
any substantial part of holy Discipline. 6. Nor to institute any new Sacrament
in the Church, or any thing that has the Nature of a Sacrament, though it have
not the name.

. 37. It seems to me that Mystical signs stated by man in Gods public
worship, directly to work grace on his soul from God, and that as instituted,
and also to oblige man to God again, are unlawfully brought into the Church.

. 38. By what has been said, you may see which of the late English
Controverted Ceremonies, I take to have been Lawful, and which unlawful. Too
many years did I spend long ago about these controversies; and the judgment
that then I arrived at, I could never find reason since to change,
notwithstanding all the changes of the times, and the helps I that have since
had; And it was and is as follows.

. 39. 1. About Episcopacy (which was the principal point, concomitant with the
Ceremonial Controversy) I have given you my thoughts before. 2. The ceremonies
controverted among us, were especially, The surplice, the gesture of Kneeling
in Receiving the Lords supper, the ring in Marriage, Laying the hand on the
Book in taking a^ Oath, the Organs and Church music, Holy days, Altars,
Rails, and the Cross in Baptism. (To say nothing of the matter or form of the
Prayers.)

. 40. And 1. If the surplice be Imposed by the Magistrate (as it was) who is a
lawful Governor, and that directly but as a Decent Habit for a Minister in
Gods service, I think he needlessly strained his Power, and sinfully made an
engine to divide the Church, by making such a needless law, and laying the
Peace of the Church upon it; But yet he meddled with nothing but was within the
reach of his Power in the general. Some Decent Habit is Necessary; Either the
Magistrate or the Minister himself, or the Associated Pastors must determine
what. I think neither Magistrate nor Synod should do any more then hinder
undecency: But yet if they do more, and tie all to one Habit, (and suppose it
were an undecent Habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of Power. It is a
thing within the Magistrates reach; He does not an aliene work, but his own
work amiss: and therefore the thing in it self being lawful, I would obey him,
and use that garment, if I could not be dispensed with. Yea though Secondarily
the Whiteness be to signify Purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet
would I obey: For secondarily, we may lawfully and piously make Teaching signs
of our food and raiment, and every thing we see. But if the Magistrate had said
that the Primary reason or use of the Surplice was to be an instituted
sacramental sign, to work grace on my soul, and engage me to God, then I durst
not have used it, though secondarily it had been commanded as a decent garment.
New Sacraments I durst not use, though a secondary use were lawful.

. 41. 2. And for Kneeling at the Sacrament, I doubt not at all, but the
imposing it, and that on such rigorous terms, tying all to it, and casting all
out of the communion of the Church, or from the participation of the Sacrament
that durst not use it, was a very grievous sin, and tended to persecution,
injustice, and Church-dividing. It is certainly in a doubtful case the safest
way to do as Christ and his Apostles, and the universal Church did for many
hundred years. That none should Kneel in public worship on the Lords day, no
not in Prayer, much less in receiving the Eucharist, was a Custom so ancient
and Universal in the Church, that it was everywhere observed before general
Councils were made use of; and in the first general Council of Nice, it was
made the last Canon; and other general Councils afterward renewed it; so that I
know not how any Ceremony can possibly pretend to greater Ecclesiastical
Authority then this had. And to cast out all from Church Communion in
Sacraments that dare not go against the examples of Christ and his Apostles,
and all the Primitive Church, (who long received the Eucharist in another
gesture) and against the Canons of the first and most famous, and other
succeeding general Councils, this is a most inhumane part. Either the gesture
is indifferent in it self or not: If it be, how dare they thus divide the
Church by it* and cast out Christians that scruple it, when they have these and
many other reasons of their scruples (which for brevity I omit.) If they say
that Kneeling is of it self Necessary, and not Indifferent, because it is
Reverent etc. then 1. They make Christ an ^mperfect Lawgiver: 2. They make
himself, or his Apostles, or both to have been sinners. 3. They condemn the
Catholic Church of sin. 4. They condemn the Canons of the Chief general
Councils. 5. And then if the Bishops themselves in Council should change the
gesture, it were unlawful to obey them. All which are consequents that I
suppose they will disown. What a perverse preposterous Reverence is this? when
they have leave to lie in the dust before and after the very act of receiving,
through all their confessions and prayers, yet they will at other times stand,
and many of them sit at prayer, and sit at singing Psalms of Prayer and Praise
to God, and yet when Christ does invite them to a feast, they dare not imitate
his Apostles and universal Church in their gesture, lest they should be
sinfully unreverent.

. 42. But yet, as sinfully as this Gesture was imposed, for my part I did obey
the imposer^ and would do, if it were to do again, rather then disturb the
Peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. For God having made some
Gesture necessary, and confined me to none, but left it to humane
Determination, I shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work, even when
they miss it in the manner. I am not sure that Christ intended the example of
himself and his Apostles as obligatory to us that shall succeed. I am sure it
proves sitting lawful: but I am not sure that it proves it necessary: (though
very convenient) But I am sure he has commanded me obedience and peace.

. 43. 3. And for the Ring in Marriage, I see no reason to scruple the
lawfulness of it: For though the Papists make a Sacrament of Marriage, yet we
have no reason to take it for any ordinance of Divine worship: any more then
the solemnizing of a contract between a Prince and People. All things are
sanctified and pure to the Pure: but that does not confound the two Tables, nor
make all things to be parts of Worship that are sanctified. The Coronation of a
King is sanctified as well as Marriage, and is as much a Sacrament as Marriage,
and the Ceremonies of it might as well be scrupled: especially when God does
seem to go before them by the example of Anointing, as if he would confine them
to that Ceremony; which yet was none of his intent, nor is it much scrupled.

. 44. 4. And though the taking of an Oath be a sort of worship, yet not the
natural worship of the first Commandment, nor the Instituted of the second, but
the Reverent use of his name in the third; so that it is not primarily an act
of worship, but Reductively, and Consequentially: It being the principal use of
an Oath to Confirm the Truth, and End strife, by appealing to God, which
appellation is indeed an acknowledgment of his Government and Justice. And the
laying the hand upon the Book, or Kissing it, is but a Professing sign of my
own Intentions, such as my words themselves are: and therefore is left to
humane choice, and a lawful thing. And I have met but with very few, among all
our Ceremonies, that questioned this.

. 45. 5. And for Organs or other instruments of Music in Gods worship, they
being a Help partly natural, and partly artificial, to the exhilarating of the
spirits, for the praise of God, I know no argument to prove (...) simply
unlawful, but what would prove a cup of wine unlawful, or the tune and meeter,
and melody of singing unlawful. But yet if any would abuse it, by turning Gods
worship into carnal Pomp, and levity, especially by such non-intelligible
singing, or bleating as some of our Choristers used, the Common people would*
have very great reason to be weary of it, a^ accidentally evil.

. 46. 6. And as for Holy days, there is great difference between them: Those
are liable to most question that are obtruded on the Church with the greatest
confidence* As for such days as are appointed upon some emergent occasions,
that arose since Scripture was indicted, and are not common to all times and
places of the Church, there is no more question whether the Magistrate may
command them, or the Pastors agree upon them, then whether a Lecture-day, or
fast day, or thansgiving-day may be commanded, or agreed on: some time for Gods
worship, besides the Lords Day must be appointed: And God having not told us
which, the Magistrate may, on fit occasions* And this is no derogation from the
sufficiency of Scripture: For the occasion of the day was not ex^stent, when
the Scripture was written: such occasions are various according to the various
state of the Church in several ages and Countries. And therefore to keep an
Anniversary day of Thanksgiving, such as we keep on the fifth of November for
our deliverance from the Papists powder plot, is no more questionable then to
keep a ^ecture. Nor for my part do I make any scruple In point of Lawfulness;
For Convenience is according to several accidents*
to Keep a Day in Remembrance of any eminent servant of Christ, or Martyr, to
praise God for their doctrine or example, and honor their Memorial. But the
hardest part of the Question is, whether it be lawful to keep days, as holy,
in celebrating the memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting,
Transfiguration, Ascension, and such like? And the great reasons of the doubt
are, 1. Because the occasions of these holy days was existent in the Apostles
days: and therefore if God would have had such days observed, he could as
easily and fitly have done it by his Apostles in the Scripture, as he did other
the like things. 2. And this is a business that if it were Necessary, would be
Equally nec^ssary to all Ages and Parts of the Catholic Church. And therefore
it cannot be necessary, but it must be the Matter of an universal Law. And God
has made no such Law in Scripture: And ^o Scripture sufficiency, as the
Catholic Rule of faith and universal Divine obedi^nce, is utterly overthrown:
which if we grant, and turn Papists to day; we shall have as strong temptations
to make us turn Infidels to morrow, so poor is their evidence for the
supplemental Traditional Law of God. 3. And God himself has already appointed
a day for the same purposes as these are pretended for. For the Lords Day is to
commemorate the Resurrection, as the great Triumphant act of the Redeemer,
implying all the rest of his works: so that though it be principally for the
Resurrecti^n, above any single work of Christ, yet also for all the work of
Redemption: And the whole is on that day to be commemora^ed with holy Joy and
Praise. Now when God himself has set apart one day in every week to
commemorate the whole work of Redemption, it seems an accusing of his
Institutions of insufficiency, to come after him to mend them, and say we must
have an anniversary day for this or that part of the work. 4. The fourth
Commandment being one of the Decalogue, seems to be of so high a nature, that
man is not to presume to make the like. Else why may we not turn the ten
commandments into twenty or a hundred? But it seems a doing the same or of like
nature to what God has done in the fourth commandment, if any will make a
necessary sta^ed holy day to the universal Church. 5. And it seems also that
these Holy days (excepting Easter and Whitsontide and other Lords days) are
but of later i^troduction. Many passages of Antiquity seem to intimate, that
Christmas Day it self was not of many hundred years after Christ. I remember
not any before Gregory N^zianzene that seem to speak of it. The allegations out
of spurious authors, and that of later date, such as the counterfeit Clement,
Dionysius, Cyprian, etc. are brought to deceive and not to convince. 6. Yea
more, the time was a matter of controversy among the Churches of the East and
West, for many ^undred years after Christ* Epiphanius* and the Churches of
Iudaea and all those Eastern parts, took the sixth of January to be the day
(see Casaubones Exercitat* on this, and Cloppenburgius more fully in Th^s.
Chrysostom says, it was but ten years before he wrote that Homily that the
Church at Constantinople was persuaded by them at Rome to change their account
of the day: And is it possible that, when for about four hundred years or more
the Churches were utterly disagreed of the day, that it was then Commonly kept
as an Holy day? The keeping o^ it would sure have kep^ a common knowledge of
the day: Or at least, the difference of observation would have raised
con^ention, as the difference about Easter did: can any believe that the famous
Council of Nice, and the vigilant Emperor, that were so exceeding impatient of
a diversity of observations of Easter, would have let a diverse observation of
Christmas alone, without once thinking or speaking of it, when they were
gathered about the like work, if the Church had commonly observed it then as a
Holy day? Or was the Church of Iudaea where Christ arose, in any likelihood to
have lost the true account of the day, if it had been observed by Apostolical
Tradition from the beginning? 7. And it seems that God did purposely deny us
the observation of this Day, in that he has certainly kept the time unknown to
the world. The confidence of some bewrayes but their ignorance. Chronologers
are never like to be agreed of the year, much less of the month or day; some
think we are four years too late* some two years, etc. Many think that Christ
was born about October (as Scaliger, Broughton, Beroaldus, etc.) and many still
hold to the old Eastern opinion, for the Epiphany being the Nativity, on Ian.
6. and others are for other times; but none are certain of the time. 8. Sure we
are, where there is no Law, there is no Transgression: but here is no Law of
God commanding Christmas day or the other Holy days; therefore there is no
transgression in not keeping them. And then 9. it is not so sure that there is
no transgression in keeping them: therefore the surer side is to be taken. 10.
And it seems strange that we find not so much as any ancient The Provincial
Consil. Agath. Can. 14. is the first that I remember mentioning them.
general Council making any mention of Christmas or such days (though of the
Martyrs days some do.) All these reasons (which I run over hastily) and many
more (which for brevity I pretermit) do seem to make it a very hard question,
whether the keeping of this sort of Holy days be lawful.

. 47. And it is not to be much stuck at, that a Day to Christ does seem more
necessary and pious, then a Day in commemoration of a Martyr, or a particular
Mercy: For in the highest parts of Gods worship, God has left man least to do,
as to Legislation and Decisions: and usurpations here are far most dangerous. A
weekly Day is somewhat more then an Ann^versary: And yet I think there is few
of the contrary minded, but would doubt whether man might impose on the Church
the observation of another weekly Holy day, in commemoration of Christ's
Nativity. The worship of God is a more excellent and necessary thing, then the
veneration due to a worthy person; And yet we have not so much liberty to make
new ways of worshipping God, as of veneration to men. So is it here, though
even the Days that are for the memorial of the Saints, are ultimately for the
honor of God; yet those that are set apart directly and immediately to
commemorate the work of Redemption, are Relatively much higher, and therefore
seem to be more exempted from the Determination of humane laws.

. 48. By this and much more, I am fully satisfied, 1. That the keeping of these
days is a thing of it self unnecessary: 2. And that there being none on earth
that can justly pretend to a power of universal Government over the whole
Catholic Church, it is certain that none on earth can bind the Catholic
Church to such observances; (The Canons of Pastors are Authoritative Directions
to their own flocks that are bound to obey them, so it be in lawful things; but
to other Churches, or to their fellow Pastors they are but Agreements, and how
far they bind, I shall show anon.) 3. And even in a single Church, or a
Province, or Nation, I am satisfied that it is a great sin for Magistrates or
Pastors to force all that scruple it, to the observation of these days, and to
lay the unity or Peace of their Churches on it, and to cast out, censure,
reproach, or punish them that dare not obey such impositions for fear of sining
against God. And it is a most dsingenuous thing to insinuate and put into the
minds of men accusations of the Impiety of the dissenters; and to persuade the
world that it is irreligiousness, or humorous singularity, when it is so known
a thing to all that know them, that the persons that scruple or disown these
days, do ordinarily walk in uprightness and the fear of God in other matters,
and profess that it is only a fear of breaking the Laws of God that keeps them
from conformity to the will of others: and that they are reproached by the
multitude of the observers of these days, for their spending the Lords Day in
Holy exercises, which the reproachers spend too much in idleness, sensuality or
profaneness; and it is not long since many of them were cast out of the
Ministerial service or suspended, for not reading a Book authorizing Dancing
and other recreations on the Lords day. In a word, to reproach them as
Precisians and Puritans, for the strictness of their lives, and yet at the same
time to persuade men that they are ungodly for not keeping Holy days, or not
kneeling at the Sacrament, is not ingenuous dealing, and draws too near the
Manners of the Pagans, who called the Christians ungodly, because they durst
not offer their sacrifices, and when they dragd them to the judgement-seats,
they cried Tollite impios, as i^ themselves were the Godly men: I compare not
the matter of the causes here, but only the temper of the persons, and manner
and justice of proceedings.

. 49. And yet for all this I am resolved, if I live where such Holy days as
these are observed, to censure no man for observing them, nor would I deny them
liberty to follow their judgments, if I had the power of their Liberties;
provided they use not reproach and violence to others, and seek not to deprive
them of their Liberties. Paul has so long ago decided these cases, Romans 14.
and 15. that if men would be Ruled by the word of God, the controversy were,
as to the troublesome part of it, at an end. They that through weakness observe
a Day to the Lord, that is not commanded them of God, should not judge their
brethren that observe it not: and they that observe it not, should not despise
or set at naught their weaker (though censorious) brethren that observe it; but
every one should be fully persuaded in his own mind. The Holy Ghost has
decided the case, that we should here bear with one another.

. 50. Yea more, I would not only give men their Liberty in this, but if I lived
under a Government that peremptorily commanded it, I would observe the outward
rest of such a Holy day, and I would preach on it, and join with the Assemblies
in Gods worship on it. Yea I would thus observe the Day, rather then offend a
weak brother, or hinder any man's salvation, much more rather then I would make
any division in the Church. I think in as great matters as this did Paul
condescend when he circumcised Timothy, and resolved to eat no flesh while he
lived rather then offend his brother, and to become all things to all men for
their good. Where a thing is evil but by accident, the greatest Accidents must
weigh down the less. I may lawfully obey and use the day, when another does
unlawfully command it: And I think this is the true case.

. 51. 7. And for the next ceremony, the Name and form of an Altar, no doubt it
is a thing indifferent, whether the Table stand this way or that way: and the
Primitive Churches used commonly the names of Sacrifice, and Altar, and Priest,
and I think, lawfully: for my part, I will not be he that shall condemn them.
But they used them but metaphorically, as Scripture it self does, Heb. 13.10,
15, 16. Romans 12.1. Ephesians. 5.2. Phil. 2.17. and 4.18. All believers are called
Priests, and their service, Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. and
20.6. I conceive that the dislike of these things in England (the form and name
of an Altar, and the Rails about it) was not as if they were simply evil: But
1. because they were illegal innovations, forced on the Churches without Law,
or any just authority. And 2. because the way of those times did cause men to
suspect, that somewhat worse was intended to be brought in by such
preparatives; especially when the Ministers were cast out.

. 52. 8. But of all our Ceremonies, there is none that I have more suspected to
be simply unlawful then the Cross in Baptism. The rest, as I have said, I
should have submitted to rather then hinder the Service or Peace of the Church,
(had I been put to it: For living in those days in a Privileged place, I had
my liberty in all save Days and the Gesture.) But this I durst never meddle
with. And yet I know that many think it as reasonable, and more venerable then
any of the rest. Yet dare I not peremptorily say that it is unlawful: nor will
I condemn either Ancients or Moderns that use it: nor will I make any
disturbance in the Church about it, more then my own forbearance will make:
only my own practice I was forced to suspend, and must do if it were again
imposed on me, till I were better satisfied. The Reasons that most move me, I
shall give you in the end, but some of them take at the present.

. 53. 1. This is not the mere circumstance of a Duty, but a substantial humane
ordinance of worship: nor is it necessary in genere that man ordain any such
symbolical Mystical signs for Gods worship: And therefore it is a matter
totally exempt from humane Power. There must be some Time, some place, some
gesture, some vesture, some utensils, etc. But you cannot say that, There must
be some teaching symbols, or mystical signs, stated by humane institution in
Gods worship: There is no command to man in Scripture de genere to institute
any such thing. And therefore in the case of Circumstantials I shall usually
(of which more anon) obey the Magistrate, even where he does mistake, because
it is his own work, though he misdoe it: But here his action is like that of a
judge in alieno foro, in another court, where he has no power, and therefore
his judgment is null. It is not an act of Authority to make and state new
mystical signs (that are such in their primary use,) in Gods worship: For there
is no Power but of God: And God has given no such power: They that say, he
has, let them prove it if they can. Natural and Artificial helps we disallow
not* But Instituted signs, that have what they have by Institution, and that as
a solemn stated ordinance, I know not that ever God required or accepted from
the invention of man. I doubt this will prove a mere usurpation, and nullity,
and worse.

. 54. 2. Yea I suspect it will prove a humane Sacrament: either fully a
Sacrament, or so near a kin to Sacraments, as that man has nothing to do to
institute it. The common prayer says, that [ a Sacrament is an outward visible
sign of an inward spiritual grace, given to us, ordained by Christ himself, as
a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof] (in the
Catech.) Let us try by this definition whether the Cross in Baptism as used in
England, be a Sacrament.

. 55. And 1. I may take it for granted that the want of the Name, makes it not
to be no Sacrament. And 2. whereas in the definition, it is said that it is [
ordained by Christ himself] that belongs to a Divine Sacrament only, and not to
a humane Sacrament devised by usurpers. Otherwise you must say, that there is
no such thing possible as a humane Sacrament imposed by usurpers on the Church:
what if all the essentials of a Sacrament, such as are found in Baptism and the
Lords supper, be invented by man, and forced on the Church, is it therefore no
Sacrament? or only, no Divine Sacrament? However, let us not differ about bare
names and words: It is the same thing that you call a Sacrament, when God is
the ordainer: and sure it will not prove it lawful because man is the
ordainer; that is it that makes it unlawful, because he wants authority, and
acts as an usurper. The Papists affirm that man has not power to make new
Sacraments; no not the Pope himself. Let not us go further.

. 56. And 1. the outward visible sign here is the Cross made in the forehead:
2. The inward and Spiritual grace is, a holy Resolution to fight manfully under
the banner of Christ, and to persevere therein. The Cross signifies the
Instrument of the sufferings of Christ, aad that we do own this Crucified
Savior, and are not ashamed of him, and will manfully fight under him. So that
here is 1. a signification of Grace to be wrought on the Soul, and given us by
God. 2. an engagement to perform the duties of the Covenant our selves. On Gods
part, we are to receive by this sign, both Qualitative or actual Grace, and
Relative Grace. 1. The Cross is to teach our understandings, and help our
memories, and quicken up our dull affections, by minding us of a Crucified
Christ and the benefits of his Cross.

. 57. That it is ordained for this use, appears from the words (anon to be
recited) in the use of it, and by those words prefixed before the the Common
prayer book, [ of Ceremonies; why some are abolished, and some retained] where
they say that they [ be not dark and dumb Ceremonies, but are so set forth
that every man may understand what they do mean, and to what use they do
serve:] and [ that they are such as are apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to
the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might be edified.] So that this and such other (if there be more
such) are appointed by their signification to teach the Understanding, and stir
up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God: Which are good
works, but to be done only by good means.

. 58. And that this is a way of working Grace in the same kind as Gods word and
Sacraments do, is undeniable. For the word and Sacraments do work Grace but
Morally, by propounding the object, and so objectively Teaching, Remembering,
and Exciting, and thus working on the Understanding, Memory, and Will, and
Affections. However the spirit may work within, its certain that the ordinances
work no otherwise. And not only Protestants are agreed on this, but one would
think that the Jesuits and all of their mind should be most of all for it. For
faculties, they that will not confess any Physical determination of the but
make all operations both of Word, Sacraments, and Spirit it self, to be but
suasory or Moral, one would think should hold more tenaciously then others,
that Sacraments work Grace but Morally. And if no Sacraments do more then
objectively Teach and excite; and the Cross is appointed to do as much in this,
then there is no difference between them to be found.

. 59. And then for Relative Grace, it is plain, that by the sign of the Cross
as well as by Baptism, we are entered into a state of Christianity; and so it is
an Investing Sacramental sign; It lists us under the banner of Christ
Crucified: And that is the very essential nature of the Sacrament of Baptism it
self. As Listing investeth the soldier in his Relation, and consequently in his
Privileges, so does Baptism by Gods appointment; and Crossing is supposed by
man's appointment, to invest men in the Relation of the soldiers of Jesus Christ.

. 60. Yea (more then is expressed in the Definition of a Sacrament in the
Common prayer book) if you judge it essential to a Sacrament to be an engaging
Covenanting sign, the Cross is instituted to this end. Yea more then that; if
you judge it essential to a Sacrament, to be an engaging sign in the very
Covenant of Grace it self* and not only in some particular promise, this also
is the end of its appointment. It is to engage our selves to a Crucified Christ
as our Captain and Savior by his Cross, and to bind our selves to the Duty of
Soldiers or Christians to our lives end: and consequently to teach us to expect
the privileges of faithful servants and Soldiers from a Crucified Christ.

. 61. All this is expressed in the very words of Ministerial application, in
the common Prayer Book: which are these [ we receive this Child into the
Congregation of Christ's flock, and do sign him with the sign of the cross, in
token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and
the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and servant unto his lives
end, Amen.] So that you see here it is used as a listing, investing, Covenant
sign, engaging us to be Christ's soldiers, and not to be ashamed of his Cross,
or to confess his faith, and manfully to fight, etc. and to persevere. What Is
wanting here to make a Sacrament?

. 62. Yet had it been but a bare Professing sign, like writing or lifting up
the hand, to signify consent, instead of words, I durst not have concluded so
hardly of it: And thus it seems in ancient times it began to be brought into
use: and the voluntary use of the cross on several occasions, in many countries
at this day, does seem to be no other. But, for my own part, I dare not be
guilty by consent, of making a humane Sacrament, or stating such an engaging
Sacramental sign, to all these uses, in the public worship of God. I had
rather suffer or leave my Ministry, them venture on this, while I see so much
to make me fear that it is a sin. But again I say, as I reverence the ancients
that used the cross (I think amiss, and yet more warrantably then we,) so I
presume not to censure them that judge it lawful; but only give the reasons
that make me doubt, and rather think it to be unlawful, though still with a
suspicion of my own understanding, and a love and honor to dissenters.

. 63. As for the Common prayer it self, I never rejected it because it was a
form, nor thought it simply unlawful, because it was such a form, but have
made use of it, and would do again in the like case. But I must needs say, 1.
That the shreding it into such abundance of small parcels seems to me very
inconvenient. It seems too light and ludicrous to toss sentences so formally
between the Priest and Clerk, and to make such a multitude of Prayers
consisting but of a sentence, or two at most: And it seems to be tautologie
and vain repetition to repeat over the same word so often: and a taking of Gods
name in vain, or too unreverently, to begin with his Titles and Attributes, and
end with his name again, and the merits or sake of Christ, and this at almost
every sentence: as if we had done with him, and were taking our leave, and had
forgot somewhat that called us to begin again: and thus we begin and end, and
begin and end again, it may be twenty times together. 2. But the enforcing
imposition of these Prayers, is most to be condemned; of which I have spoken,
in the former Disputation. But for my part, I censure none that use them, nor
take them to be therefore men of another Religion or worship: It is but a modal
difference in the same worship.

. 64. The Emperor Constantine was very much for Liberty for Dissenters, and
against persecution of them, upon tolerable differences: yet he himself was
wont to write Prayers and Orations or Sermons of his own making ( Eusebius. in
vita Constant. l. 4. c. 55. and 32. and 29.) and reads some common prayers
himself to the Congregation in his house, c. 17. (For he made his house a
Church, and preached in it ordinarily himself, though he was both a Layman,
and unbaptized; His sermon about Christianity to the Clergy is published by
Eusebius: and he preached a funeral Oration about the Immortality of the soul
in his ordinary preaching place, a little before his death: Eusebius. ib. c. 55.
etc. 29. etc. 17.) He gives his soldiers a form of Prayer, ib. c. 20.
commanding them that were Christians to observe the Lords Day, and spend it in
holy exercises, and not to labor on that day, ( ib. c. 18.19.23.) and also to
honor the Holy days consecrated to the Martyrs, ( c. 23.) that is, to their
memorial. And commanding the very Heathen soldiers to pray as they could,
though not in the Church but in the fields together. And in none of this dare I
condemn him.

. 65. The sum of all that I have said, is this; that Man may determine of
modes and circumstances of worship, Necessary and Commanded in genere, but not
determined by God in specie. But to make new worship-ordinances, or institute
Sacraments, or Sacramental signs, or any thing else, for which in genere he
has no commission, this is simply unlawful.

. 66. But this is not all: There is a second thing unlawful also; and that is
the misdetermining of those same modes and circumstances, which he is
authorized to determine. For he is (as is said) to do it by Gods General Rule.
Here therefore we must thus conclude. 1* that every misordering of such great
affairs, is the sin of them that do it. 2. But yet that the subject is not
exempted from obedience by every such mistake of the Governor: but by some, he
is.

. 67. If the mischoosing of such circumstances by Church-governors, be but an
inconvenience, and do not destroy the ordinance it self, or frustrate the ends
of it, we are to obey: 1. For he is the judge in his own work, and not we: 2.
the thing is not sinful, though inconvenient. 3. Obedience is commanded to our
lawful Governors. Of this we shall say more in the last Chap.

. 68. But if a Governor so misdetermine but a mode or circumstance, as will
overthrow the substance and ends of the worship, I would not obey, except some
greater evil were like to follow my not obeying at that particular season, then
the frustrating of the duty it self would come to: As for example; If a
Governor make a new Sacrament, I will not obey, because his command is null,
and the thing simply evil. If he miscommand a Circumstance of Time, or Place,
or Gesture, I will consider the consequents. If he command the solemn
Assemblies to be held a mile or two or three from the people, I will obey him,
if it be but as far as I can go without frustrating the work it self. But if he
command us all to go ten miles or twenty miles to worship, I would obey for
some time to avoid a greater evil; but ordinarily I would no more obey, then if
if he forbad all Christian assemblies; for it comes all to one. So if he
command the Assemblies to be at break of day, or after sun setting, I would
obey. But if he command that we Assemble only at midnight, what should I do
then? The thing is not simply unlawful: He does but misdo his own work. And
therefore for some times I would obey, if it were necessary, to avoid a greater
evil. But if he make it the ordinary case, I would not obey: because it
destroys the worship it self in a manner, as if he simply forbad it, and this
he has no power to do. An inconvenient gesture I would use in obedience, and
to avoid a greater evil: But I would not obey him that would command me to
stand ^n my head always in hearing. An unhansome vesture I would use in
obedience to a lawful Governor, and to avoid a greater evil: But not so
ridiculous a vesture as would set all the people on laughing so as to frustrate
the work that we assemble for.

. 69. In all such cases where Governors act not as usurpers in a matter that
they have no authority in, but only misdo their own work, it much concerns
the subjects to foresee what is like to be the Consequents of their obeying or
disobeying, and accordingly to do that which tends most to the Ends of the
work: still holding to this Rule, that we must obey in all things lawful.

. 70. And when we do obey in a case of miscommanding, it is not a doing evil,
that good may come of it, as some do misconceive: But it is only a submitting
to that which is ill commanded, but not evil in him that does submit. It is the
determiner that is the cause of the inconvenience, and not the obeyer. Nor is
it inconvenient for me to obey, though it be worse perhaps to him that
commands. While he sins in commanding, he may make it my Duty to obey.

CHAP. III. Prop. 2. In such unlawful impositions (as aforementioned) it is an
aggravation of the sin, if Governors pretend that their Ceremonies are Divine.
. 1. I shall be brief in the rest, having been so long on the former. The
reason of this Proposition is clear: because 1. As is aforesaid, such
pretenders do falsely accuse the Lord, and corrupt his word, and add to it their
own inventions: contrary to those severe prohibitions, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18.

. 2. 2. Because it shows that man to be a false Prophet, or false teacher, that
will say, Thus says the Lord, when God has not spoken it: and that will take
the name of God in vain, affixing it to a lie. And as many judgments are
threatened to such, so people are commanded not to hear them.

. 3. 3. It tends to the destruction of all Divine faith and obedience: while
the fixions of men are pretended to be doctrines or Laws of God, it tends to
confound things Divine and Humane; and so to bring the people to a loss, that
they shall not know what is the will of God, and what the will of men.

. 4. Let men therefore take heed how they affirm their Ceremonies to be Divine:
as the Papists do, that feign them to be of Apostolical Tradition. Some presume
to tell the world, that it is God by Apostolical Tradition that has instituted
Christmas day, or other such Holy days, (besides the Lords day,) or that has
instituted the Cross in Baptism, or the fast of Lent, yea and some of their
common prayers; abundance of humane inventions are thus audaciously fathered on
God, which is enough to make people the more cautelous in receiving them: and I
am sure makes it a more heinous sin in the imposers. We justly take it to be an
odious thing of Heretics and Papists, to affix the names of Clemens,
Dionysius, Ambrose, Austin, and other holy ancient writers, to their forgeries,
and corrupt writings: And how much greater is their sin, that dare affix the
name of God himself to their Ceremonious inventions or traditions?

. 5. Such persons forsake the doctrine of the common prayer book, where the
Ceremonies are confessed to be humane inventions. The foresaid Preface [ of
Ceremonies, etc.] begins thus: [ Of such Ceremonies as be used in the Church,
and have had their beginning by the Institution of man; some at the first were
of Godly intent and purpose devised, and yet at length turned to vanity and
surperstition: some entered into the Church by indiscreet devotion, and such a
Zeal as was without knowledge: and because they were winked at in the
beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses; which not only for their
unprofitableness, but also because they have much blinded the people, and
obscured the Glory of God, are worthy to be cut away, and clean rejected. Other
there be, which although they have been devised by man, yet it is thought good
to reserve them still -- ] so that you see here is no pretense to a Divine
institution, or Apostolical Tradition, but all is the devices of man.

. 6. And after it is there said [ that the Ceremonies which remain are retained
for a Discipline and order, which upon just causes may be altered and changed,
and therefore are not to be esteemed equal with Gods Laws.] And I hope the
justness of the cause by this time is apparent.

CHAP. IV. Prop. 3. and 4. If things unlawful are commanded as indifferent, or
things indifferent as Necessary, they are sinfully imposed, and the more,
because of such pretenses.
. 1. THE calling things Indifferent, that are unlawful, will not make them
Indifferent. If men will invent and introduce new Sacraments, and when they
have done, say [we intend them not for Sacraments or necessary things, but as
indifferent accidents of other Duties,] this will not make them things
indifferent: For it is not the altering of a name that makes it another thing.

. 2. If things Indifferent be imposed as Necessary, they become a sin to the
Imposer, and oft-times to the Practiser. For 1. It is a falsification, when the
thing is pretended to be Necessary that is not: And untruths in Laws, are far
from being commendable. 2. It tends to deceive men's understandings, to esteem
things Necessary that are not. 3. It tends to draw men to vain endeavors:
while they use those things as Necessary ( Duties or Means) that indeed are
none, they lose their labor by the mistake. 4. It tends to corrupt men's
Affections, by breeding in them a false kind of zeal for the things that they
mistake to be so necessary.

. 3. Yea worse; it tends to engage men in parties and devisions, and
persecutions against dissenters: or at least, to destroy their charity, and
make them have contemptuous thoughts of their brethren, and perhaps censorious
bitter words; when all is false, and founded in their mistakes. For who will
not think hardlier of him that differs from him, or opposes him in a
Necessary point (or that he takes for such) then in a thing Indifferent? the
greater the matter, the greater will be your distaste.

. 4. Yea more, it will make men Impenitent in such sins. For if once they think
their ceremonies to be Necessary, they will think it no sin, but a service of
God, to vilify them that are against them, as schismatics, and singular, and
proud, and humorous, and what not?

. 5. As therefore it is a heinous sin of the Papists, to impose their
ceremonies, on pain of damnation (if they were the judges, woe to others,) so is
it no small aggravation of their sin, that pretend a Necessity (of Duty or
Means) of any their Ceremonies, when there is none such. Multitudes take the
keeping of Christmas day, and such other, the Kneeling in receiving the Lords
Supper, etc. to be things of themselves necessary, so that a Governor should
sin that should alter or dispense with them, or the persons sin that do not use
them. What, say they, shall we not keep a Day for Christ's Nativity? shall we be
so unreverent as not to kneel when we receive, etc? And thus they alter the
things to themselves, by feigning them to be in themselves Necessary, which are
not so.

. 6. Yet does not every such mistake of another, no not of the imposers, make
that a sin to me which was indifferent. Otherwise all my Liberty were in the
power of another man's conceits: and he might make all my meat, drink, clothes,
time, place, gesture, etc. in specie, to be unlawful, by commanding them as
necessary, or under some unsound notion: But this is not so.

. 7. But in such cases, though they cannot so destroy our liberties, yet may
they make it our duties sometime to forbear that which else we need not to
forbear, lest our practice make others take it as a Necessary thing; and
sometime though we must obey or do the action, yet may it become our duty, to
signify (in a convenient way) that we disclaim the conceit of a Necessity.

CHAP. V. Prop. 5. A lawful and convenient thing is sinfully commanded, when
it is commanded on a greater penalty then the nature and use of it does
require, or then the common good will bear.
. 1. WHen the penalty exceeds the crime, it is injustice. There may be
injustice as well in punishing an offender too much, as in punishing him that
is no offender, with a smaller punishment. But if the penalty be destructive to
the Church or common good, it is an aggravated injustice.

. 2. When Magistrates therefore are disposed to punish men for crossing their
wills in the matters of God, it nearly concerns them to look about them, and
take heed first what they punish them for, and then, with what kind of
punishment they do it. If it be Good and not Evil that men are punished for, it
is persecution. If it be really evil, either its great or small, public or
private, etc. If it be an evil that endangereth the Commonwealth, or Church, or
the souls of men, let them punish men in such a way as best tends to the
security of the society or souls of men that are endangered. But if the person
in his calling or station be useful to the Church, or Commonwealth, let him
not be so punished as to be made unusefull. If the Bishops had punished
Non-conformists as Recusancy was punished, with paying twelve pence a day etc.
I should, comparatively, scarce have blamed them: For it had been but to make
Ministers fare harder, or live poorlier, or work for their livings, or to pay
their penalties, and the Church might still have had their labors: but to
silence and suspend them, and that when there were no better to supply the room
(then such as were put in,) this was to punish the Church of Christ, and the
souls of men (and that with everlasting punishment) for the (real or supposed)
faults of the particular ministers: which was not just.

. 3. Object. But (says the Preface to the common prayer book) though the
keeping or omitting of a Ceremony in it self considered, be but a small thing;
yet the wilful and contemptuous transgr^ssion and breaking of a common order
and discipline, is no small ^ffence before God.

. 4. Answ. 1. You should therefore put no such snares on men by your commands,
as to impose upon them needless things, when you think the penalty of
disobeying you will be damnation. 2. But how came you to see into the hearts of
men, that their nonconformity is wilful and contemptuous? when they
themselves profess that they would obey you if they durst. They think they
stand at the brink of Hell, and should wilfully sin against God if they did
obey you: and you come behind them, with silencing and imprisonment, and drive
them on, while they cry out to you for compassion, and protest that they are
ready to obey as far as they can see the lawfulness of the thing: and yet you
say, its wilfulness and contempt. 3. And why does not your Laws except from
punishment all those that conformed not, that were not wilful or contemptuous?
The Act for conformity makes the penalty to be Imprisonment half a year for the
first fault: a year for the second, and during life for the third, beside
deprivation: and Imprisonment during life for the second offense, if the person
have no Benefice: and this is besides the Ecclesiastical censure. 4. If the
work of Church Governors be to make small matters great, and make that damnable
that before was lawful, and this without any necessity at all, it will tempt
the people to think such Governors to be the plagues of the earth.

. 5. I confess it is lawful for me to wear a Helmet on my head in preaching:
but it were not well if you would institute the wearing of a Helmet to signify
our Spiritual militia, and then resolve that all shall be silenced and
imprisoned during life that will not wear it. It is lawful for me to use
spectacles, or to go on crutches: But will you therefore ordain that all men
shall read with spectacles, to signify our want of spiritual sight: and that
no man shall go to Church but on crutches, to signify our disability to come
to God of our selves? So in circumstantials, it is lawful for me to wear a
feather in my hat, and a hayrope for a girdle, and a hair cloth for a cloak.
But if you should ordain that if any man serve God in any other habit, he shall
be banished, or perpetually imprisoned or hanged, in my opinion you did not
well: especially if you add, that he that disobeyeth you must also incur
everlasting damnation. It is in it self lawful to kneel when we hear the
Scriptures read, or when we sing Psalms: but yet it is not lawful to drive all
from hearing and singing, and lay them in prison that do it not kneeling. And
why men should have no communion in the Lords Supper that receive it not
kneeling (or in any one commanded gesture,) and why men should be forbidden to
preach the Gospel, that wear not a linen surplice, I cannot imagine any such
reason as will hold weight at the bar of God.

. 6. If you say, why should we not be obeyed in ind^fferent things? and why
should men trouble the peace of the Church? I answer. 1. Subjects must obey in
all things lawful. 2. But your first question should be, why you should
command, and thus command unprofitable things? will you command all men to wear
horns on their head in token of pushing away their spiritual enemies; and will
you resolve that God shall have no service, nor men any Sacraments or Church
communion, no nor the liberty of the common air, nor salvation neither, unless
they will obey you? And then will you condemn them, and justify your selves by
saying [why should not the Church be obeyed?] 3. You govern not perfect but
imperfect men; and therefore you must rule them as they are, and fit your laws
about things indifferent to their state, and not expect perfection of
understanding and obedience from them, when God himself expects it not:
suppose therefore they manifest their imperfection in not discerning the
Lawfulness of your commands, professing that they are ready to obey them, if
they durst; the question that neerlyer concerns your own consciences (that
are the imposers) to discuss, is, what reason you have to drive all men from
Gods Church and service, that (suppose through their imperfection) dare not
conform themselves in worship to your pleasure? Where has God set you on such
a work, or given you any such commission? 4. And where you say, They should not
disturb the Church; I answer, Are you so blind that you see not that it is you
that disturb the Church? If you will make such laws without necessity, which
common wit and reason may tell you, all men are never like to be satisfied in
and obey, and then cast out all that will not obey them, as the disturbers of
the Church, this is but an aggravated self-condemning. If they be guilty, you
are so much more: If they sin and disturb the Church by disobedience, you
disturb it much more sinfully, by laying such snares as shall unavoidably
procure it, and then taking occasion by it, to make a greater disturbance by
your cruel execution. If the Fly offend and deserve death by incautelous
falling into the Spiders web, what does the Spider deserve, that out of her own
bowels spread the net in the way, and kills the Fly that is taken in it? (yet draw
no venom from the similitude, for it runs not on all four, nor is it my meaning
to apply the venom to you.) Your own actions most concern your selves. T^y
whether you do well in commanding and punishing, as well as whether others
offend in disobeying. I shall provoke all to obedience in things lawful: But if
they should obey you (more perfectly then God,) you may yet be condemned for
your wicked cruel Laws.

CHAP. VI. Prop. 6. It is not lawful to make any thing the subjects duty by a
command, that is merely indifferent antecedently, both in it self, and as
clothed with its accidents.
. 1. THE reason is evident: because Nothing but Good can be the just matter or
object of the Governors desire: and therefore nothing but Good can be the just
matter of his Laws. By [Good] I mean, Moral, or Civil Good, or Relative
Physical Good: the Good of Profit, or Honesty: And by [Indifferent] I mean not
[that which is neither a flat sin, nor a flat absolute duty.] For so an
Indifferent thing may be sometime commanded. Nor do I mean any Middle thing
between Bonum Metaphysicum and non bonum: for there is none such. But I mean by
indifferent, that which is not antecedently Appetible, a Desirable Good, though
it be not it self an evil to be avoided, or a hurtful thing. Bonum publicum,
the common good is the End of Government, and therefore it must be somewhat
conducing to the Common good, (or at least to the good of some particular
person) that is the just object of the Governors desire, and matter of his
law. For nothing but Good, does conduce to Good, of it self. Nay it is
therefore Good, bonitate medii, as a Means, because it conduces to that which
is Good, bonitate finis, as an End; or that is Desirable for it self. Desire
has no object but quid appetibile, a Desirable Good. And a Governor should
make no Laws but for somewhat that is desirable to himself as Governor.

. 2. And 2. Nothing should be made the matter of a Law but what is Desirable to
the Commonwealth, as well as to the Governor. For men must be Gover^ed as
men. Punishments indeed are not desirable for themselves: but yet by accident
they are desirable to the Common good: and the matter of Precepts should be
much more d^sirable then Punishment.

. 3. And 3. If unprofitable things be made the matter of Laws, it will tend to
the contempt of Laws and Government: and people will think it a burden and not
a benefit, and will desire to be freed from it; and this will tend to the
dissolution of Societies.

. 4. And 4. All Government is from God, and for God, and should be by him: God
is the Beginning and End, the first efficient and ultimate final cause of all
just Government: And therefore all the parts of it must favor of the Goodness
of the first Efficient, and be levelled at God as the ultimate end, which
nothing but Good is a means to. Of him, and by him, and for him are all things,
Romans 11.36.

. 5. Moreover 5. If idle words and idle thoughts be sins that must be accounted
for, then idle Laws much more. And idle they must be if they be about
unprofitable things. And they are not only idle themselves, but occasion idle
words and actions in others.

. 6. Moreover 6. It is the judgment of the Imposers that disobedience to their
Laws is a sin against God, which deserves condemnation; (For Protestants know
no venial sins, and Papists take sins against the Popes and Councils Decrees to
be Mortal.) But it is a cruelty next to Diabolical, to lay before men an
occasion of their Damnation for Nothing. When they first make their Laws, they
know (or else they are unworthy to be Governors) that some will obey them, and
some will not. If therefore they think that some (and many) will incur the
guilt of sin unto damnation by their disobedience, they must have somewhat of
greater worth then the souls of those men to encourage them to make those Laws.
For had there been no such Laws, there would have been none of that
transgression, and consequently no damnation for it.

. 7. Yea 7. It is sufficient to prove that nothing but some Good may be the
Matter of a Law, in that they inflict penalties, and so great penalties upon
the breakers of them. There must be a proportion between the Precept and the
Sanction. The Commination or penal part of the Sanction, depriveth men of some
Good: and therefore it should command, as great a good at least as it depriveth
men of: Especially when the penalty is to be cast out of the Church and service
of God, this is not to be done for nothing.

. 8. Quest. But is it not the Law that is the Rule of Moral Good? and
consequently nothing Good or Evil, but as Conform or Disconform to the Law?
And if so, then nothing but things indifferent must be commanded. For all
things are Morally indifferent, till the Law take away the Indifferency, by its
precepts or prohibitions.

. 9. Answ. You must distinguish between Divine and Humane Laws, and Primary and
subservient Laws, and between the several sorts of Good before mentioned. And
so I answer, 1. The Law is not the Rule of Natural Good, though it be of Moral.
And therefore that which is commanded, is supposed to have some Natural Good or
aptitude to be a Means of Good, that so it may be the fit matter of a command.
2. Gods Laws are the Primary Laws, which are the first Rule of Moral Good. Men's
Laws are but (...), to procure the due execution of Gods Laws. And (...) in the
greatest cases the Indifferency is taken off before by the Law of God: and men's
laws are to second Gods Laws, and rather to drive men on to that which already
is their duty, then to make them new duties: Though New duties also they may
make in subserviency to, and for the performance of the Old. But there must be
a Physical Goodness, which is the Aptitude of the matter to attain the End as a
means, before that matter can justly receive the impress of a command, and be
made a Duty. Gods own Law of Nature is Antecedent to his Positive Laws: and in
supernatural Positives, there is a supernatural adapting of the Matter before
it receive the supernatural stamp of a Duty.

. 10. Object. But if a Magistrate may not make Laws about Indifferent things,
then may he not make any Laws at all: For Evil may not be commanded: And that
Good which God has commanded already, having a higher stamp then man's
authority, needs no such Law.

. 11. Answ. I have heard this Argument insisted on in the reign of the
Ceremonies, above any other: but it deserves not such high esteem. For 1. The
work of the Magistrate, at least about the worship of God (and so of the
Pastors) is not directly to make new duties: but to procure Obedience to the
Laws of God. And therefore they are to command the same things again that God
has commanded, and to forbid the same that he has forbidden. If a Magistrate
make a Law, and see it disregarded, he may make another to quicken men to
obedience and execution of the former. 2. And this is not vain, though it have
the stamp of a higher authority before (unless you will say that humane
Government is vain;) For Magistrates are seen when God is unseen; Corporal
penalties are felt, when Hell fire is unseen, unfelt, and too little believed.
Present things have an advantage for operation. 3. And we grant that some
things neither commanded nor forbidden before, may be commanded or forbidden by
a Magistrate, so they be not Indifferent as to their Usefulness and Aptitude,
to be a means for the obtaining of that which is the end of the command.

. 12. It is charged on Mr. Jacob by Dr. John Burgess and others, as an error,
that he thought nothing indifferent at all: and Dr. Burgess confuteth him by
instancing in various gestures in hearing, where it is indifferent which we
use; and if I have two Eggs of a quality and quantity equal, before me, it is
indifferent which I eat: therefore, etc. --

. 13. To this I say, 1. Many things simply considered are Indifferent (as to
marry or not marry, which Paul disputes of,) which yet being clothed with
accidents, or Circumstances, shall ordinarily be a Duty, or a sin in the Use to
a particular person. 2. Nothing is Indifferent between Lawful and Unlawful;
but many things are Indifferent between a Duty and a Sin. 3. I conceive that
where any thing is Indifferent between Duty and sin, in the Use, as
Circumstantiated, it is not actus humanus, a proper moral act. But as
Permission is vainly numbered with proper acts of Law, it being but a Non
impedire, a Negation of an act; so Indifferency is as vainly annumerated to the
products of a Law. For there needs no act of Law to make a thing Indifferent,
that is Neither commanded nor forbidden. For instance, it is Indifferent for me
to wink with my eyes ordinarily, because it is not a Moral act that a man is to
use his reason about, to bring every twink of the eye to an Election, or
Refusal; but we may leave it to Natural instinct. So in Dr. Burgesses
instances, Whether I sit or stand at Sermon, (if I be equally disposed, and
caeteris paribus) is not a humane Moral act: Whether I eat this Egg or that
when they are equal, is not a Moral act: Nor do I properly Choose, but take
indifferently without choice. And where there is no use of choice, the act is
not Moral, except in the Intention of the end, or in deliberating accesses.)
Yet I grant that Moral acts may be exercised about these objects: A scrupulous
mind may be put to consider, whether this Gesture or that, this Egg or that is
to be chosen: but it must conc^ude, that neither is to be chosen, but either to
be taken Indifferently. Which is but to say, that the Deliberation was a Moral
act; but the choosing was not, for it was but a Taking, and not a Choosing: And
the Deliberation stopped before it came to a choice, yea and purposely avoided
it, concluding that the object was not a Matter of choice, and the act was not
to be a Moral act: Morality has but two Species, Good and Evil: and
Indifferency is no third Species, but a Negation of Morality: viz. of Good or
Evil.

. 14. Yet may one Accident take off the Indifferency, and make the action Good
or Evil. And though the Governors themselves should well weigh Accidents, and
prefer the chief, and lay no more upon them then they deserve: yet because the
Accidents are often distant, and unseen, and the Ruler is the Judge of them,
therefore the people should ordinarily obey, when they see them not themselves.

. 15. Object. But in case the Genus is commanded by God, and the Species are
equal, may not the Governor limit us to one of the two? Especially in case the
people are d^vided about them, or else will do nothing, because they cannot
resolve which way to do it. For instance: if sitting, standing and kneeling be
equally convenient at the singing of Gods Praises, if the people be in a doubt
which to use, or at least if they fall into contention about it, may not the
Governors interpose, and limit them to one? If you be the conductor of
Travailers or Soldiers, and they come to a place where the way divides,
though both ways are equally good and near, yet you must command them one way,
and choose for them, because else they will go no way at all.

. 16. Answ. 1. In this case you are not to choose one Gesture or one Way rather
then another, unless they make it necessary by Accident. But tell them of the
Indifferency and Equality, and drive them on to Action. And so you only choose
and cause them to choose Action before Cessation, but not this way before that.
2. If this will not serve, but they will do nothing, unless you determine of
their Gesture or Way, you must then command one rather then another, because
they can use but one, and some one they must use. But in thus doing, your
comparing, taking This rather then the other, is not to be done by Election,
nor be a humane act, there being no more Reason (that's supposed) for one then
for the other. But though you name them one Way or Gesture only (when they
necessitate it,) you do it but as choosing their Action before their cessation;
this therefore is all that is Moral in your Act: and that you Determine them to
Action by Naming This way and not the other, is good (for the Determination for
Duty sake was eligible:) but that it was rather to This then the other, was
Indifferent, and not Moral: For of that you had no Reason: and where there is
no Reason, there is no Morality.

. 17. All this considered, I leave it to the consideration of common Reason,
and of men that have any pity for the Church or their own souls, whether it be
a Prudent or Christian course to make Laws for the Church about things
Indifferent, that have nothing in the Nature of them to induce them hereunto:
and then to cast out Ministers and other Christians for not obeying them, and
deprive men of the greatest blessings, on the account of things indifferent.

18. If God have left us at Liberty by not commanding or forbidding, then man
should not take that Liberty from us without great cause, and without some
Accidental good that is like to come by depriving us of that liberty, and the
Good must be greater then the Accidental evil. Why should any man on earth
deprive the Church of Liberty in that thing where God thought not meet to
deprive him of it, unless he ca^ prove that time, or place, or some special
accident has altered the case? In any case which stands with us just as it
did in Scripture times, we must no more be deprived of our freedom by man, then
we are by God: Had it been best for us, God would have done it.

CHAP. VII. Prop. 7. Some things may be lawfully and profitably commanded at
one Time and Place, and to one sort of people, that may not at or to another;
no nor obeyed, if commanded.
. 1. THE case is so plain in point of Commanding, that it is past all doubt.
Many Accidents may make that destructive at one Time and place, that would be
profitable at another. Paul's precepts and pract^ce in becoming all things to
all men, do manifest this.

. 2. The Pope (...) King (...) that (...) cannot be done without tumult or
(...).] D^^ila p. 1362. an. 1595. So that when he fears losing by it himself,
the good man makes conscience of murdering them that he will c^ll heretics:
but at another time 30000. to be murdered in France in a few days ( D^^ila
says 40000.) was a blessed work!
The Papists themselves are convinced of this: and therefore sometime granted
the Bohemians the use of the cup for the Laity in the Lords Supper: and profess
that it is in the Power of the Pope and Council to do the same by other places.
Yea when they burn men for the Protestant Religion in one Country, they
tolerate it in another, for fear of a greater evil. And when they torment men
in one age and place for using a Bible in the vulgar tongue, in another place
or time, they themselves translate it.

. 3. It is therefore a very great sin in Governors, unnecessarily to make such
things the matter of a common standing Law which is so variable, yea and must
be varied according to diversity of times and places: These things should be
left to the Prudence of the Governors that are on the place. No wise General
will take a Commission for the Command of an Army, if he must be tied up before
hand, when to march, and when to stand still, and which way to go, and how to
^ight in all the variable Circumstances. Shall Governors pretend to be so much
wiser then God, as to make a standing Law for that which God thought best to
leave at liberty, to be varied as occasions vary?

. 4. The English Church Laws do tie the Ministers to a particular habit, and to
the particular Chapters of Scripture that we must read: and if the Lawgivers
had pleased, they might as well have tied us to that particular Text which they
will have us preach on, and forbid us to choose a Text as a Chapter: And they
might have as well tied us to particular Psalms in singing, as in Reading. But
all this is against the nature of our office, and the good of the Church: And
therefore it is not fit matter for a Law. If I know my hearers to be most
addicted to Drunkenness, must I be tied up from Reading or Preaching against
that sin, and tied to Read and Preach only against Covetousness or the like,
because it seems meet to Governors to tie me to a constant course? If I have
a tractable people, it may do them no harm to limit them to this or that
gesture, vesture* etc. But what if they be prejudiced against a thing that in
it self is lawful, and take it to be a sin, and resolve that they will rather
forbear Gods Ordinances then use a thing that their Consciences are against?
must I needs exercise or press a Gesture, vesture or such Ceremony, when I see
it tends to the destruction of my flock? And therefore when I said before
that in case of Necessity I would rather Kneel, then not communicate, yet I now
add that I would for all that rather be imprisoned or otherwise persecuted,
then cast out of the Churches Communion all that dare not kneel or conform in
such a circumstance: And yet this were Ministers then commanded on great
penalties to do.
Must I needs deny the Lords Supper to all my flock, if they dare not receive
it in this or that gesture (let it be sitting or kneeling,) and all because I
am commanded to do so?

. 5. Suppose it here granted that the thing being lawful, it is the peoples
sinful weakness that causes them to refuse it; and that the power commanding
me no otherwise to deliver it, is such as in things lawful I am bound to obey*
yet is it not a thing lawful to punish the peoples infirmity in a circumstance
so severely as with an excommunication, or a denying them the communion of the
Church in the Lords supper. In such a case my first duty is, to tell the
Magistrate that such a Law is sinfully cruel and destructive to the Churches
peace. If that will not prevail with him to repeal or suspend such an
unrighteous law, my next duty is, yet to persuade the people to obey him: (for
we suppose the gesture or ceremony commanded now to be lawful:) But if I can
neither prevail with the Magistrate to forbear his imposition, nor with the
people to obey him; my next duty is to forbear the execution of his unrighteous
penalty: I dare not be his executioner, in excluding all Christ's servants from
his house or holy Communion, that dare not do every circumstantial action that
is imposed on them: For the penalty is flat contrary to the Commands of Christ.
Yet would I not resist the Magistrate, but lay down my office,
if the Churches necessity did not forbid me to lay it down: but if it did, I
would do my office, and suffer what the Magistrate should inflict upon me.

. 6. And indeed, I might else be obliged by a Magistrate to excommunicate or
deny Communion to all Christians within my reach: For all Christians are
imperfect; and there is not one but is liable to error in a greater matter then
a gesture or circumstance, such as we have now before us: no nor one but does
actually err in as great a matter: and therefore one as well as another, on
this account may be cast out: But Christ would not have this dealing in his
Church.

. 7. How tender are his own expressions, his practice and his laws toward
those that are infirm! He came to preach the Gospel to the poor, and heal the
brokenhearted, and lay upon them an easier yoke and lighter burden. He will
not break the bruised Reed, Luke 4.18. Matthew. 11.28. Matthew. 12.20. Isa. 42.2,
3. and 40.11. Mat. 18.6. Luke 17 2. Romans 14.1. and 15.1, 2. and 14.13, 15, 20,
21, 23.
nor quench the smoking fl^x: he carries the Lambs in his arms, and gently
drives those with young: The little ones that believe in him must not be
offended: It were better for him (...) offends one of them (by injurious
persecution) that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast
into the sea: Him that is weak (even) in in the Faith, we must receive (and
therefore must not cast him out that doubts of a ceremony.) And they that are
strong must bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves, but every one to please his neighbor for his good to edification. No
man should put a stumbling block, or occasion to fall in his brothers way. If
we grieve our brother by our meats (or other indifferent things) we walk
uncharitably: we must not for such things destroy them that are the work of
God, and for whom Christ died. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink
wine, or any thing whereby he stumbleth or is offended, or is made weak. He
that doubts is condemned if he eat, because he eats not of faith. And we
must not be too forward in damning men for a morsel of bread, or a garment, or
a gesture.

. 8. Moreover, the Ministry has a certain end, to which all our
administrations are Means: even the saving of our flock, and the Pleasing of
God thereby: And if Magistrates will commands us to order but a lawful
Circumstance so as shall not only cross, but destroy these ends, we must as
soon leave our M^nstry as obey him: Our Power is given us to Edification and
not to Destruction: Not only those things that of themselves destroy, but those
that are like to be the occasions of such an event, through the infirmity of
the people, must be by us avoided. To command us a way of M^nistration that
shall (though but accidentally) damn men, and that unnecessarily, is to destroy
our office, by destroying the end, which is men's salvation. If men will destroy
themselves by the only means of salvation (Christ and the Gospel) this will not
excuse us from preaching that Gospel: but if men will destroy themselves by a
Ceremony, or unnecessary circumstance, I will take it out of their way if I
can. It is a Lawful thing for all sick people in England to eat of one
pa^ticular dish of meat, as well as on others: But if the Lawgivers command
that all Physicians shall give no man Physic that will not be tied only to
such or such a dish, I would not be a Physician, if I must obey that command;
what if my Patient have a weak stomach and cannot eat of that dish, or be
peevish, and will not? must I therefore be guilty of his death by denying him
my necessary help, because the Magistrate forbids me? He may as well forbid
us all to visit the sick, or relieve the poor, or cloth the naked, if he can
but find the least infirmity that they are guilty of. And I think that Christ
will not take it for an excuse in judgment if any man say [Lord, I would have
relieved them, clothed them, healed them, but that the Magistrate forbad me;
and I thought it the part of a seditious rebel not to obey my governors.] Yet
I should much less desire to be in that Ministers case (whose labors are
necessary to the Church) that had no better an excuse for his denying to preach
the Gospel, or to admit the servants of Christ to holy Communion, then that the
Magistrate forbade him: Our Ministration is a work of Charity, to be exercised
upon voluntary receivers: And if a Magistrate have power to forbid us to preach
or grant the Sacraments and Communion of the Church to any that wear not black
or blew, or white or red, or that kneel not at the Sacrament, or such like,
then may he as well or much better forbid us to give alms to any that wear not
a horn on their backs, and an iron ring about their arms as Bedlam^ do: No
Magistrate can dispense with Charity, especially in so great a case as men's
salvation: no more then the Pope can dispense with Oaths and Covenants.

. 9. We have therefore* the use of our Reason left us to weigh the tendency of
a Magistrates commands, even where the act commanded is in it self indifferent:
For the Magistrates Power, and the Ministers, are from one Fountain, and are
but Means to one and the same end: And neither of them has any power to
destroy that end: And therefore if by accident, through the weakness of my
flock, the observation of a trivial circumstance would undo them, I would not
use it, no not in obedience to the Magistrate: but would resolve with Paul
never to eat flesh while I live rather then to offend or destroy my brother.
But if I find by the weighing of all accidents, that my obedience will do no
such hurt to the Church and Souls of men, but as much good as my not obeying,
then (in such indifferent cases) I would readily obey: But otherwise I would
appeal to God, and bear the Magistrates persecution. No means can be justly
pleaded against the end (and least of all, a bare ceremony.) For it is no Means
when it destroys the end.

. 10. On this account it is that it has always by wise men been reckoned a
tyrannical unreasonable thing, to impose all the same ceremonies and
circumstances upon all places as upon some; and it has been judged necessary
that every Church have their liberty to ^iffer in such indifferent things, and
that it has been taken for a wise man's duty, to conform his practice in such
indifferent circumstances, to the several Churches with which he shall have
communion, as Ambrose professes he would do, and would have others do the same.

. 11. If any think (as too many do) that such a diversity of circumstances is a
disorder and confusion, and not to be endured, I shall further tell these men
anon, that their opinion for an hypocritical unity and uniformity, is the true
bane of Christian unity and uniformity, and that which has brought the
confusion and bloody wars into the Christian world, and that our eyes have
seen, and our ears have heard of: And it were as wise an objection for them, if
they should charge us in Britanie with Confusion, and drive us to a separation
or division, because the Scots wear blew caps, and the English hats: or because
some English wear white hats and some black; and so of other circumstances.

. 12. Did I live in France or other Popish Countries, or had lived in England
at the abolition of Popery, I should have thought it my duty in many
indifferent circumstances to accommodate my self to the good of those with whom
I did converse; which yet in another Country, or at another time, when those
things were as offensive as then they were esteemed, I durst not have so done.
And therefore our Common Prayer Book it self with its Ceremonies might be then
commendable, in many particulars, which now are reformable. And so in Ethiopia,
Greece, or Spain, those things would be very laudable, that are now in England
deservedly vituperable. And several Ceremonies in the primitive times had such
occasions and concomitants, that made them tolerable that now seem less
tolerable: The case is not the same, though the Materials be the same.

CHAP. VIII. Prop. 8. Those orders may be profitable for the Peace of the
Churches in one Nation, that are not necessary to the Peace of the Churches in
many Nations.
. 1. I mention this 1. Because the Romanists are so peremptory for the
Necessity of their ceremonies through all the world: as if the unity, peace, or
well being of the Church, at least, did hang on these. And yet sometimes they
could dispense with the different rites of the Greeks, if they could but have
got them under their power by it.

. 2. Also 2. Because the Protestants called Lutherans, stick so rigidly on
their ceremonies (as Private Confession, Exorcism, Images, Vestments, etc.) as
if these had been necessary to the unity of the Churches. And the Pacifiers
find a difficulty in reconciling the Churches of several nations, because these
expect an uniformity in ceremonies.

. 3. And so necessary does it seem in the judgment of some deluded souls, that
all Churches be one in a visible Policy, and uniformity of Rites, that upon
this very account they forsake the Protestant Churches and turn Papists. As if
Christ were not a sufficient Head and Center for Catholic union, and his Laws
and ways sufficient for our terms of uniformity, unless we are all of a mind
and practice in every custom or variable circumstance that God has left
indifferent.

. 4. I need no other Instance then 1. what Grotius has given of himself See my
writing of Grotius Religion.
(in his Discuss. Apologet. Rivet.) who professes that he turned off upon that
account, because the Protestants had no such unity: And 2. What he said before
of others (by whom he took no warning, but did imitate them) in his Epist. to
Mr. Dury (cited by Mr. Barksdale in his Memorials of Grotius life) where he
says [ Many do every day forsake the Protestants, and join with the Romanists,
for no other Reason but because they are not one Body, but distracted parties,
separated Congregations, having every one a peculiar Communion and (...) -- ]
And they that will turn Papists on such an inducement, deserve to take what
they g^t by their folly.

. 5. Did not these men know that the Church has always allowed diversity of
Rites? Did not the Churches differ till the N^cene Council about Easter day,
and one half went one way, and another half the other way? and yet Polycarp and
the Bishop of Rome held communion for all their differences? and Ireneus pleads
this against Victors temerity in excommunicating the Asian Churches? D^d they
not know that the Greek, and Armenian, and Roman Churches differ in many
Rites, that yet may be parts of the Catholic Church notwithstanding such
differences? Yea the Romanists themselves would have allowed the Greeks, and
Abassines, and other Churches a difference of ceremonies and customs, so they
could but have subjugated them to the Pope.

. 6. Yea more, the several orders of Friars and other Religious men among the
Papists themselves are allowed their differences in Rites and Ceremonies; and
the exercise of this allowed Difference does make no great breach among them,
because they have the liberty for this variety from one Pope in whom they are
all united. What abundance of observations do the Jesuits, Franciscans,
Dominicans, Benedictines, Carth^sians, and others differ in? And must men needs
turn Papists because of the different Rites of Protestants, when they must find
more variety among them that they turn to? The matter's well amended with them,
when among us, one country uses three or four Ceremonies which others do
disuse: and among the Papists, one order of Friars uses twice as many
different from the rest; yea in habit, and diet, and other observances they
many ways differ. What hypocrisy is this, to judge this tolerable, yea
laudable in them, and much less so intolerable in us, as that it must remove
them from our Communion?

. 7. And how sad a case is it that the Reconciliation between the Lutherans and
other Protestants should in any measure stick at such Ceremonies? what if one
country will have Images to adorn their Temples, and will have exorcism, and
other Ceremonies, which others do disallow and desire to be freed from? may we
not yet give each other the right hand of fellowship? and take each other for
the Churches of Christ? and maintain brotherly Charity, and such a
correspondency, as may conduce to our mutual preservation and edification?

. 8. Yea in the some Nation, why may not several congregations have the liberty
of differing in a few indifferent ceremonies? If one part think them lawful,
and the other think that God forbids them, must we be forced to go against our
Consciences, for a thing of no necessity? If we profess ou^ Resolution to live
peceably with them that use them, and only desire a toleration our selves,
because we dare not wilfully sin against our light, will charity deny us this?
If men forbear a thing (suppose) indifferent for fear of Gods displeasure and
damnation, and profess that were it not for this they would conform to the
wills of others, are those Christians or men that will come behind them and
drive them into hell without compassion, and that for things indifferent?

CHAP. IX. Prop. 9. There is no mere Humane Universal Sovereign, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, over the whole Church, and therefore none to make Laws
Obligatory to the whole.
. 1. I ADD this, because of the specious pretenses of some, that say we are
bound to an uniformity in Ceremonies by the Church: and call all Schismatics,
and such as separate from the Catholic Church, that disown and disuse such
Ceremonies as on these pretenses they obtrude. And by the Church that thus
obliges us, they mean, either some Universal Sovereign Power: or else an
universal Consent of the Church essential (as they call it.) And that Sovereign
must be the Pope or a General Council.

. 2. If it be Universal Consent of all Believers, that they suppose to be the
obliging power, I shall answer them, 1. That Believers are not Governors and
Lawgivers to the Universal Church, no nor to a particular Church. If that
point of the Separatists be so odious that asserteth the multitude of Believers
to be the Governors of a particular Church, and to have the power of the
Keys: what then shall we think of them that give them, (even to such as they
call the Laity themselves) the Government, yea in the highest point even
Legislation, over the Universal Church it self.

. 3. And 2. I add, that the Dissent of those Churches that refuse your
Ceremonies, does prove that there is no Universal consent: If all must consent,
we must consent our selves before we be obliged. We are as free as others, we
gave none power to oblige us by their consent. If we had, it had been Null:
because we had no authority so to do, and could not have obliged our selves, by
a universal Law, or perpetual contract. Or if we had, we had also power, on
just occasion to reverse a self-obligation. But no such thing de facto can be
pretended against us.

. 4. And if such an obligation by consent should be pretended, 3. I would know
whether it was by this or by some former generation? Not by this as is certain.
Nor by any former: For former ages had no power to bind all their successors in
Ceremonies about the worship of God. Show whence they had such a power, and
prove it, if you can: we are born as free men, as our ancestors were in this.

. 5. And 4. I would be satisfied, whether every man's consent in the world be
necessary to the Universality, or not? If it be; then there are no Dissenters:
or no obligation because no Universal consent. If not; then how many must
consent before we are obliged? you have nothing to say, but [ a Major part]
where you can, with any show of reason, rest: And 1. How shall we know in every
Parish in England, what mind the Major part of the Christians through the world
are of, in point of such or such a Ceremony? 2. Yea by this rule, we have
reason to think that both Papists and Protestants must change their Ceremonies,
because the greater part of Christians (in East and South, and some in the
West) are against very many of them.

. 6. But if it be the Authority of a Sovereign Head that is pleaded as obliging
the universal Church to an uniformity in Rites and Ceremonies, we must know who
that Sovereign is. None that we know, pretend to it but the Pope and a General
Council. And for the Pope we have by many volumes proved him an Usurper, and no
authorized Head of the Church Universal: The pretended Vice-Christ, is a false
Christ. The first usurpers pretended but to a Sovereignty in the Roman world,
but had never any show of Government over the Churches in Ethiopia, India, and
the many Churches that were without the verge of the Roman Emp^re.

. 7. And as for General Councils, 1. They are no more the Visible Head and
Sovereign of the Church then the Pope is, This I have proved in another
Disputation by it self. 2. There neither is nor can be any Council truly
universal, as I have there also showed. Its but a delusory name. 3. There never
was any such in the world, since the Church (which before was confined to a
narrow room) was spread over the world. Even at Nice, there was no proper
representative of almost any but the Churches under the Roman Emperors power:
Few out of the West, even in the Empire: and none out of almost any of the
Churches without the Empire: (For what is one Bishop of Persia, or such another
of another Country, and perhaps those prove the Roman subjects too, that are
so called?) If there was but one from Spain, and only two Presbyters of Rome
from Italy, and one from France (if any) and none from many another Country in
the Empire, no wonder if there was none from England, Scotland, or Ireland,
etc. And therefore there can be no universal obligation on this account.

. 8. Councils are for Concord by Consultation and consent, and not a Sovereign
or superior sort of Governing power. And therefore we that consented not are
not obliged: and if we had consented, we might on weighty reasons have
withdrawn our consent.

. 9. The Orders established by General Councils have been laid aside by almost
all, and that without the repeal of a Council: Yes such Orders are seemed to
presuppose the custom of the Universal Church, if not Apostolical Tradition, to
have been their ground.

. 10. Among many others, let us instance only in the last Canon of the Nicene
Council, that forbidding Kneeling, commands all to pray only standing on the
Lords Days, etc. And this was the common use of the Church before, as
Tertullian and others show, and was afterward confirmed again in a General
Council: And yet even the Church of Rome has cast it off; much more the
Protestant Churches. No General Council has been of more authority then this
of Nice: No Ceremony of more common use then this standing in prayer on the
Lords days: So that it might as much as any, be called the constitution and
custom of the Catholic Church. And yet we suppose not these now to bind us to
it: but have cast it off without the repeal of any other General Council. And
why are we more bound then by the same authority to other Ceremonies then to
this? And if to any, then to which, and to how many, and where shall our
consciences find rest?

. 11. Even the Jesuits themselves say that the General disuse of a practice
established by Pope and Council, is equal to an abrogation, without any other
repeal, so it be not by the said powers contradicted. And certainly all such
disuse began with a few, and proceeded further: we are allowed then to disuse
such things.

. 12. It would grieve a man that loves the Church to hear the name of the
Church abused by many dark, though confident disputers, when they are pleading
for their Ceremonies, and Holy days, and laying about them with the names of
Schismatics against all that will not do as they do [ O (say they,) These men
will separate from the Catholic Church, and how then can they be the Children
of the Church?] And 1. Which is it that is called by them the Catholic Church?
Little do I know, nor am able to conjecture. Did the Catholic Church make the
English Common Prayer Book? what! were the then Bishops in England that
consented in that work, the whole Church of Christ on earth? God forbid. Or did
ever any General Council authorize it? I think not. And if they would tell us
what General Council commanded Christmas Day, or Kneeling at the Sacrament,
etc* they would do us a pleasure: but I think they will not.

. 13. And 2. What if these things had all been commanded by a General Council?
May not a man disuse them without separating from the Church? I think, as good
as you are, you do some things your selves that God himself has forbidden you
to do; and yet will be loath to be therefore taken for men that separate either
from the Church or God. And when you read the Books of Heathen [Philosophers;
when you adore not toward the East, or when you pray and receive the Sacrament,
Kneeling on the Lords Days, would you be taken to separate from the Catholic
Church, for crossing its ancient customs, or Canons? But these perverse and
factious reasonings we must hear to the dishonor of Christianity and Reason it
self, and that from men that scorn the supposed meanness of others; yea and see
poor souls seduced into separation by such empty words! And this is one of the
present judgments on this land.

CHAP. X. Prop. 10. If it be not our Lawful Governors that command us, but
usurpers, we are not formally bound to obey them, though the things be lawful
which they command.
. 1. WE may be bound by some other Obligation perhaps, to do the thing which
they command us, but we are not formally (though sometime Materially) bound to
obey them: For it is not formally obedience unless it be done eo nomine because
commanded, or for the Authority of the Commander. If the Pope or any usurper
should command me to pray or to give alms, I will do it, but not because he
commands me, but because God commands me: and therefore I will not obey him
but God: But if a Parent or Magistrate or Pastor command it me, I will do it
both because it is commanded me, by God and them, and so I will obey both God
and them. If an usurper command me to do a thing in it self indifferent, I will
not do it because he commands it: but yet if accidentally it become my duty,
by conducing to another good, or avoiding their offense or hurt, or any other
accident, I will use it for these ends, though not for his command.

. 2. The Pope 1. As the Vice-christ or universal Head, is an usurper; and
therefore has no authority to command me or any man (in that relation) the
smallest Ceremony. 2. The Pope as Patriarch of the West, is an humane creature,
and not of Divine institution, and was indeed a sinful institution from the
first of his creation; but if it had been otherwise, yet since is that
Patriarchship become unwarrantable, since he has forfeited it, and the world
has found the mischiefs of it. So that no man is therefore bound to use one
lawful Ceremony because the Pope as Patriarch of the West commands it. 3. If
this were not so, yet Britain and Ireland were from the beginning none of his
Patriarchate, nor did at Nice consent to it: and therefore have the less
appearance of any obligation.

. 3. The Authority of General Councils cannot be pretended as obliging men in
Conscience to the English Ceremonies. 1. Because indeed General Councils are
not a superior Power for proper Government of the Church having authority to
command particular Bishops, or Synods, as their subjects; but they are only
necessary for Union and Communion of Churches and mutual assistance thereby:
and so their Canons bind but by virtue of the General commands that require us
to maintain the Unity and Communion of the Churches.

. 4. And 2. If it were otherwise, there is few, if any of these Ceremonies that
are commanded by any true General Council. They that can prove any such thing,
let them do it: but till we see it, we will not be forward to believe it. Yea
3. Some of them, General Councils have made Canons against; as I before showed
in the Case of Kneeling at the Sacrament on the Lords days. And therefore the
neglecters of our Ceremonies sin not against a General Council.

. 5. The Common plea is, that we are bound to use these Ceremonies in obedience
to the Church of England; and that we are not true sons of this Church if we
refuse it. But what is it that is called by them [ The Church of England] In a
Political sense, I know no such thing as a Church of England, or of any Nation
on earth; that is, There is no one Society united in any one Ecclesiastical
Sovereign, that can truly be called [ the Church of England] or of any other
Nation. The whole Catholic Church is One, as united in Christ the Head: And
every particular Church, associated for personal Communion in Gods Worship, is
one; being a part of the Catholic Church, and united in, and individuated by
their relation to their several Pastors. But a National Church under one chief
Ecclesiastic Government, I find no mention of in Scripture; but contrarily, [
the Churches of Judaea, Galatia, etc.] or any other Country where there were
many, are always mentioned in the Plural number; and never called one Church.

. 6. Yet will we quarrel with no men about mere names or words. If by [ a
National Church^ be meant any of these following, we acknowledge that there is
such a thing. 1. If all the particular Churches in a Nation do Associate, for
Communion and mutual assistance, and so use to meet by their officers in one
National Assembly; I confess the Association useful, if not necessary, and the
Assemblies to be maintained, and for unity sake obeyed in things lawful: And
though Scripture call not such National Associations by the name of [ a Church]
in the singular number, yet we shall leave men to their Liberty in such names.
If all the Schoolmasters in England should hold General Assemblies, to agree
what Books to read in their Schools, etc. if any man would therefore call all
the Schools in England in the singular number, by the name of [ the School of
England,] I would not differ with him for a word. 2. Or (...) the Churches are
all called One that are under one Christian Magistrate, I will confess the
thing to be true that is pretended to be the reason of the name: All the
Churches do owe obedience to the Magistrate. But he is no Essential part or
Ecclesiastical Head of the Church: and therefore it is very improperly
denominated from him; or called [ One] on that account: No more then all the
Schools are one because he is their Sovereign. It is the Commonwealth that is
specified and individuated by the Magistrate as the Sovereign Power; and not
the Churches. But yet it is but an improper word, to call all the Churches one
Church on that account, which we contend not about.

. 7. But it is the Thing that we stick more at then the name. A General Head
does properly specify and individuate the Body. Prove either, 1. That the
Archbishop of Canterbury or any other. 2. Or an Assembly of Bishops or
Presbyters, is properly an Ecclesiastical Head, having Authority from Jesus
Christ to be the chief Ruler of all the Churches in the Land and then I will
confess that we have properly and strictly a National Church. But no such thing
can be proved.

. 8 As for an Assembly, I have already showed (which Bishop Usher asserted to
me) that they are not superior Governors, nor instituted gra^ia Regiminis, but
gratia unitatis; having no more Rule over particular Bishops, then a Convention
of Schoolmasters over a particular Schoolmaster. If they say that Kings and
Parliaments give Power to Convocations, I answer, that can be but such as they
have themselves: which we shall speak of anon, and is nothing to this place.

. 9. And as for a Primate or Archbishop (of Canterbury, e. g.) 1. It will be a
hard task to prove Archbishops, as such, to be of Divine Institution. 2. And it
will be harder, even Impossible, to prove Archbishops of the English species,
as such, to be of Divine institution. 3. And certainly Christ has nowhere told
us, that every Nation shall have such a Head, nor every Province, nor every
County: nor told us whether there shall be one over ten Nations, or ten over
one: Their limits are not to be found in Scripture (supposing there were such
an office there known.) 4. Nor is it anywhere determined, that such a City
shall have the pre-eminence, and Canterbury, v. g. be Ruler of all the rest.
All these are of mere humane institution: And therefore that which the imposers
of Ceremonies call [ the Church of England] is a mere humane thing, which
therefore can bind us no further then the Magistrate can authorize them to do.

. 10. But the stronger pretense will be, that the particular Bishops of England
were severally officers of Christ, authorized to Govern their several flocks,
and therefore a Conv^cation of these Bishops binds us in conscience gratia
unitatis. The People they oblige as their Rulers: and the several Presbyters
also as their Rulers, and the several Bishops, gratia unitatis, for avoiding of
schism.

. 11. Answ. This also is an insufficient evidence to prove our Consciences
obliged to their Ceremonies, eo nomine, because of their Canons or commands.
For though we acknowledge a sort of Episcopacy to be warrantable, yet that this
sort that made the Canons in question, is not warrantable, I have proved at
large in the former Disputation on that question. Such Pastors of a Diocese as
our Bishops were, have no word of God to show for their office (further then as
they are Presbyters,) but we have showed already, that their office is
unlawful. And therefore though their actions as Presbyters may be valid, yet
their actions are Null which were done by pretense of this unlawful sort of
office, (they being no other way enabled thereto.) On this ground therefore we
are not bound.

. 12. If it could be pretended that at least as Presbyters the Convocation
represented the Presbyters of England, and therefore thus their Canons binds us
to the use of ceremonies, Common prayer, etc. I should answer, that 1. Even
Synods of Presbyters or the Lawfullest sort of Bishops, oblige but gratia
unitatis. 2. That the late Synod at Westminster was as truly a Representative
of the Presbyters of England, as the Convcaotion; where such consent, if any
were given, was retracted. 3. By actual dislike signified by disuse, the
Presbyters of England, for the most part, have retracted their Consent. 4. Yea
most that are now Ministers never gave such Consent. 5. Even ^ll particular
Pastors and Churches are free, and may on just reason deny consent to such
impositions.

. 13. There remains nothing then, that with any show of strength can be
pretended, as continuing our obligation to Ceremonies, from Authority, but that
of the Civil Power that commanded them. But to that I say, 1. So much as was
lawful, we confess that we were bound to use, while we had the command of the
Civil power: But nothing unlawful could be made our duty by them. 2. the Civil
Power has repealed those laws that bound us to these ceremonies. The
Parliament repealed them: the late King consented, at least, for the ease of
tender Consciences (as he spoke) that men should have liberty to forbear them.
And the present Rulers are against them* whom we see even the ceremoniou^ obey
in other matters.

. 14. Let those then that would subjugate our Consciences to their ceremonies,
make good their foundation, even the Authority by which they suppose us to be
obliged, or they do nothing: If all their impositions were proved things
indifferent and lawful, that's nothing to prove that we must use them, till
they prove that lawful authority commands them. The Civil Powers do not
command them: And the Ecclesiastics that command them, prove not their
authority over us. In the matters of God, we will yield to any man that bids us
do that which God has bidden us do already: But if they will exercise their
power by commanding us more then God commands us, and that unnecessarily, we
must crave a sight of their commission.

. 15. And if men that have no Authority over us, shall pretend Authority from
God, and go about to exercise it by Ceremonious impositions, we have the more
reason to scruple obeying them, even in things indifferent, lest we be guilty
of establishing their usurpation, and pretended office in the Church, and so
draw on more evils then we foresee, or can remove.

CHAP. XI. Prop. 11. The Commands of Lawful Governors about Lawful
Ceremonies, must be understood and obeyed with such exceptions as do secure the
End; and not to the subverting of it.
. 1. THE proof of this is obvious. These humane Ceremonies are appointed but as
means to a further end. But that which would cross and overthrow the end, does
cease to be a Means; and cannot be used sub ratione medii.

. 2. Order, and Decency are the pretended ends of the Imposed Ceremonies; and
the right worshipping of God, and the good of men's souls are said to be the
greater and remoter ends, and the glory of God the ultimate end. If then I have
good assurance that I cannot use such or such a ceremony but it will prove the
subversion of Order, or Edification, (though it should be by accident, through
the infirmity of men,) I know no reason I have to use them, when such a
mischief would follow, unless they can show me some greater good that also will
follow, which may recompense it.

. 3. Therefore the commanding of unnecessary ceremonies, on such Penalty, as
was done in England, and Scotland, to the silencing of the Preac^^rs, and
dissipating of the flocks, and casting out that worship, or hindering that
Edification that was pretended to be their end, was preposterous both in the
commanders and obeyers; and proved not convenient means to the ends pretended.

. 4. If I be enjoined by the Magistrates (whom I mention as of more undoubted
authority then our Bishops,) to read such and such chapters, and preach on such
and such texts through the year; I am in reason to interpret their commands
with this exception [ when it does not apparently cross the main end.] So that
if in my course I should be commanded to read and preach of an aliene subject,
when my hearers are running into schism, sedition, heresy, etc. I will suppose
that if the Magistrate were present, he would allow me to read or preach
according to the matter of present necessity. And if I were commanded to read
the Common prayer in a Surplice and other formalities, I hope if the Church
were all in an uproar, and the stools flying about my ears, as the women at
Edinburgh used the Bishop, I might think it would not tend in that Congregation
to order or Edification, to use such Ceremonies. Were they things of Gods
institution, they would not edify the people till they were prepared to
receive them; and therefore that preparation should go first.

. 5. Indeed it is the Pastors office to be the guide of his flock in the
worship of God, and therefore to judge pro re nata, what subject to speak on to
them, and what circumstances to choose, that may be most suitable to time, and
place, and persons, to promote his ends, even the good of souls: And therefore
no Magistrates should take the work or power of Pastors from them; though they
may oversee them in the use of it.

CHAP. XII. Prop. 12. It may be very sinful to command some ceremonies, when
yet it may be the subjects Duty to use them when they are commanded.
. 1. I Add this Proposition as necessary both for Rulers and for Subjects: For
Rulers; that they may not think that all may be lawfully Commanded which may be
lawfully done when it is commanded. And for subjects; lest they think that all
things are unlawful to be done, which are sinfully commanded.

. 2. Some Governors think, that the Sermons and Arguments that charge the
people with sin for disobeying them, do all justify them for making the Laws,
which others should obey: And all the words that are spent in aggravating the
sin of the disobedient, they think are spoken in justification of their
commands. And on the contrary, many people think that all that is said against
the laws or penalties, is said in justification of their disobedience. And they
are so lamentably weak that they cannot discern, how that can lawfully be
obeyed, that is sinfully commanded: when yet the case is very plain.

. 3. If a thing be simply unlawful, as being forbidden by God himself, there
no command of man can make it lawful. But if it be but inconvenient or evil
only by some accident or circumstance, it is possible for the commands of
Governors to take off the accidental evil, and make it become a duty. For
example, It is not lawful for me to travail one mile in vain: nor is it
lawful for a Prince to command me to travail a mile in vain: And yet if he
send me such a command, to appear before him at such a place, (yea though it be
many miles) it may become my duty to obey him. Otherwise subjects should not be
bound to appear before any judicature, till they were satisfied of the cause,
which is absurd. I a Prince command his officers to execute some unjust
sentences, if they know it not, at least, it may be no sin of theirs, (in many
cases) though it be his. Every war that is unlawfully undertaken by the Prince,
is not unlawful in all his Soldiers: Some of them that have not opport^nity
to know the evil of his undertaking, may be bound to obey (the case of others I
determine not.)

. 4. So if a Pastor call the Assembly at an inconvenient hour, or to an
inconvenient place, though it be his sin to do so, yet is it their Duty to
obey. If in the manner of Prayer he (tolerably) miscarry, they may not
therefore refuse to join with him. If of two Translations of Scripture, or two
versions of the Psalms, he use the worser, (so it be tolerable) they must obey.

. 5. Yet if the miscarriage be so great in the ordering even of these
circumstances, or in the Manner of Duties, as shall overthrow the Duty it self,
and be inconsistent with the ends, or bring greater evils upon the Church, then
our refusing to obey the Pastors (in those cases) can do; then (as I have
before showed) we are not bound to follow him in such a case: But otherwise we
are.

. 6. The Reasons of this are obvious and clear. Even because it is the office
of the Governors to determine of such Circumstances: It is the Pastors office
to guide and ove^see the flock. And so the determining of Time and Place of
wo^ship, (that's undetermined) belongs to his office: and the choice of the
subject on which he shall preach, the leading them in prayer, and praise, and
choice of versions, translations, and other ordinary helps in his work. And
therefore when he determines these, he is but in his own way, and does but his
own work: and therefore he is therein the judge, if the case be controvertible.
If none shall obey a Magistrate or Pastor in the works of their own office, as
long as they think he did them not the best way, all Government then would be
presently overthrown, and obedience denied. We are sure that God has commanded
us to obey them that are over us in the Lord, (1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.7, 17,
etc.) And therefore a Certain duty may not be fo^born upon uncertain
conjectures, or upon every miscarriage in them that we owe it to. This would
unchurch a^l Churches (as they are Political Societies) For if Pastors be taken
down, and the work of Pastors, the Church is taken down: And if Government and
obedience be taken down, then Pastors and their work is taken down; Which will
be the fruit of this disorder.

. 7. And the things in which the Pastor is now supposed to err, are not of
themselves unlawful; but only by such an accident, as being over-weighed by
another accident, shall cease to make them unlawful. For instance: If the
Pastor appoint a more imperfect version of the Psalms to be sung in the Church
(as is commonly done in England,) the obeying of him in the use of this, will
not bring so much hurt to the Church as the disobeying on that account would
do: For besides the sin of disobedience it self, the Church would be in a
confusion, if they forsake his conduct that preserves the union; and some will
be for this, and some for that, and so the worship it self will be overthrown.
But if the Pastor would command a version so corrupt as would overthrow the
duty it self, or be as bad as nonperformance, the Church is then to seek
redress, and not obey him. So if he command a Time inconvenient, but tolerable
(as to meet at sun rising or sun setting) it were better obey then dissolve the
Church (if we cannot be otherwise relieved) But if he appoint a Time that's
intolerably unfit (as at midnight) I would not obey (except in such necessity,
as leaves to that time or none) the same I spoke before of other circumstances.

. 8. On the other side, if Magistrates or Pastors shall think their Imposition
lawful, because the people may lawfully obey them, they are as much mistaken.
Even many of those Divines that wrote for conformity to the late Ceremonies,
did take it to be (...) sin of those that imposed them, as they were imposed,
and would have written as much against the Imposition, if they (...) but had
liberty: I m^an such writers as Mr. Sprint, Mr. Paybody, Dr. John Burgess (who
told the King of Pollio's glasses that were broken by Caesar, that no more
anger and danger of men's lives should follow; and would have had him so to have
used our Ceremonies.) So Zanchy that judged the Ceremonies such as might
lawfully be used, did write to the Queen to take them down, and not leave them
as snares to cast out the Ministers, and at the same time he wrote to the
Ministers to use them, in case the Queen would not be persuaded to forbear the
imposing and urging of them.

. 9. If I be bound to obey a Governor if he set me to pick straws, or to hunt
a feather, it follows not that he may lawfully command it. I have heard many
pleading for Ceremonies say, that if the Magistrate commanded them, and would
not otherwise permit them to preach the Gospel, they would preach in a fools
Coat, and a fools Cap with a feather, rather then forbear. But I do not think
that any of them would justify that Ruler that would make such a Law, that no
man should preach or celebrate the Sacraments, but in a fools Coat and Cap:
such might expect to be judged by Christ, as the scorners of him and his
Ordinances.

CHAP. XIII. Prop. 13. The Constant use of things indifferent should not be
(ordinarily) commanded; but they should be sometimes used, and sometimes
disused.
. 1. I WILL say but little of this, because I have opened it before in the
Disputation about Liturgies. The Reasons of it are plain. 1. Indifferent things
should be used as indifferent things, and therefore with some indifferency.

. 2. And 2. The people else will be brought to think them Necessary, if they be
constantly used, and custom will grow to a Law: And no contradicting this by
doctrine will serve turn to rectify the mistake: For we cannot be always nor
often preaching on such things: And if we were, yet practice is much more
observed by them then doctrine; which commonly they understand not, or forget.

. 3. And 3. Hereupon their minds will receive a false impression about the
nature of their Religion, and they will be brought to worship they know not
how, and to set a high value on that which is not to be valued; and
consequently it will kindle a false zeal in their affections, and corrupt all
their devotions.

. 4. And 4. It will make them disobedient against Magistrates or Pastors that
would take them off from their false apprehensions, and misguided practices:
and if they live in a place where the Governors are against their customs,
they will disobey them on pretense of duty to God, and think that they do him
service in it.

. 5. Yea 5. They will be uncharitably censorious against their Brethren that
are not of their mind* and ^oo^ on them as men that are self-conceited or
irreligious, as the Papists do by all that do no entertain every opinion which
they (...) with the Articles of their faith, and every practice which they
place their Religion in.

. 6. We see all this by sad experience among our selves. The imposers of our
Ceremonies and the maintainers of them, did still profess that they were no
parts, ^ut Accidents of worship; and they pleaded for them but as things
indifferent. And yet now the Magistrate, and their lawful acknowledged
Pastors, would bring the people in some of these Ceremonies to change their
customs; they will not do it, in many places, but make conscience (as they
profess) of Gestures, and forms and D^yes, and such like, as if they had been
of Divine Institution. If they be things Indifferent, why may not they disuse
an Holy day one year as they use it another or disuse a form of Prayer one day,
as they use it another, or recieve the Lords Supper one time sitting, as they
do another time kneeling? But this they will not endure to yield to: so that
you see that constant uninterrupted use, has made custom a Law with them, and
given the Lie to the Doctrine of the Bishops themselves, that called them but
indifferent things; and caused the people to place Gods worship in them.

. 7. And on the other side a constant purposed disuse of convenient Modes and
Circumstances of worship, may draw people to think them things unlawful, and
to rise up against them as innovations, and strange things, when they are
imposed.

. 8. Yet here we must distinguish of ind^fferent things. Some are so
convenient, that we cannot frequently vary, but with great inconveniency and
wrong to the Church (as a due hour for Assembling, and a convenient place, and
the best Translations, and versions of the Psalms, the fittest Utensils for
worship, etc.) In all these cases it were giddiness to vary frequently and
without need; and yet worse to tie men up from varying when they find need.
Other things are of ordinary inconvenience, which therefore ordinarily should
be disused: though in some cases of necessity they must be allowed. Other
things depend upon the will of men, and there is no great difference in point
of convenience between the using and disusing them, but what the will of man
does cause: (as in our vestures, our gestures in some of the Ordinances, as in
hearing, singing Psalms, and in abundance of Ceremonies or Circumstances, this
is the case.) These are they that I say should be used, but unconstantly.

. 9. As for them that cry out of Confusion and Sacrilege, and irreligiousness,
and I know not what, if Ceremonies be not constantly used, and all forced to
them, but be used with an indifferency; the distempers of their own souls
contracted by such Customs, is a sufficient argument to move a sober
considerate man, to desire that the Church may be delivered from such
endangering customs. They do but tell us that custom has made cer^monies
become their very Religion! And what a kind of Religion is that?

CHAP. XIV. Reasons against the Imposing of our late Controverted Mystical
Ceremonies, as Crossing, Surplice, etc.
. 1. HOW far Ceremonies are lawful or unlawful to the users, I have showed
sufficiently already: and therefore may omit the fourteenth Proposition as
discussed before: But so eager are the minds of men to be exalting themselves
over the whole world* and putting yoaks on their Brethrens necks, even in the
matters of God, and setting up their own wills to be the Idols and Lawgivers
to all others, that I take it for the principal part of my task, to give in my
Reasons against this distemper, and to try if it be possible to take men off
from Imposing or desiring, the Imposition of unnecessary things. I durst not
desire the Imposing of our Mystical Ceremonies, but had rather they were
abolished, or left indifferent, for these followings Reasons.

. 2. Reas. 1. To impose (...) symbolical Rites upon the Church which Christ
has not imposed, does seem to me to be an usurpation of his Sovereign power.
It belongs to him to be the Lawgiver of his Church. No man has Power to
make him a new worship. Officers are but to see his Laws executed: and to
determine only of such circumstances, as are needful for the well executing
them. To make new Symbols or instituted signs to teach and excite Devotion, is
to make new humane Ordinances: whereas it belongs to us only to use well such
as he has made: and to make no Laws but such as are thus needful for the
executing of his Laws. But of all this I have more largely spoken already.

. 3. Reas. 2. The imposing of these Mystical Rites does seem to accuse Christ
of ignorance or negligence, in that he has not himself imposed them, when he
has taken upon him that Royal office to which such Legislation does belong.
If Christ would have such Rites imposed on the Churches, he could better have
done it himself, then have left it to man. For 1. These being not mutable
circumstances, but the matter of standing Laws, are equa^ly necessary or
unnecessary to this age of the Church as to that in which Christ lived upon
earth, and to those Countries in which he conversed as to these. If Images,
Crossing, significant garments, etc. be needful to be imposed in England, why
not in Iudaea, Galatia, Cappadocia, (...), etc. And if they are needful now,
why not then? No man can give a rational cause of difference, as to this
necessity* If therefore Christ did neither by himself nor by his Apostles, (who
formed the first Churches, and delivered us his mind by the Spirit) institute
and impose these Rites, then either the imposing of them is needless, and
consequently noxious: or else you must say that Christ has omitted a needful
part of his Law and worship, which implies that he was either ignorant what to
do, or careless and neglective of his own affairs, which are not to be
imagined. Moses left nothing out of the Law that he delivered, that was to be
the standing matter of the Law: nor omitted he any thing that God required in
the instituting of the Legal worship. But Christ was faithful to him that
appointed him as Moses was in all his house, Heb. 3.2.3. therefore certainly
Christ has omitted nothing that was to be a standing Gospel Law and Worship
nor done his work imperfectly.

. 4. Reas. 3. And as this Imposition of Mystical Rites does imply an accusation
of Christ, so does it imply an accusation of his Laws, and of the holy
Scriptures, as if they were insufficient. For if it belong to Scripture
sufficiency to be the full revelation of the will of God concernng Ordinances
of worship and duties of universal or stated Necessity, then must we not
imagine that any such are left out. If Scripture be Gods Law, it is a perfect
law: And if it belong to it as a Law to impose one stated Symbol, Ordinance, or
matter of worship, then so it does to impose the rest of the same nature that
are fit to be imposed. If we will do more of the same that Scripture was given
for to do, we accuse it, while we seem to amend it.

. 5. Reas. 4. And by this means we shall be brought to a loss for the Rule of
our Religion. For if once we leave the holy Scriptures, we shall not know where
to fix. If God have not instituted all the Ordinances of Worship (such as
Sacramental, or Mystical Rites, etc.) that are meet to be statedly Imposed on
the Churches, then we are uncertain who is to be the institutor of them. The
Pope will claim it: and General Councils will claim it: and Provincial
Councils, and particular Bishops will claim it: and Princes will claim it: and
we shall be at a loss for our Religion.

. 6. Reas. 5. But whoever it be that will be the master of our Religion they
will certainly be men, and so it will become a humane thing. Whereas Divine
worship supposes a Divine institution: and it is an act of obedience to God,
and therefore supposes a Law of God: For without a Divine Law there cannot be
obedience to God.

. 7. Reas. 6. These impositions seem to be plain violations of those
prohibitions of God, in which we are forbidden to add to his worship, or
diminish from it. As Deuteronomy. 12.32. [What thing soever I command you, observe to
do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.] Object. But we add
nothing to the Word of God, though we impose such Mystical Rites as he imposes
not. Answ. The text does not say Thou shall not add to my Command] but [ Thou
shall not add to the thing that I command thee.] It is the Work, Worship, or
Ordinances that you are forbidden to add to, or diminish from, and not the Word
or Law it self only.

. 8. Reas. 7. It seems to be a very great height of Pride that is manifested
in these impositions. 1. When men dare think themselves wise enough to amend
the work of Christ and his Apostles, and wise enough to amend the holy
Scriptures: is not this exceeding Pride? How can man more arrogantly lift up
himself, then by pretending himself to be wiser then his Maker and Redeemer? Is
it not bad enough to equalize your selves with him, unless you exalt your
selves above him? If you do not so, what mean you by coming after him to
correct his Laws, or mend his work, and make better laws and ordinances for his
Church then he himself has done? 2. And I think it is no better then Pride for
men so far to exalt themselves above the Church of God, as to institute new
signs and ordinance^, and say, [ I command you all to worship God according to
these my institutions and inventions: and he that will not thus worship him,
shall not have liberty to worship him at all, nor to live in the Communion of
Christians.] What Is Pride and arrogance, if this be not?

. 9. Reas. 8. None knows the mind of God concerning his worship, but by his
own Revelation: If therefore he have not Revealed it to man, that he would be
served by such mystical Rites, and Ceremonies, then no man can know that it
will please him. And if it Please him not, it will be lost labor and worse:
and we may expect to hear [ who requires this at your hands?] How do you know
that it pleases him to be served by Images, Exorcisms, Crossings, and many
pompous Ceremonies? He has nowhere told you so. And your will is no proof of
the will of God.

. 10. Reas. 9. God would not have taken down the Legal Ceremonies, and
delivered us from them as a burden, and commanded us to stand fast in the
Liberty with which Christ has made us free, and not again to be entangled with
the yoke of bondage Gal. 5.1. if he would have given men leave to have imposed
the like burdensome observances at their pleasure. If you say that these
present Ceremonies are not burdensome; I ask, why then were those of Gods
institution burdensome? That yoke was straight and burden heavy; and Christ
has called us to take upon us his yoke that is easy, and his burden that is
light. Matthew. 11.28. It was not only the threatenings conjunct against the
disobedient, that made the Jewish Ceremonies to be a burden, which they were
not able to bear, Act. 15. nor yet because they were but Types (for to be Types
of Christ, was their highest honor:) But also because they were numerous, and
required labor and time, and were unnecessary (when Christ was come) and so
against the liberty of the Church, as Col. 2.16. etc. And is it a likely thing
that God would take down his own institutions when they became unnecessary, and
at the same time give commission to the Pastors of the Church to set up
unnecessary Ce^emonies of their own? Yea or give them leave to do it, without
his commission? If it be such a mercy to be delivered from Divine Ceremonies,
when they grew needless, and a liberty which we are commanded to stand fast in,
I know not why men should impose on us unnecessary Ceremonies of their own, and
rob us of our Mercies.

. 11. Reas. 10. The imposition of unnecessary Ceremonies, is a certain means
for the D^vision of Christians, and therefore is but an engine of the Devil,
the great divider. As the Papists set up a Vicechrist and false Center of
union, under pretense of the unity of Christians, when nothing is so great a
cause of their division; so usually the Imposers of Ceremonies pretend the
Unity and Peace of Christians to be their end, when they are most effectually
dividing them. They are preserving the house by casting fire into the thatch.
There is no more effectual means of Division, then to set up impossible terms
of unity, and tell men, that they must Agree upon these or none. All Christians
will unite in Christ, and Agree in all the essentials of Christianity, and all
that is the known word of God: But no wise man will expect that all Christians
should ever Unite and Agree about the Mystical signs and Ceremonies of man's
invention and imposition. Come to a Congregation that walk in unity and holy
order in the simplicity of faith and Scripture ordinances, and make Laws to
this Church, that no man shall join in the worship of God that will not Cross
himself, and be sprinkled with holy water, and bow toward the Altar, and wear a
sword and helmet, to signify the spiritual warfare, and such like, and try
whether this course will not divide the Congregation; Men are like^ to agree in
few things then in many; in Certain truths, then in uncertain Controversies; in
Divine ordinances, then in Humane inventions. Undoubtedly if you impose such
Ceremonies, multitudes of honest Christians will dissent. And if they dissent,
what will you do with them? If you leave them to their liberty, then your
Ceremonies are not imposed. If you do not, you will drive them to a separation,
and break all in pieces by your violence, and exasperation of men's minds.

. 12. Reas. 11. And by this means you will be led, and also l^^d others into
the heinous guilt of persecuting the members of Christ. For when you have m^de
Laws for your Ceremonies, you will expect obedience, and take all for
schismatics or disobedient that refuse them; and its like your laws will be
backed with penalties; you will not be content to have the liberty of using
these Ceremonies themselves, and to leave all other to their liberties. We hear
(and formerly heard it more) how impatient almost all of this way are of
diversity in Circumstances and Ceremonies. They take it to be intolerable
confusion to have diversity in these things: what say they? shall one use one
gesture, and another use another? what confusion will this be? or if a few of
the wiser sort have more wit, yet custom will bring the multitude to this
pass. We see now, they will not endure to join with those that sit at the Lords
Supper, though they may kneel themselves. If they see but two or three shops in
a Town open on Christmas day, they throw ston^s at them and break their
windows, where they dare, and are ready to rise up against such as enemies in
war. Besides you will take it as a contempt of your Laws, if men do not conform
to them: And if you use the Ceremonies, and others disuse them, you will think
they censure your practice by their forbearance. And its like they will be
forced to give some reasons of their forbearance: And those Reasons must needs
be against your way, and consequently seem to disparage you, so that I may take
it for granted, that those that would have Ceremonies, would have them forced
on the Church, and so would raise a persecution to maintain them.

. 13. And then this persecution when its once begun, its never like to stay
till it reach to the height of Cruelty. For 1. When you have begun, you will
think that you are engaged in honor to carry it on, and not to suffer every
poor man or woman to disoby you, and disparage your wisdom. 2. And if you lay
but a gentle penalty on dissenters, ^t will do no good on them (but perhaps
excite them to the more opposition*) When Conscience is engaged against you, it
is not small mul^ts nor imprisonment neither that will alter the judgments or
the ways of such. And therefore you must either proceed to blood or
banishment, or you miss your ends, and will but be opposed with greater
animosity.

. 14. Reas. 12. And then this will raise an odium upon your Government, and
make men look upon you as tyrants: For naturally men pity the suffering party,
especially when it is for the cause of God, or Profession of more then ordinary
exactness in the obeying of Gods commands: And then men's minds will by this be
tempted to disloyal jealousies, and censures, if not to the opposition of the
Rulers.

. 15. Reas. 13. And it were an evil which your Ceremonies will never
countervail, if it were but the uncharitableness that will certainly be raised
by them. When you will persecute men, and force them against their Consciences
in such indifferent things (as you call them) you will occasion them to judge
you persecutors, and cruel, and then they will censure you as ungodly, yea as
enemies to the Church: And then you will censure them for schismatical, and
self-conceited, and refractory disobedient people. And so Christian love, and
the offices of love will be extinguished, and you will be mutually engaged in a
daily course of heinous sin.

. 16. Reas. 14. And it will be the worse, in that your persecution will often
fall on the most conscientious persons. Hypocrites and temporizers dare do any
thing; and therefore will follow the stronger side, and obey him for their
worldly ends. But the upright Christian dare not do that which is displeasing
to God, for a world: He is the man that will be imprisoned, or banished, or
rackt, or slain, rather then he will go against his Conscience. And is it not a
horrid thing to make such Laws, that the most conscionable are likest to fall
under, and to perish by? May it not make you tremble, to read that God himself
does call such his Jewels ( Mal. 3.16; 17.) and says, he that touches them,
touches the apple of his eye, and that it were better for him be cast into the
depth of the sea with a M^lstone about his neck, that offends one of these
little ones? Away with the Ceremonies that are unnecessary, and yet have such
effects, and bring you into such danger.

. 17. Reas. 15. And then a more grievous evil wil^^follow: the Ceremony will
devour the substance, and shut out the preachers, and consequently the word and
worship of the Lord. For you will never give men Liberty to forbear them. And
when godly Ministers will not be conformable to your will, you must silence
them, lest they draw the people from you. And so the ignorant must be left in
their ignorance, and the profane in their profaneness, and the godly in their
sorrows for want of their faithful Teachers, and the ordinances of grace.

. 18. Reas. 16. And then it will follow, that ignorant, idle, ungodly Ministers
must be taken in to supply their rooms: For if the best disobey you, you will
think your selves necessitated to take such as will obey you. And so God shall
be dishonored, his word and work abused, his people grieved, his enemies
encouraged, the wicked hardened, and the unworthy Ministers themselves undone
and destroyed; and all for a few unnecessary ceremonies of your vain invention.

. 19. Reas. 17. And now it were more unexcusable then ever before, to Impose
such unnecessary burdens on the Churches, when we have so lately seen and felt
the sad and miserable effects of such impositions. We are scarce out of the
fire, that this straw and rubbish kindled in this land. We are the men that
have seen the Churches divided by them, and the preachers cast out for them,
and persecution occasioned by them, and the Nation hereupon corrupted with
uncharitableness, the Bishops against the people, and the people against the
Bishops; and war and misery hence arising. And ye^ shall we return to the
occasion of our misery, and that while we confess it to be a needless thing?

. 20. Reas. 18. Yea this course is like to kindle and maintain Divisions
between the Churches of several Nations, as well as among those that are under
the same government. For either you will have all the Christian world to join
with you in your Mystical and unnecessary Ceremonies, or not: All cannot be
expected to join with you: For 1. The world will never agree in such humane
unnecessary things. 2. There is no universal governor to Impose one Law of
Ceremonies on all the Churches. Christ only is the universal King and Head: and
he has done his part already. If you will have more universal Laws, you must
first have another universal King or Head. And there is none such. Only the
Pope and a General Council pretend to it; and they are both deceived (in this)
and would deceive us. They are none of our Lords, as I have elsewhere proved.
But if you expect not universal Concord in your Mystical signs and Ceremonies;
then 1. Why should you cast out your Preachers and brethren, for those things
which other Nations may be so well without: and hold communion with foreigners
that avoid them, and deny Communion to neighbors as good, that are of the same
mind? And 2. This will make foreign Churches and you to grudge at one another,
and the diversity will cause disaffection: especially when you persecute your
members for the cause that's theirs. We find now by experience, that the Images,
Exorcism, Crossing, etc. of the Lutherans does exceedingly hinder their Peace
with other Churches, while others censure them as superstitious; and they by
custom are grown so highly to value their own Ceremonies, as to censure and
disdain those that are not of their mind.

. 21. Reas. 19. It easily breeds and cherishes ignorance and formality in
the people. You cannot keep them from placing their Religion in these
Ceremonies: and so from deceiving their souls by such a Pharisaical
Religiousness, in washings and observances: And so in vain will they worship
God, while their worship is but a Conformity to the doctrines, traditions, and
inventions of men. Mat. 15.

. 22. Reas. 20. To prevent these evils (and yet in vain) your Rites and Signs
must bring New doctrines, and new labors into the Church, which will
exceedingly hinder the doctrine and work of Christ. The Ministers must teach
the people the meaning and use of all these Ceremonies (or else they will be
dumb signs, contrary to your intent, and the use of them will be vain) And if
we must spend our time in opening to our people the meaning of every ceremony
that you will impose: 1. It will be but an unsavory kind of preaching. 2. It
will divert them and us from greater and more needful things. Yea we must teach
them, with what Cautions, in what manner, to what ends, etc. to use all these
Ceremonies; or else they will turn them all to sin; if not to Popish, yea to
heathenish formalities. And alas, how much ado have we to get our people to
understand the Creed, and the Kernel of the Gospel, the essentials of
Christianity, and the two Sacraments of Christ's institution, and some short
Catechism that contains these? And when we have done our best in public and
in private, we leave many of them ignorant what these two Sacraments are, yea
or who Christ himself is. And must we put them to so much more labor, as to
learn a Rationale or exposition of all the Ceremonies, holy days* etc? We
shall but overwhelm them, or divert them from the Essentials.

And here you may see the unhappy issue of humane wisdom and false means. It is
to be teachers of the ignorant that men pretend these Signs, Images and
Ceremonies to be useful. And yet they are the causes of ignorance, and keep
men from necessary knowledge. If you doubt of this, do but open your eyes, and
make use of experience: See whether among the common people the most
Ceremonious are not commonly the most ignorant? yea and the most ungodly too?
It is a truth so notorious, that it cannot be denied. Who more ignorant of the
Sacraments, then they that rail at them that fit in the act of receiving? Who
more ignorant of the doctrine of the Gospel? who more obstinate enemies of a
holy life, more worldly, self-conceited, licentious, profane, despisers of
their faithful Teachers, then the most zealous persons for all these
Ceremonies?

. 23. Reas. 21. Moreover these new Laws and services introduce also a new
office into the Church. There must be some of pretended Power to impose all
these Ceremonies, and see them executed: or else all is vain. And no such
office has Christ appointed. Because men thought it necessary that all the
Christian world should have but one way and Order in the Ceremonious worship
which was commonly approved, therefore they thought there was a Necessity of
one Head to maintain this unity of order: and so came up the Pope, (as to one
cause.) And so in a Nation, we must have some one or more Masters of
Ceremonies, when Ceremonies are kept a foot. And so whereas Christ has placed
officers in his Church to teach and guide them, and administer his own
Ordinances, we must have another sort of officers, to make Laws for Mystical
signs and Ceremonies, and see them executed, and punish the neglecters, and
teach the people the meaning and the use of them. The Primitive Bishops had
other kind of work; we find directions to the Pastors of the Church containing
the works of their office (as to Timothy, Titus, etc.) But we no where find
that this is made any part of their work, to make new Teaching signs and
Ceremonies, and impose them on the Church, nor have they any directions for
such a work: which surely they much needed, if it had been their work indeed.

. 24. Reas. 22. When we once begin to let in humane Mystical Rites, we shall
never know where to stop, or make an end. On the same ground that one Age
inventeth three or four, the next think they may add as many, and so it will
grow to be a point of devotion, to add a new Ceremony (as at Rome it has done)
till we have more then we well know what to do with.

. 25. Reas. 23. And the miserable plight that the Christian world has lain in
many ages by Ceremonies, may warn us to be wise. Augustine complains that in
his time the Church was burdened with them, and made like the Jewish Synagogue.
The most of the Churches in Asia and Africa are drowned too deeply in
Ceremonious formality, turning Religion into ignorant shows. The Church of Rome
is worse then they; having made God a worship of histrionical actions, and
shows and signs and Ceremonies: so that millions of the poor blind people
worship they know not whom nor how. And if we abate only of the number, and
keep up some of the same kind, (even Symbolicall Rites of man's institution, to
teach us, and excite our devotion) we shall harden them in their way, and be
disabled from confuting them. For a Papist will challenge you to prove just how
many such signs are lawful: And why he may not use threescore as well as you
use three, when he says he is edified by his number, as you say you are with
yours?

. 26. Reas. 24. It is not inconsiderable that God has purposely established a
spiritual kind of worship in the Gospel, telling us that God is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth: Such worshippers does God require
and accept: Bodily exercise profits little. The kingdom of God is not in
meats or in drinks, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost:
Neither Circumcision avails any thing in Christ Jesus, nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature, and faith that works by Love. God would never have so
much called men off from Ceremoniousness to spirituality, if he had delighted
in Ceremony.

. 27. Reas. 25. The Worship of God without his blessing is to little purpose.
No man can have encouragement to use any thing as a Means to teach him and help
his devotion, which he has no ground to believe that God will bless. But there
is no ground (that I know of) to believe that God will bless these Instituted
Teaching signs of man's inventions to the Edifying of our souls. For God has no
where bid us devise or use such signs. 2. Nor no where promised us a blessing
on them (that ever I could find) And therefore we have no encouragement to use
them. If we will make them, and impose them our selves, we must undertake to
bless them our selves.

. 28. Reas. 26. As vain thoughts and words are forbidden us in Scripture, so no
doubt but vain actions are forbidden: but especially in the worship of God: and
yet more especially when they are Imposed on the Church by Laws with penalties.
But these Mystical Rites of humane institution are vain. You call them your
selves but [ Things indifferent:] And they are vain as to the use for which
they are pretended, that is, to Teach and Edify, etc. having no promise of a
blessing, and being needless imitations of the Sacraments of Christ. Vanity
therefore is not to be imposed on the Church. My last Reason will fullier show
them to be vain.

. 29. Reas. 27. We are sure the way in which Peter, and Paul, and the Churches
of their times did worship God, was allowable and safe: and that Princes and
Prelates are wise and righteous overmuch, if they will not only be more wise
and righteous then the Apostles in the matters of Gods worship, but also deny
their subjects liberty to worship God, and go to heaven in the same way as the
Apostles did. If Peter and Paul went to heaven without the use of Images,
Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, kneeling in receiving the Lords Supper, and
many such Ceremonies, why should not we have leave to live in the Communion of
the Church without them? would you have denied the Apostles their liberty
herein? Or will you be partial? Must they have one way, and we another? They
command us to imitate them: give us leave then to imitate them, at least in all
things that your selves confess to be lawful for us.

. 30. Reas. 28. Has not God purposely already in the Scripture determined the
Controversy, supposing your Ceremonies (which is their best) to be
indifferent. He has interposed also for the decision of such doubts. He has
commanded, Romans 14.1, 3. that we [ Receive him that is weak in the faith, but
not to doubtful disputations] (much less to imprisonment or banishment) [ Let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats
not, judge him that eats, for God has received him] Nay we must not so much
as offend or grieve our brother, by indifferent things* Verse 13.15.21. to the
end. And so Chap. 15.1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves.] So that the case is decided by the Spirit
of God expressly, that he would have weak Christians have liberty in such things
as these; and would not have Christians so much as censure or despise one
another upon such accounts. And therefore Prelates may not silence Ministers,
nor excommunicate Christians on this account; nor Magistrates punish them,
especially to the injury of the Church.

. 31. Object. But this is spoken only to private Christians, and not to
Magistrates or Prelates. Answ. 1. If there had been any Prelate then at Rome,
we might have judged it spoken to them with the people. And no doubt but it was
spoken to such Pastors as they then had. For it was written to all the Church,
of whom the Pastors were a part. And if the Pastors must bear with dissenters
in things indifferent, then most certainly the Magistrates must do so. 2. If
Magistrates are Christians, then this command extends also unto them. God
has sufficiently told us here that he would have us bear with one another in
things of such indifferency as these. If God tell private men this truth, that
he would have men born with in such cases, it concerns the Magistrate to take
notice of it. Either the error is tolerable, or intolerable. If intolerable,
private men must not bear with it. If tolerable, Magistrates and Pastors must
bear with it. It is as much the duty of Private Christians to reprove an
erroneous person, and avoid him, if intolerable and impenitent, as it is the
duty of a Magistrate to punish him by the sword, or the Pastor by
Church Censures. If therefore it be the duty of Private men to tolerate such as
these in question, by a forbearnce of their rebukes and Censures; then is it
the duty of Magistrates to tolerate them, by a forbearance of penalties; and of
Pastors to tolerate them by a forbearance of excommunication. Who can believe
that God would leave so full a determination for tolerating such persons, and
yet desire that Prelates should excommunicate them, or Princes imprison, banish
or destroy them. Some English Expositors therefore do but unreasonably abuse
this text, when they tell us that Magistrates and Prelates may thus punish
these men whom the rest of the Church is so straightly commanded to bear with and
not offend.

. 32. So Col. 2.16. to the end [ Let no man judge you in Meat or Drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbaths, etc.] ver. 20.
[ Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as
though living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances? (Touch not, taste not,
handle not, which all are to perish with the using,) after the commandments and
doctrines of men: which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.] Here also God shows that it is his will that such Matters should
not be made Laws to the Church, nor be imposed on his servants; but their
freedom should be preserved. Many other texts express the same, which I need
not cite, the case being so plain.

. 33. Reas. 29. Moreover, me thinks every Christian should be sensible, how
insufficient we are to perform the great and many duties that God has imposed
upon us already. And therefore they should have little mind to be making more
work to the Churches and themselves, till they can better discharge that which
is already imposed on them by God. Have not your selves and your flocks enough
to do to observe all the precepts of the Decalogue, and understand all the
doctrines of the Gospel, and believe and obey the Gospel of Christ, but you
must be making your selves and others more work? Have you not sin enough
already in breaking the Laws already made, but you must make more Laws and
duties, that so you may make more sin? If you say, that your precepts are not
guilty of this charge, you speak against reason: The more duty, the more
neglect we shall be guilty of. See how the Lord Falkland urges this Objection
on the Papists. And it is considerable, that by this means you make your selves
unexcusable for all your neglects, and omissions toward God. Cannot you live up
to the height of Evangelical Sanctity? Why then do you make your selves more
work? Sure if you can do more, it may be expected that you first do this that
was enjoined you. If you will needs be Righteous (materially) overmuch, you are
unexcusable for your unrighteousness.

. 34. Reas. 30. Lastly, consider also, that all your Mystical Teaching Signs,
are needless things, and come too late, because the work is done that they
pretend to: God has already given you so perfect a directory for his worship,
that there is nothing more that you can reasonably desire. Let us peruse the
particulars. 1. What want you in order to the Teaching of our understandings?
Has not God in his word and his works, and his Sacraments, provided sufficient
means for our instruction, unless you add your Mystical signs? Will your
Ceremonies come after and teach us better then all these Means of God will do?
We see by the Disciples of Ceremonies, what a Master they have. 2. What want
you for the exciting of dull affections, that God has not provided you
already? Have you Ceremonies that can give life, and are more powerful
remedies against Corruptions, and more effectual means of Grace then all the
institutions of God? Or has God left any imperfection in his institutions for
your Ceremonies to supply? Would you have plain Teaching in season and out of
season? This God has appointed already: and settled the Ministry to that end.
Would you have men taught by a Form of words? Why you have a copious Form: The
whole Scripture is a form of words, for men's instruction. And yet we deny not
but out of this Form you may gather more contracted forms for the instruction
of your flocks. Catechizing and public and private teaching are Gods own
Ordinances. Would you have a Directory for Prayer, Confession and Thanksgiving?
Scripture is a Directory; and out of it we shall be glad of any direction that
you will gather for us. Would you have forms of Words for Prayer and Praise?
Scripture has given you many: the Lords Prayer, the Psalms, and many more. And
if you think you can do better, you have liberty to do it your selves. And is
not that enough? God has left it indifferent to us, whether we use a stinted
form or not. If you be not wiser then God, do you leave it indifferent also.
Would you have a stated day for Gospel Worship in Commemoration of the work of
our Redemption? Christ and his Apostles have taught you to observe one, even
the Lords day to these Ends. Would you have exciting mystical instituted signs?
Christ has appointed you Baptism and the Lords Supper, which signify the very
substance of the Gospel: Can your signs do more? Or is a greater number more
desirable? Why may not a few of Christ's institution, full and clear, that have
a promise of his blessing, serve turn without the additions of men's froathy
wits? Use the Lords Supper ofter, and with more preparation, and you will need
no Sacramental Ri^es of your own. If Christ's signs will not do it, in vain do
you hope for it from the devises of men. Gods Ordinances have no blemishes and
wants that need your patches. Do that which Scripture has cut out for you, and
I warrant you, you will find no want of such additions. The making of the Law and
Rule of Worship is Gods work, the obeying it is yours. Its a course most
perverse when you fail and deal falsely in your own work, to fall upon Gods
work, and take on you to mend that. Do your own well, in obeying, and judge not
the Law, and trouble not the Church with your additions.

. 35. Yet still remember, that we allow both Magistrates and Pastors to see to
the execution of Gods laws, and to determine of Circumstances in order thereto
that are necessary in genere. But it is only 1. Such Mystical signs as in
genere are not commanded us, and left to man's determination, that I speak of.
2. And also the needless determination of circumstances, and making Laws for
such things as should be left to the prudence of every Pastor, to be varyed as
occasion requires.

CHAP. XV. Reasons for Obedience in Lawful things.
. 1. LEST men that are apt to run from one extreme into another, should make an
ill use of that which I have before written, I shall here annex some Reasons to
persuade men to just obedience, and preserve them from any sinful
nonconformity to the commands of their Governors, and the evil effects that
are like to follow thereupon.

. 2. But first I will lay together some Propositions for decision of the
Controversy; How far we are bound to obey men's precepts about Religion?
Especially in case we doubt of the lawfulness of obeying them? and so cannot
obey them in faith?

. 3. Briefly: 1. We must obey both Magistrates and Pastors in all things
lawful which belong to their offices to command. 2. It belongs not to their
office to make God a new worship; But to command the Mode and Circumstances of
worship belongs to their office: for guiding them wherein God has given them
general rules. 3. We must not take the Lawful commands of our Governors to
be unlawful. 4. If we do through weakness or perverseness take Lawful things
to be unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience. Our error is our
sin, and one sin will not excuse another sin. Even as on the other side, if we
judge things unlawful to be lawful, that will not excuse us for our
disobedience to God in obeying men. 5. As I have before showed, many things
that are miscommanded, must be obeyed. 6. As an erroneous judgment will not
excuse us from Obedience to our Governors, so much less will a doubtfulness
excuse us. 7. As such a doubting, erring judgment cannot obey in (plenary)
faith, so much less can he disobey in faith. For it is a known Command of God,
that we obey them that have the Rule over us: but they have no word of God
against the act of obedience now in question. It is their own erring judgment
that intangleth them in a necessity of sinning (till it be changed.) 7. In
doubtful cases, it is our duty to use Gods means for our information: and one
means is to consult with our Teachers, and hear their words with teachableness
and meekness. 8. If upon advising with them we re^ain in doubt about the
lawfulness of some Circumstance of order, if it be such as may be dispensed
with, they should dispense with us: if it may not be dispensed with without a
greater injury to the Church or cause of God, then our dispensation will
countervail, then is it our duty to obey our Teachers, notwithstanding such
doubts: For it being their office to Teach us, it must be our duty to believe
them with a humane faith, in cases where we have no Evidences to the contrary:
And the Duty of Obeying them being certain, and the sinfulness of the thing
commanded being uncertain and unknown, and only suspected, we must go on the
surer side. 9. Yet must we in great and doubtful cases, not take up with the
suspected judgment of a single Pastor, but apply our selves to the unanimous
Pastors of other Churches. 10. Christians should not be over-busie in prying
into the work of their Governors, not too forward to suspect their
determinations: But when they know that it is their Rulers work to guide them
by determining of due Circumstances of worship, they should without causeless
scruples readily obey, till they see just reason to stop them in their
obedience; They must not go out of their own places to search into the Actions
of another man's office, to trouble themselves without any cause.

. 4. And now I entreat all humble Christians read^^y to obey both Magistrates
and Pastors in all Lawful things; and to consider, to that end, of these
Reasons following. Reas. 1. If you will not obey in Lawful things, you deny
authority, or overthow Government it self, which is a great ordinance of God,
established in the fifth commandment with promise: And as that commandment
respecting societies and common good, is greater then the following commands,
as they respect the private good of our neighbors, or are but particular Means
to that Public good, whose foundation is laid in the fifth commandment, so
accordingly the sin against this fifth commandment must be greater then that
against the rest.

. 5. Reas. 2. In disobeying the lawful commands of our superiors, we disobey
Christ, who rules by them as his officers. Even as the disobeying a Justice of
Peace or Judge is a disobeying of the sovereign Power; yea in some cases when
their sentence is unjust. Some of the ancient Doctors thought that the fifth
commandment was the last of the first Table of the Decalogue; and that the
Honoring of Governors is part of our Honor to God, they being mentioned there
as his officers, with whom he himself is honored or dishonored, obeyed or
disobeyed: For it is Gods Authority that the Magistrate, Parent, and Pastor is
endued with, and empowred by to rule those that are put under them.

. 6. Reas. 3. What confusion will be brought into the Church if Pastors be not
obeyed in things lawful? For instance: If the Pastors appoint the Congregation
to Assemble at one hour, and the people will scruple the time, and say, it is
unlawful, and so will choose some of them one time, and some another, what
disorder will here be? and worse, if the Pastors appoint a Place of worship,
and any of the people scruple obeying them, and will come to another place,
what confusion will here be? People are many, and the Pastors are few: and
therefore there may be some unity if the people be Ruled by the Pastors; but
there can be none, if the Pastors must be ruled by the people, for the people
will not agree among themselves: and therefore if we obey one part of them, we
must disobey and displease the rest. And their ignorance makes them unfit to
rule.

. 7. Reas. 4. Moreover, disobedience in matters of Circumstance, will exclude
and overthrow the substance of the worship it self. God commands us to pray:
If one part of the Church will not join with a stinted form of Prayer, and the
other part will not join without it, both parties cannot be pleased, and so one
part must cast off Prayer it self, or separate from the rest. God commands
the reading, and preaching, and hearing of the Scripture, and the singing of
Psalms: but he has left it to man to make or choose the best Translation of
Scripture, or version of the Psalms. Now if the Pastor appoint one version, and
Translation, and the Church join in the use of it, if any members will scruple
joining in this Translation or version, they must needs forbear the whole duty
of Hearing the Scripture, and singing Psalms in that Congregation. If they
pretend a scruple against the appointed time or Place of worship, they will
thereby cast off the worship it self. For if they avoid our Time or Place, they
cannot meet with us, nor worship with us.

. 8. Reas. 5. And when they are thus carried to separate from the Congregation,
upon such grounds as these, they will be no where fixed, but may be still
subdividing, and separating from one another, till they are resolved into
individuals, and have left no such thing as a Church among them. For they can
have no assurance or probability, that some of themselves will not dissent from
the rest in one Circumstance or other, as they did from their Pastors and the
Church that they were of before.

. 9. Reas. 6. By this means the wicked that are disobedient to their Teachers,
and reject the worship of God it self, will be hardened in their sin, and
taught by professors to defend their ungodliness: For the very same course that
you take will serve their turns. They need not deny any Duty in the substance,
but deny the circumstance, and so put off the substance of the Duty. If a
wicked man will not hear the word preached, he may say [ I am not against
preaching; but I am unsatisfied of the lawfulness of your Time or Place, I am
in judgment against coming to your Steeple-house, or against the Lords Day.]
And so he shall never hear, though he say he is for hearing. If a wicked man
will not be personally instructed, or admonished, or be accountable to the
Church or Pastors for any scandals of his life, nor submit to any discipline,
he may say [ I am for discipline, I know it is my duty to be instructed: but I
am not satisfied that I am bound to come to you when you send for me, or to
appear at such a place as you appoint: the word of God names no time or place,
and you shall not deprive me of my liberty.] If a wicked man would not hear or
read the Scripture, or sing Psalms, he may say that he is for the duty, but he
is only against this and that Translation and version: And so while every
version is excepted against, the duty is as much evaded as if it were denied it
self. By this device it is that the Rebellion of unruly people is defended:
They run to the circumstances of the duty, and ask, [Where are they bound to
come to a Minister? or to be examined by him in order to a baptism or Lords
supper? or to speak their consent to be Church members, or to subscribe to a
Profession, or to read an English Bible, or to hear in a Steeple-house, with
many such like.] Thus also it is that they put off family prayer, and ask, [
Where are they bound to pray in their family Morning and Evening?] and so keep
no constancy in family prayer at all, under pretense of denying only the
circumstances.

. 10. Reas. 7. By this disobedience in things lawful, the members of the
Church will be involved in contentions, and so engaged in bitter
uncharitableness, and censures, and persecutions, and reproaches of one
another: which scandalous courses will nourish vice, dishonor God, rejoice the
enemies, grieve the Godly that are peaceable and judicious, and wound the
consciences of the contenders. We see the beginning of such fires are small,
but whither they tend, and what will be the end of them, we see not.

. 11. Reas. 8. By these means also Migistrates will be provoked to take men of
tender consciences for factious, unruly, and unreasonable men, and to turn
their enemies, and use violence against them, to the great injury of the
Church: when they see them so self-conceited, and refusing obedience in lawful
circumstances.

* 12. Reas. 9. By this means also the conversion and establishment of souls
will be much hindered, and people possessed with prejudice against the Church
and ordinances, when they take us to be but humerous people, and see us in such
contentions among our selves. To my knowledge, our late difference about some
such lesser things, has turned off, or hindered abundance of people from
liking the holy doctrine and life which we profess.

. 13. Reas. 10. It will seem to the wisest, to savor of no small measure of
Pride, when people on the account of lawful circumstances, dare set themselves
against their Govenors and Teachers, and quarrel with the ordinances of God,
and with the Churches: Humble men would sooner suspect themselves, and quarrel
with their own distempers, and submit to those that are wiser then themselves,
and that are set over them for their guidance by the Lord. There may more
dangerous Pride be manifested in these matters, then in Apparel, and such lower
trifles.

. 14. Reas. 11. Consider also what yielding in things lawful the Scripture
recommendeth to us? How far yielded Pa. when he circumcised Timothy? Act. 16.3.
And when he [ took the men, and purified himself with them in the Temple, to
signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an
offering should be offered for every one of them] and this for almost seven
days, Acts 21.26, 27. with the foregoing verses.

. 15. So 1 Cor. 9.19, 20. [ For though I be free from all men, yet have I made
my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as
under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them that are
without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak I became as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I
might, by all means save some, and this I do for the Gospels sake, etc.] Study
this example.

. 16. Read also Romans 14. and 15. Chapters, how much condescension the Apostle
requires even among equals, about meats and days. And 1 Cor. 8.13. the
Apostle would tie up himself from eating any flesh while the world stands,
rather then make a weak brother to offend. Many other passages of Scripture
require a condescension in things of this indifferent nature, and show that the
Kingdom of God does not consist in them.

. 17. And Matthew 12.1, 2, to 9. you find that hunger justified the Disciples
of Christ for plucking and rubbing the ears of Corn on the Sabbath days. And
hunger justified David and those that were with him, for entering into the house
of God, and eating the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor
for them which were with him, but only for the Priests: And the Priests in the
Temple were blameless for profaning the Sabbath day.] Now if things before
accidentally evil, may by this much Necessity become lawful and a duty, then
may the commands of Magistrates or Pastors, and the Unity of the Church, and
the avoiding of contention, and offense, and other evils, be also sufficient to
warrant us in obeying, even in inconvenient Circumstantials of the worship of
God, that otherwise could not be justified.

. 18. Reas. 12. Lastly consider, how much God has expressed himself in his
word to be pleased in the Obedience of believers. Not only in their Obedience
to Christ immediately, but also to him in his officers, 1 Samuel 15.22. [ Behold,
to obey is better then Sacrifice, etc.] Col. 3.20, 22. [Children obey your
Parents in all things (that is, all lawful things) for this is well-pleasing
to the Lord] [Servants Obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh,
etc.] And Obedience to Pastors is as much commanded. 1 These. 5.12, 13. [ We
beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly, etc.) Heb. 13.17. [
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls as they that must give account, etc.] So Verse 7. and 24. 1 Timothy
5.17, etc.

. 19. As the General Commission to a Parent, or Master, or Magistrate to Govern
their inferior relations, does authorize them to many particular acts
belonging to their office, that were never named in their commission: so your
general command to obey them, obliges you to obey them in the said
particulars. And so it is also betwixt the Pastors and the flock, in matters
belonging to the Office of a Pastor.

. 20. If a Child shall ask a Parent, [ Where does Gods word allow you to
command me to Learn this Catechism, or read this Divines writings, or repeat
this Sermon, or write it? etc.] does not the question deserve to be answered
with the rod? The General Commission for parents to Govern their children is
sufficient; so if a Schoolmaster command his Scholars to come to such a place
to School, and to take their places in such an Order, and to learn such books,
and do such exercises, etc. the General Commission that he has to teach and
Govern them, will allow him to do all this. (Though it will not allow him to
set his Scholars to any Artifice or Manual Operation alien-to his profession.)
So if a Minister determine of the variable Circumstances of worship, as what
place the people shall come to, and at what time, to be Catechized, examined,
instructed, etc. what Translation or Version of Psalms to use, what Utensils to
make use of about Gods service, or such lik^, he is warranted for this by his
General Commission. And if he miss it in the manner, by choosing inconvenient
circumstances, or by unnecessary determination of points that should rather be
left undetermined to liberty, though this be his own sin, it will not excuse
the people from obedience; unless the error of his directions be so great as
would frustrate the Ordinance it self, or do more harm then our disobedience
would do; which in Circumstantials is rarely found.

. 21. And thus I have finished this discourse of Ceremonies; a Subject that may
seem unseasonable at such a time when we are disburdened of Ceremonies. But the
offense and vehement accusations of the Ceremonious, has made it seem
necessary to me, while they accuse Dissenters of schism and obstinacy, and
reproach them as Puritans, and seem ready to act their second part in casting
out those that be not of their mind, if it were in their power: when yet they
call the Ceremonies but things indifferent; and Preachers and Gods Ordinances
are not Indifferent things to us.

FINITVR. July 9. 1658.
Satisfaction to certain CALVMNIATORS.
I Am informed from London, and several parts of the Land, that some of my
Books having lately been sold at excessive rates by the Booksellers, it is
somewhat commonly reported that it is caused by my excessive gain, which say
they, is at least three or four hundred pounds a year. I thank the Lord that
does not only employ me in his service, but also vouchsafe me the honor and
benefit of being evil-spoken of for doing him the best service that I can, Mat.
5.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Blessed Augustine was put to vindicate
himself by an oath, from the infamy of a covetous design, which was raised by
one godly woman, upon a disorderly action o^ other men, and to that end he
wrote his 225. Epistle. I find no call to use his oath; but yet I judge it my
duty to imitate him in patience, and in rescuing the slanderers from their sin,
that they abuse not their souls by uncharitable surmises, nor their tongues by
false reports. To which end I give them this true information: The two first
Books I printed, I left to the Booksellers Will; for all the rest, I agreed
with them for the fifteenth Book, to give to some few of my friends, hearing
that some others agreed for the tenth. Sometime my fifteenth Book coming not to
an hundred, and sometime but to few more, when of Practical Books I needed
sometime 800. to give away. Because I was scarce rich enough to buy so many, I
agreed with the Bookseller, (my Neighbor,) to allow 18. d. a Ream (which is
not a penny a quire,) out of his own gain toward the buying of Bibles, and
some of the practical Books which he printed, for the poor: Covenanting with
him, that he should sell my Controversal Writings as cheap, and my Practical
Writings somewhat cheaper then books are ordinarily sold. To this hour I never
received for my self one penny of money from them for any of my Writings, to the
best of my remembrance: but if it fell out that my part came to more than I
gave my friends, I exchanged them for other Books: My accounts and memory tell
me not of 5. li. that ever was returned for me on these accounts, which was on
litera^y occasions: so that my many hundreds a year is come to never a penny in
all, but as abovesaid, in some exchange of Books. And the price I set on my
Books which I exchanged for theirs at the dearest rates, is as follows,
[Treat. of Conversion, 2. s. Treat. of Crucifying the World, 2. s. Disput. of
^ustificat. 2. s. 4. d. The Call to the Unconverted, 8. d. Disput. of saving
Faith, 5. d. Of the Grotian Religion, 6. d. Directions for sound Conversion, 1.
s. 8. d. Disput. of Right to Sacraments, Edit. secund. 2. s. 4. d.] These are
all my bargains and my gains. And I chose the honestest Booksellers that I
could meet with, according to my small measure of wit and acquaintance; who
told me, they still made good their Promises. And now censorious Slanderer,
tell me, what thou would have had me to have done more? If I had got Food and
Raiment out of my own hard labors, had it been unlawful or dishonorable, when
Booksellers get so many hundred pounds by one Book, that never studied nor
spent their time and cost for it, as I have done? And yet do thou reproach me
that receive not a groat? But because I will not oblige my self to the same
course for the future, and that thou may know at what rates I serve thee, let
me tell thee, that in these labors early and late my body is wasted, my
precious time laid out, and somewhat of my Estate, and somewhat of the labor of
my friends. I cannot have twenty quire of my writing well transcribed, under
fifty pounds. And who shall pay for this, or maintain me in thy service? I have
troubled a Neighbour-Minister in the tedious work of transcribing my Characters
(for some books,) for which, neither he nor I had ever one penny. These
personal matters are unsavory to me, and I take it for a great injury that thou
put upon me a necessity of mentioning them. But I have yielded this once to
thy unrighteous importunity, that thou may hereafter learn what to believe
and utter, and make more conscience of thy censures and reports. And that thou
may have the utmost relief that I can procure thee for the time to come, I
shall agree with my Booksellers, to sell all that I publish at three farthings
a sheet, and to print the price of every book at the bottom of the Title page.

Farewell. Richard Baxter.
October 11. 1658.

