THE SECOND PART OF THE ADDRESS TO THE FREEMEN AND FREEHOLDERS OF THE NATION.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford for George Wells, at the Sun in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

THE AUTHOR to the READER.
THE kind reception the former Part of this Discourse found in the World has
drawn forth this Second, which had otherwise expired in as much Secrecy as it
was written. Nor am I concerned for the future fate of either of them.

But if I might be so happy as to discover the Errors of those courses which
have brought these three Potent Kingdoms, and this most Excellent Church into a
dis-esteem abroad, and great danger at home, and so might contribute in the
least to the prevention of those Mischiefs that in time may hazard the Ruin
of them, I should then account my self blessed, and my undertaking prosperous,
what ever effect it might happen to have upon my private Fortunes.

Next the Preservation of the public Peace of any People, the Advancing Trade
and Commerce, and the Effects, of these, Wealth and Power; Reputation and the
Conveniences of humane Life, are chiefly to be reguarded; and if I can show
that the contrary of all these will attend the proceeding any further in our
late Methods, I shall not question, but all that have any kindness for
themselves will see that it is their Interest to desert them.

Commerce and Trade spring Naturally from Peace and Settled Governments; and are
cherished and preserved by the mutual Trust and Confidence, Love and Kindness
which Men have in, and to each other; and where these fail, there is a stop,
and sometimes a total ruin of the former.

A very small reflection on the Inconveniences that do attend a War of any
Kind, will satisfy a person of mean Capacity, That Trade will stand still when
the Sword is in Motion, for Men will not care to venture their Estates or
Persons abroad, when they may justly expect to fall into the Hands of Soldiers,
who purchase the richest Commodities with their Swords, and pay off the Traders
with ready Blows instead of Money.

The same Effect though not so visibly, must attend any Government that reels
and staggers, and seems every day likely (by violence) to be changed into
another; for who would employ his Time, Stock, and Thoughts, to increase that
Wealth, which a Stranger, and it may be his Mortal Enemy, may ravish from him
in a moment, after many years toil and labor to acquire it?

Besides, it is not unusual for Merchants (who are quick sighted) when they
perceive a Storm to hang over any People, to take Care betimes to lodge their
Fortunes, or a considerable part of them, in places that are better secured;
the Consequence of which is, that not only what was imported is wasted, but
much that might have been brought in is diverted, and the Neighbor Nations are
by that means Enriched, whilst the Miserable People languish and feel one of
the worst Effects of War, Want, even in the time of a suspicious Unsettled Peace.

But this (though bad enough) is not all, the richest Men in such Countries,
who have any Considerable quantities of Treasure will be likely too, to secure
as much as they can well spare abroad; not knowing how soon that which they
have by them may fall into other Hands, who will give them but small thanks for
it; and it may be, destroy them as they do Bees toward Winter, that they may
rifle the Hive with the greater Security. Thus will much more be Exported that
might better have been Kept at Home, and the Wealth of the Nation be insensibly
Wasted.

And without either of these, the distrusts and fears of men amongst themselves
will lessen their Industry, and make them court even Poverty it self, when it
promises more Security than an Inviduous Fortune.

But if this Effect be not usual, especially when Dangers are at a distance;
yet I suppose few men are so ignorant as not to have observed, that some shaken
Governments have endeavored to secure themselves by the Poverty of their
People, who are commonly easiest Governed, when like a Ship they are not
over-loaden with the weight of too much Wealth; and this must of necessity have
a mischievous Effect upon any People, when their Governors contrive their
Impoverishment, and promote it in such ways, that they shall feel the Effect,
and yet never see the Cause; it is true, we have had nothing of this yet, but
who knows how soon we may, if we go on still to provoke it.

I wish I could as truly say, that the Trade and Commerce of these Countries
have not designedly been diminished and impaired by them who are opposite to
the Established Government, with intention to render it uneasy and hated, and
the People discontented and ungovernable: but the truth is, there have many
things been done of late years, or omitted when they might have been done,
which I believe no Mortal can give any sound reason for, if this were not at
the bottom; and this has, and will have the same Influence upon us, as if
those that are properly called our Governors had done it.

But not to drive this any further, It is a known Method of promoting broyls in
Governments, to stop the Supplies that should preserve and maintain them; and
then if a People be really very rich, yet if the Government that should
preserve their Wealth be so poor as not to be able to protect them, the People
have been always in danger, and sometimes actually ruined. Thus was Charles the
Martyr brought to yield so much, that at last he was forced to defend the rest,
and himself with his Sword; which besides all the Blood shed, occasioned the
Expense of a vast Treasure; and went very near to the ruin of these Three
Nations. I shall not need to determine how far this Course has been of late
pursued; but I say it tends to the ruin of our Trade and Commerce, by the same
degrees as it makes our Government weak and contemptible in the World.

When the dangers to any Government have arisen from Contending Parties or
Factions within it self, nothing is more usual then for those Parties to
endeavor the impoverishing of each other by interrupting, diverting, and
hindering each others Trades; and refusing each to other the Aid and Assistance
that is absolutely necessary for the promoting them; and that this is every day
done among us, is too apparent to be denied; and the Effects this has upon the
whole Trade of the Nation are such, as no man can penetrate to the bottom of
them, or tell where the Mischief will end.

That I may make these general Reflections more useful to my Countrymen, I
will take a short view of the state of the Trade of England, since the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory.

The State of England was then very low, and its Condition Deplorable, when God
brought that Excellent Prince from the Miseries of a Prison to Support and
Restore it; I cannot possibly better represent this than in the Words of
Camden: The State of England was most miserable at that time, as being involved
in a War with Scotland on the one side, and France on the other; oppressed with
the Debts which Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth had Contracted; the
Exchequer was Exhausted; Calis and the County of Oyen, and in them a great
Magazine, were lost to the dishonor of the English Name; and the People were
divided in their Opinions concerning Religion. The Queen had no Potent Friends,
nor was fortified with the Cognatione.
Alliance (or Kindred) of any Foreign Princes. The Trade of England must of
necessity be very small when the Nation was thus Near ruin.

But when the Queen had once settled the business of Religion; and afterward
had taken care to preserve it from Foreign Violence, by Repairing her Navy
Royal, so that it was far Superior to any other; which gave her Reputation at
home, and Fame abroad; and also from the Attempts of the Papists and Dissenters
by severe Laws, constantly put in Execution, and had thereby Won the Affections
of her People, and stilled their Fears: They being secured thus at home, began
to search all the corners of the World for Trade, and sent forth their Fleets
to the East and West Indies, to Muscovy, (by the Bay of St. Nicholas by them
Discovered,) and Green-Land, and indeed, whether not? whence they returned with
Honor and Wealth, and made her and themselves Happy.

One thing that gave a great Advantage to the Trade, and consequently to the
Wealth of England, in her time, was the Devastations which the severity of the
Duke de Alva, and the Wars of Flanders thereby occasioned, caused in those
Countries; by which means we gained some Addition to our People, the knowledge
of some Manufactures, which we had not before; and also a vast stock of Money
and Treasure, which altogether had like to have totally ruined the Spanish
Netherlands; but however this concurring with the rest, helped to advance
England to that height of Wealth, and Reputation in the World, that it was in
her days the Bulwark of Christendom; and without any considerable foreign
Assistance humbled and brought down the House of Austria, which then aimed at
an Universal Monarchy.

But then it cannot be denied, that together with these Low Countrymen.
Factions and Common-Weath Principles entered England: And although the severity
of that Queen, and the great Affection and Veneration the People had for her,
added to her Constancy whose Motto was Semper eadem, Always the same, kept them
both under, so as they were never able to give her any considerable
disturbance; yet they grew and increased, and in the Reign of her Successor
tugged stoutly in the House of Commons for the Victory with the Court Party, as
they then styled all that stood to the Crown, and kept King James at Bay, and
destitute of those Supplies that were necessary to preserve the Grandeur of the
Crown, and the Reputation of England; and forced him to spend Seven Years of
his Reign without calling any Parliaments; and the last he called, which was in
his One and Twentieth Year, involved him in War. And the next, basely Betrayed
his Son, who succeeded presently after, to the Necessity of clapping up a
Dishonorable Peace for want of Means to carry on a War.

When King James came to the Crown, the Dissenters of England expected a mighty
advantage by it, because Scotland had been always Presbyterian (from whence he
came) during his time, and they hoped his Education might have strongly
influenced him to favor them, above the Religion Established; and upon this
intuition, Jan. 14. 1603.
they procured the Conference at Hampton Court: but alas, they had so basely
and Traitorously used him in Scotland, and he was a Prince of that great
Learning and Prudence, that when they desired a kind of Presbytery to be
Settled here; He replied, If you aim at a Scotch Presbytery, Full. C.H. L. 10.
p. 18.
it agrees with Monarchy as God and the Devil; then Jack and Tom, and Will and
Dick shall meet, and Censure me and my Council. Therefore I reiterate my former
Speech, Le Roy S' avisera (the King will be advised;) stay I pray for one Seven
Years before you demand it, and then if you find me grow pursie and fat, I may
perchance hearken unto you, for that Government will keep me in breath, and
give me work enough. And in the next Paragraph, he tells them, That he had
learned by the Example of his Mother, and their dealings with him in his
Minority, this Maxim, NO BISHOP, NO KING. So they totally failed of their
expected advantage, and were kept under, though with a gentle hand, in all his
time.

But when his Son Succeeded, and in his Parliaments found how strong these
Factions were, who had in a great measure prevailed upon the Freemen, and
Freeholders of the Nation to send up thither great Numbers of good Common
wealth men, as they then styled them; that is, Factious, Ambitious, Disloyal
Persons, that hated the Religion and Monarchy by Law Established; and when he
saw these made it their business to increase the necessities of the Crown, and
then denied just and necessary supplies, but upon such terms as would have
ruined him; and when he also perceived that one great design of theirs was to
render him and his Government odious, by clamoring eternally against his
Conduct and Ministers of State. He then saw there was an absolute necessity of
a more effectual and vigorous Execution of the Laws against them.

Hereupon these godly men grew impatient, Roger Cokes Englands improvement
part. 3. p. 13.
and one part of them in the years 1636, 37, and 38, fled over into Holland,
and planted themselves at Leyden, Alkmare, and other places, where they
instructed the Dutch in our Woollen Manufactures of Norfolk and Suffolk; and I
have heard (says my Author who is a credible person) Sir Charles Harbord (a
person of great Wisdom and Insight in Foreign as well as the Interest of this
Nation) say, That if all the Bishoprics of England were sold, and given to the
Nation, it would not near compensate the loss the Nation sustained thereby. And
page 32 of the same discourse he informs us, That in the time of our late Wars
the Dutch, by the means of these Manufactures, got from the English the
East-land Trade, the Company of which heretofore was above all others the most
flourishing, and by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First was
termed the Royal Company; for it supplied Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and
Lifeland, with our Woollen Manufactures, and made very advantageous Returns by
Treasure (especially Hungaria Ducats) and the Commodities of those Countries,
into England. This Trade till King Charles his Reign, the English solely
enjoyed. About the beginning of King Charles his Reign, the Dutch began to be
Interlopers rather than Traders with the English in it, but in the time of the
Wars, by the aforesaid means, the Dutch almost totally excluded the English.
We may observe how much the Trade of the Nation in general suffered by all this
and especially that of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex, of which the said Author
gives an instance, page 33. and from thence we may conclude how far the Trade
of the Nation has been, and consequently may again be, impaired by Factions,
if they be encouraged still amongst us.

I ought not to pass over in silence, that my last quoted Author, Ascribes this
to the severe injunctions of Ecclesiastical discipline, which these Zealous
people would not endure. And I know that many have used this as an Argument
against Persecution, and for a Toleration, Comprehension, or (as the new Name
is) an Union But I reply, if there were no Factions there could be no
Persecution, as they style it, nor any such damage of our Trade and Commerce.
Secondly, that they were not thus persecuted till they had provoked that King
to the uttermost by rendering all Parliaments dangerous to the Crown, and
brought things into that State, that neither the Monarchy nor the Religion
Established could be any longer preserved without that severity. So we may see
if they be treated gently they grow Numerous, and endeavor to subvert the
Government; if they be dealt severely with, they over into foreign Countries
and destroy our Trade; so that both ways our ruin is almost assured by them,
and therefore should be no more encouraged than Pirates and the common enemies
of Mankind.

But to go on: Another part of these people had before Planted themselves in
New England in the West Indies, 1629.
where they have since grown Numerous and Rich, and have abundantly practiced
that severity upon others who have dissented from them, which they clamoured
against, and called persecution, when it was used with more reason against
themselves.

The Dutch being much exalted by the peace they had made with Spain, whereby
they were owned and acknowledged for a free and independent State by their old
Sovereign, and having acquired a vast Treasure by their Trade over all the
World and by redeeming the places which were put into Queen Elizabeth's hands
for security of repayment of the Expense she was at to protect their feeble
infant State, out of the Hands of King James; having so cut off their former
obligations of respect to the Crown of England, and lastly being grown strong
in Shipping, and knowing very well upon what ill terms King James and King
Charles the Martyr stood with their Parliaments; fell to plot the entire
destruction of the English Trade and Navigation; and in Order to this, fell to
endeavor the ruin of the English Fishery upon our own proper Seas. His
Majesty's propriety and dominion on the British Seas. p. 26.
They had formerly never Fished till they had begged leave of the King or of
his Governor of Scarborough Castle, this was now thought beneath the
Magnificence of the Hogan Mogans, and therefore they refused it: Ib. page 29.
30. 55.
They had formerly been limited by our Kings, both for the number of the
Vessels they should Fish with and the time. Now they were resolved to be their
own Carvers, and in order to that, denied the English the Sovereignty of the
British Seas, Ib. p. 6.
And as if all this had not been enough, grew nearer and nearer upon the
English Shores, year by year, than they did in preceding times, without leaving
any bounds for the Country people and Natives to Fish upon their Princes
Coasts, and oppressed some of his Subjects with intent to continue their
pretended possession; and had driven some of their great Vessels, through
their Netts, to deter others by fear of the like Violence from Fishing near
them, etc. as Secretary Nanton, Page 58.
January 21. 1618. acquaints the Lord Ambassador Carlton: And to justify all
this, they sent out Men of War with their Fishermen to maintain that by force,
which they might have had of Courtesy for the asking. To prevent these
disorders of the Dutch, King James Published a Proclamation in the seventh year
of his Reign, to assert his Right, and exclude all Persons from Fishing upon
our Seas, without particular License; but they neither valued this nor his
Remonstrances by his Ambassadors, nor the like Proclamation made in the twelfth
year of his Sons Reign, but went on by all the Crafts and Violences imaginable
to ruin our Fishery; to subvert the Right and Sovereignty the Kings of England
have ever had to the Narrow Seas. And all this only upon a presumption that
those Princes would never be able to call them to an account by a War for all
these Injuries.

And in the year 1639, The Reign of King Chapter fol. London. 1655. page 163.
they fell upon a Fleet of Spaniards in our Ports and Harbors with Canon and
Fireships, so furiously, as made them all cut their Cables, and being 53 in
Number, 23 ran on shore, and stranded in the Downs, whereof Three were burnt,
Two sunk, and Two perished on the Shore; the remainder of the Twenty three
being deserted by the Spaniards, who went to Land, were Manned by the English
to save them from the Dutch; and the other Thirty Ships put to Sea, of which
only Ten escaped; thus far for the Narrative in short. And now be pleased to
read the Opinion of the Historian upon this.

These Two Potent Enemies, Ibid. p. 165.
being both Friends to England, the British Seas ought by rule of State to have
been an Harbor of Retreat to secure the Weaker from the Stronger, not the
Scene of their Hostile Engagement, and had this presumptuous Attempt of the
Hollander met with a King, or in times of another temper, it would not it is
like, have been so silently connived at, and their Victory might have cost them
the loss of Englands Correspondence, etc. besides the King, the Dutch well knew
was of a Genius, as not querulous, so if provoked very placable, and the
Disposition of his Affairs, as well as of his Mind, dissuaded from
expostulating the Matter with them. To that height of injustice and insolence
were the Dutch then grown, by the Divisions of England, and the ill
understanding betwixt the King and his Subjects. This unfortunate Prince had
made many brave Attempts before, for the Honor and Safety of the English
Nation without any good success, for want of such Effectual Supplies from his
Parliaments as might enable him to go through with them; and he had taken up a
generous Resolution to increase the Navy Royal to a greatness proportionable to
the Dutch, and other neighbor Nations, who were now striving for the Mastery
of the Seas by out-building each other. He got nothing from the Commons in
Parliament that was considerable, but with great difficulty, and accompanied
with Remonstrances, Impeachments of the Chief Ministers, complaints of
Grievances, and loud Clamours of pretended fears and jealousies of Popery,
Arminianism, Innovations in matters of Religion; and as fast as this Prince
gratified them in one thing, they started another Game, hoping at last to ruin
this Excellent Prince by his own Concessions, as at length they did; for these
sober Protestants were resolved never to leave asking, till they had brought
their King to be their Equal first; and at last, under them. This procedure did
in part discover the Design, and necessitated him to stretch his Prerogative to
find some small Relief for his urgent and pressing Necessities; by Monopolies,
Knight-mony, Loans upon Privy Seals, and at last Ship Money; great parts of
which Moneys were employed upon the Building Ships for the increase of the
Royal Navy: which he did to that height, that it was so Invincible to any
Humane Power, that though Sir William Batten in 1648. carried a very
Considerable part of it to his Now Majesty, yet the remainder of it with a
small Addition beat the Dutch for all their many years Preparations. Yet first,
all those that signalized themselves by opposing the King in these Levies most,
were chosen into the following Parliaments, as the best Patriots and
Common-wealth-men, and these again made it their business in Parliament by
joining with the Rebellious Scots to involve us in that accursed War which
endangered not only the ruin of our Government and Trade, but our very Being.

In the beginning of that War, the Parliament-side went down, and in likelihood
the King and his Party had finally prevailed, if the Scots had not broke out
again upon the solicitation of the English Parliament, without the least cause
given them by the King. And during this time, and afterward too, Page 12.
Sect. 19. Of the Relations and Observations upon the Parliament, begun in 1640.
page 143. Sect. 5. And in the Remonstrance of many Thousands in and about the
City of London; dated Mar. 22. 1648. to the Army, is this Passage. Then shall
those faithful Persons who hazarded all for the Parliament, and many of them
lent more than their whole Estates, and now live in Prison, nay starve for want
of it, not be put to devour Cathedrals, and ransack the Monuments of the Dead,
but be honestly paid with thanks and requitals; then shall not the Public
Faith be out pawned, and so little care taken to Redeem it, whilst Millions of
Treasure have been conveyed beyond the Seas. Page 3. I suppose this was not all
private Treasures, though the loss is the same to the Nation, if it were so.
Walker in his History of Presbytery and Independency has acquainted us; That
many of the Parliament Grandees, who besides their own Wealth which was great,
had drawn in most of the Treasure and Plate of the Nation, on specious
pretenses and the Public Faith, sent huge sums over to the Banks in Holland
and the Western Plantations, that in case the King should finally prevail, they
might have a place of Retreat, where they might enjoy the Blood and Tears of
the poor deluded People in safety and security.

But this was not all, during this War the English Trade both at home and
abroad was almost totally Ruined, many Thousands of Tradesmen were either
Undone, or Killed and Destroyed, or forced to seek quieter Habitations beyond
the Seas; above one half of the Nation (the West and the North) were almost
totally ruined and depopulated by the War; and the other half by excessive
Taxes, Excise, Sequestrations, etc. by all which ways I have seen an Account
Printed, Relation of the Parliament, begun 1640. p. 8. Sect. 14.
That there was about Forty Millions of Money Collected and Spent within the
space of a few years by that Parliament side only, not one farthing of which
turned to any account to the Nation. But in the interim, the wise Dutch drive
on the Trade of almost the whole World, and only furnished the King with Arms
and Ammunition for the Jewels of the Crown; and dealt with the Parliament for
Timber, The last cited Remonstrance to the Army. p. 4.
which they sold of the Crown Lands, Church Lands, and the Sequestered Estates
of the Gentry and Nobility; which Timber the Dutch wisely employed in Building
Ships to ruin the prevailing side when the War was done, and then they did not
question but to be the Sovereigns of the Ocean, and of all the Trade and
Commerce that is exercised on it; and to speak the truth, they had then some
reason to hope it might have happened so: For if England had once been brought
under, no other State could have disputed the point with them; and England was
then preparing it self for ruin, by giving the Hollanders more advantages than
their Modesty could have wished for.

And the Dutch were so confident, that the Success would answer their
Expectations; that they grew impatient to have Possession of their almost
assured Mastery: and before our Internal Broyls were over, and the Nation
settled any way, in the Year 1652. set upon our Fleet in the Downs, and if the
Advantage of almost two to one, and an unexpected Assault, had not been
overruled by the Providence of God, and the unparalleled Valor of the
English, they had certainly destroyed them, as they did the Spanish Fleet in
the same place about Ten Years before; and although the English fortune and
Courage prevailed then, and in the whole Course of that War, and brought down
the Craft, Treachery and Pride of the Hollanders; yet was the whole Glory of
these Victories, in which the Rump boasted so much, (next Gods Mercy to these
poor Nations) owing solely to the Providence of that Prince they had but a
little before so basely Murdered as an Enemy to God and his People, and then
styled the Tyrant: As Mr. Coke has well observed in his Preface to the fourth
Treatise, Of the Improvement of England. To which excellent Discourses I refer
my Reader. All that I shall infer from hence, is, that I hope the Nation will
never run the same hazard of losing all their Foreign Trade again, by siding
with factious Men against the Monarchy.

The Rump having beaten the Dutch, found a more dangerous Enemy at home, and
being generally now hated by the People, were without any difficulty turned out
by Oliver Cromwell their Hypocritical Servant; 1654.
who to secure himself in his ill gotten Possession of the Government, made an
unsettled and dishonorable Peace with the Dutch. Which they employed in
Building much larger and more Men of War than they had before, to prevent the
Ruin of their States by another English War; which could not be concealed from
Oliver, who likewise increased the English Fleet with many more, and
considerable Men of War: as the last Cited Author tells us.

As O. C. lost the English the Advantage of their Naval Victories by that Peace
he made with the Dutch, which left the English nothing but a little
unprofitable Glory, and the blows they had received from the Hollanders, whilst
it gave them opportunity to grow rich, and prepare for another Attempt: So our
Tyrant fell soon after into another extravagance; he had always an
Enthusiastic Conceit that God had raised him up to pull down the Whore of
Babylon, the Man of Sin, the Antichristian Pope of Rome; and this led him into
a War with Spain, believing that Prince to be the only Bullwark of the Papacy:
and his Attempts upon the Islands in the West Indies, and the Plate Fleets
belonging to Spain, not having that success he desired by reason of their
distance, or perhaps being outwitted by the French Ministers, he fell in the
next place (in Conjunction with France) upon the Spaniards in Flanders; in
which War, Dunkirk was taken, and cunningly Surrendered to Oliver by the French,
in hopes to encourage our silly Upstart to go on and help them to Conquer the
rest: but tu^ ^atal mischiefs attended this, The first was, that our Spanish
Trade, which was one of the best and most profitable the English then had left,
was interrupted and in danger to be totally lost, as all the Eastern Traffic
was rendered very unsecure by the Ostenders. The Second was, That the Balance
of Christendom was broken, and the French Interest brought to that height, as
to overpower all the Neighboring Princes, and in some sort, to Compel His
Majesty before he was well settled after his Restitution to resel them Dunkirk.
But these things were above the Politics of our Oliver, who was a better
Soldier than a Statesman.

How the Domestic Trade of England was likely to flourish in this Man's time,
may be easily conjectured by any man that will but reflect on the Vast Taxes
were then Arbitrarily raised without Parliaments; and the Standing Armies that
were then kept on Foot, only because he durst not Disband them, who had no
other Title than the Sword had given him; and when God called him in the Year,
1658. to give an account for all the Villainies he had perpetrated with so much
Treachery, Perjury and Impiety; neither his Son Richard who Succeeded him, nor
any of those various Governments, which within the space of Two Years followed,
were able to Establish themselves; so that during that time, there was nothing
but Treachery, Rapine, Confusion, and Distrust to be found in the English
Nation: and it was only Gods infinite Mercy and Goodness which rescued us and
our Trade from total Ruin, by the peaceable Restitution of our Now most
gracious Sovereign.

When His Majesty returned, he brought nothing over with him but a Vast Debt,
contracted in his Exile to preserve him, and his, in a mean Condition from
starving; and he found nothing here at home but an empty Exchequer; a People
exhausted with Twenty Years War and Misery; all his Palaces disfurnished, his
Magazines rifled, his Armory wasted, his Ammunition spent or imbezzel'd, and
the remainder of the Army which had great Arrears due to them, to be Disbanded
and Paid off. All these things called for large Supplies, and they were as
Loyally and freely granted by our Parliaments, as Generously employed by His
Majesty to these uses.

But then these Good-Common-Wealth-men who had Taxed and Plundered the Nation
without mercy for twenty years before, all on a sudden turned tender hearted,
and begun to bemoan the good Peoples hardships in the payment of such Sums as
their own Villainies and Treasons had made necessary: and not contented with
this, Skynneri Motuus Compositi.
encited the Dutch by large Promises of Assistance to enter another War with
us, which (though we prevailed) had fatal Consequences, the Plague falling in
with it, Bedloes nar. of the P. Plot. for the Burning of London. page 14. Oats
his Nar. Arti. the 34.
and a great part of the City of London being Burnt at the same time, which
Fire is said to have been began by some of these godly Malcontents, (on
purpose without doubt to promote Trade;) though the whole blame is now laid
upon the Jesuits, who might possibly put the Fifth Monarch-men upon it: and
has been since owned.

I Consider, That I am Writing a Preface to a small Book, and therefore
endeavor to be short; and for ought I know, may be dark: but if all this be
reflected on, as it ought, it will be a wonder not that our Trade is so little,
but that it is not totally Ruined.

But then my dear Countrymen, may not Heaven and Earth stand amazed at our
Stupidity and folly, if we shall still go on stubbornly in those very ways
which we have found so destructive to us: but there is a greater wonder in it
yet; we stabb and wound our own Vitals (our Trade and Commerce,) and at the
same time, pretend we are horribly afraid others should ruin us many years
hence; we caress and cherish these very Men and Factions, that once before
Impoverished us to almost Beggary, we are hard at Work to ruin that
Government, by making it odious to the People, under which England has
flourished in Wealth and Power, in Reputation and Peace at home and abroad so
many Ages, and to set up one in the stead of it, which within the memory of
Man, so narrowly missed of Ruining us forever. Do you think another domestic
War will increase the Wealth, or Trade, or Navigation, or Reputation of England.

Consider your Sea coast Towns, from Dover to Barwick, and observe how many of
them are falling down, or empty of Inhabitants, or possessed by Men that are able
to drive no Trades: Consider the Fishery of all sorts, consider the falls of
your Rents and Farms; and when you have thought seriously of them, think once
more whether the pretended fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government ought so to
possess you, and to keep you entirely from reflecting on what does more
immediately concern you, and which if but a little longer Neglected, will end if
not in Popery, in Beggary; if not in Arbitrary Government, in Anarchy, War, and
Confusion.

But though Men may Consider these things as much, or as little as they please,
yet I crave the Liberty to Conclude upon the whole, That whoever promotes
Factions in Church or State, is an Enemy to Trade and Commerce, and that when
ever the Government of this, or any other Country is endangered, the Traffic
of that place will suffer proportionably; so that let them pretend what they
will to the contrary, they that promote our present Disturbances are as great
Enemies to the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation, and all that are any
way concerned in Trade, as they are either to the Crown or the Church.

THE SECOND PART OF THE ADDRESS TO THE FREEMEN and FREEHOLDERS OF THE NATION.
HIS Majesty had no sooner declared the Long Loyal Parliament Dissolved, and by
His Royal Writ, Commanded another to be chosen, to meet the Sixth of March
following, but the Subjects in every place became divided amongst themselves,
and there being men, not only of different, but of opposite Interests offered
to the People; the choice was rendered very difficult and uncertain, but the
Opposition, Feuds and Passions of the Contending Parties was apparent and
certain enough.

The Dissenters in the interim, who had with much impatience expected this day
of Deliverance from this terrible Parliament, and had sought the Dissolution of
it so many Years, by all those Arts I have described in the former Part now
began to lift up their heads, expecting to have another tugg for the Day, and
having before wrought upon the meanest but most Numerous part of the Freemen
and Freeholders, and the weakest of the Gentry, by jading their Ears with
tedious canting Discourses against Humane Institutions, Persecuting Gods
People, and Arbritrary Government; and now of late, with Tragical
Representations of the Popish Plot, Massacres, Popery, and Superstition; flew
from their sullen retirements, and Riding Night and Day about the Villages, and
trudging about the Corporations, incited those they found willing, and
persuaded, entreated, and sometimes hired those they found less disposed to
join with them, and by the choice of a sober Protestant Parliament, (as they
pretended) to deliver the Nation from Popery and Arbitrary Government, which
were good Words, but had a Knavish signification in their Sense, and if any Man
smelt ir out, and told them truly, they were neither for Popery nor Arbitrary
Government, nor yet for Puritanism and a Commonwealth; they ran him down with
noise, or traduced him behind his back to their Neighbors as a Papist in
Masquerade, and a Man of Arbitrary Principles.

But if a Man had but chanced to drop a Word by way of questioning the Truth of
one Tittle the many Informers had given out concerning the Plot, or these
Zealots had raised by way of Consequence, presently they flew in his face, and
villified him as a defamer of the Kings Evidence, a concealer of the Plot; and
could hardly forbear saying, He was a Party to it, and one of the Conspirators
in it. As if we had not only been bound to submit our Faith and Reason as
entirely to Mr. Oats's Relation in every Punctilio, as to the Evangelists upon
which he Swore it; but also to what Inferences a Faction should draw from it.
From hence they proceeded to insinuate into the Populace, That those Loyal
Gentlemen who had been Members of the late long Loyal Parliament, who were then
called the Court Party, had joined with the Court, to hinder the Discovery of
the Plot, and promote the Designs of the Papists upon us: And although there
was not one syllable of Truth in this, yet they asserted it with that
confidence, and added so many protestations, often interrupting their opposites
with such questions as these, What, you are for Popery? you are willing to have
all your Throats Cut? and the like, that they persuaded too great a Number to
join with them in the Exclusion of those Gentlemen.

In the next place, fearing the greatest hindrance from the conformable Clergy
and the Bishops, they represented them amongst their Confidents as nothing
better than the Papists; and amongst the rest, as Men that had a mighty
kindness for Popery in their hearts, (where these prying people spied it)
though they durst not discover it for the present, and with great Assurance
said, that they would certainly all turn Papists if the Plot went on; though
Mr. Oats had assured them their Places were disposed of to others before hand,
and they must expect nothing but beggary, assassination, and Ruin: But yet the
people who never consider any thing, believe them in this too.

In the next place, they were to deal with the Gentry and Magistrates, and here
the task was harder, for these were never to be wrought over generally to them;
but amongst them, some were their friends of old, others had come half way over
to gain the Reputation of Moderate Men; others had been disgusted by the
Government; and some few had Relations amongst the Dissenters, or Children, and
Brothers Apprentices, Journey-men, and Factors to them, and these Interests
prevailed upon to join with them; the rest they blasted what they could by the
same Arts they did the Clergy, averring they were Papists, or favorers of
Papists and Popery; especially, if they had any relations of that Religion; or
had showed the least kindness to their Popish Neighbors in the first Discovery
of the Plot, or had had any acquaintance with them before the Plot.

And having by all these multiplied Slanders, got over a very considerable part
of the meaner people, and yet fearing the party might be too weak, they made
fraudulent Conveyances for Twenty four hours of their Freehold-Lands and
Tenements to their Neighbors, by this means creating Twenty Mushrom Voters,
sometimes out of Forty pounds a year, and some that were less scrupulous took
the Gifts by word of Mouth, without Livery or Seizin, Lease or Release; and
some gave Twelve pence in part of payment for those Lands and Tenements they
never meant, nor were ever able to Purchase further, and so became qualified to
give their Votes as they thought; and others gave their Children that were
Infants part of their Estates with them, and brought them along for company;
and in the interim, the Wealthy sort of Men hired Horses, or gave Money to the
more Needy to give their Votes for the precious Men that were to keep out
Popery.

The Conventicle Teachers rallied up their Flocks, all but the Aprons, and they
were unwillingly enough left at home; The old Committee Men, Sequestrators;
Army Officers, and Soldiers of the last Rebellion; who had kept holes ever
since His Majesty's Return for Grief, Confusion, and Fear, now all took the
Field again to Vote too: and with these joined all those unwilling Conformists
whether Clergy or Layety who have complied with the Religion Established, with
purpose to ruin it as soon as it is possible, and in the interim, great gain
is godliness with them: and does any man believe all these Forces were thus
Mustered up for the Service of His Majesty, the Safety of the Monarchy, and the
preservation of the Religion and Government Established?

The persons they recommended to the people to be chosen again, were first, all
those Gentlemen, who calling themselves the Country Party in the former
Parliament had appeared most Zealously against the Queen, his Royal Highness,
and the Ministers of State: to these they added as many as they could of the
Relics of the old Rebellion, or their Children, and made up the Number out of
the moderate and discontented Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Tradesmen, taking in
here and there an honest Gentleman in hopes to win him to their side by this
kindness; and sometimes this pitiful Project took.

For my part, Act. 22.
I think nothing could more confirm the Testimony of Mr. Oats who informs us,
That the Catholic Religion was to be brought in the same way that they had
used for the Destruction of the Father of the King, and as that could not be
effected till much Blood was spilt on BOTH SIDES, so this must be effected by
effusion of Blood, Page 64.
and this he Expounds was to be done by weakening and dividing the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, by Civil Wars and Rebellions, as in His
(Majesty's) Fathers time, to make way for the French to Seize these Kingdoms,
and totally to Ruin their Infantry and Naval Force: These are Mr. Oats his
Words, and whoever had seen the persons Must'red up, about the choosing this
Parliament, would have thought, that Forty One had been returned again, and
that the Jesuits under the shape of Nonconformist Ministers had been turning
the Plot that way, now God had defeated the close one.

But though all this Care was taken, the Dissenters did not carry the Elections
every where, nor almost any where without great Resistance. For on the other
side, the Gentry appeared themselves, and brought in their Tenants and
Dependences; and many of the Yeomanry and Freeholders were Zealous for the
Church and Government, and in Corporations, the Magistrates and Freemen, had
not forgot the old tricks of the Dissenters; and were resolved not to be ruined
twice by the same Arts, so that the two Parties were almost equal there, and in
the Counties the Gentry were certainly the stronger side, if Perjury had not
been employed against them; and in some places they prevailed against that too,
but not so as to make an equal Party in the House.

The Persons that stood on this side, were Men of Undoubted Loyalty to the
King, hearty lovers of the Religion Established, and great Enemies to
Puritanism, Faction, and Rebellion; and for these good qualities were styled by
the contrary Party-men of Arbitrary Principles, and favorers of Popery: some
of these had been Members of the Last Parliament, and been of that they call
the Court Party, who had been guilty of Settling the Monarchy, and Suppressing
the Rebellion, and the Nurseries of it the Conventicles; and others were taken
in to fill up the vacancies, of or very nearly of the same Principles.

The Elections being thus made, the Parliament met the day appointed, which was
Thursday the sixth of March, 1678. and my business is to wait upon them, and
see how matters went in the Lower House especially; and as an Introduction I
will take notice of His Majesty's Speech in the first place; part of which was
as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Meet you here with the most earnest desire that man can have to Unite the
Minds of all my Subjects, both to me, and to one another; and I resolve it
shall be your faults, if the Success be not suitable to my desires, I have done
many great things already, in order to that end; as the Exclusion of the Popish
Lords from their Seats in Parliament; the Execution of several men, both upon
the Score of the Plat, and of the Murder of Sir Edmonberry Godfrey, and it is
apparent that I have not been idle in prosecuting the discovery of both, as
much further as has been possible in so short a time.

I have disbanded as much of the Army as I could get Money to do, and I am ready
to disband the rest, so soon as you shall reimburse the Money they have cost me,
and will enable me to pay off the remainder: And above all I have Commanded my
Brother to absent himself from me, because I would not leave the Malicious Men
room to say, I had not removed all causes which could be pretended to influence
me toward Popish Counsels.

Besides that end of Union which I am at, (and which I wish could be extended
to Protestants abroad as well as at home) I propose by this last great step I
have made, to discern whether Protestant Religion, and the Peace of the Kingdom
be as truly aimed at by others, as they are really intended by me, for if they
be, you will employ your time upon the great concerns of the Nation, and not be
drawn to promote private animosities under pretenses of the public; your
Proceedings will be calm and peaceable, in order to those good ends I have
recommended to you, and you will curb the motions of any unruly Spirits which
would endeavor to disturb them. I hope there will be none such amongst you,
because there can be no man that must not see how fatal differences amongst our
selves are like to be at this time both at home or abroad.

I shall not cease my endeavors, daily to find out what more I can both of the
Plot, and Murder of Sir Edmondberry Godfrey, and shall desire the Assistance of
both my Houses in that work.

I have not been wanting in giving orders for putting all the present Laws in
Execution against Papists, and I am ready to join in the making such further
Laws as may be necessary for securing of the Kingdom against Popery.

And after a short discourse of supply's he goes on.

I will conclude as I begun, with my earnest desires to have this, a Healing
Parliament, and I do give you this Assurance, that I will with my life defend
both the Protestant Religion and the Laws of this Kingdom, and I do expect from
you to be defended from the Calumny as well as Danger of those worst of men,
who endeavor to render me and my Government odious to my people.

By which last passage I believe his Majesty reflected upon the Dissenters and
Common wealth Party, who as they were more believed, so they had been more
busy in traducing him, and that with a more Mischievous Malice and effect than
the worst Jesuits, during this short time, betwixt the Dissolution of the last
and the Election of this present Parliament, and therefore his Majesty had
reason to tell the Parliament he expected to be defended by them from the
Calumny, (of the Dissenters) as well as from the danger of the Papists, (both
which are) the worst of men, as who did endeavor to render him and his
Government Odious to his people.

The Lord Chancellor's Speech was for the most part but an enlargement upon his
Majesty's, as it uses to be; and therefore I shall take notice of some
passages only in it.

He advised them not to overdo their business, and by being too far transported
with the fears of Popery, neglect the opportunities they then had of making
sober and lasting provisions against it.

He told them it was a Custom of the Jesuits, first to Murder the fame of
Princes, and then their persons, first slandering them to their people, as if
they favored Papists, and then to assassinate them for being too Zealous
Protestants.

He represented what a joy it would be to them, to see us whom they could not
destroy by the conspiracy, Ruining our selves after the discovery, by incurable
jealousies and disturbing the Government.

And that further care might be taken of Regulating the Press, from whence
there daily stole forth Popish Catechisms, Psalters, and Books of Controversy,
and Seditious and Schismatical Libells too.

We shall now see how these Counsels were pursued by the Parliament.

The first thing the House of Commons did, was to choose Edward Seymour,
Esquire, their former Speaker, their Speaker again. But the next day the King
disliking the choice, and Commanding them to make a new one, they returned and
Adjourned till Saturday Morning. But not agreeing then, they desired a further
time; which was granted till Tuesday following: The King telling the
Messengers, that as he would not have his Prerogative intrencht upon, so he
would not do any thing against the Privileges of the House.

But then instead of Presenting a new Speaker, they Presented a Representation,
Claiming it as a Right to have that Speaker they chose accepted, if he were not
excused for some Corporal Disease, which has always (heretofore) been
alleged either by themselves or some others, in their behalf in full
Parliament, as they said.

But his Majesty not admitting this neither, they Adjourned till Wednesday, and
drew up another Address to have the former better considered, and to this his
Majesty replied he would send them an answer the next day. And accordingly,

On Thursday he sent for them up to the House of Lords, and Prorogued them for
one day, and on Saturday morning sent for them again, and by the Lord
Chancellor Commanded them to proceed to the Choice of a Speaker, and Present
him on Monday Morning; which they accordingly did; and then they chose Mr.
Sergeant Gregory, of whom his Majesty approved on the Monday following.

It was Ominous thus to stumble at the Threshold; and therefore there is no
great wonder if after this, much of his Majesty's and the Lord Chancellors good
Counsel relating to calmness in the Management of their Affairs was forgotten.

Tuesday, Wednesday, and a great part of Thursday the 20th day of March, being
spent in the preliminaries, and in receiving and reading the shoal of
Petitions, concerning undue Elections and Returns, on the Evening of the last
day, the Commons sent a Message to the Lords to put them in mind of the
Impeachments of High Treason against Thomas Earl of Danby, in the names of the
Commons of England, and to desire he might be Committed to safe Custody.

And referred it to the Committee of Secrecy to draw up further Articles
against him. By which it appeared that they were resolved to begin where the
former Parliament ended; so that men easily conjectured what would follow. And
some there were that suggested, as if his place was his greatest Crime, and
that the ruin of a Minister of State in order to fright the rest of the
Ministers was more sought, than the Punishment of any Traitor whether Popish or
Protestant.

In the week following it appearing that the Earl of Danby had a pardon by his
Majesty's mentioning of it in the House of Lords. And a Committee being
appointed to search it out, returned on Monday the 24th of March, that it had
not been Regularly sued out, but was Sealed in the King's presence by his
express Command. Upon which the Commons sent up a Message to the Lords to
demand Justice against him, and ordered an Address to his Majesty to represent
the dangerous Consequences of granting Pardons to any persons that lie under an
Impeachment of the Commons of England.

And the same day the Lords sent word to the Commons that they had ordered him
to be taken into Custody.

On Tuesday the 25th of March, 1679.
the Lords sent a Message to the Commons, that the Earl of Danby was not to be
sound, upon which the Commons ordered a Bill to be brought in to Summon him by
a certain day, or in default thereof to Attaint him.

Mr. Edward Sacvile a Member of the House of Commons, being accused by Mr.
Oats, to have called the truth of the Plot and Murder of Sir Edmonberry Godfrey
in question was ordered to be committed to the Tower, Expelled the House, and
an Address made to his Majesty for the removing him from all Public
Employments and Trusts. This was a sure way to have the Plot believed.

On Wednesday there having before been a Complaint brought against one Hills
and Edwin, for Printing a Pamphlet entitled, A Letter from a Jesuit at Paris
to his Correpondent in London: Showing the most effectual way to ruin the
Government and the Protestant Religion; was to promote the Dissenters Interest,
and to choose factious men into the House of Commons. And it appearing, that Dr.
John Nalson was the Author of it, there being no Law to punish this offense,
the said Doctor was ordered to be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms,
to inform the House touching the said Pamphlet.

The same day a Bill was sent down from the Lords, Entitled, an Act for the
better discovery and speedy Conviction of Popish Recusants. Which had been sent
down in the former Session of Parliament time enough to have been passed, but
was neglected, which was read the day following.

On Thursday the 27th of March, the Lords sent down a Bill for the Banishing
and Disabling the Earl of Danby (which his Majesty had proffered to do) and
desired the Concurrence of the House of Commons, which the Commons read and
rejected that day.

But notwithstanding the Commons went on with the Bill of Attainder against
him, and ordered a Clause to be added for the discovery of all trusts relating
to him, and that he should be made incapable of receiving pardon but by Act of
Parliament, wherein he shall be particularly Named.

The same day the Lords sent down a Bill to disinable any person from Sitting
in any of the Houses of Convocation, till he has taken the Oaths, and made and
subscribed the Declaration therein contained.

On Friday, a Bill was read for better securing the liberty of the Subjects.

Sir Christopher Calthrop Knight, who was returned one of the Knights of the
Shire for Norfolk, being then sick of the Smallpox, desired that the Case in
difference betwixt him and Sir John Hobard Baronet, which was to be heard on
Friday next, might be delayed, which was denied.

Note, That Calthrop was of the Court-party, and Hobard of the Country-party.

But to look a little back: On Monday the 25th of March, the House of Lords
sent to examine the five Lords in the Tower, concerning a French Book about the
Plot, the Author of which had it seems endeavored to invalidate Mr. Oats his
testimony, but they would not own they knew the Author.

The same day the Vote mentioned in the former Part, of the reality of the
Popish Plot, which had been renewed by the Commons, and sent up to the Lords
for their concurrence, was Voted by the Lords, and ordered to be inserted in
the first leaf of the Office, to be publicly used on the day 11 of April.
appointed by his Majesty for solemn Fasting and Humiliation, at the request of
both Houses.

On Saturday the 29th, the Lords agreed to have a Bill brought in to expel out
of the Inns of Court, Doctors Commons, the College of Physicians, and Heralds
office, all such persons as shall not give testimony of their being
Protestants, by going to Church, and by taking the Sacrament, and such Oaths,
Tests, and Declarations as are appointed by any Law, for the distinguishing
Protestants from Papists, and that none shall hereafter be Admitted into any of
the said Societies, that shall not do the same.

And that an Address should be made to his Majesty, that all persons who bring
up, or suffer their Children to be bred up, in the Popish Religion, may by his
Majesty's order be put out of all public Employments, civil, and military,
whereof they are now possessed; AND that for the future no person may be put
into or continued in any employment, civil or military, who shall knowingly
Marry a Papist. These last particulars are most worthy to be passed into an Act
of Parliament.

On Tuesday the first of April, the Commons finished the Bill of Attainder
against the Earl of Danby, and sent it up to the Lords.

After which they passed this Vote.

Resolved, That the continuing of any standing Forces in this Nation, other
than the Militia, is illegal and a great Grievance and Vexation to the people.

This is the first Vote that was ever made against his Majesty's Guards since
his return, tho there have been Parliaments sitting ever since.

On Thursday the 3d of April the Articles of Impeachment against William Earl
of Powys, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William
Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasyse, were brought into the House of Commons,
and received.

And a Bill about the Convocation sent down by the Lords, and another to
Regulate the Elections of Members to serve in Parliament, were read the first
time, and ordered a second Reading.

Friday the 4th of April, An Act for the better discovery and more speedy
Conviction of Popish Recusants, sent down from the Lords, was read the second
time, and Committed to a Committee, who were also to bring in a Clause to
prevent any of the Royal Family from matching with Popish Recusants.

Was not this that tacking of things of a different Nature together, which his
Majesty had resolved against, as he told the Houses in these words about a year
before?

One thing more I have to add, and that is, His Majesty's Speech the 23 of May,
1678.
to let you know, that I will never more suffer the course and method of
passing Laws to be changed; and that if several matters shall ever again be
tacked together in one Bill, that Bill shall certainly be lost, let the
importance of it be never so great.

But it was resolved it seems now to try whether he would be as good as his
word, and if he were, then the clamor should be, that he was against the
speedy conviction of Popish recusants.

Besides this was no such trivial thing but that it might have deserved a
distinct Bill.

The same day the Bill against the Earl of Danby being delivered back by the
Lords at a Conference with some Amendments, the Commons referred the
consideration of the Amendments to be considered the next day, and ordered an
Address to be drawn up, for a Proclemation for the Apprehending the said Earl,
with the usual penalties upon such as conceal him, and that he should not be
permitted to reside with in any of his Majesty's places of White Hall, Somerset
House, and St. James's.

On Saturday the Bill for Regulating Elections was read the second time, and
Committed to a Committee, 5 of April.
with liberty to divide the Bill as they see cause.

On Monday the 7th of April his Majesty by Mr. Secretary Coventry, acquainted
the House of Commons, that Mr. Reading had acquainted him by a letter directed
to one Mr. Chiffinch, that he had matters of great importance concerning the
Prisoners in the Tower, and the present Plot; but that his Majesty would not
meddle with any Prisoners Committed by this House, and that he would (if the
House thought fit) not only permit him but lay his Commands on him frankly and
freely to impart whatsoever he knew of that affair to the House of Commons, or
the Committee of Secrecy appointed by them. Which so pleased the Commons, that
they ordered the humble thanks of the House to be returned to his Majesty; So
far was he from concealing any thing relating to the Plot, as he has been
basely and falsely calumniated.

This day the Commons sent up the Articles against the five Lords in the Tower,
into the House of Lords.

The same day it was ordered that a Bill should be brought in for Annexing
Tangier to the Imperial Crown of England,
upon a report that it was to be sold to the French.

I should not have taken notice of this Vote, but that I shall have occasion to
make further use of it hereafter.

The Ninth day of April the House further Voted,
that those who did advise his Majesty to part with Tangier to any Foreign
Prince or State, or were instrumental therein, ought to be Accounted Enemies to
the King and Kingdom.

On Tuesday the eighth of April, the Bill relating to the Convocation was read,
and referred to a Committee.

And then they fell to debate the Reasons against the Amendments of the Lords
to the Bill against the E. of D. which chiefly stood upon this point, that the
Bill was by them changed from a Bill of Attainder to a Bill of Banishment,
which the Commons could not consent to. 1. Because 'twas not the legal
punishment of Treason. 2. That he might make use of the remission as an
Argument of their distrust of their proofs against him. 3. That it would
encourage others to withdraw themselves as he had. See the Reasons at large in
the Printed Journal.

The Habeas Corpus Bill was read the third time, and passed, and sent up to the
Lords.

The same day was a conference betwixt the Lords and Commons about the E. of D.
Bill, wherein the Lords prayed a Mitigation of the said Bill. Which was
referred by the Commons to be considered the next day.

When their desire was denied, April 9.
and Reasons ordered to be drawn up against it.

The next day there was two several Conferences about this Bill. But no report
of either of them entered that day in the Journalls of the House of Commons,
but they are entered on Saturday the 12th. of April. And it appears that the
Commons resolved then to stand to the Bill without the Amendments.

In the House of Lords on Saturday the 5th of April, the Lord Bishop of Ely
complained that one Mr. Sidway had put an information against himself and some
others of the Lord Bishops that was very derogatory to them; and thereupon the
House commanded the business to be brought before them, and stopped the
proceedings of their Committee of Secrecy in that and all other things relating
to any Member of their House.

Where the business being heard on the Monday following, the said John Sidway
was Committed to the Prison of the Gatehouse, for bringing a frivolous and
untrue accusation against the Lord Bishop of Ely and other Bishops, though
several Lords dissented.

So the Bishops were quitted that time with Honor, as I wish they always may
be, and that their enemies may meet with that shame and confusion they deserve,
who through their sides strike at the Lords Anointed, and endeavor to ruin
both the Church and State, by changing the Government from a Monarchy to a
Commonwealth, as experience taught us once before, when the Crown soon
followed the Miter, and the Temporal Lords the Bishops.

On Wednesday four of the five Lords in the Tower were brought to the House of
Lords, and heard the Articles readagainst them, and had Copies of them, and
were assigned their Counsel for matter of Law, but not for matter of Fact, and
had time to answer till the 15th Instant. But the Lord Bellasys not being able
to appear, by reason he was lame of the Gout, was excused, and had a Copy of
the Articles sent him.

On Monday the 14th of April, at a conference, the Lords consented to pass the
Bill against the Earl of Danby without any amendment.

Wednesday the 16th of April, A Bill for securing the King and Kingdom against
the growh and Danger of Popery, was read the second time and commttied to a
Committee.

The same day a Message was brought from the Lords, that the E. of D. had
rendered himself and was sent to the Tower.

And by another Message word was sent, that the four Lords had Appeared, had
sent in their Answers to the Articles upon which they had been proceeded
against, which Answers they sent down to the Commons, being the Originalls, and
the Lords desired the return of them with all convenient speed, that they might
consider of them.

And then the Commons Voted his Majesty a supply for the Disbanding the rest of
the Forces not disbanded by the former Act. To be levied by a Land Tax in six
Months. By which all Forces raised or brought over from Foreign parts since the
29th of September, 1677. were to be disbanded. The Commission Officers being to
be paid only to the first of this April.

The next day a debate arising, Thursday the 17 of April.
whether the Money for Disbanding the Army should be paid into the Exchequer? it
was carried in the Affirmative by 60 Voices.

A Committee of Secrecy was appointed to prepare and draw up evidence against
the E. of Danby, and also further Articles, as they should see cause.

On Friday the 25th of April, a Bill for prevention of raising Money upon the
Subjects but by Act of Parliament was read the first time, and ordered to be
read a second time.

A Bill for exporting Cloth to Turkey was read a first time, and ordered to be
read again.

The same day the E. of D. and John Lord Bellasys appeared at the Bar of the
House of Lords, and put in their several Answers, which were sent down to the
Commons, with desire they might be returned with all convenient speed.

On Saturday it was resolved in the House of Commons, 26 of April.
that they would the Friday following take into consideration how to make the
law for prohibiting the importation of French Commodities more effectual.

William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, and William Earl of
Powis, Appeared this day at the Bar of the House of Lords, and retracted their
former Plea's and put in their Answers, which were by a Message sent down to
the Commons, which were read, and referred to the Committee of Secrecy
belonging to the said House.

This day the House of Commons resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That this House will sit to morrow, to consider of the best means to secure
and preserve the Kings person, and also the Protestant Religion, against the
Attempts of the Papists, both in the Reign of his Majesty and his Successors.

And accordingly they did sit, and began the day very inauspiciously with
reading an Address to his Majesty for the Execution of Pickering, who as they
said had been employed by some of the Conspirators, to execute their Execrable
design of Murdering his Majesty, and upon his Trial was found guilty thereof;
as also of diverse Priests and Jesuits, who stood then Condemned by his
Majesty's Judges at the Old-Bayley; and in several of the Circuits. Upon which
Offenders they humbly desired immediate Execution might be done, to the terror
of all such wicked persons, who by their daily Traitorous practices do justify
the prudence of their Ancestors in making such Laws, and manifest the necessity
of putting them in Execution. And though there is nothing to be said for the
men, yet I wish they had not made this severe motion on a Lord's day, it being
none of those works of Charity and Mercy, 29. Car. Cap. 7.
no nor necessity neither, which are commendable on that day, and this might as
well have been done on any other day.

Then they proceeded to the work appointed, and Voted in the first place, That
a Bill be brought in upon the debate of the House, to Banish all Papists or
reputed Papists from London and Westminster and twenty Miles of the same for
Six Months, and to confine all those that live above twenty Miles from London
within five Miles of their own Habitations under penalties, and referred it to
a Committee to draw up the same. And then,

Secondly, Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming such to the
Crown, have given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the present
Conspirators and designs of the Papists, against the King and the Protestant
Religion.

Resolved, That the concurrence of the Lords be desired to this Vote.

Ordered, that the Committee of Secrecy draw up a Narative of all such matters
as concern the D. of Y. relating to the present Plot, contained in such Papers
as they have in their hands, and present the same to the House on Wednesday
next. And then they adjourned the debate till Monday following.

The next day being Monday the 28th of March, the House attended his Majesty
with the said Address, for the Executing Pickering, etc. To which his Majesty
replied.

Gentlemen,
I Have always been tender in matters of blood, which my Subjects have no
reason to take exception at, but this is a matter of great weight, I shall
therefore consider of it and return you an answer.


So little was this merciful Prince exasperated by all the practices against
him.

On Wednesday the 30th of April, his Majesty sent for the Commons up to the
Lords House, and made this Speech to the two Houses.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe Season of the Year advancing so fast, I thought it necessary to put you in
mind of three particulars:

1. Prosecuting the Plot, 2. Disbanding the Army, 3. Providing a Fleet for our
common security.
And to show you, that whilst you are doing your parts, my thoughts have not
been misimployed; but that it is my constant care to do every thing that may
preserve your Religion, and secure it for the future in all events.

I have commanded my Lord Chancellor to mention several particulars, which I
hope will be an evidence that in all things that concern the Public security,
I shall not follow your zeal but lead it.

The Lord Chancellor spoke thus,

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons.
THat Royal care which his Majesty has taken for the general quiet, and
satisfaction of all his Subjects, is now more evident by these new and fresh
instances of it, which I have in command to open to you.

His Majesty has considered with himself, that it is not enough that your
Religion and Liberty is secure during his own Reign, but he thinks he owes it
to his people to do all that in him lies, that these blessings may be
transmitted to your posterity, and so well secured to them, that no succession
in after Ages may be able to work the lest alteration.

And therefore his Majesty, who has often said in this place that he is ready
to consent to any Laws of this kind, so that the same extend not to alter the
descent of the Crown in the Right Line, nor to defeat the Succession, has now
commanded this to be further explained.

And to the end it may never be in the power of any Papist, if the Crown
descend upon him, to make any change either in Church or State, I am commanded
to tell you, that his Majesty is willing that provision may be made, first to
distinguish a Papist from a Protestant Successor; then to limit and
circumscribe the Authority of a Popish Successor in these cases following, that
he may be disabled to do any harm; first in reference to the Church, his
Majesty; is content that care may be taken, that all Ecclesiastical and
spiritual Benefices and promotions in the Gift of the Crown, may be conferred
in such a manner, that we may be sure the Incumbents shall always be of the
most Pious and learned Protestants: And that no Popish Successor (while he
continues so) may have any power to control such preferments.

In reference to the State and civil part of the Government, as it is already
provided that no Papist can sit in either House of Parliament, so the King is
pleased, that it be provided too, that there may never want a Parliament when
the King shall happen to die: But that the Parliament then in being, may
continue indissolvable for a complete time, or if there be no Parliament then
in being, then that the last Parliament, which was in being before that time,
may reassemble, and sit a competent time, without any new Summons or Elections.

And as no Papist can by Law hold any place of trust, so the King is content,
that it may be further provided, that no Lords or other of the Privy Council,
no Judges of the common Law, nor in Chancery, shall at any time during the
Reign of any Popish Successor, be put in, or displaced, but by the Authority of
Parliament.

And that care also be taken that none but sincere Protestants may be Justices
of the Peace.

In reference to the Military part, the King is willing that no Lord
Lieutenant, or Deputy Lieutenant, nor no Officer in the Navy (during the Reign
of any Popish Successor) be put out or removed but either by Authority of
Parliament, or of such persons as the Parliament shall entrust with such
Authority.

It Is hard to invent another restraint to be put upon a Popish Successor,
considering how much the Revenue of the Successor will depend upon consent of
Parliament, and how impossible it is to raise money without such consent. But
yet if any thing else can occur to the Wisdom of the Parliament, which may
further secure Religion and liberty against a Popish Successor, without
defeating the Right of Succession it self, his Majesty will most readily
consent to it.

Thus watchful is the King for all your safety, and if he could think of any
thing else that you do either want or wish, to make you happy, he would make it
his business to effect it for you,

God Almighty long continue this blessed Union between the King and his
Parliament and people.

The House of Commons returning, resolved to Adjourn the consideration of his
Majesty's Speech till the next Monday Morning.

And now let any man but seriously consider the Condescension of these
proposals, and that they were franlly and freely offered, before the House of
Commons had obliged themselves in point of Honor, to stand to any Vote of
Exclusion, (for that was not then made) and he must then be amazed to see to
what extremities matters have proceeded, during that, and the two last
Parliaments.

But who can brook the impudence of those men, who have notwithstanding this,
by Tales and Pamphlets endeavored to represent his sacred Majesty to his
people as a favourer of Papists and Popery.

Some men may possibly say, that all this will not infallibly secure us against
Popery, and I say nothing can make any thing in this lower world steady and
unalterable, but it is more likely to do it than the exclusion Bill, because it
disarms a Popish Successor of the tempration and opportunity of enslaving us by
force, where as the other puts the Sword into his hand, and compells him to try
his fortune for the whole, the event of which is much more uncertain than some
pretend, who trusting now to force and number, will in likelihood find
themselves disappointed by men, and punished by God for their distrust of his
providence; and reliance on the Arm of Flesh, if not ruined by their over great
confidence in the number of their party, which often have deceived men in such
occasions. But this it not the place of these considerations, but that they
broke loose here against my will.

On Thursday the Commons gave leave to bring in a Bill, 1. of May.
that when any Member of their House is preferred to any Office or place of
profit, a new Writ should immediately issue out, for Electing of a Member to
serve in his stead: This was to keep the party together, and to prevent the
Ministers from bying off any of them by preferment, Seasonable Address to both
Houses, p. 10.
and it is to be wished it had passed, for that would have lessened their
Numbers, and have taken off all those that hoped to rise by opposition to the
Court, as they call it, but indeed to the King and the Morarchy: In the interim
it may be a caution to the Country, that they take not all these Gentlemen to
be what they pretend to be, for that apparently some of them were driving a
Market for Preferments, how much soever they had clamoured their predecessors
on that account.

This day also Dr. John Nalson, who had been a long time Imprisoned and put to
vast charge for Writing the Letter of Advice from a Jesuit in Paris to his
correspondent in London, was discharged without assigning any reason or Law for
this way of proceeding against him, which was never yet used against any of the
Writers of the most virulent Libells, against the Government, and Religion by
Law established, and they Voted also, that an Address should be made to his
Majesty, by such Members of their House as were of his Majesty's Privy Counsel,
to desire his Majesty to Command the Lord Chancellor to put him out of the
Commission of the Peace. Because it seems his Imprisonment was not punishment
enough for so great an offense as this: Exact Coll. of the most considerable
debates etc. p. 337.
And the Writing several other books to revive the memory of 1641. as one of
the Members expressed it, in the following Parliament; when it seems they meant
to have another fling at him; for though his Majesty can pardon and forgive,
there are that cannot. But I believe they have got no great matter by this: Nor
was the Doctor turned out of the Commission for all their Address, his Majesty
knowing this would not suit his Interest.

On Saturday the Lords sent down a Bill, entitled, May 3.
An Act for freeing the City of London and parts adjacent, from Popish
Inhabitants, and providing against other dangers which may arise from Papists.

And in the Afternoon, May 5.
an Account that the Earl of Danby would insist upon his Pardon; and that he
desired his Council might be heard to the Validity of it.

On Monday His Majesty sent this message to the Commons by the Lord Russell.
His Majesty has commanded me to let the House know, that his Majesty is
willing to comply with the request made to him by the House concerning
Pickering; and that the Law shall pass upon him accordingly; and as to the
Condemned Priests, the House of Peers have sent for them in order (as his
Majesty conceives) to some Examinations; and further to acquaint you, that he
repeateth his instances to you, to think of putting the Fleet in such a posture
as may quiet men's fears, and at least secure us from any sudden attempt, which
his Majesty doubts not, but you will do: And though the streights and
difficulties he lies under, are very great, he does not intend during this
Sessions to press for any other Supply; being willing rather to suffer the
Burdens that are upon him, some time longer, than to interrupt you, whilst you
are employed about the discovery of the Plot, the Trial of the Lords, and the
Bill for securing our Religion.

The same day the Commons went up to the Bar of the Lords house to demand
Judgment against the Earl of Danby upon the Illegality of his pardon. May the 6.


On Tuesday, John Wilson and Roger Bockwith Esquires, two Justices of the Peace
of the County of York, were sent for in Custody, for saying, that this
Parliament was no Parliament, and they would justify it. Of which more
hereafter, May 22.

A Message was sent to the Lords by the Commons, that the House was ready to
make good the Impeachments against the five Popish Lords in the Tower, and the
Committee of Secrecy belonging to the Commons was appointed to manage the
evidence against them at their Trials.

Wednesday, The 7. of May
the Lords sent down a Message, that they had appointed Saturday to hear the
Earl of Danby's Plea, for the Validity of his Pardon, that they had Addressed
to the King for the naming a Lord High Steward at his Trial, and that of the
Popish Lords, which was appointed by their Lordships to be that day seven-night.

On Thursday, The 8. of May.
the Commons agreed an Address to his Majesty against John Duke of Lauderdale,
upon general pretenses of fears and jealousies, desiring he might be removed
from his Majesty's Counsels in England and Scotland, putting his Majesty in
mind of the Address of the last Parliament to that purpose, and resolved, they
would attend his Majesty in a body.

The Commons desired a Conference with the Lords, to state before hand the
manner of proceedings in the Trial of the Earl of Danby, and of the five Popish
Lords, and took exceptions to their motion for a Lord High Steward.

On Friday his Majesty sent for the Commons, and passed the Bill for Disbanding
the Army, and such other Bills as were ready, which was wisely done; for by
this surprise other debates were prevented, which might have proved of
dangerous consequence. After this, they appointed a Committee to inspect the
Journalls, and search Presidents touching the carrying up of Bills, and what
previous intimation ought to be given to them of his Majesty's intention to
pass Bills, and from and by whom such notice has usually been given, and
whether the House may debate after the message delivered by the Black Rod, for
attendance of the House upon his Majesty. It would have been very unhappy if by
reason of these Debates, the Forces then on foot should have continued
undisbanded. By all which as much as is possible to conjecture, it would have
been very unhappy if by reason of these Debates, the Forces then on foot should
have continued undisbanded to the great damage of the King and Kingdom
(notwithstanding the common clamor against them) if his Majesty had not thus
prevented it.

The same day the Commons passed this Vote, that no Commoner whatsoever, should
presume to maintain the Validity of the pardon, pleaded by the E. of Danby,
without the leave of their house first had, and that the persons so doing
should be accounted betrayers of the Liberties of the Commons of England: and
Ordered this Vote to be posted up at Westminster Hall Gate, Serjeants-Innes,
and Innes of Court.

His Lordships Friends called this a depriving him of all counsel to defend
himself, but what was appointed by his Enemies and Accusers, in a matter of
Law; insisting upon the Rules of proceedings in all other Courts, and the
ordinary methods of Common and Natural equity and right; it seeming hard to
ruin a man, if not some diffidence of the case, to deny him those Privileges
the meanest and worst of Rogues have; which is to choose such Council as the
Court before whom they are to be tried will allow, the Kings Council excepted.

And when the humor was stirred, they voted, that the Answer delivered by the
Lords that day at the Last Conference (about the manner of trying the Peers,
whereby their Lordships had not consented to a Committee of the Houses, because
they did not think it Conformable to the Rules and Orders of their Court, of
which (they said) they had reason to be tender in matters relating to their
Judicature) tended to the Interruption of the good correspondency between the
two Houses. May 10.


The first thing the Commons did on Saturday morning, was the Reading of an
Address to the King for the raising of the Militia of London, Westminster, the
Tower Hamlets, and Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, for the security of his
Majesty's Person at the Trial of the Popish Lords, by reason of the Great
Resort of the Jesuits, Popish Priests and other Popish Recusants at that time
in contempt of his Majesty's Laws and Royal Proclamation; to which they desired
the Concurrence of the Lords, to which they unanimously agreed.

The E. of Danby sending a Petition to the Lords, that his Counsel durst not
appear to defend his case by reason of the Vote of the Commons; the Lords at a
Conference desired to know if there were any such Vote, to which the Commons
would not answer.

Sir Robert Howard acquainting them, there had been paid from our Lady Day
1676, to the 20th. of March 1679, the Sum of 252467 lb. 1 s. 9 d. for Secret
Services: They ordered that Mr. Charles Bertie should be taken into Custody of
the Sergeant at Arms attending their House.

And in the Next place they ordered, that all the Members that were of the Long
Robe of their house should prepare themselves with Reasons against the pardon
pleaded by the E. of Danby. Which was very necessary now that no body durst
defend it.

So the Lords Ordered the E. to be returned to the Tower in safety.

On Sunday the Lords agreed to the demand of the Commons for the appointing a
Committee of both Houses to state the Preliminaries of the trials to be had, to
meet the next day. May 11.


And then the Commons proceeded to Vote; that a Bill be brought in to disable
the Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and appointed a
Committee to draw the same.

Which was in pursuance of their former Vote, on Sunday the 27th of April.
Though the Lords who had been twice desired to concur in that vote, had given
no answer to it. Out of an apprehension perhaps that his Majesty's Life might
be endangered upon this Vote, they resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That in defense of the Kings person and the Protestant Religion, this house
does declare, that they will stand by his Majesty with their Lives and
Fortunes; and that if his Majesty should come by any violent death (which God
forbid) that they will revenge it to the utmost upon the Papists.

As if it had been impossible his Majesty should be murdered by any other then
a Papist; or that it had been any consolation to his Majesty to have known that
his death should have been revenged to the utmost on them who ever had been the
cause or procurers of it.

This proved the occasion of breaking all the following Parliaments to this
day, and thereby to secure the Popish Lords in the Tower from Trial, and to
prevent all the excellent Laws that were then under consideration against
Popery, from ever being brought to pass. And finally, it proved an obstacle of
union between the King and the Houses, to the great advantage of our Enemies at
home and abroad; to the great hazard of the Nation: and more especially of the
Protestant Religion which was pretended to be secured by it.

I shall say more of this Vote and the former hereafter, when the effects of
them will appear better then they did at first.

On Wednesday his Majesty sent another Message to the Commons to put them again
in mind of the Fleet, May 14.
and let them know he would acquit himself of the evil consequences, which the
want of a Fleet in such a juncture might produce; and that the entering upon
it, could be no hinderance to the other great affairs on their hands, but
rather a Security in the dispatch thereof.

Upon which, a debate arising, they adjourned the Consideration of this Message
till Monday Sennight after: which had the appearance of a denial.

On Thursday there arose a Controversy betwixt the two Houses about the
Bishops; May 15.
for the Lords having Voted that the Lords Spiritual have a right to stay, and
sit in Court till the Court proceed to the Vote of Guilty or not guilty. The
Commons opposed it, and said, that the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any
Vote in any proceedings upon impeachments against the Lords in the Tower;
involving the E. of Danby's case, with the other Lords, though it was vastly
different. And indeed from hence arose this contest, the Commons imagining that
the Bishops would be for the validity of his pardon, and so make a major Vote
in that House; and therefore as they had deprived him of his Counsel before, so
now the business was to out the most favorable part (as they thought) of his
Judges.

The same day the Bill to disinherit the D. of York, was read the first time,
and Ordered a second reading.

On Saturday a Vote of the House of Lords was read in the House of Commons. May
17.


16 May, 1679.
Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled that
Thursday next be appointed to begin the Trials of the five Lords in the Tower,
(viz.) the E. of Powis, etc.

After which resolution, the Lords Spiritual asked the leave of that house,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trials of the said Lords, with the
Liberty of entering their usual Protestations.

Upon which the Commons Resolved.

That it be given as an instruction to their Committee to insist upon the
former Vote of this House, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any vote
in any Proceedings against the Lords in the Tower: and when that matter shall
be settled (as they please, for the Lords had settled it) and the method of
proceedings adjusted, this House shall then be ready to proceed upon the Trial
of the E. of Danby; against whom the House has already demanded judgment: and
afterward to the Trial of the other five Lords in the Tower.

So here was the two Houses in their Votes point blank against one another.

I shall here take notice of some Arguments that passed betwixt the Lords and
the Commons as they are expressed in the Lords Journal.

On Tuesday the 13th of May, The Commons desired to know concerning the Bishops
being present at the Trials of the Lords impeached, to which the Lords made
this Answer.

That it belonged not to the Commons to be concerned in the Constituting parts
of the Court, upon such Trials; but that the judgment of this matter belongs
entirely to the Lords, and when they have adjudged it, the Commons cannot alter
it, and therefore should not debate it. Upon which the Commons acknowledged,
that Judgment after Trial is in the Lords, but their Lordships are not to give
judgment, unless the Commons demand it, and that the Commons desire to know
whether the Lords will proceed in these Trials, as their Lordships did
anciently; for if the Bishops should sit upon these Trials, they should not
demand Judgment, but being dissatisfied with their being there, and it may be
the Commons may proceed by Bill. To which the Lords made Answer, that after the
Evidence is fully heard, they are bound to give judgment of Condemnation or
Acquittal; but this being a matter of Judicature, the Lords declared, that they
would impose silence upon themselves, and debate it no further. The Commons
further desired to know whether the Bishops should be allowed to vote upon the
Validity of the pardon of the E. of Danby, which they account no Preliminary
but the very essence of the Trial.

On Thursday the Votes I have mentioned before being communicated by the Lords
to the Commons, the Commons answered, That if the pardon of the E. of Danby
infer Life and Death, it is the same with Guilty or not Guilty, and desired
again to know whether the Lords Spiritual should Vote upon the E. of D. Pardon,
in answer to which, the Lords said they had no Instructions in that point, but
would acquaint the House with it.

On Friday the Commons insisted, that the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any
Vote in any of the proceedings upon the impeachments against the Lords in the
Tower, and the Commons declared that they knew not how to proceed in Capital
matters, before a new Court, to which the Lords would not reply.

So the Lords voted, that Thursday next should be appointed to begin the Trials
of the five Popish Lords.

After which the Lords Spiritual desired leave of the House that they might
withdraw themselves from the Trials of the said Lords, with the liberty of
entering their usual Protestations; as I have formerly said.

And it was Ordered that the Resolution of the Lords House and the desire of
the Lords Spiritual should be communicated to the Committee of the House of
Commons the next Morning.

This being so done, the Commons insisted, that their Vote extended to the E.
of Danby as well as the five Lords, whereas the Lords Vote relate only to the
five Lords, and therefore they desired to know what answer the Lords would give
as to the E. of Danby, they further objected, that they conceived, that their
vote was as to the Right of the thing, and that the Bishops have no right to be
at any Vote in any capital cases.

And they conceived the E. of Ds. to be a Capital case, as well as the cases of
the other five Lords, and that if the Bishops may have leave to withdraw, it
implies a right, which if they have, it is a new Court which the Commons cannot
admit of.

The Lords replied there is no day yet appointed for the trial of the E. of D.
and that the Lords Spiritual will be absent at all the parts of the Trials of
the five Lords, and that the Protestations they now desire to enter, will be
the same as in the Earl of Strafford 's case.

Then the Commons said they could not proceed to treat of any other Proposals,
till such time as the business about the Court be settled.

On Monday the 19th of May the Commons further insisted that the Lords
Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in the proceeding against the Lords in the
Tower, and when that matter shall be settled, and the Method of proceedings
adjusted their House would be then ready to proceed upon the Trial of the
Pardon of the E. of Danby, against whom the Commons had already demanded
judgment, and afterward to the trial of the five Lords in the Tower.

Upon which the Lords told them they had no Authority to debate this Matter.

Note that the trial of the E. of D. was rendered impossible, by Voting no
Commoner of England should be of Counsel with him, or defend the validity of
his pardon. 2ly, That all this contest about the Bishops was only in relation
to the Earl's case. 3ly, That they insinuate they would proceed by Bill, all
which were Declarations they meant to force the Lords as much as in them lay to
condemn the E. one way or another, as the Long Parliament forced his Majesty's
Father, and the House of Lords against their declared judgments, to condemn the
E. of Strafford. But to go on.

The Commons then further said that the Lords resolution which was offered, was
no answer to their proposition; which comprehended the E. of D. as well as the
five Lords: besides the Lords answer was doubtful, for it appears that the
Bishops asked leave to be absent, but it appeared not that it was granted, then
consequently the Bishops must sit in Court at the Trials; that the Commons
conceived that the Bishops absenting themselves by way of Leave, is a strong
implication of a right asserted, which they cannot allow, can ever be
maintained (yet this they were told, let it imply what it will) was allowed
them in the case of the E. of Strafford in Parliament by a house of Commons
that were no great Friends to Bishops, and why could not the Commons now be
contented with what was practiced then and at all other times? and (the
Commons) did think (they said) there was the same reason for the Bishops being
absent from the Trial, upon the pardon, as from the trial of the other five
Lords, and that the naming of a day for the trial of the five Lords, before the
trial of the pardon of the E. of Danby, against whom the Commons had already
demanded Judgment, as the putting that last which they desired should be first.

To which the Lords told them, they were not empowered to debate, but would
impart these Matters to the House.

The Commons hereupon replied, they were ready to go on, and that for want of
these trials all public business stood still, but the Lords seemed to lay the
stop at the Commons door, by naming a day, which they conceived ought not to
have been appointed, before the Methods were considered, for the Lords had not
answered the Commons in matter of Right, (which never was, nor it may be will
be answered) which was necessary first to be adjusted, and they desired their
resolution as to that matter; for they conceived they (the Bishops) had no
right (which whether they had or no, there was no more necessity of determining
it then, then heretofore) and the Lords might as well make the Judges part of
their Court, as the Bishops in this point; As they said.

And they said, the Commons would give no disturbance to the Ancient
judicature, for they owned that to be sacred, and they conceived they had a
right to know before what Court they shall appear, and they hoped the Lords
would consider of their having appointed a day, before the Methods were
considered, and would give them leave to wonder at it.

It is as likely the Lords took leave all this time to wonder at the Commons
too; and it is likely posterity will wonder that all this Controversy should be
banded thus, when it was thought to have been full time at least, to have been
trying the five Lords, and dispatching the Bills against Popery.

On Tuesday the 25th of May the Lords having again considered of all this, in a
Committee of the whole House; gave further day for the Trial of the five Lords
till that day sennight.

The same day, the Commons read the Bill for freeing the City of London, and
parts adjacent, from Popish Inhabitants, with the Amendments the third time;
and having added two clauses, returned it to the Lords from whom it came.

The Bill for disabling the D. of York to inherit the imperial Crown of this
Realm, being read the second time, and the question put whether it should be
committed, the House divided, and there were for the Yeas -- 207. Noes -- 128.


And so it was resolved in the affirmative. And the Bill was committed to a
Committee of the whole House, which was to sit the Friday following.

On Thursday the 22th of May, John Wilson and Roger Beckwith Esquires, the two
Yorkshire Justices of the peace, who were sent for into custody, for saying
this was no Parliament; exhibited in the House a Petition under the Hands of
Eight Justices of the peace of the North Riding of the County of York:
certifying that they were all present at the Sessions at Thirske the first of
May 1679, when John Wilson Esquire; being desired to give his opinion whether the
Act for Settlement of the poor of the 14 of Car. 2, which was to continue to
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament was still in force; to
which he answered, it was doubtful, in regard they had not yet made any Act,
and is not a Parliament in Law, because no Record remains of it; to which it
seems the other assented, and all the said Justices certify that neither of
them did then speak any words derogatory to the Parliament.

Now this doubt did arise by reason of the prorogation in the beginning of this
Parliament before the Speaker was chosen; which seemed to make a Session.

Hereupon the Commons Ordered that they should be discharged, paying their fees.

But who should make these Gentlemen any Recompense for the trouble, charge,
and injury they had sustained by this imprisonment, was a matter they were not
then at leisure to consider. But in the interval of a Parliament, it may be
worth their while to look into the authorities that enabled them to imprison
their fellow Subjects upon a bare, and it may be false and malicious
Suggestion, who are no members of their house. But if they shall not be pleased
to consider of it themselves, the rest of the Gentry will, and take other
Measures perhaps for the future; in regard that no man is secure of his Liberty
in time of Parliament at this boundless rate of Privilege.

On Friday 23 of May 1679, the House being informed that Sir Stephen Fox had
paid several Sums of Money to some of the Members of the last Parliament, and
that he had books of Accounts to evidence the same: first they ordered,

That he should be immediately sent for to attend the House, and to bring with
him all the Books and Papers of Accounts of any moneys he has paid to any
Members of the last Parliament. And presently again

Ordered,

That Sir S.F. do forthwith produce to this House his Leiger Book, Cash Book
and Journal; and his Receipts for money by him paid for secret Services, and
that he be enjoined not to go out of the Company of the Members (they sent with
him) before they return to the House. Ordered again,

That no Members depart the Service of the House until Sir S.F. and the other
Members return. Ordered again,

That Sir F. Winnington do to morrow morning make a report of the informations
given to the Committee of Secresy, touching Money paid for Secret Services to
the members of the last Parliament. Ordered again,

That Sir S. Fox do upon his Memory, name to the House such Members of the last
Parliament, as he paid any money to for Secret Service. There is no Entry of
the Persons by them named, but many Lists of them in writing were presently
spread about the Nation, some of which had more Names, and others fewer,
according to the affection of the Transcribers, and so the Honor of many an
honest Gentleman, was underhand blasted; with the people especially, there
being no way left to rectify this falsehood, but by repairing to Sir Stephen
Fox for a Certificate, and that would not have been believed neither by their
Enemies, whilst their friends did not need it.

As I recommended one consideration before to our Parliament men, relating to
our Liberties, so they may be pleased to take another along with them for our
honors, for it seems if a man be imprisoned or accused by the Order of the
Commons in Parliament, though never so wrongfully, he shall hardly obtain any
relief; and therefore great care ought to be taken not to precipitate matters
of this Consequence. Now Sir Stephen Fox might possibly have given a better
account next morning in Writing, then thus hastily upon his memory; and there
the Gentlemen accused, might have been heard what they could say for
themselves, before they had been defamed to the whole Nation, and after that an
exact account might have been given in Print, without leaving it to the Liberty
of every man to add and diminish as he pleased. Such inconveniences as these,
will ever follow hasty Counsels, which therefore ought to be avoided; if they
be not, the injury will at one time or another be repaid with Interest.

To conclude this matter, as there was never any Law to prohibit Parliament Men
from taking the liberality of our Princes in time of Parliament, so there was
the greater reason for it in this Parliament, which lasted too long, to the
Ruin of many Gentlemen of small estate, who were Members of it; the custom of
taking Wages being then wholly laid aside; and as this tended to make them
odious to the People, so it reflected upon his Majesty: and therefore ought to
have been pursued with great Tenderness, and care also ought to have been taken
for the time to come, by allowing better Wages, and making it duly paid;
without which, this thing will never be prevented.

All which is said not to accuse Sir Stephen Fox or the Gentlemen that were
accused by him, but to show what injuries may and will happen, as often as that
great Body acts with too much warmth, and how difficult it is to redress what
might easily enough have been prevented, which I desire may end in the honor
of Parliaments, by making them Act with all possible reservedness and caution
for the future.

On Saturday, May the 24th, the Commons ordered an Answer to be returned to the
last Message of the house of Peers, touching the Appointment of Tuesday the
27th of May, for the Trial of the five Lords in the Tower, with reasons why
they could not proceed to the Trial of those five Lords, before judgment given
upon the E. of D's. plea of his Pardon, and the point of the Bishops not Voting
in any proceedings, upon impeachments for Capital offenses were settled, and the
methods of Proceedings adjusted, and that a Committee should be appointed to
draw up these reasons.

A Petition being exhibited the same day to the Commons by Sir Thomas Hare,
John Trinham Esquire; and others on the behalf of themselves, and the major part of
the Freeholders of the County of Norfolk. Complaining of several rude and
illegal practices, in Electing and Returning Sir John Hobart to serve in that
Parliament, as Knight of the Shire for the said County of Norfolk; and the
Petitioners having in their Petition set forth, that by reason of Printing and
Publishing of the Resolves and Orders of the House, the Freeholders of the
said County, were affrighted and terrified.

And a Motion being made that the said Petition might be rejected, the same was
upon the question rejected.

Sir Francis Winnington reported from the Committee of Secrecy, several
Informations of Moneys paid for Secret Service to the Members of the last
Parliament.

Whereupon they Ordered, that one Mr. Knight, and Sir Richard Wiseman, should
be immediately sent for to attend the House. And that the Speaker should Issue
out his Warrant, for the summoning of such Witnesses as should be Named to him,
by any Member of their House, touching Moneys paid for Secret Service.

And then Adjourned the Debate of that affair till Tuesday Morning following;
when his Majesty put an end to this and all their other proceedings.

On Monday the 26th of May, the Commons drew up reasons why they could not
proceed to the Trial of the five impeached Popish Lords, till they had their
demands in relation to the E. of Danby, and the Bishops; which are too long to
be here inserted, not without some seeming reflections upon the Proceedings of
the Honse of Peers.

But I need not interpose betwixt them, the Lords are better able to Justify
and Vindicate their Cause against the Commons then I am; and it is fit I should
leave it to them.

Yet I cannot but take notice, they never gave any reason for their Vote of the
9th of May; That no Commoner whatsoever should presume to maintain the Validity
of the Pardon pleaded by the E. of D. without the leave of their House first
had and obtained, and that the Persons so doing, should be accounted betrayers
of the Liberties of England. By which Vote it became impossible for the Lords
to do the E. Justice; for his Plea being matter of Law and not of Fact, by the
Law of the Land, he ought to have Counsel assigned him by the Lords, without
the Interposition of the Commons, the Lords being his Judges, and the Commons
his Accusers, and by consequence his Enemies. And it seems contrary to the
Rules of Natural and Eternal Equity, that a man should have no means to defend
his life, but what his Accusers will allow him: and I believe they themselves
would never have submitted to this. Now Counsel he could have none if they were
not Commoners (as they that made that Vote will I suppose allow,) all the Peers
being his Judges, and so foreclosed from being of Counsel for him. And without
Counsel, the Lords neither could nor ought to proceed against him, therefore
the Commons had made it legally impossible to try the E. till that Vote were
recalled, and this I take to be the true reason why their Lordships Ordered the
Trials of the five Lords before his, which they did after this Vote, for before
that time they were willing to have tried him first, as appears by their
Journal.

2ly. The Commons give no reason why the Bishops should not be allowed to
withdraw upon leave, as they anciently used to do; for they do not deny, that
anciently they use to withdraw upon Leave, though the Lords urged that, nor
produce one instance, where they were excluded, but upon Leave, and with
protestations entered. And therefore there seemed to be much Reason why the
Lords should stick to their own Vote, and refuse to gratify the Commons in this
point, to the damage of the Bishops.

3ly. The Commons proceeded a little mysteriously with the Lords, under a
general term of the Lords in the Tower; including the E. of D. by that term,
tho his Case was vastly different, both in matter of Fact, and the manner of
the Trial. For the Lords yielded at the first, that the Bishops ought to
withdraw from the Trial of the five Popish Lords and therefore that point ought
to have been no further insisted on; yet still the Commons urged that the
Bishops ought not to be present at the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
including the E. of D. in those general Terms, as before; which seemed liker a
dispute at the Bar, then a Treaty betwixt two Committees of the Houses for an
Accommodation.

Now that the E. of Danby's case was vastly different from that of the five
Lords appears from hence. 1. There is nothing charged upon the E. that is
treason within the Statute of the 25th of Ed. 3. c. 2. nor any other Statute
that was ever alleged, and so it must have been debated upon the Trial whether
the Crimes were Treason or no, supposing the matter of Fact had been proved or
granted; and of this the Bishops are Judges, as well as the Temporal Lords, and
have ever had their Vote in all those Statutes that have made or declared what
was, and what was not Treason, and particularly in the Statute above cited,
which is the great and standing rule, and so ought not to be excluded here, but
in the case of the five Lords it was otherwise, for their Treasons were
apparently within the said Statute, if proved true. 2ly, The E's. plea was a
mere Law point, viz. whether the Pardon was Valid or not, and the Bishops are
Judges with the Lords Temporal in all points of Law brought before that House.
3ly. Though the Commons insisted that the Event was the same as upon Guilty or
not Guilty. Yet this may be questioned, for it seems just, that if the Pardon
had been overruled, the E. should have still been in the same case, as if it
had not been granted, and so have been tried again upon the impeachment, and
then might have demurred to the point in Law, whether the Crimes charged were
Treason or no, before he had been condemned, and in this point perhaps, the
Bishops had been Judges; and when both these points had been heard and
overruled, then that the matter of fact should have been tried upon the Plea
of Guilty or not Guilty, and then the Bishops should have been absent. And
perhaps the Commons will find that the Earls resolution of abiding by his
pardon will amount to no more then this, when ever he be tried, at least it
seems reasonable it should not. For there is no reason a man should be hanged,
because the Attorney General mistook in drawing his Pardon, or he in the manner
of suing it out, without a Trial. If it be said that Consensus tollit Errorem,
I answer, No man can consent to his own destruction, so as to foreclose him of
all lawful means of saving his Life. If it be objected that this is too tedious
a way of proceeding, I answer in the words of the Heathen, de morte hominis
nulla est cunctatio Longa; it being easy to cut off a man's Head, and impossible
to restore him to life, good consideration ought to be taken before it be done.

It may be some will be ready to say a Fools bolt is soon shot, and though this
is true, yet, I know no reason why I may not speak my judgment as well as
others; and if I be adjudged an enemy of the Commons of England for my pains, I
cannot help it, only I have not meddled with the Validity of the pardon in all
this, nor I think never will, and so I have not offended against that Vote.

The Conclusion I shall draw from hence is, that the Lords had reason to put
the Trial of the five Popish Lords first, and that the Commons necessitated
them so to do, by that Extraordinary Vote, by starting a new Controversy about
the Jurisdiction of the Bishops in all Capital causes; and by refusing them
liberty to do as they always had done before, that is to withdraw upon Leave,
with the usual protestations entered; all which things were not presently to be
given up, nor could suddenly be determined.

The rest of that day was spent in two Conferences, the one concerning the
Habeas Corpus Act, and the other about the Trials; in which the Long reasons I
mentioned were delivered.

On Tuesday the 27th of May, The Habeas Corpus Bill was agreed at a Conference
betwixt the two Houses.

Then a Message was sent by the Lords to the Commons to acquaint them that his
Majesty was coming in his Robes, who accordingly sent for the Commons, and
having passed,

1. An Act for the reingrossing the Records of Fines, burnt or lost in the late
Fire in the Temple:

2. An Act for the better securing of the Liberty of the Subject, and for
preventing imprisonment beyond Seas. Which is that I call the Habeas Corpus Act
for shortness. Which were all that had been got ready for his Royal assent in
this Session of Parliament:

His Majesty made a short Speech to this effect.

My Lords and Gentlemen;
I Was in good hopes that this Session would have produced great good to the
Kingdom, and that you would have gone on unanimously, for the good thereof; but
to my great grief, I see that there are such differences between the two
Houses, that I am afraid very ill effects will come of them. I know but one way
of Remedy for the present, assuring you, that in the mean time I shall show my
sincerity with the same Zeal I met you here; and therefore my Lord Chancellor I
command you to do as I have Ordered you.

Who immediately Prorogued both Houses to the 14th day of August following.

The news of this Prorogation of the Parliament, was no sooner spread about the
Nation, but the cry was taken up by the zealous Impostors, that it was done of
purpose to hinder the Trial of the Popish Lords: for as for the E. of D. the
People were generally unconcerned what came of him. And dreadful Stories were
told in Coffee-houses, Alehouses, Taverns, and Meeting houses of the danger of
Popery, and what great favorers they had at Court, not sparing his Majesty.

But this was not all, the Act for Regulating Printing, expiring with this
Session, of which no care was taken, notwithstanding his Majesty recommended it
so seriously to the Parliament by the Lord Chancellor, at the opening of it.
The Nation became presently so pestred with a swarm of Lying, Seditious
treasonable and scandalous Pamphlets, Papers and Pictures; that a man would
have thought Hell had been broken loose. His Majesty, the Church, the
Government, were represented every day by them in the most odious manner that
spite, falsehood, and malice could invent; to beget a disaffection in the
people to the Government, and to involve us in another Rebellion. And if any
man presumed to Defend them, he was presently a Papist in Masquerade, a Tory or
Tantivy man; and very often threatened with the Parliament. All which was done
without doubt out of as pure kindness to his Majesty, and to beget honor to
the Government, and tended as apparently to the Interest and Safety of the
Protestant Religion, as the Jews Cries of Crucify him, Crucify him, did to the
delivery of our Savior out of the hands of Pilate.

There was an Accident that began in this Session of Parliament, and received
its occasional being from some Distempered Spirits. In March 1679, there was a
Speech said to be made in the House of Lords by a certain This Speech is
Printed in a Pamphlet called An impartial account of diverse remarkable
Proceedings in the last Session of Parliament. London 1679. folio.
Earl, and by the Diffenters and Commonwealth Party spread about the three
Kingdoms with a mighty Zeal, which in Scotland was followed with the usual
effects of such like Speeches, and in regard that it may administer much
consolation to that Party to read it over again that were so well pleased with
it before, I will reprint it here word for word.

My Lords,
You are appointing of the State of England to be taken up in a Committee of
the whole House, some day next week. I do not know how well what I have to say
may be received, for I never study either to make my Court well or to be
popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the Dictates of the Spirit
within me.

There are some Considerations that concern England so nearly that without them
you will come far short of safety and quiet at home: We have a little Sister,
and she has no Breasts; what shall we do for our Sister in the day when she
shall be spoken for? If she be a wall we will build on her a palace of silver,
if she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar. We have several
Little Sisters without Breasts, the French Protestant Churches, the two
Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland; the Foreign Protestants are a Wall, the only
Wall and defense to England, upon it you may build Palaces of Silver, Glorious
Palaces. The protection of the Protestants abroad, is the greatest power and
security the Crown of England can attain to, and which can only help us to give
check to the growing greatness of France. Scotland and Ireland, are two doors,
either to let in good or mischief upon us; they are much weakened by the
Artifice of our cunning Enemies, and we ought to Enclose them with Boards of
Cedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes one goes
first, sometimes the other, in at doors, but the other is always following
close at hand.

In England Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow.

I do not think your Lordships or the Parliament have Jurisdiction there, it is
an Ancient Kingdom; they have an Illustrious Nobility, a Gallant Gentry, a
Learned Clergy, and an understanding worthy People: but yet we cannot think of
England as we ought, without reflecting on the condition they are in. They are
under the same Prince, and the influence of the same Favorites and Councils;
when they are hardly dealt with, can we that are the Richer expect better
usage? for it is certain, that in all Absolute Governments, the poorest
Countries are always most favorably dealt with.

When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there, cannot enjoy their Royalties,
their Shreivaldoms, and their Stewardaries, which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several Hundreds of years; but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council, to make deputations of their Authorities, to such as are
their known Enemies.

Can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long, under the same Persons and
Administration of affairs? If the Council Table there can imprison any
Nobleman or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to Trial, or
giving the least reason for what they do; can we expect the same men will
preserve the Liberty of the Subject here?

I will acknowledge I am not well versed in the particular Laws of Scotland;
but this I do know, that all the Northern Countries have by their Laws, an
undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties and Properties; yet Scotland
has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their Lives,
Liberties and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary will and pleasure of them that
Govern. They have lately plundered and harassed the Richest and Wealthiest
Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the Barbarous Highlanders to devour
them; and all this without a most colorable pretense to do it. Nor can there
be found a reason of State for what they have done, but that those wicked
Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any rate; which as they managed,
was only prevented by the miraculous hand of God, or otherwise all the Papists
in England would have been armed, and the fairest opportunity given in the just
time for the execution of that wicked and bloody design the Papists had; and it
is not possible for any man that duly considers it, to think other, but that
those Ministers that acted that, were as guilty of the Plot, as any of the
Lords that are in question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this the plainer, because till the pressure be
fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me or any
thinking man to believe that good is meant us here.

We must still be upon our guard, apprehending that the Principle is not
changed at Court, and that these men that are still in place and Authority,
have that influence upon the Mind of our excellent Prince. that he is not, nor
cannot be that to us, that his own Nature and Goodness would incline him to.

I know your Lordships can order nothing in this, but there are those that hear
me, can put a perfect cure to it; until that be done, the Scotch Weed is like
Death in the Pot. Mers in Olla. But there is something too, now I consider,
that most immediately concerns us; their Act of Twenty two Thousand men to be
ready to invade us upon all occasions. This I hear, that the Lords of the
Council there, have treated as they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a
Standing Army of six thousand men. I am sure we have reason and right to
beseech the King that that Act may be better considered in the next Parliament
there. I shall say no more for Scotland at this time, I am afraid your
Lordships will think I have said too much, having no concern there. But if a
French Nobleman, should come to dwell in my House and Family, I should think
it concerned me to ask what he did in France, for if he were there a Felon, a
Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him to live elsewhere; and I hope your
Lordships will do the same thing for the Nation, if you find the same cause.

My Lords give me leave to speak two or three words concerning our other Sister
Ireland; thither I hear is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us against the
French. Besides I am credibly informed, that the Papists have their Arms
restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered from being the
suspected Party; the Sea-Towns as well as the Inland, are full of Papists: that
Kingdom cannot long continue in the English hands, if some better care be not
taken of it. This is in your power, and there is nothing there, but is under
your Laws, therefore I beg that this Kingdom at least may be taken in
consideration, together with the State of England: for I am sure there can be
no safety here, if these doors be not shut up and made sure.

Whether any such Harangue was made in that August assembly or not, I cannot
say; but I am sure that all the Seditious and Treasonable Pamphlets that have
been since Printed, are but flourishes upon this Text, and an extract of those
that went before them, the very model of the last Rebellion, and probably the
design of an other. But England and Ireland are not as yet ripe for so generous
an undertaking. But to show you how matters past in Scotland, I will Transcribe
the very words of my Author, and leave the credit of them with him.

By the very next post after this Speech was said to have been spoken, The
Spirit of Popery, speaking in the Phanatical Protestants. page 73. London.
1680. fol.
Forty written Coppies of it were sent from London to Edenbrough; and the
Fanatics grew so insolent and so daring upon it, that several Loyal Gentlemen,
wrote up accounts, to what height of Insolences this Speech had blown up the
Enemies of the Church and the Monarchy; and that they had just reasons to fear
that very dangerous attempts, if not a downright Rebellion would speedily
ensue thereupon: but those reports found not too much credit at London; where
the world was made to believe by men (whose interest it was that they should
not be credited) that they were but the inventions of the Duke of Lauderdale,
for whose advantage in that conjucture, it was that they should be believed.

My Author goes on that he is confident (such is his charity) he that made it,
The Effects.
would not have done so, had he known the true State of Scotland, which few
English men do, or foreseen the evil effects, which it immediately had, in
encouraging the Covenanteers to Assassinate, Massacre and Rebel. For now they
begin to look and speak big in Edenbrough; and many of them were heard and seen
upon the Crown of the Causway, who had sneeked about in darkness before. And as
for the disaffected parts of the Country, they now displayed the Banners of
Jesus Christ, (as they Blasphemously called their colors) at their
Conventicles every where, and their Preachers now told them, that the time of
their deliverance, and of Gods taking Vengeance upon his Enemies, was now at
hand; only they must repent, and be strong, and of a great courage, and fight
the Battles of the Lord. They also threatened in all places, such as they
thought were seriously active against them, talking of great Changes and
Revolutions in England, and in Public Places, dropped Lists of the Names of
those men, whom they had a mind should fall by Heroical Hands. And in the first
place naming Dr. Sharp the Archbishop of St. Andrews and Primate of Scotland,
whom they meekly styled, That perjured Apostate Prelate Sharp. Threatening to
handle him and the rest severely.

Having spent a few Weeks in these godly Exhortations, animating each other to
this good work, and being thereunto further encouraged by the Brethren in
London, the third of May following, they began the work with the murder of the
said Archbishop; and I will inform you of the manner of that Butchery in the
words of the same Author.

The Archbishop had been attending his Majesty's Service in the Privy Council
at Edenbrough, from thence he went over into Fife, in the afternoon, on the
Second of May 1679. That night he lodged at Captain Seaton's House, in a
Village called Kennoway, which is in the Midway betwixt Bruntisland and St.
Andrews. About Midnight as the People of the Town report, two men well mounted
and armed, came thither to enquire if the Archbishop of St. Andrews was Lodged
at Captain Seaton's; and as soon as they were informed that he was, they
presently rode out of the Town again.

The next morning being the Third of May, several Parties of Horsemen were
seen to traverse the Road betwixt Kennoway and St. Andrews, who doubtless were
the Assassins, who watched for an opportunity to effect the Murder which they
had long designed. But the Lord Primate who was a man of great Natural courage,
and whom so many deliverances for almost Twenty years, from the hands of those
bloody Zealots, had now brought to an entire confidence in God's Protection,
took Coach about Nine of the Clock, without any presage or apprehension of
danger.

He had none but his Eldest Daughter to ride with him in the Coach, and only
three Servants on Horseback to attend him; one of whom he had sent before he
was assaulted, to pay his respects to a Person of Honor, by whose house he
passed on his Road. He advanced on his journey in great security till he came
to a little Country Village called Magus, two miles distant from St. Andrews
betwixt Eleven and Twelve a Clock in the Forenoon.

There he first perceived himself to be pursued by Eleven or Twelve men
barefaced, well mounted, with Pistols cocked in their hands, and drawn Swords
hanging in Strings from their Arms; as soon as he spied them, he bid his
Coachman drive as fast as his Horses could gallop, but alas too late, for the
Assassin furiously pursued him, and in their pursuit, shot at him several times
in his Coach, running as fast as six good Horses could draw it. The Coachman
(who discovered the Villains before his Lord, and had thereupon begged leave of
him, but was not permitted to gallop away) had certainly outdriven them, if one
Balfour of Kinlock, mounted on a very fleet bay horse, had not overtaken them;
who not daring to attack the Coachman, because his Whip did fright his
Sprightly horse, therefore rod up to the Postilion, whom he wounded with his
Sword in the face, shot one of the foremost Horses, and hamstringed the other,
and so stopped the Coach.

By that time this was done, the rest of the Murderers came up, and one of
them fired a Pistol or Blunderbuss so near his Breast, that his Daughter rubbed
off the burning which stuck to his Gown. Then they called him by the Name of
Dog, Villain, Apostate, Persecuter of the Godly, Betrayer of Jesus Christ and
his Church, and bid him come out of his Coach, to receive what he deserved for
his wickedness against the Kirk of Scotland.

Upon this his Daughter got out of the Coach, and fell on her knees, begging
her Father's Life; but they regarded neither her Prayers nor Tears, but threw
her down several times upon the ground, trampled upon her and wounded her:
which her tender hearted Father seeing, after much reproachful Language, and
many Threatenings, came meekly out of the Coach, and with calmness said unto
them, Gentlemen, I know not that I have ever injured any of you, or if I did I
am ready to make you reparation; and therefore I beseech you to spare my life,
and I promise I will never pursue you for this violence, and I pray you
consider, before you bring the guilt of Innocent blood upon your selves.

The reverence of his Presence, and his undaunted Courage in addressing himself
so resolutely and gravely unto them, surprised them, and made them stand a
little while, as it were unresolved what to do; and one of them relenting,
Cried to the rest, Spare these Gray Hairs: but their cruel Zeal overcoming
their Natural Pity and Justice, paused not long before they replied, He must
die, He must die. And then again calling him Traitorous Villain, Judas,
betrayer of the Interest of Christ, Enemy to God and his People, said unto him,
Thou shall now receive the reward of thy Apostasy, and enmity to the People of
God.

Then seeing them determined to take away his Life, he begged a little while to
pray, telling them, he would pray for them; but they scornfully told him, That
they cared not for his Prayers, being sure that God would not hear so base a
Dog as he was. Then looking steadfastly upon one of the Assassins, whom he
seemed to know, he kneeled down before him, and said unto him, Sir you are a
Gentleman, and I must beg my last favor from you, that since you are resolved
that I must dye, you would have pity upon my poor child here, and spare her
life, and for this, Sir give me your hand: and thereupon stretching his hand
toward the cruel man, he had for a return, a very great blow with a Shable,
which almost quite cut off his Hand, and the Villain redoubling his Stroke,
gave him another violent Wound upon the left Eye, which cut him two Inches
above it, and one below; this Stroke knocked him down, but getting up upon his
Knees again, he said, Gentlemen, it is now enough, you have done your work; and
holding up his Hands (as well as he could) to Heaven, he fervently cried out,
Lord Jesus, have mercy on my Soul, and receive my Spirit. While he was in this
Posture of Devotion, they wounded him in his Hands which he held up to Heaven,
and in other parts of his Body, till in a kind of composure he laid down his
Head upon his Arm, saying God forgive you, and I forgive you all.

These were the last words which he uttered, like an excellent Christian; after
which they gave him no less then sixteen Wounds on his Head; some of them as
they were going away, thought they heard him groan, which made them go back,
and to make sure work, stir about his Brains in the Scull with the points of
their Swords. His Head seemed to be all one Wound; and pieces of his shattered
Scull, and Brains were some days after found on the Ground that Unhallowed
Golgotha where he was slain.

Having finished their long desired Murder, they made his Servants Solemnly
swear not to discover them, and then bad them in derision take up their Priest,
and having said so, rode back to Magus, where they first assaulted the Coach;
and one of them, by Name John Balfour of Kinlock, as he passed by that Town,
was heard to say very audibly and distinctly, That now Judas was killed.

A Proclamation being published in his Majesty's Name for the discovery of
these abominable execrable Murderers, and search made among the Tenants and
Heritors of the Shire of Fife, and the Inhabitants of Magus being examined upon
oath; it was made apparent, that the bloody Assassins, and many others, who
were strongly presumed to have been Abetters, and Contrivers of the Murder,
were notorious Fanatics, Frequenters of Field-Conventicles, and Followers of
Mr. Welsh, and other Traitorous intercommuned and Rebellious Preachers; Nine of
the Actors in this Tragedy were discovered by their Names and Sirnames, which
are as follows.

John Balfour of Kinlock, David Hackston of Rathilettet, George Balfour in
Gilston, James Russel in Kings-Kettle, Robert Dingwall a Farmers Son in Caddam,
Andrew Guillan Weaver in Balmerinoch, Alexander Hinderson and Andrew Hinderson,
Sons to John Hinderson in Killbrachmont, George Fleming, Son to George Fleming
in Balbuthy.

The rebellion interrupting the course of Justice against these miscreants for
some time, the 20th day of September 1679, there was another Proclamation
published for the apprehending those Nine, and all others that were in the
Rebellion, and were Heritors or Ministers.

But by this time the Murderers and Rebels, had fled the Kingdom,
notwithstanding all imaginable care and diligence to prevent their escape; and
whilst the Covenanting Army lay at Glascow, one of the Balfours, as a very
credible Gentleman, who was then the Town, told me (says my Author) openly
boasted of the Murder as a glorious fact; and said holding up his Arm, This
hand helped to kill the Fox. And five of the Accomplices, Complotters and
Abetters of the Murder, chose to dye, and be hung up in Chains upon the place,
rather then confess the sinfulness of the action, by acknowledging it was a
Murder or a Sin.

The Fanatical Party, foretold it in several places, and the Morning before it
was committed, one of the Assassins like a Jesuit Consecrated to an Heroical
Act, after a solemn Sacrilegious form, held up his hand, and swore, that That
hand should kill the Arch-Prelate; upon which the Holy Sister his Hostess,
kissed him. And it is notoriously known in Scotland, that he, who commanded the
foot for Mr. Welsh upon Reupar Law (that famous Field Conventicle) owned that
their Friends thanked God for the Archbishops death, which neither they nor
their abetters in either Kingdom will call Murder, when they have occasion to
Speak thereof.

My Author goes further, and shows how the Predecessors of these Godly
Cutthroats Norman Lesly, John Lesley, Peter Carmichael and James Meluil
Assassinated Cardinal Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews in his Castle there in
cold blood, gravely, and with the preface of an harangue; which Knox commends,
calling the Principal Murderer, a Meek man of God: an odd kind of Presbyterian
meekness which our Savior does not commend.

From thence he descends, and show their Principles both Anicent and Modern,
upon which they build these bloody practices. He tells as Goodman Knox's
Companion in his Discourse of Tyranny and Popery, page 30. has these words,
All men are bound to see the Laws of God kept, and to suppress and resist
Idolatry by force. Nor is it sufficient for Subjects not to obey the wicked
Commands of Princes; but they must resist them, and deliver the Children of God
out of the hands of their Enemies, as we would deliver a Sheep that is endanger
to be devoured by a Wolf. And if the Magistrates refuse to put Mass-mongers and
False Preachers (now all Bishops and Church-ministers in their esteem are such)
to death, the people in seeing it performed, show that zeal of God which was
commended in Phineas.

Hence all Kirk Writers since his Majesty's Return, such as Napthali, Jus
populi, The Apologetical Narration, The Poor man's Cup, The History of the
Indulgence (as he tells us) call the Bishops Apostates, Perjured Prelates, a
perjured Fraternity; Traitors to Christ, Enemies to his people, Idolaters,
Backsliders. All which is meant of forsaking the Covenant, and Presbyterian
Government, and is the very Language they murdered the Archbishop with; which
shows they were not Jesuits but arrant Presbyterians that did the Wicked fact;
and my said Author quotes this Passage from Jus Populi, page 415. The fact of
Phineas was a Laudable Act of justice, and a precedent for Judges and
Magistrates in all times coming, and that by his Example any Member of the
Council (for Phineas rose from among the Congregation) might lawfully rise up
and execute judgment on this wicked Wretch (the Archbishop) and his cursed
Fraternity, who have brought by their Apostasy and defection from the Covenant,
and cause of God, the wrath of God upon the Land.

For the rest, I shall refer my Reader to that ingenious Author, from whom I
had not Transcribed all this, but to prompt others to read him, and to Supply
that Defect to them who cannot get that Book.

The news of this Execrable and Barbarous Murder, was soon diffused all over
England, and it may be all the rest of Christendom, and entertained by all
People who were not poisoned with this Presbyterian Leven, with horror and
deterstation. The rest began to qualify and allay it, with ill Characters of
the poor man; or to divert it from the right Agents, by laying it one while
upon the Jesuits, and another while upon the Tenants of the Archbishop.

But they foresaw these things would not do their business, and therefore their
friends in London did what they could to instigate an Address against the Duke
of Lauderdale, which was the man they most hated and feared of all the world,
and who if he were not removed would certainly prosecute and revenge this
Murder; now so it fell out, that though not upon their solicitation, there
was an Address Voted the 6th of May, which passed the Eighth.

The Address which I think fit to be inserted here was as follows.

We your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, finding your Majesty's Kingdoms involved in eminent
Dangers, and great difficulties, by the evil designs, and pernicious Counsels
of some, who have been, and are in high places of trust and Authority about
your Royal Person: who contrary to the duty of their places by their Arbitrary
and Destructive Counsels, tending to the subversions of the Rights, Liberties,
and Properties of your Subjects, and the alteration of the Protestant Religion
established, have endeavored to alienate the Hearts of your Loyal Subjects from
your Majesty, and your Government. Amongst whom, we have just reason to accuse
John Duke of Lauderdale, for a chief Promoter of such Counsels, and more
particularly for contriving and endeavoring to raise jealousies and
misunderstandings between your Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
whereby Hostilities might have ensued, and may arise between both Nations if
not prevented.

Wherefore we your Majesty's Loyal Subjects could not but be sensibly affected
with trouble to find such a Person (notwithstanding the repeated Addresses of
the last Parliament) continued in your Counsels at this time, when the affairs
of your Kingdom require none to be put into such employments, but such as are
men of known abilities, Interest and esteem in the Nation, without all
suspicion of either mistaking, or betraying the true interest of the Kingdom,
and consequently of advising your Majesty ill. We do therefore most humbly
beseech your most sacred Majesty for the taking away the great Jealousies,
Dissatisfactions, and Fears amongst your good Subjects, that your Majesty will
graciously be pleased to remove the Duke of Lauderdale from your Majesty's
Counsels in your Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and from all
offices, employments and places of trust, and from your Majesty's Presence for
ever.

This Address they presented to his Majesty the day following, to which his
Majesty replied he would consider of it, and return an Answer.

But in the mean time, it was doubtless sent after the Speech into Scotland,
where it found all things rather necessitated to a Rebellion than disposed, the
Murder of so illustrious a Person as the Primate of that Kingdom, and one of
his Majesty's Privy Counsel there, was a Villainy not to be smothered. And the
Proclamation published the day after the fact, for the discovery and
apprehending of the Assassines, representing the Act (as it deserved with great
detestation) had further alarmed the whole Party; who had as they thought, no
other way to escape the deserved revenge, but by justifying the Murder with a
Rebellion. And finding by this Address, that the House of Commons in England
were in this critical moment, pressing upon their dreadful Enemy the Duke of
Lauderdale, they took it for granted, God had espoused their cause; and if they
could make a head in Scotland, they should be seconded out of England, hoping
perhaps to be as well rewarded for this, as they were for beginning the former
Rebellion, and so being pushed forward by their destiny and desperation on they
went.

On Tuesday, the 27th of May 1679, The Parliament was prorogued; and the
Thursday following, which was the 29th of the same month, the Scotch
Covenanters who knew nothing of it, began their Rebellion at Ragland in
Scotland, to which place about fourscore men well mounted and armed, came and
proclaimed the Covenant, and burnt several Acts of Parliament, and affixed this
following Declaration on the Market Cross.

As the Lord had been pleased still to keep and preserve his Interest in the
Land, by the Testimony of some faithful Witnesses from the beginning, so in our
days some have not been wanting, who through the greatest of Hazards, had added
their Testimonies to these who have gone before them, by suffering death,
Banishment, Torturings, Finings, Forfeitures, imprisonments, etc. Flowing from
cruel and perfidious Adversaries to the Church and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Land. Therefore we owning the Interest of Christ according to the
word of the Lord, and the National and Solemn League and Covenant, desire to
add our Testamony to the Testimonies of the Worthies that has gone before
(though unworthy, yet hoping as true Members of the Church of Christ in
Scotland) and that against all things that has been done prejudicial to his
interest, from the beginning of the work of Reformation in Scotland; especially
from the year 1648, to the year 1660, against these following Acts.

1. The Act of Supremacy.

2. The Declaration whereby the Covenants are condemned.

3. The Act for Eversion of the established Government of the Church, and for
establishing Prelacy, and for the Outing of Christ's Ministers, who could not
conform thereto, by an Act Rescissory of all Acts of Parliament and Assemblies
for the Establishment of the Covernment of the Church of Scotland, according to
the Word.

4. As likewise the Act of Council at Glasgow, putting that Act recissory in
execution, where at one time, were violently cast out above three hundred
Ministers, without any Legal procedures.

5. As likewise the Act, appointing a Holy Anniversary Day to be kept, upon the
29th of May, for giving thanks for the upsetting of an usurping Power,
destroying the Interest of the Church in the Land, which is to set up the
Creature to be worshipped in the room of our Great Redeemer, and to consent to
the assuming of the power that is proper to the Lord alone, for the appointing
Ordinances in his Church, as particularly the Government thereof, and the
keeping of Holy Days, and all other sinful and unlawful Acts Emitted and
Executed by them.

And for Confirmation of this our Testimony, we do hereby this day, being the
29th day of May, 1679, Publicly burn them at the Cross of Ragland most Justly;
as they perfidiously and Blasphemously had burnt our Holy Covenants, through
several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdoms. We judge none will take exception at
our not subscribing this our Testimony, being so solemnly gone about; for we
are ready always to do it, if judged necessary, with all the faithful suffering
Brethren in the Land.

They intended to have affixed this Declaration at Glasgow too, but were
prevented by the Kings Forces there.

On the Sunday following, they Rendevoused upon London Hill being then. 14, or
1500 men, well armed and in good order, the foot commanded by one Weir, and the
Horse by Robert Hamilton, one Patron, Balfour and Hackston; (these two last
being of the number of them that murdered the Archbishop, and consequently
most concerned to carry the Rebellion as far as they could;) being thus
disposed and Ordered, one Captain Graham of Claver House, marched against them
with a troop of Horse, and a Company of Dragoons, upon whose approach, the
Rebels sent out two Parties to Skirmish with him, which he beat into their main
body; and then they advanced with their whole force upon him: So that after a
considerable slaughter of them, and the loss of his Cornet, two Brigadiers, and
about eight Horse, and twenty Dragoons (his own horse being killed under him,
and he mounting another) being so much overpowered in number, he made his
retreat toward Glasgow, being in his way forced to fight his way through the
Townsmen of Streuin, who were got together to oppose it, leaving ten, or twelve
of them dead upon the place.

On Monday the Second day of June, the Rebels in the morning attacked the City
of Glasgow, at two several times, but all the Streets were so well Barracadoed
by the Lord Ross, and the Soldiers there put into so good a posture, that they
were beat off with considerable loss, besides many Prisoners that were taken,
and thereupon the Horse and Dragoons in the Town sallied out, and pursued them
upon their drawing off.

In the Interim, the Council of Scotland, having first given an account of this
Rebellion to his Majesty, published a Proclamation for the suppression of it;
and that failing, Levied what forces they could to oppose them, by which means
they were kept together, not daring to part to plunder; and their Number was
also kept from increasing as otherwise it might have done. But yet the Council
knowing the Rebels could not continue long together, would not fight them till
his Majesty should send them orders so to do, and a general.

His Majesty and the Council here resolved to send down his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth, who had given good proof of his Courage in Flanders, and elsewhere;
who undertaking the enterprise against the Rebels, went post into Scotland for
that purpose.

The Rebels in the interim having possessed themselves of Glasgow, grew insolent
at first, and published a Proclamation in these terms.

WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army, do require and command you the
Inhabitants of the Burgh of Glasgow, to furnish us with Twenty four Carts, and
sixty Baggage Horses, for removing our Provision from this Place to our Camp,
wherever we shall set down the same, and to abide with us for that end, during
our pleasure, under the pain of being reputed our Enemies, and proceeded
against accordingly.

And another thus.

WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army, do require and command the Magistrates
of Glasgow, to Extend and Banish forth thereof, all Archbishops, Bishops and
Curates, their Wives, Bairns and Servants, and all other families and persons
concerned in the Kings Army, within eight and forty hours, after the
Publishing hereof, under the Highest pains.

You have seen before what bad Subjects they were, and these two will show what
insolent Masters they proved, but their Dominion was not long.

That which first amated them, was the news of the Prorogation of the
Parliament in England, upon which they chiefly depended, and in all probability
had never risen, but that they were forced into a belief, that they were sure
on that side: not that I think the Parliament would have been any way
serviceable to them, but they were made to believe so in Scotland, where any
thing that looked that way, was magnified above its real bigness. But that
being gone, and the rest of Scotland continuing quiet, or Arming against them,
and their friends in Edenborough, being kept from joining with them; they began
to suspect the worst, and so fell a little from their first fury, and published
this second Declaration for their Vindication.

AS it is not unknown to a great part of the World, how happy the Church of
Scotland was, whilst they enjoyed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in purity and
power; of which we have been deplorably deprived by the establishment of
Prelalacy: So it is Evident not only to impartial persons, but to professed
Enemies, with what unparalled patience and constancy the People of God have
endured all the Cruelty, Injustice and Oppression that the Will and Malice of
Prelates and Malignants could invent and exercise. And being most unwilling to
Act any thing which might import opposition to Lawful Authority, or engage the
Kingdom in a War, although we have all along been groaning under the
overturning the work of Reformation, Corruptions of Doctrine, Slighting of
Worship, Despising of Ordinances, the changing the Ancient Church Discipline
and Government, Thrusting out so many of our faithful Ministers from their
Charges, Confining, straightly Imprisoning, exiling yea and putting to death
many of them, and intruding upon their Flocks, a company of insufficient and
scandalous persons, and Fining, Confining, Imprisoning, Torturing, Tormenting,
Scourging and Stigmatizing poor people, Plundring their Goods, Quartering upon
them rude Soldiers, Selling their persons to foreign Plantations, Horning is
Out Lawing. There is nothing like intercommuning with us; for if any man hold
any correspondency with the offender, he is to be adjudged a Rebel of the same
guiltiness; all which severities they themselves first set up and practiced
against others.

The Burden of Issachar. Printed 1646. page 41, 42.


Horning and Intercommuning many of both, whereby great Numbers in every Corner
of the Land, were forced to leave their Dwellings, Wives, Children, and
Relations, and made to wander as Pilgrims still in hazard of their Lives; none
daring to reset, harbor or supply (though starving) or so much as to speak to
them, even upon death bed, without making themselves obnoxious to the same
punishments, and these things Acted under color of Law, in effect tending to
banish not only all sense of Religion, but also to extinguish Natural
affection, even amongst persons of the nearest Relations, and likewise groaning
under the intolerable Yoke of Oppression in our Civil Interests, our Bodies,
Liberties and Estates. So that all manner of outrages have been most
arbitrarily exercised upon us through a tract of several years past;
particularly in the year 1678, by sending among us an Armed Host of Barbarous
Savages, contrary to all Laws and Humanity; and by laying on us several
Impositions and Taxes, as formerly. So of late by a meeting of Prelimited and
Overawed Members in the Convention of Estates in July 1678, for keeping up of
an Armed Force entrusted (as to a great part of it) into the hands of avowed
Papists, or favorers of them; by whom sundry Invasions have been made upon us,
and most exorbitant abuses, and incredible Insolences committed against us,
and we being continually sought after, while meeting in Houses for divine
Worship, Ministers and People frequently apprehended, and most rigorously used;
and so being necessitated to attend the Lords Ordinances in Fields, in the most
desert places; and there also often hunted out, and assaulted, to the effusion
of our blood, and killing of some, whereby we were inevitably constrained
either to defend our selves by Arms at these meetings, or to be altogether
deprived of the Gospel preached by faithful Ministers, and made absolute
Slaves. At one of which Meetings, upon the first of June instant, Captain
Graham of Claver House, being Warranted by a late Proclamation, to kill
whomever he found in Arms, at Field Conventicles, making resistance, did
furiously assault the people assembled; and further to provoke, did cruelly
bind like Beasts, a Minister, with some others, whom he had that very same
Morning found in Houses: and several being killed on both sides; they knowing
certainly, that by Law they behoved (if apprehended) to die; they did stand to
their own defense, and continue together; and there after many of our Friends
and Countrymen being under the same oppression, expecting the same measure, did
freely offer their assistance. We therefore thus inevitably, and of absolute
Necessity forced to take this last Remedy; (the Magistrates having shut the
Door by a Law against application, that what ever our Grievances be, either in
things Civil or Sacred, we have not the Privilege of a Supplicant) do judge our
selves bound to declare, That these with many other Horrid Grievances in Church
and State (which we purpose to Manifest hereafter) are the true Causes of this
our lawful and innocent self-defence. And we do most solemnly in the presence
of Almighty God the Searcher of all hearts, declare, That the true reasons of
our continuing in Arms, heartily and sincerely are these.

1. The defending and securing of the true Protestant Religion, and
Presbyterian Government; founded upon the word of God, and summarily
comprehended in our Confessions of faith, and Catechisms, and Established by
the Laws of this Land. To which Kings, Nobles, and People, are solemnly sworn
and engaged in our National and Solemn League and Covenant; and more
particularly, the defending and maintaining the Kingly Authority of our Lord
Jesus Christ over his Church, against all sinful Supremacy derogatory thereto,
and encroaching thereupon.

2. The preserving and defending the Kings Majesty, his Person and Authority,
in preservation and defense of that true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdom, that the World may bear Witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty;
and that we have no thoughts or intention to diminish his just Power and
Greatness.

3. The Obtaining of a free and Unlimited Parliament, and a free General
Assembly, in Order to the Redressing or foresaid Grievauces for preventing the
eminent danger of Popery, and Extirpating of Prelacy from amongst us.

This therefore being the cause we appear for, and resolve in Gods great Name
to own, They are much more honest and ingenuous than our Dissenters, for that
they speak frankly and freely what they mean to do; which the other deny in
words, and prosecute in deeds as much as the Scots, as far as they durst.
thereby Homologating all the Testimonies of faithful Sufferers for the truth
in Scotland these eighteen years by gone. We humbly request the Kings Majesty
would restore all things as he found them, when God brought him home to his
Crown and Kingdoms; and if that cannot be obtained, then we heartily and humbly
invite, entreat, beseech and obtest in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, all who are
under the same That is the Obligation of the Covenant.
Bonds with us, to occur in the Defense of this Country, Cause and Interest.
And that they will not stand still and see not only us oppressed, but this
foresaid cause ruined; Adversaries highly and proudly insult against God, and
all good Friends of the truth discouraged. Yea, the Protestant Cause in Britain
and Ireland, and even your selves within a little time made a Prey of, or else
forced when we are Broken (which the good Lord prevent) dreadfully to wrong
your Consciences. Finally, because we desire no man's hurt or blood, We request
our Country men, now the standing Forces of this Kingdom, some of them being
our Friends and Kinsmen, not to fight against us; least in so doing, they be
found fighting against the Lord; whose cause and quarrel we are sure he will
own and signally countenance, seeing we fight under his Banner, who is the Lord
of Hosts.

I have taken the pains to transcribe this Long Declaration, not for any
delight I take in it, but because it is an undeniable instance and
demonstration, that the Kirk-men in Scotland did then intend to have renewed
that War again that formerly brought this Nation to the very brink of Ruin,
and was the means of the Barbarous Murder of his Majesty's Father, of the
Banishment of our King and his Brothers and Sisters for twelve years; of the
expense of 48 Millions of Money and Plate, and of the loss of one hundred
thousand Lives by Fire, Sword and Famine: All which calamities were begun and
carried on by these very men first in Scotland, by the encouragement of some
factious men of our own Nation, and afterward here in England, upon the same
pretenses. As any man may remember that is but fifty years old, and the rest
may see by comparing this Declaration with those that were made then; and
therefore I cannot but admire the Providence of God in preventing this
Presbyterian Plot, by a Prorogation in the very nick of time, without which
this Rebellion would in all likelihood have had much countenance from some in
England, who encouraged it Underhand, upon pretenses of Countenance from above,
how groundless soever; nor had it ended as it did, and where it did, if they
had got the first battle, or but been able to have kept the Field.

But for the benefit of my Country Reader, who is not acquainted with the
affairs of Scotland, let me observe two or three things for the better
understanding of this Grand Cheat, and without which this doleful Story may
leave great impressions of pity upon the mind of an Englishman, which these
bloody Rebels of all the world do not deserve.

The Reader then shall be pleased to understand, that besides this Rebellion;
there was a former one at Pentland Hills, where these Covenanteers fought the
Kings Forces in ranged Battle in 1666, and in many of their Field Conventicles,
there was weekly Meetings of Hundreds and Thousands of Armed men formed into
Troops and Companies, ready upon all occasions of probable capacity to fight
against the King, for the King in Sion. And in 1676, they appeared so numerous,
that the Privy Council of Scotland advised his Majesty to send English Forces
to lie in readiness upon the Borders, and to order Viscount Granard to lie with
an Army on the Irish Coasts, ready to be transported upon occasion; and
likewise upon the Motion of the Marquess of Athol, to procure the Lords of the
Highlands a Commission to march with their Vassals under the Command of his
Majesty's Major General into the West, which descent of the Highlanders is
mentioned in the Declaration, and Aggravated beyond truth or reason, by
stilling them Barbarians; which those that knew these men aver they were not,
(but behaved themselves very civilly) to prevent the Field Conventicles from
running together into a general Rebellion; as they did this May. But to come to
particulars, they had a Field fast near Iedburgh in Tiveotdale toward the
latter end of March 1678, where there were present 7 Preachers and 5000 people
(the men being armed) to seek God for three things. 1. That he would be pleased
to put an end to the persecution of his people in that Kingdom. 2ly, That he
would have mercy on all those that took the wicked Bond, (that was not to
suffer any Conventicles on their Lands) and give them grace to repent. 3ly,
That he would bless with success those Noble Lords that were gone to London (
to complain of the Duke of Lauderdale, and who procured the first Address
against him, though to no purpose.) There was another in the March, the May
following, where were assembled eight or 9000 People to receive the Sacrament,
and renew the solemn League and Covenant, of which the Privy Council gave his
Majesty an account. And another near Dumbar shortly after, where they fell upon
the Kings forces of the Basse, that went out to dismiss them; and killed one of
the Soldiers, and wounded more. Finally, my Author who is a learned Gentleman,
says, if he should go on to enumerate all the Field Meetings, till that great
one, which began the Rebellion this May, he might write a History. [The Spirit
of Popery, speaking out of the Mouths of Phanatical Protestants; or the last
Speeches of John Kid and John King, etc. page 11.

The matter of fact being thus stated, the Reader need not wonder they were
severely treated, when they suffered the pains of Treason and Rebellion; but
besides those, they had committed a vast number of Massacres and Assassinations
before they murdered the Primate, and this aggravated their sufferings. Now
all the cunning of this Declaration lies in this, that they tell us what they
suffered; and perhaps truly, but not a tittle of the case. Which is just as if
all the Rogues in the Nation, should join and pen a complaint, ennumerating how
many of them, since his Majesty's Return, have been Hanged, Quartered, Whipped,
Branded, Transported, Pillored, Imprisoned, which never meant any hurt to his
Majesty or the Government, but only to get a Living the best and easiest way
they could. Now to one that is as little versed in our ways of Punishment as we
are in the Scotch, it would seem a rueful Story; whilst an English man would
smile, as knowing why they suffered all these hardships. I need not apply it,
but shall add this, they have deserved ten times more then they have felt, as
being the bloudiest Cutthroats in the world. So that in Scotland no man dare
to offend them openly for fear of assassination, but such as either must by the
necessity of their places, or else have good means of defending their Lives
against them.

Next I observe this Declaration is nothing but a large flourish upon the
Speech, and drawn just at that loose general rate which that is, calling those
Taxes and Punishments Arbitrary, which they acknowledge were according to
several Acts of Parliament; and then pretending the persons that do constitute
their Parliaments or States, are overawed. But then I must commend their
ingenuity in this, that they do not (with the Commons of England) lay the blame
of all this upon the Duke of Lauderdale, or their Ministers, but upon the total
change of their Government and State both Sacred and Civil, and upon the
Parliament of Scotland and the King; whom they supplicate with menaces to
restore him into the same State he found them in; without which they were
sensible, the removing of the Duke of Lauderdale, or any other of the great
Ministers of State would signify nothing as to their Designs: which was as they
plainly tell us, to set up the Presbyterian Doctrine and Church Government, to
serve the King in nothing else, any further then he would serve them in that.
And lastly to obtain a free and unlimited Parliament and Assembly, that is such
as it might not be in his Majesty's power to dissolve or frustrate by
prorogation; till they had extirpated Popery and Prelacy both together, which
was freely and roundly to tell us what they would have, without canting and
amusing us with general terms and hints, but then I must not deny they had
swords by their sides to justify these demands, which our Gentlemen want, and I
wish ever may do; but yet the Reader may observe that Speech that was so hugged
in England, and the Scotch Declaration meant the same thing, though in
different terms.

Observe also, that they call the Presbyterian Doctrine and Government, the
Religion established; though they own it to be taken away by a rescissory Act
of Parliament; for they believe all those Acts that have or shall be made
against it, are Null and Void, and the former Acts are still in force though
repealed: which is an odd sort of Establishment, consisting in the fancy of the
people that own it, and not in Law or Nature.

They lay the stress of their Justification upon necessity, and yet own the
greatest part of it to arise from hence; that they must be deprived of the
Gospel preached by the faithful Ministers, and be made Slaves, if they did not
rebel. Now as to their civil interest, they would be in the same State with
their Country men, who are so far from rebelling, that they have several times
chastised them for it, with a very little assistance from England. And as to
their Preachments, I wonder in what part of the Gospel they learned to defend
Christ's Religion by rebellion; but we must know this is pure Scotch,
Calvinistical, Jesuitical Doctrine, begun by the Devil and his Vicar the Pope,
not many hundred years ago: and for which Bellarmine acknowledges, there is
neither Precept nor Example in the Bible, nor in all Church History till near a
thousand years after our Savior's time; and he gives this reason why the
Gospel taught patience and submission, because the contrary would have ruined
Christianity then, when but a few professed it, but tells us St. Paul would
have taught otherwise if he had lived in our days. I shall not dispute how the
Cardinal or the Scotch Gentlemen (who talk at the same rate) came to know this,
but I say, it is equally destructive of any other Doctrine a man has no mind
to practice; as of this of submission to Princes, and suffering patiently for
the truth without resistance. As suppose I have a mind to revenge, and they
tell me of the Doctrine of meekness, and forgiving injuries and Enemies; if I
reply, this Doctrine was adopted to the Infant state of Christianity, when
Professors were few, and exposed to persecution, and could have got nothing by
revenging their quarrels but ruin; but the state of things is otherwise now,
and I may revenge my self with security both as to my self, and as to my
Religion; and from thence infer that that Doctrine is ceased, and I am at
liberty to do in that particular as I see cause; and that St. Paul would have
taught so if he had lived in these times, I say if I should argue thus upon
their principles, it could never be answered; and a man might say as much for
any other Gospel precept, he had no mind to obey.

But to return. The Covenanters in their first Declaration, date the rise of
all their troubles from the year 1648, and that is true and worth a Note. You
must know Charles the first had given them by the pacification all that they
asked, and the long Rebel Parliament had sent them home laden with thanks,
Money and the spoils of England before our wars began A View of the late
Troubles. cap. 18.
, but things going ill on the Parliament side, after the King had routed Waller
in the West, and almost totally subdued the North by the valor of the E. of
Newcastle; the Parliament having no other way to turn them, were forced to call
in the Scots once more with Money and Promises, yea and Oaths too, to settle
the Presbyterian Church Government here in England. These two things prevailing
upon them, in they came, and that ruined the King and his Party, who at last
surrendering himself to the Scots, they dutifully sold him to the Parliament for
300000 lb. as all the World knows; but the Chapmen fell out, and Independency
prevailing at the same time in England, on it went with the same force, and
ruined the poor Kirk of Scotland, and made this Covenanting Nation, the veriest
Slaves in the world; and ever since, Presbytery there as well as in England
have been in a feeble state: and they were oppressed in their civil Interests,
Liberties and Freedoms, and made such Slaves by a standing Army of English, and
two Forts which his Majesty has since demolished, that a Scot in those days
durst not have walked (as I have been told) with a Cudgel in his hand, and
Parliament, general Assembly, or any other Convention, they were never to have
more, nor any other Address but what they got by most humble Supplication, only
they had no Bishops, so that if his Majesty should restore all things as he
found them, when God brought him home to his Crown and Kingdoms, the Scots
would have no reason to thank him for the favor.

But in the interim, I wonder they can reflect thus upon the time, when their
calamities began, which was the very year they sold his Majesty's Father into
the hands of his Enemies, who basely murdered him; and not be confounded with
horror and shame at the Villainy they then did; nor yet reflect upon the Justice
of God which has pursued them ever since through all the changes that have
happened, and having first made their dear Covenanting Brethren of England to
begin the Chastisement of them, has gone on from time to time, to baffle all
their attempts to recover their Lost Estate; and they have reason to believe he
will do so, till the opinions and persons of that schismatical Confederacy be
rooted out of the World.

And here let our English Dissenters too be pleased to remember, they have done
worse then the Scots; for they murdered that Prince which the Scots only sold,
and by how much they have smarted less then the Scots, so much the more is
behind, and the Justice of God will not be restrained by the Act of Indemnity,
but he will certainly recompense them according to their deserts, with so much
the greater severity, because they have abused the Lenity of his Anointed and
his long-sufferance.

I shall add but one word more, and then see the Catastrophe of these Rebels;
and that is an humble Request to the Loyal Scots, that they would not take this
amiss, for I heartily applaud their fidelity to his Majesty, and acknowledge
they deserve to partake of his Royal bounty and Princely favor equally with
the English; and I wish them all that prosperity and happiness they can desire:
for they are no otherwise concerned in the Covenanters, then the Church of
England men are in the evil Actions of the English Dissenters.

The 20th of June, the Duke of Monmouth who went Post into Scotland for that
Service, went to the Army which the Council of Scotland had prepared for him,
which lay then at a place called Blackburn, where he viewed and mustered all
the Forces, and put all things in a readiness to encamp, the next day he
marched with his Army to Moorhead, and the day following to Bothwell bridge.
Where the Enemy lay about eight Miles distant from his second Camp.

The place where they then were, was called Hamilton Park, and was well chosen,
if it had or could have been well defended; for there was no passage to it but
over Bothwell bridge, which they had well lined with Musketeers, and
Barricadoed with Stones, Cart Wheels, and the like.

The Dukes Army marched in great silence and Order, and had been upon the
Rebels before they had taken the Allarm; but that their foremost Guards
discovered them by the light of their Matches. And so they put themselves into
a posture of Defense.

The Duke found the Rebels in two Bodies, half a Mile one from the other; the
foremost Party which was the weakest in Number, lay near the Bridge, the other
near their Camp, as high as the liitle Park; where they stood in their Orders
and Ranks.

Major Oglethorp, posted himself upon the first approach near the Bridge, with
the Dragoons, and the rest of the Dukes Army drew up, upon a Hill fronting
Hamilton Park, about a mile from the Bridge; the River being between the two
Armies.

As soon as the Duke came to Major Oglethrop's Post, there came out to him from
the Rebels, one David Haine, and another of their Preachers, who presented to
his Grace, the Declaration I have recited, Printed, and a Petition signed by
Robert Hamilton their General, in the name of the Covenanted Army then in Arms;
in which they prayed that the Terms of their Declaration might be made good,
and that a safe Conduct might be granted to some of their Number, to address
themselves to his Grace in this Matter.

To which the Duke replied, that he would not treat with them upon their
Declaration, the terms of which were contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, and such as he would not, nor could grant; as indeed they were too high
to have been offered after a Victory; much more in the first approaches of a
General, with a better though smaller Army then theirs. But then he told them,
that if they would lay down their Arms, he would receive them into the Kings
mercy. And with this Answer the two Preachers went back, desiring some time to
consider; which the Duke granted them.

About half an hour after, the Rebels sent a Paper by a Drummer, representing
that they were informed that his Grace came from England, with terms to be
offered to them, and they desired to know what he had to propose, that they
might advise whether the Terms were such as they could accept of.

Whether this were so or no, it was very imprudent in them, to send this
Message before they had excused themselves in relation his first demands; and
besides, this was a mighty slight to the General to demand an account of his
private Instructions by a Drummer with a Paper; when as it had been fitter to
have sent two or three of the best Gentlemen in their Army to have asked this
favor, with all the Courtship imaginable; though their Forces had been much
stronger then they were. For this indeed was it that made them thus insolent,
their Preachers had doubtless informed them, that the Dukes Army was less then
theirs; as it is said it was. And hence they concluded very ignorantly, they
might ask what they pleased, and have it.

The Duke was not idle all this while, but had ordered his Cannon to be brought
down from the Body of the Army, and Planted near the Bridge, and with them he
had Drawn down some part of his Horse and Foot, whilst they were treating, and
took no notice of what he did, or at least did not oppose it, so they were
every moment in a worse condition and he was in a worse condition, and he in a
better.

So that being netled with this contempt of theirs, he sent away their Drummer
with this answer, that since they had not satisfied him, but rather trifled, he
would receive no more messages from them. And to show them he was in Earnest,
whatever they were, commanded his Cannon to fire; which it no sooner did, but
the Rebels who were drawn up on the other side upon a rising ground near the
Bridge, threw themselves upon the ground to avoid the shot. But those that were
placed upon the Bridge, fired at first pretty briskly, but after five or six
Cannon shot they ran away, those on the rising ground beginning first; as they
were a sort of tumultuous people fitter to begin then carry on a War.

The Dukes men immediately seized the Bridge, and threw into the River their
Barracadoes; where they took the only piece of Cannon they had, of which they
had made no use; and then followed them up the Hill: but their Number being
very small, the Rebels rallied, and faced them, but had not the courage to come
down upon them. So the Dukes Party returned back again to the Bridge, and one
shot of Cannon more, made the Rebels fly to their main Body, where they stood
again. By which, one may see here was neither courage nor conduct in these men
or their Commanders.

In the mean time, the General passed the Army over the Bridge, and drew it up
upon the rising ground which took some time, and at last a little before they
were quite in Order, the Rebels advanced upon the Army in very good order; but
espying the Cannon in the head of the Dukes Army, they immediately shifted
their Order and opened in the middle, thinking it seems they were obliged to
shoot straight forward, but the Cannon being turned upon them as they then
stood, and discharged three or four times, they began to run again; their
Commander Robert Hamilton being one of the first; and the Dukes Dragoons and
the Highlanders Advancing upon them in this Confusion, it was a perfect Rout,
and they fled all ways; the Dukes men pursuing them. In this Skirmish there
were killed 7, or 800, and Eleven or 1200 taken Prisoners. The Horse were
wholly broken, and those of the Foot that escaped, fled immediately to the Wood
in Hamilton Park; where the only care was to secure them from flying. To which
purpose his Grace drew up his Forces, and surrounded the Park, and sent
Colonel Duglas with a detacht Party to ferret them out of the Wood. Of the
Dukes Party few men were lost.

The next day, the Duke sent out several Parties to pursue those that were
fled; marching himself with the Army to a Village within two miles of Streuine;
and the twenty fourth of June, sent all the prisoners which were said to be 11,
or 1200, upder the Guard of two Militia-Regiments, and Captain Strathan's Troop
of Dragoons to Edenborough; the Magistrates of which place, undertook to secure
them with the Town Guards; and accordingly put them into an enclosure with high
Walls round it, at the Back of the Gray Friars Church.

The next day, the Duke returned to Edenborough, to consult with the Lords of
the Council how to dispose of the Heretors and Militia-Regiments that had
served his Majesty on that occasion against the Rebels, as also of those that
were then on their march from the several Shires; seeing there was then no need
of their further Service. Which affair being ordered, together with such other
as he thought most necessary, he took Posthorses, and returned to London.

Thus ended the Scotch Rebellion, with the Common fate of such ill grounded
enterprises; it made them weaker and more hated, and strengthened and confirmed
the lawful Authority of his Majesty; it being the nature of the Vulgar to loath
and despise the Innocent when unfortunate; much more Rebels and Traitors.

But then these Zealots like their Predecessors who ruined the Jews, and
Josephus informs us, by their cruelty and furious bloody devotion, had bespoke
the detestation of all sober men; not only by their barbarous assassination of
the Primate, which was the occasion of this Rebellion, but also by their
insolence and unaccountable rage and madness during the short time it lasted.
Of which I will give a few instances.

They Barbarously treated the dead Body of one Graham an Officer, The Spirit of
Popery. page 47.
whom they killed at that Conventicle which began the Rebellion upon the
account of his Name only. They committed insufferable Insolences in the Houses
of the Regular Ministers and Loyal Gentlemen as they marched along the Country
to Glasgow, Stabbing, Cutting, and Gashing his Majesty's Picture wheresoever
they found it; particularly in the House of the Lord of Hagges, executing that
Treason they had entertained in their hearts upon his Effigies, because his
Royal Person was out of their reach; foolishly at once betraying and
disappointing their disloyal designs. They behaved themselves barbarously in
the house of the Archbishop of Glasgow, where they burnt his Books, cut in
pieces his best Hangings and Furniture, and almost killed a Gentlewoman with
blows, who was left to keep the House, only for saying these words; Gentlemen,
I hope you will remember that you are in the Archbishops House. They
sacrilegiously entered the Cathedral of Glasgow, and finding a Tombstone over
the Two Children of the Bishop of Arguile with an Inscription of a Modern date.
They dug up their Bodies, run them through with their Swords, and left them
lying above the ground.

And even after they were beaten, An Account of the Vidory; Printed at London.
one of the Kings Soldiers, going into a Country house belonging to one of
these Covenanters for a little Meal, as he stooped down to take it out of a
Chest, was by the Master of the House stabbed through the Back, for which
unmanly Murder, he was immediately apprehended, and shot to death. Which (as
the Author says) shows the cruel and merciless disposition of that sort of
people.

To which if you add the two insolent Proclamations I have mentioned already;
it will be no wonder the City of Edenborough received the news of their defeat
with the greatest joy imaginable; there being nothing to be heard there, but
joyful acclamations, Ringing of Bells, and Roaring of Cannons from the Castle,
and good store of Bonfires besides, all men dreading to fall into the hands of
such Godly Villains, and therefore rejoicing at their Ruin.

The Conclusion.
And now my dear Country men, if you will but be pleased to reflect seriously
and impartially upon what I have written with great pains for your information;
I doubt not but you will conclude with me; that as never any Prince treated a
People with more Candor and Lenity then his Majesty did upon this juncture, so
there were some that made very unsuitable returns to his goodness; and plainly
discovered that the peace of the Kingdom, was not so truly aimed at by some of
them, as it was intended by him. Notwithstanding their loud pretenses of
preserving and settling the Protestant Religion, which is inseparably annexed
to, and bound up in the other.

How far they employed their time in the great concerns of the Nation, how far
their Proceedings were calm and peaceable, and how far they tended to the
curbing of the motions of those unruly Spirits which did endeavor to disturb
them, I shall leave also to your and their serious thoughts.

I have all along followed the Printed Journal of this Session of Parliament,
transcribing for the most part the very words; except they were too long, and
then abbreviating them with all the fidelity imaginable: but when all is done,
I advise you to read the Original too.

If I seem too sharp in any of my reflections, I desire you would consider that
it is impossible for flesh and blood to be unconcerned, when a man's Prince, his
Religion, his Liberty, Estate, and life is at the Stake; and all in danger to
be ruined by the knavery of some, and the folly of others.

I have not catched at all opportunities to make them neither; but have left
scope enough to my Reader to add his own, where I have spared mine, which he
may do with more safety then I can.

And lastly being sensible of the infirmities of mortality in general, and of
my own in particular; I submit my self entirely to wiser men, having had no
other design in this, then to preserve the Protestant Religion by Law
established, and the Civil Government, as much as in me lies, by showing how
they have been endangered by others besides the Papists, which will appear more
fully also, if any occasion shall present it self, of speaking further upon
this Subject hereafter.

FINIS.
The THIRD and LAST Part OF THE ADDRESS TO THE FREEMEN AND FREEHOLDERS OF THE
NATION.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for George Wells, at the Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

To all the Loyal Persons in the Nation, who Addressed to His MAJESTY to Thank
Him for His late Gracious DECLARATION.
GENTLEMEN,
THis and the two former Parts of this Work were all written at once, tho they
have happened since to be published at several times, and were occasioned by
those many Generous and most Loyal Demonstrations you every day then gave of
your Attachment to His Majesty's Interest, and the Established Government both
in Church and State; for the truth is, till I saw you rise up so generally, and
declare so heartily what your intentions were, I durst not think of opposing
that Torrent, that then seemed to bear down all that stood before it, and
threatened the rooting up of the Monarchy.

But when you came forth, and with a Loyalty and Courage becoming Englishmen,
tell your Sovereign however you have of late been represented to him and the
World, you were resolved to maintain His Royal Authority, the Church and the
Government, and the Lawful Succession too, in the State they were now Legally
settled, against all opposition whatsoever, and to that purpose freely and
sincerely offer him your Lives and Fortunes to Command when necessity should
require; I then saw there were more Thousands then I thought of that were
resolved never to bow the Knee to the schismatical Calves either at Dan or
Bethel; or submit to another Hogan Mogan Commonwealth; and then I perceived
that my former fears, how just soever they might seem before, were yet too
great, for there were (or at least might be) more for us then against us.

But then when I considered your quality, and the places you enjoyed in the
Government, I raised my hopes yet higher, and I concluded a people who had such
Loyal, such Religious, such Free and Generous Persons entrusted with the
Government of them, could hardly miscarry in the end, tho for a time popular
Storms might toss them.

I thought also that God himself had again respected his beloved Daughter the
Church of England; for which I was before more concerned then for my self: and
that he had declared himself the second time for the Family of his Servant the
Illustrious Royal Martyr; For I could not ascribe so universal and unusual
Concurrence of Men of different Humors, Educations, and degrees to any other
cause then the Divine Providence inspiring them with a Spirit of Unity,
Loyalty, and Resolution.

Yet observing that there was a considerable number of Freemen and Freeholders
in the Nation to whom Heaven had not yet vouchsafed that favor, who went wrong
out of Ignorance and incogitancy rather then Faction or Disloyalty, and being
an idle person, I thought I could not possibly better employ a part of my time,
then in Addressing to them, to reduce and inform them, and as much as in me lay
to render them like you; and also to confirm such as might possibly yet stagger
if another Temptation should befall them.

So that Gentlemen, is was from your example, I took Courage to Write, and for
your sakes Chiefly have I since ventured to publish what I have written, that I
may in some sort justify your Numerous Addresses, and therefore I humbly beg
your leave to Dedicate the whole Work to you who indeed first gave it life.

It may possibly seem strange to some of you to find an Epistle Dedicatory in
the end, Eusebius puts the Dedication of his Ecclesiastical History in the
beginning of the tenth and last Book of it.
as it were of a Work; but the thing has been done before, and the truth is, I
would not venture at a Dedication till I did see whether it would be received
in the World, and now it is, I am sorry I have nothing better to present you
with whose Names deserve to be Registered to all succeeding Ages, and your
Encomium written by the most Elegant Pen the Christian World affords.

But Gentlemen, it is not my design to Create a high opinion of you, in your
selves, but to excite you to go on and perfect the good Work you have began,
for that is the thing the Factious please themselves in, viz. That however you
seem now, when time shall be, you will unsay all again, and join with them as
heartily as any other against the Church and State, and this they have
published in print; and that I may not seem to slander them, I will Transcribe
the very words of one of them.

No applications of this Nature to the regnant person are to be esteemed of any
great Weight or Significancy; An Impartial Account of the Nature and Tendency
of the late Addresses, Sect. 2.
if you do but consider the result of the many Addresses Three and Twenty years
ago to Richard Cromwell, and how they only served to render him secure till he
was undermined and supplanted, for all the Sixteen Hundred Thousand that vowed
to live and dye by him, not so much as one man drew a Sword for him when he
came to be laid aside. I acknowledge that there is great difference betwixt an
Usurper and a lawful Prince, (he might have added also, and betwixt a parcel of
men that had sworn and forsworn themselves as often as occasion required, and
betrayed thereby all parties one after another, and such Addressors as these
who applied themselves to their lawful and rightful Sovereign to whom they were
true when his 1600000 Rebelled, first against their Natural Prince, and when
they had prevailed against him by Perjury and Violence, they made use of them
one against another, till at length they ruined themselves too) Yet that (as he
goes on) detracts very little in the present Case from the Importance of the
Consideration which I have suggested, seeing the least that we are to gather
from it is this, that no Addresses contrary to the Interest and general Humor
of the Nation (which he supposes these were) are to be accounted of any value
for a Prince to sustain himself upon. And if there be nothing else to secure
our late Addressors to his Majesty (which he grants there is, they being his
Natural Subjects, and ever Loyal to him) but their promises and protestations
in these papers, he may be as much disappointed, should he trust to them, as
the former Gentleman after the like Security. Thus far my Author, but he ought
to have considered, Richard was turned out by the Army against whom these
Addressors could not have protected him if they would, which added to the
former of the temper of the different Addressors to the several Parties, and
their very distant or rather opposite positions, which he takes notice of, the
one being an Usurper, and the other a lawful Prince, will make the two cases so
totally unlike; that no consequence can be drawn from the one to the other,
much less that bold one, that because Richard was laid aside without any
resistance made by the Addressers, therefore none is to be expected from these.

But the truth is, tho you be never so sincere, yet you may be overpowred by
force, and then all your protestations in these Papers will have no other
effect then to betray you to ruin when ever these Godly Richardians can get
the mastery over you; to prevent which it is absolutely necessary to back your
said Loyal Declarations with effectual supplies when necessity requires, and in
the Interim to take all the care imaginable to win off as many as you can of
the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation from siding with such men as my
Author, in the next Election of Parliament Men: and because I could do little
more, I writ these three small discourses for that end, and how meanly soever I
have performed my part in it, I beg your acceptance of my good intentions, and
that you would in your several Stations promote this Work which is so
absolutely necessary, by more effectual means.

Amongst which I am persuaded none would succeed better then an Universal
Execution of the Laws against the Dissenters, Especially those against
Conventicles, for these are the Seed-places where factions are nursed up till
they may be strong enough to graple with and overturn the Government of Church
and State, and to this end the Oxford Act would be more subservient in
Corporations, then that of the 22d of his now Majesty's Reign. For if the
Teachers were once removed out of these places, tho but to a distance of Five
Miles, they would not so easily poison the small Freemen with Rebellious
principles; and those that they have already seduced would in time become more
tractable.

One other means I would recommend to you, is the Communicating the Loyal
discourses that are every day printed to your Neighbors, which is done much
more usually by the Dissenters by the other sort, so that you shall sometimes
find a Seditious Libel to have passed through so many hands, that it is at last
scarce Legible for dirt and sweat; whilst the Loyal answer stands in a
Gentleman's Study as clean and as neat as it came from the Press. But if the
meaner sort of men might but hear both the Parties, the Advantage the
Government gives to the Loyal side, added to the strength of their Reasons,
would certainly in time turn the Scale that way; and then they would be zealous
too for the Government, when their Reasons and Consciences were once convinced
that their Interest and Duty lay there.

And another is, the keeping (as much as is possible) of Factious men out of
all places of Trust, Power, or Profit; which when they have once gained, they
constantly employ these private advantages to the public damage. Had this
been duly Attended upon his Majesty's Return, and practiced ever since, we had
not been in the danger we now are of being ruined the second time by them: but
alas, they had plundered the Nation for 20 years together, and the Act of
Indemnity made all this Ill-gotten wealth their own, and with it they purchased
the far greatest part of the places of profit, whilst the poor Caviliers were
excluded because they had nothing to give; and the rich because it was a shame
to take any thing of them. And thus the Factious with the spoils of the Royal
Party put themselves once more into a Capacity to ruin the Government, and
having thus got much more wealth then they had before, they procured a great
part of the places of Trust and Authority to be put into their hands too, and
many Loyal persons turned Whigs in revenge and out of discontent.

But that which of all other things would the most speedily and effectually
secure the Nation from a relaps into misery and confusion, is a surrender of
the Charters of the Corporations into his Majesty's hands, and the taking out
of new ones with such restrictions as he and his Council thinks fit. Nor can I
imagine why this should be scrupled, it being the only way that can secure
them long in that Vast and disproportionable Privilege they now have of sending
up Burgesses to the Parliament, which as they had it at first from the Crown,
so it was in danger to have been lost when the Government fell into O. C's.
Hands; and will go near to be lost in the Next Rebellion, and therefore it
befits them, of all men, to Secure the King's Authority, which is the
foundation of theirs.

Gentlemen,
You may perhaps not thank me for thus offering my Advice before it was asked;
The impartial account of the Nature and Tendancy of the Addresses.
but if you please to reflect Seriously upon what I have said, and also upon
the Indignities the Author of the Pamphlet I mentioned have Cast upon you, it
will soon appear reasonable to do all that is in your power to preserve your
Selves out of the hands of such insolent men. And this is not to be done by
Addressing to the King only, (tho that was well done too) but by addressing
your selves to root out Faction by all the Lawful Means God in his Providence
shall afford you: and if you be once resolved on this, no man's Counsel will be
refused in a business of that Consequence, that it Needs the United Hands and
Heads of the whole Nation to effect it.

But that I may obtain your belief the better in relation to what concerns the
Author I just now mentioned, I will transcribe some Passages out of him,
Section the 7th, he tells us, The Number of the Subscribers (to the Addresses)
is not to so Considerable as to bear any proportion to those who are against
them; for though a few busy people have made a great noise and buz in several
places of the Kingdom, yet all of them put together, make not so great a Number
as we have seen not long since to one Petition for a Parliament. Now doubtless
this his Neglect and Scorn of your Paucity and Fewness, (as he words it) as it
proceeds from hence, that you were for the most part the Governors, or at least
the Freemen or Freeholders that Addressed, when the Rabble and their Children
Petitioned, so it is intended to provoke his Mirmidons to fall upon you, and
teach you more respect to his Leviathan The Multitude.

This he prosecutes further, Section the 8th, where he tells us, Though the
Clergy and many of the present Commissioners both Civil and Military, and the
Magistrates of several of the Corporations had not only Interested themselves
in Countenancing the Addresses, but been Sticklers for them as for the Great
Charter or the Petition of Right, and some of them had been Knighted merely for
that Service, (as he Contemptuously calls it) yet could not all this prevail
with or bring over any great or valuable Number to join in them. The truth is,
it was early days then, but I believe the Gentleman had enough at last, and it
is no wonder that men of the quality he reckons up, should not be Numerous.

Yet Section 9th, he tells us, Your quality was as Inconsiderable as your
Number, being such as for want of Years (their Party are always of Age if they
can but tell their Names) or Poverty were never Capable of Giving a Vote in
Election of Members to Sit in Parliament, and (a few excepted) the rest made up
of the Scum and Refuse of the Places where they live. Were all his Petitioners
Worshipful Gentlemen, Learned Statesmen and Lawyers, or Sound Divines, etc.
tho the Order was, Care should be taken the Subscribers should be numerous, tho
they were neither Gentlemen, nor so much as Freemen? But he goes on, Norwich,
whence we have been alaramed with the greatest Noise, yields but a small Number
of persons either of Estate or Usefulness, whose hands were Annexed to the
Paper which was sent up. Yet this small number of Poor, Useles? people, were
the Governors and Common Council of one of the Richest as well as Loyallest
Cities of the Nation.

Section the 10th he says, That your Moral Conditions were agreeable to your
Civil, men Popishly inclined. Abhorrers of Petitions, or guilty of one or other
offense which the late Parliaments were about calling them to an Account for:
the rest were little Bankrupt Tradesmen, Scandalous and disgraced Attorneys:
men whose folly made them pragmatical and impertinent, or whose prodigality and
ambition forced them to look for preferment above their merit. So that did but
his Majesty know, (and Value the Judgment of the Petitioners) he would esteem
it a reflection upon his Honor, and an Aspersion upon the Wisdom and the
Equity of his Proceedings, to be either Approached or Thanked by them. Yet this
is a little more modest, than for a parcel of such men to come forth and tell
him against his Declared By Two Proclamations, one of the 11th day of December.
1679. for Proroguing the Parliament till the 11th of November. following. And the
other Published the 12th day of December. 1679. against These Tumultuous
Petitions, as contrary to the Common and Known Laws of the Land: and tending to
promote Discontents amongst the People, and to raise Sedition and Rebellion,
etc.
Resolution, That it was necessary to suffer the Parliament to Sit presently:
for this was to Teach him. And you may from this Character perceive what
Treatment you must Expect from these Gentlemen if ever they get an Advantage
against you.

Section the 11th he tells us, Your Politics were equal with your Morals; for
can any man believe (says he) that the Mayors, Headboroughs, Aldermen,
Bailiffs, Burgesses and Freemen of Ripon, Wigan, Windsor, Chatham, Hazelmeere,
New-Sarum, etc. are Competent Judges what the late House of Commons did legally
or illegally? etc. Yet this is not altogether so difficult, as it is to tell
when it is fit a Parliament should Sit, and when it is not fit, because this
depends on certain known and fixed Rules, which the other does not, but is to
be judged by the present state of Foreign and Domestic Affairs; things that
are known to few men. Then he goes on and tells us, The Learned Gentlemen of
the Gown were at least as well qualified to give their sense and opinion about
these matters, as Country Mercers, Innkeepers, Tailors and Thatchers (You must
know, the London Tradesmen are next Neighbors to his Learned Gown-men, and so
are Excepted by the Addition of the word Country.) And yet he tells us, Those
refused to meddle with Addresses, etc. But, Sir, did any of them Sign your
Petitions, I pray! if they did not, to use your own words a little varied,
20000 hands, to your Petitions, will not make that impression on the Minds of
Modest thinking men, as their being Cast out too by the Benchers and Barristers
of the Inns of Court will.

He Concludes, Sect. 22. with this Threat, That as you must Expect that the
judgment which you have passed upon persons and things, will at one time or
another come under a review; So matters which have either been misrepresented
by you, or in reference to which Parliaments (you know which he means) have
been Arraigned, may before then, come to be so well understood by his Majesty,
and all things so well Adjusted between Him and his People, that you (the
Addressers) may neither find your selves able to decline, nor be in a condition
to Control the Jurisdiction of the next Parliament, to which, he says, he
shall at present leave you. And you may be sure he expects it will be such an
One as the Last were, and then he thinks he shall not need to wish you a worse
punishment.

At this Insolent rate you have been treated in Print, and what can follow but
the Utmost Revenge this worst sort of Men can inflict upon you, if ever they
get you again under their power. I have read, That in the end of the last War
there was a Motion made at a Council of War, for a general Massacre of all the
principal Malignants, as they then styled the King's Party, and that it was
Carried in the Negative by a few Votes; and Considering the Rage, Malice and
Despair of these men to accomplish their Traiterous Designs of Subverting the
Government any other way, now the Kingdom has taken the Alarm, and not only
Addressed, but Abhorred their Association too, it is but reasonable to Expect
it will not be again overruled if Ever they be in a Capacity to put it to the
Vote the Second time: which God prevent.

My Intentions were to have ended this Epistle here, it being but too long
already; but there is one Passage in this Pamphlet I judge absolutely necessary
to be Considered, the words are These; Sect. 2.
Tho men are to be esteemed capable of knowing their own Wants, Fears and
Dangers, and ought to be justified in begging those means of Relief and Redress
which the Law has provided for them; yet every one is not to be accounted
Sufficiently qualified to Determine concerning the Reasonableness and Legality
of Parliamentary Proceedings and Resolves; nor is any Number of Men whatsoever
Empowered to Umpire differences between his Majesty and his Great Council. This
is the pretense that justified the last War, and as long as it stands for a
Maxim at this loose rate it is here penned, will justify Ten thousand one
after another; and therefore it cannot but be worth a small parcel of your time
to Enquire and Consider how much truth or falsehood there is in it.

And in the first place it cannot be denied, but that every man ought to have
the Liberty to propose his own personal Wants, Fears and Dangers to his
Superiors, and to be allowed thereupon to beg such Redress as the Law has
provided: but then to infer from hence, that he has an Equal right or ability
to Consider of the Public and National Wants, Fears and Dangers, and to beg
the Enacting of New Laws, or the Repeal of Old Laws, for the removing of them:
or, which is all one, the Calling, or Sitting, the Continuance, or Changing, of
Parliaments to that purpose, is so gross a delusion, so full of Danger, and
does so immediately tend to Sedition and Rebellion, Especially if Multitudes of
Factious men may be allowed to pretend what Fears, Wants and Dangers, they
please, and then in a Tumultuary way to beg what Redress they think fit, by
Petitions signed by 40, 50, or 60 thousand men at a time, that it was
prohibited by an Act of Parliament upon Experience of the Mischief it has
done, 13 Car. 2. cap. 5.
and the foresight of what it will do as often as it is used, it being
destructive to any Government whatsoever.

As to the Second Proposition, It is to be acknowledged, That every one is not
to be accounted Sufficiently qualified to Determine concerning the
Reasonableness and Legality of Parliamentary Proceedings and Resolves; But then
it is not fit to infer from thence, First, That no man is so qualified; nor
Secondly, That it is impossible but that all their Proceedings should be Legal
and Reasonable. Nor Thirdly, That any man ought to approve of, and submit to
them, whether they be so or no. For tho it is most certain, there are but few
men are so qualified; yet it is as Certain, that some men even amongst the
Addressers were, if many Years Sitting in Parliament will qualify a person of
great abilities for it: And it is no less certain, That of 1640, 1649, 1653,
1656. in none of which, Except the first, was there any Royal Writ at all. Lord
Chancell. Speech, May the 8th, 1661.
That the Proceedings of Two or Three Parliaments within the Memory of Man,
have been not only Unreasonable and Illegal, but Traiterous and Rebellious;
and we are not sure but that we may have more such, if God be not the
Mercifuller to us: and if any such should happen to be, and we should join with
them, tho but out of a Modest Opinion that we are not sufficiently qualified to
Determine concerning the Legality and Reasonableness of Parliamentary
Proceedings and Resolves; yet it would neither Excuse the Guilt, nor prevent
the Punishment that is due by Law to them who shall Rebel against the King, tho
in Obedience to a Parliament.

To the Third, That no Number of Men whatsoever is Empowered to Umpire betwixt
his Majesty and his Great Council; may be answered, That there is an ambiguity
in the word Umpire, and it may be taken not only different, but contrary ways,
and therefore it ought not to have been used in this place.

And Secondly, That if any difference should happen to arise betwixt him and
them, we ought not to resist the King, nor to assist his Great Council against
him with Force and Arms, tho the King should be in the Wrong, and they in the
Right; for that is Determined in Parliament already. 13 Car. 2. cap. 6.


Thirdly, It is true, That no Number of men whatsoever have any authority to
hear and determine their Differences in a Judicial way, so as to compel them to
submit to their judgment; for then that Number of men should be Superior both
to King and Barliament; but all this notwithstanding seeing the House of
Commons Appealed to the People by Printing their Votes, etc. and the King by
publishing his Gracious Declaration, why might not the Addressers, so far
approve of His Majesty's Proceedings, as to Thank Him for the Satisfaction he
had given them, and to promise him to stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes, which they were bound to do however.

Fourthly, It may be answered, That besides the Differences betwixt the King
and the Commons, and the Lords and Commons, there were some Differences betwixt
the Commons and some of them that Addressed afterward; they had Imprisoned
several Gentlemen and other Subjects which they conceived then (as perhaps they
do still) were Illegal and unreasonable Proceedings, and they were as capable
of Knowing their want of Protection, and as sensible of the Dangers, and Fears
of further Oppression as other men, and therefore they ought to have been
Justified if they had begged those means of Relief and Redress which the Law
had provided for them; but yet they Patiently and Silently Expected the Issue
till GOD put it into His Mejesties Royal Breast (in whose hands are the Hearts
of Kings) to declare these their Proceedings ARBITRARY; and might they not then
rise up and Thank their Sovereign for the Favor he had shown them? It is hard
to conceive upon this Man's principles they might not have Petitioned His
Majesty for Relief and Redress before this time, but yet no man did it.

And in Relation to the Differences betwixt His Majesty and the Commons, and
the Upper and the Lower House, what necessity is there that the Addressers
should approve of them; for tho the Commons were their Representatives and
Trustees, the King is their Sovereign, and the Lords are not Aliens and
Foreigners, but the Two highest States of this our Native Country: and although
the Addressers pretend no Authority over that Supreme Court of Jurisdiction,
yet what reason is there why they may not approve of what the Lords have done
well, tho the Commons will not?

Upon the whole therefore I crave Leave to Conclude, That the Addressors in
General have done nothing but what may be fairly Justified, and was necessary
to Satisfy his Majesty and the World, that there was a Considerable Part of
the Nation did not approve of what was done in the Names of the whole by the
Commons in Parliament: and if it be the Duty of every English man to fight for
his King, if occasion require, against any Party that ever shall hereafter
pretend to have the Authority of both or either of the Houses to back them, 13
Car. 2. cap. 6.
as I humbly conceive is most plain, then why may not they right his Majesty
with their Pens, who must do it with their Swords; why may they not Approve his
Cause as well as Defend it?

And if this be not allowed, Any King of England may be Deposed and Murdered
as the late King was; for if there be a Blind Obedience due to all the Votes of
Parliament, 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.. 2.
and no man may in any Case judge them Illegal and Unreasonable; then must all
men absolutely Submit to them, and obey them; and the Consequence is, if any
future Parliament shall Vote any future King, or or Monarchy it self a
Grievance to the Nation, and those that stand by them Enemies to the Kingdom,
if no man may Contradict such a Vote, nor any Number of Men how great soever
Umpire betwixt the King and his Great Council; that is, Defend him against his
Parliament, the effect will Certainly follow; and as this is the natural
Tendance of these Principles as we saw in the Late Troubles, so I can conceive
no other cause why they should be now again insinuated into the Heads of the
Rabble.

For these Men who pretend to reverence the Three Last Parliaments at such a
Prodigious rate, The late Long Parliament tho filled with Danby his Pensioners,
The Modest Vindication of the Two last Parliaments, p. 11.
do traduce that which went immediately before most abominably; and those who
are so tender of the Votes of these, care as little for the Established Laws
of the former, as I do for the Decrees of the Council of Trent, or of the Synod
of Dort: So that it is plain, it is not respect to Parliaments as Parliaments,
that makes them thus obsequious; but as made up of such a Sort of men, and
Driving on such Designs and Interests.

To return then, Gentlemen, from this long Digression, which I have inserted
only to Justify You, I will Conclude, That as you have begun bravely, so you
must go through with the business, or Expect a Revenge from the Opposite Party
equal to their Rage; and tho I Know you do not fear them, yet I would Advise
you not to be too Secure of them, but let your Vigilance, Industry, and
Application to all Sorts of Men, be equal to theirs at least; and then it is
Ten thousand to one, you shall never try either theirs or your own Valor, and
as your Case is better, so let it inspire you with more Resolution to Stand and
Fall with it; and his Most hearty Prayers for a good Success upon all your
Loyal Undertakings and Designs, shall never be wanting, who is

Your most Devoted Servant.

THE Third Part OF THE ADDRESS TO THE FREEMEN and FREEHOLDERS OF THE NATION.
HIS Majesty by the Blessing of GOD having Suppressed the short Scotch Rebellion,
which in great part miscarried by the timeing of it, tho no human foresight on
their part could have prevented that, His Majesty first Proroguing and then
Dissolving that Parliament which seemed to be the occasion of it, with such
Secrecy and Quickness, that their Friends at London could give them no previous
Notice of his Intentions so to do: So that besides the total disappointing them
of all that Countenance, Aid and Assistance they promised themselves from
England, many of their Friends at home, whose Crimes being less, had not the
same necessity, or whose Zeal was not of that fiery temper with theirs, and
therefore were prudently resolved (tho they wished well to the design) yet not
to hazard their sweet Lives and Fortunes in it till they saw what Success these
first Venturers had, who hearing of the Prorogation of the Parliament, and
being doubtless admonished by their London Friends at the same time not to stir
during this short Recess, (as they then thought it would be) laid by all
thoughts of Joining with them and Augmenting their Numbers, and the Privy
Councils in both Nations attending solely to that business, it was Extinguished
almost as easily as it began.

Upon which His Majesty by his Royal Proclamation Dissolved this Parliament,
and Issued out Writs for another to Sit at Westminster the Seventeenth day of
October, 1679. Hoping his Subjects duly reflecting upon the Miscarriages of the
Last House of Commons, and the Danger the Nation had so narrowly escaped of
Being involved in another destructive Intestine War, at a time when the
Victorious Arms of France hung like a dreadful Cloud over our heads, and the
High Discontents of the Popish Party, which were inflamed and enraged both by
the Discovery and Prosecutions of the late Plot, lay broyling in the Bowels of
the Nation, would proceed with more Prudence and Caution in the Next Elections,
and send Him up men of Better Tempers, or that at least these Gentlemen by that
Act, seeing He was resolved to keep the Reins in his own hands, and to let them
Sir or Dissolve them according as they behaved themselves, would thereby be
kept in better awe for the future, and make use of a little more calmness in
their Proceedings, if it were but to continue their Being.

But alas, His Majesty soon found himself deceived in his Expectation, the
common people who see with other men's eyes, and follow as they are led, and
that is for the most part, the wrong way, were easily persuaded to believe in
the first place that this Parliament was Prorogued and Dissolved only to
prevent the Trial of the Popish Lords in the Tower; tho the Not Trying of them
was one of the greatest Causes that Moved his Majesty to it, as appears plainly
both by the Journals of both the Houses, and his Majesty's Speech in the
Conclusion of that Session of Parliament; and although these Five Lords were
brought to the Bar, and the Commons summoned to give in Evidence against them
that very day that they were Prorogued, they refused to do it.

And on the other side, the Malcontents rejoiced greatly in it, being well
assured that the same Men would be chosen again, and so made use of this
Dissolution as a means to incense the People against the King and the
Government, and to increase the real or pretended fears of Men by their Loud
Clamours against French Pensioners, Popery, Arbitrary Government, and the like,
which both in discourse and Print (the Press being now at Liberty from its
former restraint) they objected with equal Confidence and Falsehood against the
Loyal Gentlemen that had opposed them.

But besides these general Charges, they made special use of two things that
fell out in the last Parliament, and that had a mighty influence upon the Minds
of the populace and other Unthinking men. The first of which was to represent
all those Gentlemen of the House of Commons who had Voted against the Bill for
Excluding his Royal Highness the Duke of York, as Papists, or at least Popishly
affected; and for my part, I believe it was the principal Motive of bringing in
that Bill: for it is scarce possible but that they must see, after that Second
Declaration that his Majesty made in that very Session concerning the
Succession: and the House of Lords refusing to join with them in the first of
these Votes that introduced that Bill, that they should never be able to get it
pass into an Act, but then they might easily foresee however it would be a
powerful means of inciting the People against all that should oppose it, and
prevail with them to pass a Sentence upon them as Popishly affected at least,
if not downright Arrant Papists; and herein they had great part of their
design, and there was no Motive more frequently used than this, and for the
most part it was driven a little higher and urged against his Majesty too, as
by the bye, thus, What, will you give your Voice for -- who is a Papist, and
Voted for the Duke of York in the last Parliament, who is an Arrant Papist, and
the King is little better. Which words were actually spoken by one of that
Party, and Sworn upon him at his Majesty's Suit, and for which the party was
Fined Five hundred Marks in the King's Bench. And by this Sole Argument they
prevailed to Exclude almost all those Gentlemen, and to fill up their places
with men of their own principles, and traduced his Majesty, the Court, and all
the Ministers of State, and almost all the Gentry and Loyal Clergy too for
endeavoring to have these men chosen again.

The Second Thing that they made great advantage of, was the pretended
discovery of Sir S. Fox of the Pensioners in the Long Loyal Parliament; which
discovery being hastily made, and No Record of it being entered, they took the
Confidence to Add to it whomsoever they were pleased to have so thought, by the
small Freemen and Freeholders, and that was a Number it may be double and
treble to that Sir S. mentioned; however I am sure that the Written Lists that
were then spread abroad, and which were all of Equal Authority, or pretended to
be so, did not agree, some having more Names than other, and I am well assured
that some Persons Named were not Pensioners, nor could be so; and therefore I
believe Sir S. never said they were; but they were added by the Transcribers,
according to their private Interests or Passions, but they made the People
believe they knew who would be Pensioners too, which was somewhat difficult,
and led the diffidence to that height, as to Exclude, as far as they could
possibly, not only all the Courtiers and other Persons who had any Places of
Profit and Advantage under his Majesty, but their Relations too; and Wanted not
much that they had Excluded all those who bore any honorary Employments or
Offices, such as Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace. So that nothing
now recommended a man so effectually for a Parliament Man, as that he had not
been thought fit to be trusted in the least by his Majesty or their Neighbor
Gentry; or having been so, had been turned out: all which were applauded as Men
not to be bought, Enemies to the Court, and Ministers, and therefore true
Friends to the Protestant Religion and the Country. All which tended (as they
said) to the Advancement of his Majesty's Service, and to the increasing the
Love of the People toward him and the Government, and he was a hard-hearted
man who called the Sincerity of their Loyal intentions in question.

These two being added to all the Ill ways they had made use of in the former
Election, no wonder if his Majesty was not Satisfied with the Returns, when he
faw by them what men he was to meet in his next House of Commons. Whereupon his
Majesty Prorogued them at the day of their meeting till a further time, and so
kept them from meeting to Sit till the 21th. of October, 1680. And now let us
see how they behaved themselves in this Interval. Wherein I shall desire the
Reader's Excuse if I do not relate things in that precise order they fell out,
it being nothing material to my purpose.

His Majesty's Intentions of Proroguing the Parliament from time to time, so as
not to permit a Session till the time he had designed, which was a Year, being
once known, the great Contrivers of all our Disturbances, who met, and ordered
all things in Clubbs and close Cabals, fell into the greatest Passion
imaginable, they had carried things to that height, out of design to force the
King to Dissolve that Parliament, or yield more than he could either spare or
recall; but then they had made their count he could not continue long without
another Parliament, and the quick choice, and the temper of the Men generally
Returned was, Appeal from the Country to the City.
as they gave out in their Pamphlets, according to their hearts desire: But
then if they might be dissolved or prorogued when ever they came to Redress the
Grievances of the People, that is, when ever his Majesty pleased to think it
Expedient, and especially for so long a time, the heat the People were then in
might cool, other thoughts might arise, the fears of an immediate Execution of
the Plot upon them, might appear (as they knew they were) vain and salse. His
Majesty might Recover his Estimation with his People, and show he was able to
Subsist without present Supplies from a Parliament; and which grieved them most
of all, he might in this time Root up the Relics of the Scotch Rebellion in
such manner, that no assistance would afterward be to be had from those
Northern Brethren, what need soever they might have of them; which is as good
as confessed by the Author of the Appeal to the City.

To prevent these and several other dreadful Consequences of this Nature, they
cast their heads what course they should take, the way of Pamphlets was slow
and uncertain, and they had almost Cloyed the Appetite of the Nation with that
Crude sort of Rebellious and Disloyal Discourses, which served rather for the
divertisement to Idle men, then gave them any great Advantage, at least for the
present; and they had need, in this affair, of some very quick and powerful
Expedient, that might work upward upon the King, and downward upon the People.

Neither could they then bethink themselves of any better remedy than to revive
the old way of Tumultuous Petitions, signed by all sorts of people, and that in
vast Numbers. The first of which sort, as I believe, An. 1603. C. His. Book 9.
Page 7.
was the Mill manus Petition Presented to King James; Tho as Fuller acquaints
us, there was only 750 But after this the Author says other Petitions were
set a foot about the same time for Abolishing Episcopacy, and setting up
Presbytery; To which no Hand that had five Fingers, was Refused; and that
George Lord Goring, then a Boy, set his hand to one of them, in the right (I
believe) of his Mother, a good Lady much Addicted to that Party. Fuller. Ib.
page 24.
Preachers hands set to it, and those Collected out of 25. Counties. Yet
afterward, Especially in the beginning of the Last Rebellion, when they had
any great Design to bring about, which they had reason to expect would be
opposed; Next to bringing great Numbers of mean and tumultuous people down to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, with rude and loud Clamours to Say over again
what they had first inspired into them: This I now mention of Sending into the
City of London, and the Remoter Corporations and Counties, of Petitions,
Complaints, Remonstrances and Declarations to the King, or both or either
Houses of Parliament, 13 Car. 2. cap. 5.
for alteration of Matters established by Law, redress of Pretended Grievances
in Church or State, or other public Concernments was one special means they
often made use of, and that with great Success, These Petitions, as the Learned
Dr. Hammond tells us, Vind. of the Liturgy, Sect. 28. cap. 2. Short View of the
late Troubles, p. 83, pro 81.
were for the most part framed and put into the Peoples hands even in set
prescribed forms, and then committed to certain Confiding men, who carried them
to the places appointed, and there solicited as many as they could possibly to
Sign the same, not regarding so much the Quality as the Number of the
Subscribers, who for the most part were mean Mechanics, Illiterate ignorant
Countrymen, Servants, Apprentices, Journeymen and Children; which Petitions
they after delivered with great Numbers of People to the King or Parliament,
and were designed by them that then set them afoot, not so much to persuade or
entreat, as to terrify and compel, every Petitioner being as it were Listed to
force, if he could not otherwise obtain his desire. And accordingly this way
was made use of, when either the King or the Major part of either House would
not be drawn otherwise to Comply with these Republicans; Short View of the Late
Troubles, page 85, 86. 89. 234.
and afterward when they came to be employed against them, or to cross their
humors or Interests, they discountenanced them as much as they could; tho all
this would have been too little, if they had not made use of Arms against these
bold Suitors, the Apprentices of London, July the 26. 1647. shutting up the
Commons Doors, and Compelling them to yield the City the Ordering of their own
Militia; and also to pass a Vote, Ibid. 248. Ib. 282, 283.
That the King should be admitted to come to London to Treat; which tho it were
sufficiently revenged, yet when afterward Essex and May 26, 48.
Surrey Petitioned again for a Peace in that manner, they sent the Guards to
beat them away; whereupon diverse were wounded, and some slain. And as to the
Kentish-men, who by their Grand Jury about the same time had framed a Petition
for Peace in the Name of the whole Shire, they by the Committee for that County
prohibited the same, by a Printed Paper published in all the Churches, Branding
it to be SEDITIOUS and TUMULTUOUS, and saying, that They would hang up two in
every Parish, that were promoters of it, and Sequester the rest. Which was to
declare themselves Abhorrers with a Vengeance.

Yet this Unruly Engine was the only tool our Sober Protestants could at this
time think powerful enough to Compel his Majesty to recede from his declared
Resolution, and permit the Parliament to Sit forthwith; and the method they
used was precisely the same that had been employed against his Majesty's Father
of Blessed Memory, viz. these Petitions were drawn by their Clubbs and Cabals
in London: or some say only transcribed from an Old 41. Copy, and then sent
down by trusty men who had five shillings per Centum, for procuring hands, and
The Instructions were, That it mattered not tho they were neither Gentlemen nor
Freeholders, but that they (the Procurers of Subscriptions) should get as many
Hands as they could.
that of all Sorts and Ages, Degrees and Qualities; not caring who they were,
so the Number was great: And I have been told this Story from Credible hands,
One of these Procurers coming to a Godly Weaver in Essex to get his hand to the
Petition, bethought himself that the Weaver had a Boy to his Son, and asked if
he would not Subscribe too? Yes, replied the Weaver, if he were at home, but he
is now gone with a Cow to a Neighbor's Bull. That is nothing, said the
Petition-Monger, I can set his hand. Which he accordingly presently did, and
made the poor Boy become an humble Supplicant to the King, when he thought of
nothing less. But I must confess they varied in one thing from the Old method;
for they did not present them as heretofore by the hands of great Multitudes of
the Petitioners, but sent them by some few persons of the better sort, which
was a Civility was not so much paid to his Majesty, as his Guards, who might
have endangered these Gentlemen Orators Skulls, if they had made as bold with
the Son, as their Predecessors did with the Unarmed Father.

For my part, when I reflect seriously on this Stratagem, I cannot persuade my
self they had any great hope to prevail upon the King by it; who too well
remembered what ill Consequences had followed this way of proceeding in the
Reign of his Father, to Countenance it in his own, by granting any thing that
was so asked. And therefore I conceive the Cunningest of them had these further
ends in it: First, to Engage men by these Subscriptions to be more fast to
them, and their designs. Secondly, To Try whether the People might be brought
to Tumult if they had occasion for it. Thirdly, To incense them the more
against the Government if these Petitions were denied, by representing it as a
personal injury to them, every man being Naturally more fond of his own than
another Counsel. Fourthly, to show the Number and Strength of their Adherents.
Fifthly, To make them known each to other, to which end the Odd Phrases,
Whining Tones, Devout shruggs of old, and the Green Ribbans of late, were taken
up also.

But whatever the design was, his Majesty having the Authority of a Statute on
his side wisely provided in better times, had the Address to disappoint this
Project; 13 Cor. 2. c. 5. as also by the Judgment of all the Judges, 2 Jacobi.
First, by a Proclamation, which prohibited this Practice.
Exercise as Illegal and Tumultuous, and tending to Sedition and Rebellion.
Secondly, by discountenancing and sharply reprehending those that were so silly
as to present them. Thirdly, by encouraging another Sort of persons who upon
better grounds were as ready to detest and abhor them in a more Regular and
Legal way; and these being for the most part men of Authority in their Country,
so quelled this many-headed Hydra, that the triple Cordial of a Commons Vote
have not been able since to Revive it: And so I shall take my leave of it, till
I come to those Votes and the proceedings upon them.

In the Interim, I desire my dear Countrymen, they would reflect Seriously upon
what is here said, and remember what fruits they reaped of this pernicious seed
the last time they were prompted by this Sort of men to the use of it, and how
they Treated the Surrey and Kentish men for using it to a purpose for which it
was never designed, the procuring PEACE.

His Majesty therefore Prorogued the Parliament from the 17th of October, to
the 26 of January, and then meeting them in Person and making a Gracious Speech
to them, Prorogued them to the 15th of April, and then to the 17th of May, and
from thence to the First of July, and so on to the 22d. of the same, and thence
to the 23d. of August, and from thence to the 21. of October, 1679. when he
declared they should finally Sit according to his former Resolution; which the
Petitions had more confirmed him in.

In the Interim several things happened worth the taking Notice of, as giving us
some Light into the Designs of the Commonwealth Party and the Temper of the
Dissenters, by which we may Judge what we shall meet with at their hands if
ever they prevail again.

The first I will Instance in was their Treatment of the London Apprentices.
Some of them had been busy in Burning the Pope, and after that had been drawn
in to Sign the Petition; but finding they had disobliged others by it,
L'Estrange's Narr. of the Plot, page 15. 4to.
to give some Satisfaction, they gave Notice in Print, That they would burn the
Rump the 29th of May following; and this was taken for such an affront, by the
Young Gentlemen of that Old Family of Rumpers, that presently all the Prentices
were made Traitors, Conspirators, most of them said to be Papists, for which
several of them were Imprisoned, and it was much grief of heart to the Merciful
Rumpers too, that they were not Hanged; and one of them, with great regret,
told the following Parliament, That he thought Cap. Tom. was at Tangier, Exact
Collection of Debated. p. 112.
who should have headed the Apprentices Mutiny in London; and if (says the
Gentleman) I be not Misinformed, is a Captain too for that intended Eminent
Service. A Sad Story if it was true, and there was no misinformation in the
case some where or other: but this was only meant for a Kind Reflection on the
Government, which is grown of late strangely in Love with Mutinies, and
doubtless made Capt. Tom, a Captain there not only to reward him for his
Eminent Intended Service in London, but to put him into a Capacity of promoting
a Tumult or Mutiny there too. Upon this Occasion I am shrewdly tempted to
remember some of the 41. Tumults and Mutinies in behalf of the Rump; but
because they were not Popish but Puritan Mutinies, and for the Service of the
Commonwealth of England, I will forbear it: Only I will give the World a
Caution not to be mightily Surprised, if afterward the Late Addressing
Apprentices be clawed away for Papists and Mutineers too, If there be not too
many of them.

In the beginning of May, his Majesty had two or three Fits of an Ague, which
went off again without any great hazard to his Life; yet this occasioned some
considerable Events. In one of the Fits there was some tampering among his
back-Friends for the Proclaiming his Grace the D. of M. King, in case his
Majesty should die of that Sickness.

About that time, that there was a Pamphlet Printed to make out a Title for him
too, pretending to some Strange Discoveries to be made of a Black Box, that
should do the D. much Kindness; but tho his Majesty and the Privy Council took
all the Care imaginable to discover the Author of this Black Box-discourse, it
could not be found: And to prevent the Ill Effects of such Rumors for the
future, his Majesty Published a Declaration the 2d. of June, 1679. which tho it
has been already printed, and is Long, yet because it may be very hard to
produce it some Years hence, I will take the pains to Insert it here, from the
Gazette of the 7th of June, 1680.

CHARLES R.
WE cannot but take Notice of the great Industry and Malice wherewith some men
of a Seditious and Restless Spirit, do spread abroad a most False and
Scandalous Report of A Marriage or Contract of Marriage, supposed to be had and
made between Us and one Mrs. Walters, alias Barlow, now Deceased, Mother of the
present Duke of Monmouth, aiming thereby to fill the Minds of Our Loving
Subjects with Doubts and Fears, and if possible to divide them into Parties and
Factions, and as much as in them lies, to bring into question the Clear
Undoubted Right of Our True and Lawful Heirs and Successors to the Crown. We
have therefore thought Our Self Obliged to Let our Loving Subjects see what
steps We (cut of Our Care of them and their Posterity) have already made, in
order to Obviate the Ill Consequences that so dangerous and Malicious a Report
may have in Future Times upon the Peace of Our Kingdoms.

In January Last was Twelvemonth, We made a Declaration written with Our Own
Hand in the Words following.

THere being a False and Malicious Report Industriously spread abroad by Some,
Who are Neither Friends to Me nor the Duke of Monmouth, as if I should have
been Either Contracted or Married to his Mother: and though I am most Confident
that this Idle Story, cannot have any Effect in this Age, Yet I thought it my
Duty in relation to the true Succession of this Crown, and that future Ages may
not have any pretense to give disturbance upon that Score or any other of this
Nature, to declare, as I do here declare in the presence of Almighty God, That
I was never Married, nor gave any Contract to any Woman whatsoever, but to My
Wife Queen Catherine, to whom I am now Married. In Witness whereof I have set
My Hand at White Hall the Sixth of January 1679.

This Declaration I made in the Presence of CHARLES R. W. Cant. H. Finch, C. H.
Coventry, J. Williamson.


To strengthen which Declaration, We did in March following (which was March
last was Twelvemonth) make a more Public Declaration in Our Privy Council,
written likewise with Our Own Hand; and having caused a true Transcript thereof
to be Entered in Our Council Books, We Signed it, and caused the Lords of Our
Privy Council then attending Us in Council, to Subscribe the same likewise; and
We Ordered the Original to be kept in the Council Chest, where it Now remains.
The Entry whereof in the Council Book is in these words following,

At the Court at White Hall, March 3d. 1679.
Present

The KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.

Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of Lauderdale, Marquess of Worcester,
Earl of Ossory, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Sunderland, Earl of Clarendon, Earl
of Essex, Ear of Bathe, Earl of Craven, Earl of Aylesbury, Lord Bishop of
London, Lord Bishop of Durham, Lord Maynard, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain,
His Majesty was this day pleased to Command that the Declaration hereafter
following be Entered in the Council-Book, it being all Written and Signed by
his Majesty's Own Hand, in a Paper which his Majesty this day delivered at the
Board, to be Kept in the Council Chest, viz.

FOR the avoiding of Any dispute which may happen in time to come concerning
the Succession of the Crown, I do hereby Declare in the Presence of Almighty
God, That I Never gave nor made any Contract of Marriage, nor was Married to
any Woman whatsoever, but to My present Wife Queen Catherine now Living.

White Hall the Third day of March, 1679. CHARLES R.
His Majesty Commanded us who were present at the making and Signing this
Declaration, to attest the same.

Finch, C. Danby, Lauderdale, Worcester, Ossory, Arlington, Sunderland,
Clarendon, Essex, Bathe, Craven, Aylesbury, H. London, N. Durham, W. Maynard,
G. Carteret.




In April Last We found the same Rumor not only Revived again, but also
Improved with New Additions, to wit, It was given out, That there was a Writing
yet Extant, and lately produced before several Persons, whereby the said
Marriage or Contract at least, (for the Report was Various) would appear, and
that there are several Lords and others yet Living, who were pretended to have
been present at the said Marriage. We Knew full well that it was Impossible
that any thing of this should be true, (there being Nothing more Groundless and
False then that there was any such Marriage or Contract between Us and he said
Mrs. Walters alias Barlow) Yet We proceeded to call before Us, and caused to be
Interrogated in the Council such Lords and other persons as the Common Rumor
did Surmise to have been present at the pretended Marriage, or to Know
something of it, or of the said Writing. And Though it appeared to all Our
Council upon the Hearing of the said Lords and other persons severally
Interrogated, and upon their denying to have been present at any such Marriage,
or to Know any thing of it or of any such Writing, That the Raising and
Spreading of such a Report so incoherent in the several parts of it, was the
Effect of deep Malice in some few, and of Loose and Idle discourse in others,
Yet, We think it Requisite at this time, to make Our Declarations above recited
more Public; and to Order the Same (as We do hereby with the Advice of Our
Privy Council) to be forthwith Printed and Published. And We do again upon this
Occasion call Almighty God to Witness, and Declare upon the Faith of a
Christian, and the Word of a King, That there was never any Marriage, or
Contract of Marriage had or made between Us and the said Mrs. Walters alias
Barlow, the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, or between Us and any Woman whatsoever,
Our Royal Confort Queen Catherine, that now is, Excepted.

And We do hereby Strictly Require and Command all Our Subjects whatsoever,
That they presume not to Utter or Publish any thing contrary to the Tenor of
this Our Declaration, at their Peril, and upon pain of being proceeded against
according to the Utmost Severity and Rigor of the Law.

Given at our Court at White Hall the Second day of June, in the Two and
thirtieth Year of Our Reign.
On the 15th of the same Month of June, Mr. Attorney General by his Majesty's
Command, moved in the Court of Chancery, That these Declarations might be
Enrolled and made a Record of that Court, for the preservation of them; and in
order thereunto, the Rords, and others of his Majesty's Privy Council, who were
present when his Majesty made and Signed those Declarations, (and were Now in
Court) being desired to Attest the same: They did it upon their Oaths; as did
likewise the Clerks of the Council; and then it was Ordered, That the said
Declarations should be enrolled accordingly.

And when about this time his Majesty had sent the Duke of Monmouth to reside
for some time beyond the Seas, that he might not be made a Stale to these Men's
ill designs, they wrought so much upon him, that he returned without his
Majesty's Leave, and all his Places which were of great Value as well as Trust,
Power, and Honor, were taken from him.

In the Last Parliament at Westminster, the 10th day of January, 1680. The
Commons past these Votes.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That James Duke of Monmouth
has been Removed from his Offices and Commands, by the Influence of the Duke
of York.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such Members thereof, as are of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire his Majesty to Restore the said James Duke of Monmouth to his said
Offices and Commands.

Now let it be Considered, That there was not the least regard had to the Duke
of Monmouth or his Interest, till this day, in all that Session of Parliament;
and now when it was said they should be Prorogued, and all the reason in the
world to believe that a Dissolution would follow, the last day in probability
they were to Sit, his Majesty being also disobliged by the Votes about the
Revenue; so that it could not be Expected that almost any thing could be
granted; and when they could not Hope to see any effect of it, they passed
these two Votes. For what might be expected from it, let his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth, and all the World Judge.

I have heard some men insinuate, that the Duke of Monmouth was sent into
Scotland, (tho there was no need of him) that by that Defeat of the Dissenters,
he might be rendered odious to their Partisans here in England, and so be
turned out of all his Places, and No man Concern himself for him; he having, as
they would insinuate, no Friends in England but they.

To which I answer, That it ought to be Considered, that on the one Side his
Majesty, who is the Father of the Duke, appears, whom all the World (his worst
Enemies not Excepted) acknowledge to be a Prince of a Godlike Goodness and
Clemency to his very Enemies; and on the other Side a Company of Men who have
given large Demonstrations that they are Enemies to Monarchy it self; and
therefore not likely to be over-kind to any of the Royal Family, but for ill
Ends, and such as the Duke has no reason to promote, if he did perfectly
Understand them.

Now let any man reflect upon this, and then pronounce as his Reason shall
direct him, whether his Majesty, or the Anti-Court Party were likeliest to
design the Ruin of the Duke; that is, A Kind Father, or an Enraged and
disobliged Enemy: To say here, as they commonly do, That his Majesty was
imposed upon by Crafty men, contrary to his Natural Goodness, to Consent to the
Ruin of his Son, is to Exalt his Goodness to the destruction of his Prudence,
and represent him to the World as merely passive, a Person easy to be deluded
and abused; the contrary of which is most apparent by his Actions, tho it
should be granted, that (as a Man) he has some few times been deceived.

Amongst the Various Tricks and Projects that were then Set a foot, or
Continued, there was none that pleased so well, as a Custom which was taken up
since the Expiring of the Acts for the Regulating of Printing, viz. to Print
Weekly Intelligences or News-Books. Concerning which his Majesty published this
following Proclamation the 17th of May.

WHEREAS it is of great Importance to the State, that all News Printed and
Published to the People, as well concerning Foreign as Domestic Affairs,
should be agreeable to Truth, or at least Warranted by Good Intelligence, that
the Minds of his Majesty's Subjects may not be disturbed or amuzed by Lies or
vain Reports, which are many times raised on purpose to Scandalize the
Government, or for other indirect Ends: And whereas of Late many Evil-disposed
Persons have made it a Common practice to Print and Publish Pamphlets of News,
without License or Authority, and therein have vended to his Majesty's People,
all the Idle and Malicious Reports that they could Collect or Invent, contrary
to Law; the Continuance whereof would in a short time endanger the Peace of the
Kingdom, the same manifestly tending thereto, as has been declared by all His
Majesty's Judges Unanimously: His Majesty therefore Considering the Great
Mischief that may ensue upon such Licentious and Illegal practices, If not
timely prevented, Has Thought fit by his Royal Proclamation, (with the Advice
of his Privy Council) strictly to prohibit and forbid all persons whatsoever to
Print or Publish any News-Books, or Pamphlets of News not Licensed by his
Majesty's Authority. And to the Intent all Offenders may Know their Danger, and
Desist from any further proceedings of this Kind, His Majesty is graciously
pleased hereby to Declare, That they shall be proceeded against according to
the Utmost Severity of the Law: And for that purpose His Majesty does hereby
Will and Command all his Judges, Justices of Peace, and all other his Officers
and Ministers of Justice whatsoever, That they take Effectual Care that all
such as shall offend in the Premises, be proceeded against and punished
according to their demerits.

There was scarce any thing more Clamoured against than the Proceedings upon
this Proclamation, as if all the Liberties of the Subject in England had
Consisted in this, that they might be deluded and abused, terrified and
affrighted, flattered and enticed, by whosoever had the Impudence to Undertake
it, and that Weekly.

These Sorts of News-Mongers in the Interim are indeed nothing but a sort of
State Tale-bearers: Now to make the Mischief more Apparent, to any man that is
fond of this Sort of Trash, let them but consider what would follow in a
private Family, if the Master of it should permit this Sort of Vermin to Act at
Liberty what Feuds, Heart-burnings, Fears, Distrusts and Mutual Hatreds would
arise; so that no man could be able to maintain the Peace of his own house, if
he might not punish nor turn out such persons. Now the same Consequences, only
much worse, must needs follow in a City, Country, or Kingdom; for in a private
Family the truth of things may be easily found out, the Parties being together;
and yet it is a mighty trouble to peaceable people to be always contending and
proving against others: but in the other instance it is impossible oftentimes
for an innocent person to represent his Innocence, or disprove his Accuser. Now
if it be true of the meanest private person, That A Good Name is to be valued
as a man's Life, how much more reasonable is it that the Estimation of Princes,
and Great Men should not ly at the Mercy of a company of Mean Scriblers? It is
usually said, Malice speaks well of no body; but to be sure if that be tainted
with ambition and faction, the very poison of Asps will be shot out upon the
Governors that oppose and hinder their wicked Intentions and Designs.

Nor is all this a Speculation, but an Experimented Truth, the same Sort of Men
by the same ways, in the Memory of Vast Numbers of Men, once before Ruined this
Kingdom, and brought his Majesty's Father to the Block; as He Himself has
Elegantly described it in his Eikon Basilike, Cap. 15. Part of which is as
follows.

IF I had not my own Innocence, and Gods Protection, it were hard for Me to
stand out against these Stratagems and Conflicts of Malice, which by Falsities
seek to oppress the Truth, and by Jealousies to supply the defect of Real
Causes, which might seem to Justify so Unjust Engagements against Me.

And indeed the worst effects of upon Hostility come short of these Designs:
For I can more willingly Loose my Crowns then my Credit; Nor are my Kingdoms so
dear to Me as My Reputation and Honor.

Those must have a Period with my Life, but these may Survive to a Glorious
Kind of Immortality when I am dead and gone: A good Name being the Embalming of
Princes, and a sweet Consecrating of them to an Eternity of Love and Gratitude
among Posterity.

Those Foul and False Aspersions were Secret Engines at first employed against
My Peoples Love of Me: That Undermining their Opinion and Value of Me, my
Enemies, and theirs might at once blow up their affections, and batter down
their Loyalty. --

If they had been my Open and Foraign Enemies, I could have born it; but they
must be my own Subjects, who are, next to my Children, dear to me. --

The Noise of my Evil-Counsellors was another useful Device. For those, who
were impatient any men's Counsels but their own should be followed in Church or
State; who were So Eager in giving Me better Counsel, that they would not give
me Leave to take it with Freedom, as a Man; or Honor, as a King; making their
Counsels more like a Drench that must be poured down, than a Draught which
might be fairly and leisurely drank, if I liked it.

I will not Justify beyond humane Errors and Frailties my Self, or my
Counselors: They might be subject to some miscarriages, yet such as were far
more Reparable by Second and better thoughts than those enormious
Extravagances, wherewith some men have Now even wildred, and almost quite Lost
both Church and State.

The Event of things at last will make it evident to my Subjects, That had I
followed the worst Counsels, that my worst Counselors ever had the boldness to
offer to Me, or my Self any Inclination to use; I could not so soon have
brought both Church and State in Three Flourishing Kingdoms to such a Chaos of
Confusions and Hell of Miseries, as some have done; out of which they cannot or
will not in the Midst of their many great Advantages, redeem either Me or my
Subjects.

I cannot suffer so much in Point of Honor, by those Rude and Scandalous
PAMPHLETS, (which like fire in great Conflagrations, fly up and down to set
all places on like flames) as those men do; who pretending so much to Piety,
are so forgetful of their Duty to God and Me: by no ways ever Vindicating the
Majesty of their King against any of those who contrary to the Precept of God,
and Precedent of Angels, speak evil of Dignities, and bring Railing Accusations
against those, who are honored with the Name of Gods: but it is no wonder if
Men not fearing God, should not honor their King.

Thus far That Illustrious Saint and Martyr, who felt the Heat and suffered the
Scorchings; first, of those Tongues that are set on fire by Hell; and after of
these Pamphlet-Flakes and Sparks which raised such a Fire in His Three
Kingdoms, as occasioned his Ruin, and Murder; and the Banishing of his Wife
and Children, and were likely enough to have ended in the total and everlasting
Ruin of the English Church and Nation.

And can any man believe it reasonable that his Son our present Most Gracious
Sovereign, should sit still and Suffer Himself and his Ministers, his Judges
and his Officers both Civil and Military, to be represented to his People in
the most Odious Manner that Malice can invent, and a Thousand false ridiculous
Lies and Slanders to be vented against him and them! No surely, it can never be
expected; and were not another Rebellion designed, it would never be desired:
Thus the Last began, and thus the Next must begin. We have the Testimony of His
Majesty's Father and our own Remembrance for the one; and we are Sensible how
far things are Advanced of late that way, for a proof of the other. And if
these hotheaded Religious Liars think it reasonable that for fear of the
Unjust reproach of Asserting Arbitrary Government, the hazard should be run of
having no Government, I hope they will find themselves deceived, and I am sure
his Majesty has not one Loyal Subject in all his Three Kingdoms that is not of
this mind.

My Lord Coke in the Pleas of the Crown tells us, Cap. 93. Inst. leg. Aluered.
Cap. 28.
That the Law before the Conquest was, That the Author and Spreader of False
Rumors amongst the People had his Tongue cut out, if he redeemed it not by the
Estimation of his Head: And surely the Printing of such is not a less but a
greater Crime, and deserves a greater punishment.

And in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1581.
one Stubbs had his Right hand Cut off for writing a Libel against the Queen,
as Camden tells us; which Stubbs was Brother in Law to Carthwright the famous
Puritan Preacher in those days.

By a Statute made the 3 Ed. 1. Cap. 33. it was Enacted, That from thenceforth
none should be so hardy to Tell or Publish any False News or Fales, whereby
Discord or Slander may Grow between the King and his People, or the Great Men
of the Realm; And he that does so, shall be taken and kept in Prison until he
has brought him into the Court which was first Author of the Tale. Which is
confirmed, 2 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. And again, 12 Rich. 2. Cap. 11. with this
addition, That if the Offender, could not find his Author, He should be
punished by the Advice of the Council. Both which Statutes are still in force:
tho those of the 1 and 2 P. M. Cap. 13. and 1 Eliz. 6. upon which Stubbs was
punished, are Expired. So that here is no Need of Arbitrary proceeding to
punish such Disorders, when a due Execution of these Old Statutes might do the
business.

The 22. of June, 1680. The Rebel Scots endeavoring to renew their Rebellion,
21 persons Assembled, and after a Solemn Procession and Singing of Psalms,
Published and affixed on the Cross at Sanchar a Paper, wherein they declare for
themselves, And all that will Adhere to them as the Representatives of the true
Presbyterian Church and Covenanted Nation of Scotland, they do disown Charles
Stuart who has been Reigning, or rather Tyrannizing on the Throne of Britain
these Years past, as having any Right or Title to, or Interest in the Crown of
Scotland or Government, as Forfeited several Years since by his Perjury and
Breach of Covenant with God and his Church, and Usurpation of his Crown and
Royal Prerogatives therein, etc. So they proceeded to Excommunicate and Depose
his Majesty, and 70 Persons took up Arms against him, the chief of which were
Donald Cargile, and one Hall, who were Actually in the Last Rebellion.

These men swore either to other, That if any person who should join with them,
should afterward submit to the King upon any account whatsoever, or own him
for their King, the rest should Butcher the Party so submitting. So that
several of them being taken, and upon Trial found Guilty of this Horrid and
Divillish Conspiracy, chose rather to Suffer as Traitors, than to own their
King, or ask a Pardon from him, as fearing a worser Death from their fellow
Conspirators, than the Law would inflict upon them.

Now I would desire my Countrymen to Consider Seriously, whether the Popish
Tenants are worse than these Presbyterian Doctrines; and whether his Majesty is
not as much in danger to fall by the hands of one of these reformed
Assassinates, as by a Consecrated Jesuit.

On Thursday the 21. of October, 1680. The long Expected and impatiently
Desired Parliament met at Westminster; And I will now attend it, to see whether
it were such as answered the hopes of these Petitioners, who had boasted of it
as a Masterpiece, and which was to Confound all they were pleased to Call
Popery. Which Parliament his Majesty began with this Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE several Prorogations I have made, have been very advantageous to Our
Neighbors, and Very Useful to Me; for I have employed that time in making and
perfecting an Alliance with the Crown of Spain, suitable to that which I had
before with the States of the United Provinces, and they also had with Spain,
Consisting of Mutual Obligations of Succor and Defense.

I have all the Reason in the World to believe, that what was so much desired
by former Parliaments, must needs be very grateful to you now: for tho some
perhaps may wish these Measures had been taken sooner, yet no man can with
reason think it is now too Late; for they who desire to make these Alliances,
and they who desire to break them, show themselves of another Opinion.

And as these are the best Measures that could be taken for the Safety of
England and Repose of Christendom, So they cannot fail to attain their End, and
to spread and improve themselves further, if Our Divisions at home do not
render Our Friendship less Considerable abroad.

To prevent these as much as may be, I think fit to renew to you all the
Assurances which can be desired, That nothing shall be wanting on My part to
give you the fullest Satisfaction your Hearts can wish, for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, which I am fully resolved to maintain against all the
Conspiracies of Our Enemies, and to Concur with You in any new Remedies which
shall be proposed, that may Consist with the preserving the Succession of the
Crown in its Due and Legal Course of Descent.

And in Order to this, I do recommend to You, to pursue the further Examination
of the Plot, with a strict and impartial Enquiry. I do not think My Self Safe
nor You neither, till that Matter be gone through with; and therefore it will be
necessary that the Lords in the Tower be brought to their speedy Trial that
Justice may be done.

I need not tell you what danger the City of Tangier is in, nor of what
Importance it is to Us to preserve it. I have with a mighty Charge and Expense
sent a very Considerable Relief thither; but Constantly to maintain so great a
Force as that War will require, and to make those New Works and Fortifications,
without which the Place will not be long Teneable, amounts to so Vast a Sum,
that without Your Support it will be impossible for me to undergo it. Therefore
I lay the matter plainly before You, and desire Your Advice and Assistance.

But that which I Value above all the Treasure in the World, and which I am
Sure will give Me greater Strength and Reputation both at home and abroad then
any Treasure can do, is a perfect UNION amongst Our Selves.

Nothing but this can restore the Kingdom to that Strength and Vigor which it
seems to have Lost, and raise Us again to that Consideration which England has
Usually had.

All Europe have their Eyes upon this Assembly, and think their own Happiness
or Misery as well as Ours will depend upon it.

If We should be So Unhappy as to fall into such Misunderstanding among Our
Selves, as should render Our Friendship unsafe to trust to, it will not be
Wondered at, if Our Allies should begin to take new Resolutions, and perhaps
such as may be Fatal to Us.

Let Us therefore take Care that We do not Gratify Our Enemies, and Dishearten
Our Friends by any Unseasonable Disputes.

If any such do happen, the World will see it is no fault of Mine; for I have
done all that was possible for Me to do, to Keep You in Peace while I live, and
to Leave You So when I die.

But from so great Prudence and so good Affections as Yours, I can fear Nothing
of this Kind; but to Rely upon You all, That You will use Your best Endeavors
to bring this Parliament to a Good and Happy Conclusion.

The Lord Chancellor made no Speech at all, His Majesty giving himself the
whole Trouble of this Affair, hoping his Words would the more be Considered by
them, and the business the more zealously pursued.

The House of Commons being returned, and a Motion made, That William Williams
Esquire; should be chosen Speaker; It was Resolved in the Affirmative, Nemine
Contradicente; who forthwith made two Speeches in the House, which are Printed
in the Votes, one to Excuse himself by reason of his insufficiency, by reason
of the difficulty both of the Place, and Things to be transacted. But that
being refused, he made a Second, which showed more the temper of the Man; and
is as follows.

Gentlemen,
I Tremble when I reflect under what difficulties Learned, Experienced, and
Wise Men have Labored in this Chair: Yet I am not afraid of their President
who impaired their Estates and Health, no nor of them who lost their Lives in
this Service. These are a Sacrifice I owe my Country. But when I suffer my self
to think that some Gentlemen have Maimed their Reputation in this Trust, these
Thoughts are dreadful to me, and must yet strike deeper with me, unless you
that called me hither shall please to Stand by me, Cherish and Support me in
all the difficulties of this Place. I have it by your Courtesy, and shall hold
it at your Pleasure; and I have this to Secure me, If I fall, I fall into the
Hands of Gentlemen that made me what I am in Your Service.

I doubt not but you will remember, your own Minister, your own ONLY, your own
ENTIRELY, placed in this Service without Seeking, without Recommending: I
expect No Boon, but your Grace and Favor to depart as I came, when you shall
please to Command me, without repenting.

Some have said these Speeches were never made in the House, but added
afterward to the Votes; tho it is possible they might be designed: but that is
nothing to the purpose. In my poor Judgment this last Speech is liable to many
great Exceptions, and for which he would certainly have been eased of this
Laborious and Dangerous Employment under any Prince but the Mildest of Men with
whom he had now to do.

First he might have treated his Predecessors in that Chair with more respect,
than to take notice of them that had Maimed their Reputation; which as they
were not many, so that thought might with more Humility and Candor have been
kept to himself; and the rather, because one present had had the Misfortune to
be represented disadvantagiously in the latter end of the former Parliament;
and this looked more like an insulting Bravado, than a Modest Excuse. It had
been good he had taken the Lord Verulam's Counsel, Essay the 11. Use the Memory
of thy Predecessor Fairly, and Tenderly; for if thou do not, it is a Debt,
will Surely be paid, when thou art Gone.

In the Second Paragraph he flies higher, and is not content to tell them that
he is their Minister, without he added, Only, and Entirely. Now another man
would have left out these words, or have added something to them, to declare
his Loyal Intention to his Prince too, whose Minister the Speaker is more
properly than the Houses, whose Place he holds there, and from whom he has his
Authority, tho he has his Nomination from the Commons; nor is he a Speaker at
all till the King has approved of their Choice.

His Majesty to avoid any Contest about a Speaker, had it seems not Recommended
any Person to them, as is usual; and he takes Notice of that too, but in such a
manner, as looks more like a Triumph over his Majesty, than any thing else, as
having gained that point upon him by the last Contest, when he tells them he
was placed in that Service without Seeking, without Recommending: And in the
Next place he tells them, He Expects no other Boon, but by their Grace and
Favor to depart as he came, without repenting. He may possibly prove a
Prophet, and as he seems to scorn his Prince's Favor, so he may ever want an
opportunity of Refusing it.

On Friday the House of Commons attended his Majesty with their Speaker, where
he that has entered two Speeches to the Commons, is not pleased to Enter that
which was made to his Majesty, but only tells us that he made claim by Humble
Petition in the Name of the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled, of the
Ancient Rights of the Commons for them and their Servants in their Persons and
Estates, to be free from Arrests and other disturbances; in all their Debates
to have Freedom and Liberty of speech; and as occasion should require, to have
Access to his Majesty's Person. Which was allowed by the King.

But tho he has not been pleased to Print his own Speech, there was one given
out for the Information of the People in Writing, which was as follows.

May it please Your Majesty,
THE House of Commons have been pleased to Make use of ME for their Speaker,
and Have presented me for Your Majesty's Approbation. It is a Place of great
Weight and Pains: Both by my Education and Profession I have been always used
to Labor and Industry, Therefore I will (by Your Majesty's Approbation)
endeavor to discharge the Trust reposed in me.

If this were the Preface to the Three Demands or Petitions, I cannot blame him
for not Printing it, no more then I can commend him for making one so totally
different from what used to be said on such occasions.

But a man may smile to see how finely the man had digested and put over all
his trembling fears in one Nights time, when he called to mind his Education
and Profession, which he had totally forgot the day before, and now having
considered better, did not think it was fit to ask his Majesty to discharge a
person so wonderfully qualified for the Place, as all other had done before
him, being, it seems, not so sensible that by their Education and Profession
they had been used to Labor and Industry.

And it is pretty to see how his Majesty's Approbation is put into a
parenthesis; as if one should say it was Needless, and scarce worth the asking,
and the Sense of what he was to speak would have been perfect without it.

But such was his Majesty's Goodness, that he easily passed over these things,
tho they were apparent encroachments upon his Royal Prerogative, and such too
as another Prince would have stomached. He sought the good of his People more
than any thing, and for that cause bore these disorders.

On Monday the 25. of October the Lords sent down an Address they had made to
his Majesty for the Pardon of all such persons as should come in and discover
any thing further of the Plot within two Months; and with it his Majesty's
Answer, which was as follows.

HIS Majesty has Considered of the Address made by the House, and is so
willing to Encourage all persons who know of any Treasons and Conspiracies
against his Person and Government, that he will cause his Royal Proclamation to
Issue, declaring, That he will fully Pardon and Secure all persons who shall
make such discovery, not Only during the space of Two Months as is desired,
but at any time after, whenever such discovery shall be made.


The next day the Commons resolved to make an Address to his Majesty to the
same purpose.

And Mr. Dangerfield the discoverer and great Agent in the Meal-Tub Plott,
which was a Silly design of the Papists to turn their Plott upon the
Presbyterians, mentioning Sir Robert Peyton, a Member of their House, in this
Information.

They referred it to a Committee to Examine the Matters touching Sir Robert
Peiton, and to report the same to the House: And then Resolved Nemine
Contradicente,

That it was the Opinion of their House to proceed effectually to suppress
Popery, and Prevent a Popish Successor.

On Wednesday the 27th of October, they agreed the said Address, which was as
follows.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, being highly Zealous for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, Your Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, and resolving to pursue
with a strict and impartial Inquiry the Execrable Popish Plot which was
detected in the Two Last Parliaments, and has been Supported and Carried on by
potent and restless Practices and Machinations, especially during the late
Recesses of Parliaments, whereby several persons have been terrified and
discouraged from declaring their Knowledge thereof; most humbly beseech Your
Majesty, That for the Security of such persons who shall be willing to give
Evidence, or make further Satisfactory Discovery concerning the same to this
House, Your Majesty would be pleased to Issue Your Royal Proclamation, assuring
all the said persons, of your Gracious Pardon, if they shall give Evidence, or
make such Discovery within two Months after the date of such Proclamation.

There was two Exceptions taken to this Address by others, Tho I find none made
in the House, viz.

The first was, That in the height of their Zeal they forgot to tell his
Majesty what Protestant Religion they meant or desired to preserve, for there
being in England many not only several but contrary Religions, which yet may
be Comprehended under that General term of Protestant. Some of which are worse
than Popery, they were not to be preserved but Suppressed, if it might be;
Except they intended in opposition to Popery to uphold all the Heresies and
Schisms that arose in the late Rebellion amounting to near Eightscore, as they
have been counted; but then it had been better to have called them Protestant
Religions: for it is a perfect piece of Nonsense to call these Contrary and
Contending Factions, who do mutually endeavor to Ruin each other, tho they
are now Combined as much against the Religion that is Established, as against
Popery, and to Act against it with more fury than they do against Popery; I say
it is Nonsense to call these Conjoyntly Religion, when if there be or ever were
any such things as different Religions in the World, these are such, and they
are as Contrary to the Religion established, and each to other as they are to
Popery.

Hitherto the Parliaments had always qualified that loose general word, with
such terms as these, Established, or by Law Established, or the like; and
sometimes not so much as mentioned the Word Protestant, which is very
improperly affixed to any Party of the Reformed Religions of England, there
being perhaps never a Lutheran in England, to take it strictly.

But we shall see afterward that it was not a Casual or Accidental omission
here, but as these Protestants at Large had advanced the greater part of these
Commons into that high dignity, so they were resolved, to lift them up above
the Church and Laws by way of Reward, tho the Peace of the Nation and the
Government were Ruined by it.

The Second thing objected was, That they Tacitly and Injuriously reflected
upon His Majesty in their Pretenses, That during the Recess of Parliament,
several persons had been terrified and discouraged from declaring their
Knowledge of the Plot. As for the Recesses, Prorogations and Dissolutions of the
Parliaments, they were apparently forced upon the King much against his Will by
the unreasonable Heats, Feuds, and Irregularities of the Commons, and so the
King was not to be blamed; and all that would Inform any thing concerning the
Plott in these Intervals had been as Kindly used by the King and Council, as
they could have been by the Parliament. So that this was, as I said, an
Injurious Reflection upon His Majesty and the Government, and was an Argument
of an ill temper, and could not but disgust his Majesty.

Their limiting their Petition of Pardon to only such persons as made any
Discovery to their House, was looked upon as much restrained; for if the
Discovery were really and effectually made, what matter was it to what house or
person it was made. But it may be this might not be intended by them for any
such purpose as the limiting of the thing to them, tho in effect it did so, and
therefore I shall pass it over.

From this Address the House proceeded to the Votes about the Petitions; which
were as follows.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente. Which shows the Strength of the party, and
not the Consent of the whole House.

That it is, and Ever has been, the Undoubted Right of the Subjects of
England, to Petition the King for the Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, and
Redressing of Grievances.

Resolved, N. C.

That to traduce such Petitioning (howsoever managed, for so it must signify,
or else it will conclude nothing from the Other as a Principle) as a Violation
of Duty, and to represent it to his Majesty as Tumultuous and Seditious, is to
betray the Liberty of the Subject, and Contributes to the Design of Subverting
the Ancient Legal Constitutions of this Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary
Power.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to inquire of all such persons as have offended
against these Rights of the Subjects.

Resolved,

That an Address be made to his Majesty, declaring the Resolution of this House
to Preserve and Support the King's Person and Government, and the Protestant
Religion at home and abroad.

This last seemed to sweeten the Crudity of the former Votes, and to
Countenance and Justify one of the greatest disorders that Contributed to the
Ruin of his Father.

As to their first Vote, which is their Principle, it is granted modo and forma
as they have set it down.

But the Second is too general, and an Undeniable foundation for Rebellion, as
has been Experimented: for all the Controversy was here about the manner of
Petitioning, viz. Whether a few private men might agree upon a Petition, and
then send Emissaries abroad to procure Hundreds and Thousands of Ignorant
people to Subscribe it, and then tender it to his Majesty, as it were by the
Number to fright him into a Compliance with them against his declared
Resolution to the Contrary: if this might be allowed, the Liberty of the
Subject would soon eat up the Prerogative of the King, and disorder this or any
other Government in the World.

In the Reign of Henry the Seventh, one Thomas Flammock, Lord Bacon 's Hist. of
H. 7.
a Lawyer, thought he could make a Rebellion and never break the Peace; and the
People of Cornwall being discontented about some Subsidies granted to the King,
he persuades them that it was not good they should stand like Sheep before the
Shearers, but put on Harness and take Weapons in their hands: yet to do no
Creature hurt, but go and deliver the King a Strong Petition, for the Laying
down of those grievous Payments, and for the Punishment of those that had given
him that Counsel, and to make others beware how they did the like in time to
come: And he said for his part, He did not see how they could do the Duty of
true Englishmen and good Liege-men, except they did deliver the King from such
Wicked ones, that would destroy both him and the Country; or in the Language of
our days, introduce Arbitrary Power.

And accordingly 16000 men armed, assembled, and marched from Cornwall to
Black Heath in Kent Modestly and Quietly enough, Except that at Taunton in
Somersetshire they killed, in fury, an Officious and Eager Commissioner for the
Subsidy, whom they called the Provost of Perin: but by that time they came at
Black Heath, they Threatened either to bid Battle to the King (for now the Seas
went higher than his Counselors) or to take London within his View; imagining
themselves, there to find no less fear than wealth. And accordingly they
persisted, till the King having drawn out his Forces and Surrounded them, he
fought them, and killed 20000, and took all the rest Prisoners.

Now I would Know whether this Strong Petition was Justifiable, and whether if
any body in our days should persuade a Number of Men to Act this over again,
it would be an offense against the Rights of the Subjects, to abhor such
Petitioning as a Violation of Duty, and represent it to his Majesty as
Tumultuous and Seditious, or rather plainly Rebellious; and it would be worth
the while to try whether Flammock's Strong Petition may not be Justified by
these Votes, as they now stand penned: for it does not appear that any sort of
Petitioning whatsoever, may be opposed by the Votes.

But it may be replied, That here were no men in Arms in the case of the
Petition in hand; but what then, if there should be for the future, these Votes
will Justify them too; for if the People may Petition for the Calling or
Sitting of a Parliament, or Redressing of Grievances, when and howsoever they
please, and no man may hinder them, then is Honest Old Father Flammock's Strong
Petition, which was for the Redress of two Notable Grievances, fairly
Justifiable, if it were now to be acted over again: But if the People be
allowed to Petition, but not any way, it had been fit to have told us, and
them, what manner of way they were allowed to Petition, as well as for what;
for that was the main thing in question.

But seeing they were not so kind to the People, I will try if I cannot direct
them into a better course the next time they shall have an Occasion to Petition
the King for the Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, and Redressing of
Grievances. And to that purpose I will here insert a whole Act of Parliament.

XIII Car. 2. Cap. V.
An Act against Tumults and Disorders, upon pretense of Preparing or Presenting
Public Petitions, or Addresses to His Majesty or the Parliament.
WHEREAS it has been found by Sad Experience, That Tumultuous and other
Disorderly Soliciting, and Procuring of Hands by private persons, to Petitions,
Complaints, Remonstrances and Declarations, and Other Addresses to the King, or
both, or either Houses of Parliament; 1. For Alteration of Matters Established
by Law. 2. Redress of pretended Grievances in Church or State: 3. Or other
Public Concernments, have been made use of, to serve the ends of Factious and
Seditious persons gotten into power, to the Violation of the Public Peace, and
have been a great means of the late Unhappy Wars, Confusions and Calamities in
this Nation. For preventing the like Mischiefs for the future.

Be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Consent of
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, That no person or persons whatsoever, shall from and after the First of
August One thousand six hundred sixty and one, solicit, labor or procure the
getting of Hands, or other Consent of any persons above the number of Twenty or
more, to Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, any Declaration or other Address to
the King, or both, or either Houses of Parliament, for alteration of Matters
Established by Law, in Church or State, Unless the Matter thereof have been
first Consented unto, and Grdered by Three or more Justices of the County, or
by the Major part of the Grand Jury of the County, or Division of the County,
where the same matter shall arise, at their Public Assizes, or General
Quarter Sessions; or if arising in London, by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commons in Common Council assembled; And that no person or persons whatsoever
shall repair to his Majesty, or both or either of the Houses of Parliament,
upon pretense of presenting, or delivering any Petition, Complaint,
Remonstrance or Declaration, or other Addresses, accompanied with Excessive
Numbers of People, Nor.
not at any one time above the number of Ten persons, upon pain of Incurring a
penalty not exceeding the Sum of One hundred pounds in Money, and Three Months
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise for every offense, to be prosecuted at
the Court of King's Bench, or at the Assizes or General Quarter Sessions, within
Six Months after the Offense committed, and proved by two or more Credible
Witnesses.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be
Construed to Extend to debar or hinder any person or persons, not exceeding the
Number of Ten aforesaid, to represent any public or private Grievance or
Complaint to any Member or Members of Parliament after his Election, and during
the Continuance of the Parliament, or to the Kings Majesty, for any Remedy
thereupon to be had, or to Extend to any Address whatsoever to his Majesty by
all or any of the Members of both or either Houses of Parliament during the
Sitting of the Parliament, but that they may enjoy their Freedom of Access to
his Majesty as heretofore has been used.

Now had this Act of Parliament been pursued, I believe there would have been
no Controversy in this case; and there was great reason it should, Because.
By reason of the Unquietness of the Times, when every thing seemed to tend to
the renewing of those Calamities the Act mentions in the Preface, and was made
to prevent.

But supposing it had been never so Regular, what reason can be assigned why
one part of the People should be freer to Petition for any thing, than the
other was against it, if one party may for the instance Petition the King to
change his Mind after he has declared it in any cause, why is not the other
part as free to desire him not to change? now that which may seem a public
Grievance to one County or Place, may be a great Advantage to another, and they
are totally debarred of all means of Maintaining their present advantage, if
they may not Counter-Petition.

But in this case here the persons that Petitioned were private men, and
contrary to the express Letter of this Act, solicited hands in an irregular
way; and such sort of hands, as besides their Number, were of No Consideration;
for the directions that they sent with the Petitions, were, That it mattered
not whether they were Gentlemen, or so much as Freeholders, so they were
Numerous. Now let any man consider whether it be reasonable that a company of
Rude Country Clowns, and a parcel of Pragmatical Apron-men, should contrary to
his Majesty's Proclamation pretend themselves wise enough to Advise his Majesty
when the Parliament should Sit. But if it be alleged, That there were others
besides these: why were not these totally left out? why was there such care
that the Subscriptions should be so Numerous? did these small Folk add any
weight to the Advice? No surely.

On the other Hand, they that appeared against them were Parliament Men
themselves, Justices of the Peace, Grand Juries at Assizes and Sessions,
Common-Councels and Magistrates in Corporations, men full as likely to
Understand what was fit to be done, and as Unlikely to betray the true
Liberties of the People on the one hand, or to invade the just Prerogatives of
the Crown on the other; but then these were men true to the Religion and
Government by Law established; and the Petitioners were of the same sort, for
the most part, with them that had brought on the former Calamities by this and
other such specious and popular pretenses, to the ruin both of King and
People, Prerogative and Liberty: and therefore the more justly suspected to be
playing over the Old Game.

Thus much may suffice concerning the Votes; And now let us see how they
proceeded against the pretended Offenders. And in the first place Sir Francis
Withens, a Member of their House, being accused on this Account as an offender
against the Rights of the Subject, who was not then present, It was

Ordered,

That Notice should be given him to attend in his place the next Morning.

On Thursday October 28.

Sir F. Withins appearing in his place, It was ordered that the Clerk of the
Peace for Westminster should attend the House the next Morning at Ten of the
Clock with the Roll of the Orders for the Last Easter Sessions for the City of
Westminster.

Then they fell upon an Information which had been given the House against Sir
Robert Yeomans of Bristol, and Sir Robert Cann, a Member of the House, That
they did in October 1679, Publicly declare, That there was no Popish Plot, but
a Presbyterian Plot.

Which was attested against them by Mr. Row, Sword Bearer of Bristol, and Sir
John Knight a Member of the House. Sir Robert Cann being to make his defense,
Uttered several Reproachful and Reflecting words against Sir John Knight, for
which he was called to the Bar, and received a Reprehension on his Knees, and
then being ordered to withdraw, they Voted he should be committed to the Where
he lay till the 8th of November. and then was discharged.
Tower, and Expelled the House; and that Sir Robert Yeomans should be sent for
in Custody of the Sergeant attending their House.

This weighty affair took up the whole day, and it had been well spent, if the
Popish Plot had been made one jot the plainer, or the Presbyterian Plot ever so
little taken off by it; but the World was full as well satified of the truth of
the former before, notwithstanding what these Gentlemen had said to the
Contrary; and much confirmed in the truth of the latter, by this Violent, if
not Arbitrary way of proceeding against them.

For if these Gentlemen had offended against any Law, why were they not
prosecuted in a Legal way, where they might have made a Legal defense, and have
received a Legal Sentence? But here they had nothing but bare affirmations,
without any witness to defend them; and a Sentence founded upon this as sharp,
chargeable, and dishonorable as was possible. If this be the Liberty of the
Subject, and these men our defenders from Arbitrary Government --

On Friday October 29. Sir George Downing having obtained Leave to bring in a
Bill for wearing of the Woollen Manufacture of England; The House Ordered that
Dr. Tongue should be recommended to his Majesty for the first Considerable
Church-Preferment that should happen to become void in the Kingdom. And then
the Speaker Reported his Majesty's Answer to the Address concerning Pardons,
which is recited above; which Answer was,

THat he did intend to direct such a Proclamation, and was resolved not only
to prosecute the Plot, but Popery also, and to take Care of the Protestant
Religion Established by Law; and if We join, and the Lower House go on Calmly
in their Debates, without heats, He did not doubt but to beat down Popery and
all that belongs to it.


This Answer will stand upon Record against them, and Posterity will certainly
give them their due for Neglecting this Mild Admonition of this Meek Prince.
But to go on, Mr. Harbord Reported the Address for the Support of the King's
Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion both at Home and Abroad.
Which was as follows.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, Do with most Thankful Hearts Acknowledge, not
Only Your Majesty's many former Royal Declarations of Your Adherence to the
What Protestant Religion? why are not the words by Law Established, here, as
well as in his Majesty's Answer above?
Protestant Religion, in the Preservation and Protection thereof, but Your
further Manifestation of the same in Your Gracious Speech to both Houses at the
Opening of this present Parliament, in which Your Majesty is pleased to Command
us strictly and impartially to prosecute the Horrid Popish Plot, without which
we do fully assent to Your Majesty's great Judgment, That neither Your Person
nor Government can be Safe, nor your Protestant Subjects, It being part of the
very Religion of Popery, where it can obtain, to Extirpate all Protestants both
Prince and People; which has caused in the Times of Your Royal Ancestors since
the Reformation, that great Care to oblige the Subjects against their return to
the Papal Yoke, in the very same Oaths wherein they Swear Allegiance to their
Prince. And as Now the Eyes of all the Protestant Kingdoms and States abroad
are upon us, and looking upon Your Majesty as the Royal Head of so many
Protestant Countries, cannot but hope, upon a Happy and Solid Security in our
Religion at Home, That your Majesty will be the greatest Protection to them,
from whom we may expect a Mutual Assistance, as being involved in the same
Common Danger: So we do humbly assure your Majesty, That we shall be always
ready to preserve your Majesty's Person and Government, and to Support the What
that by Law Established, or another As contrary to it as Popery is?
Protestant Religion both at home and abroad: And do Humbly beseech your
Majesty, to Esteem all persons whatsoever who shall otherwise represent Us to
your Majesty, as those who design to divide between the King and his People,
and to defeat the Meeting and Sitting of Parliaments, That those Popish Designs
may succeed, which they well know cannot otherwise prosper. And this they have
made Undeniably Evident in the Interval of Parliaments, by Contriving, with
unparalled Insolence, a most Damnable and Wicked Design to transfer their own
Crimes upon so many of your Majesty's Loyal Protestant Nobility and Gentry,
hoping thereby to destroy those who with the greatest Zeal and Integrity
endeavor to prosecute them.

The Effect of this Specious Address to possess the People, what Stout
Champions the Presbyterians are against Popery, and to Involve all them that
had appeared against them, as Papists or Favorers of Papists, and to let the
World know what a horrid opinion they had of that
Silly-impossible-Meal-Tub-Sham Plot: And Certainly the Popish Party were much
to blame to Lay their Treasons to the Presbyterians, who have too many of their
own to answer for without this Accumulation of guilt from others Crimes. But as
to their boast of their Great Zeal and Integrity in endeavoring to prosecute
the Popish Plot, we shall be better able to judge of it in the Conclusion of
this Session of Parliament.

Then the House Proceeded to Examine Sir Francis Wythens business, and it
appearing by Witness and his own Confession, that he had presented an Address
to his Majesty, expressing an Abhorrency to Petition his Majesty for the
Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, they Voted him a Betrayer of the Undoubted
Rights of the Subjects of England; and ordered him to be Expelled the House for
this High Crime, and to receive his Sentence at the Bar upon his Knees. Which
he submitted to.

Observe how they misrepresent this Gentleman, the Address he presented was
drawn by the Bench at Easter Sessions for Westminster, and related only to
that Petition, and that Parliament, in those Circumstances; now as they word
the business, it must signify that the Address was against All Sorts of
Petitions, for the Sitting of Parliaments, in the plural Number; which is foul
play to misrepresent the Matter of fact in a thing so lately done and well
Known to every body in the very place where they Sit: but it was necessary it
should be so worded, to Justify the Severity of the House, if that would have
done.

This was the Second Member of Parliament they Expelled in a way that was
looked on as Arbitrary, and unexampled; and this was the use they made of His
Majesty's Advice to proceed Calmly, and without Heats.

On Saturday the 30th of October, They passed a Vote,

That the Votes of their House should be Printed, being first Perused and
Signed by Mr. Speaker, who was to Nominate and Appoint the persons to Print the
same.

From these Printed Votes I have Extracted what has gone before and shall
follow after; and to them I appeal for the truth of this Narrative of their
Proceedings: and but for this Vote it might have been difficult to have known
what they had done, so as to have charged them: By them also I have been
encouraged to speak my Mind more freely of this, than of the former
Parliaments; for this Printing their Votes could be designed for Nothing but to
enable the People to pass a Judgment on their Actions; one of which Number I am.

Their next Vote was, That they would proceed to the full Examination of the
Popish Plot, in order to bring the Offenders to Justice.

And then they Nominated a Committee to Inspect the Journals of the Two last
Parliaments; and Report their proceedings relating to the Popish Plot; and
Ordered

An Address to his Majesty for the Letters, Papers and Evidences which have
been delivered to the Privy Council relating to the said Plot.

This Afternoon they Waited upon his Majesty with their Address for the
Preservation of his Person and Government, etc.

On Monday the First day of November, Mr. Secretary Jenkins told the House, the
Papers they had Addressed for, had been sent to the Committee of the House of
Lords for Examination of the Plot, the 24th of October.

The Bill for wearing of Woollen, was also read and committed.

Then the Speaker Reported the King's Answer to their Address for Preservation
of his Majesty's Person, and the Protestant Religion; which was as follows.

I Thank you very heartily for your Zeal for the Protestant Religion: and I
assure you there shall be nothing wanting on my part at Home or Abroad to
preserve it.


Sir Francis Winnington Chairman of the Committee for Inspecting the Journals
of the Two last Parliaments concerning the Proceedings relating to the Popish
Plot, reported a general abstract of the same; which was Ordered to be
perfected, and that they should inspect those of the House of Lords for the
same time.

Then one Hardwich a Linnen-Draper, being accused of some Misdemeanors against
one Seignior Francisco, a Witness in the Popish Plot, was Ordered to be sent
for in Custody of the Sergeant Attending their House to answer the same. This
was to punish a man before they knew whether he were guilty or no, upon a bare
Suggestion.

On Tuesday the 2d. of November, A Bill for prohibiting the Importation of
Irish Cattle, was read and committed.

And then one Harnage was ordered to be brought to the Bar for abusing
Francisco Ferria.

And then they Voted an Address to his Majesty for a pardon for Dangerfield,
and that he would take him and Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Prance and this Seignior F.
Ferria into his Royal Care and Protection.

But these were small matters to what follow.

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That the Duke of York's being a Papist, and the Hopes of his coming such to
the Crown, has given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement to the present
Designs and Conspiracies against the King and Protestant Religion.

Resolved, That in defense of the King's Person and Government, and of the
Protestant Religion, this House does declare, That they will stand by his
Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, and that if his Majesty shall come by
any violent death, (which God forbid) they will Revenge it to the Uttermost
upon the Papists. (who ever did it.)

Resolved,

That a Bill be brought in to disable the Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial
Crown of this Realm.

On Tuesday the 3d. day of November, the Lords sent down an Act they had passed
for the better Regulating the Trials of the Peers of England, to which they
desired the Concurrence of the Commons; and it was read the same day and
committed.

Mr. Harnage being then brought to the Bar, was continued in Custody of the
Sergeant during the Pleasure of the House. Not one tittle being inserted
concerning the Nature of his Misdemeanor.

The Committee for Examination of the Journals were also appointed to inspect
the Impeachments against the Lords in the Tower, and the proceedings thereupon.
And they were also to prepare Evidence against the said Lords. And in the mean
time they Voted,

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That a Bill be brought in for the better Uniting of all his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects. This was now a New Name for a Toleration, as I will make
it appear.

Ordered,

That Sir Tho. Whitegrave and Mr. Birch of Stafford Apothecary, and Lieutenant
Ellis be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant, to answer to the Charge given
against them by Mr. Dugdale.

Ordered,

That Herbert Herring be sent for in Custody, etc. for a Notorious Breach of
Privilege by him committed against Mr. Colt a Member of their House; No
account how or when being given.

But Jeremiah Bubb was only Summoned to appear at the Bar to answer for a
Breach of Privilege committed against Mr. Colt.

The Bill for Prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle was read the second
time, and committed.

And Leave was given to bring in a Bill for the Exportation of Leather.

On Thursday the 4th of November the said Bill was read the first time, and
Ordered a second reading.

And then Mr. Secretary Jenkins Reported his Majesty's Answer concerning the
Informers against the Popish Plot; which was, That Care had, and should be
taken of them.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to inspect the Act entitled, Trade Encouraged,
made in the 15th Year of his Majesty's Reign, and to bring in a Bill for
prohibiting of Scotch Cattle at certain Seasons.

And then after some Debates and Votes concerning Elections, of which I shall
take no Notice.

The Bill for disabling the D. of York to Inherit, was read the first time and
committed.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to Inspect the Laws that are in being, touching
the Maintenance of the Poor; and to bring in a Bill or Bills for Regulating and
preventing the increase of the Poor in this Kingdom.

On Saturday the 6th of November it was Ordered, That a Committee be appointed
to Inspect the Law concerning the Anniversary Reading of the Narrative of the
Gunpowder-Plot in Churches, on every Fifth day of November, and to Report the
same to the House.

Resolved N. C. That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Acts of
Parliament made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James against Popish
Recusants, Ought not to be Extended against Protestant Dissenters. It would
have been well if we had been told why they ought not to be Extended to all
that break them, one as well as another. And then how it should be possible to
distinguish these two Sorts of offenders one from the other, the offense being
Exactly the same, tho the cause be a little different: And then thirdly, if a
Bill had been brought in for that purpose, for the Votes of the House of
Commons are no binding Expositions of Law, nor I hope never will be. Lastly,
this Vote was needless, if the Bill of Union went on; and to no purpose if it
did not; as I suppose they understand Now.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill for Repeal of all
or any part of the Act of Parliament made in the 35th Year of the Reign of
Queen Eliz. Cap. 1. Printed in the Statute Book of Pulton.

This was a severe Act against the Dissenters, and they were Now to be
Countenanced and Encouraged to the utmost; for what end and purpose is not
difficult to be guessed, by their Insolence against the King and Government.

A Bill for Exportation of Cloth and other Woollen Manufactures into Turkey was
read the first time and committed.

The Bill to disable the Duke of York was read the Second time, and committed
to a Committee of the whole House, with a Resolution declared that it should
Extend to the Person of the Duke of York Only; and that Committee was
appointed on the next Monday Morning at Ten of the Clock: And accordingly it
was that day Debated, and some Clauses added to it.

On Tuesday the Ninth of November his Majesty sent the Commons another Message
by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, which was as follows.

CHARLES R.
HIS Majesty desires this House, as well for the Satisfaction of his People as
of Himself, to Expedite such Matters as are depending before them, relating to
Popery, and the Plot; and would have them rest assured, That all Remedies they
can tender to his Majesty, conducing to those Ends, shall be very acceptable to
him; Provided they be such as may Consist with preserving the Succession of the
Crown in its Due and Legal Course of Descent.


On Wednesday the 10th of November, A Bill for Regulating the Elections of
Members to Serve in Parliament for the House of Commons, was read the first
time, and ordered to be read the second time.

And the same day the Bill for prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle was
read the third time and passed, and sent up to the Lords.

Now let the Reader observe, there was not one Public Bill passed through the
House of Commons in all this time, but this; and yet no Bill was more opposed
than this: but here the priyate Concerns of the North and West Country
Gentlemen were Engaged, and therefore they carried it on Might and Main against
all opposition; but as for any Bills against Popery, they took no care or
thought: for that against the Duke of York may perhaps be made to appear to be
of another Nature then was pretended, and rather against any thing then Popery.

The same day the Lords sent down to the Commons a Bill which they had passed,
for Freeing the City of London, and his Majesty's Court and the Parts adjacent,
from Popish Inhabitants, and providing against other Dangers which may arise
from Papists. To which they desired their Concurrence.

Note, That this Bill had been sent down from the Lords before, and the Commons
had lost the opportunity of passing it, as you will see they will in this
Session also, tho there were Tragical representations made of the Danger the
City and Nation were in from the Vast Numbers of them which were Seated in and
about the City of London: The truth is, it was not convenient to loose any
thing that might serve to fright the People, and much better to have Papists in
London for that purpose, than to have them sent elsewhere, and loose the means
of Fermenting the Rabble. But if men were not as willing to be or at least seem
to be cheated, as others are to delude them, they would soon perceive whose
interest it is to keep them in Fears and Jealousies, and after discharge their
Bug-bears, or turn their rage another way.

The same day they Voted an Address to his Majesty, in answer to his last
Message.

And that they would proceed in the prosecution of the Lords in the Tower,
beginning with William Viscount Stafford.

On Thursday the 11th of November, 1680.

A Bill to prevent the offenses of Bribery, and Debauchery, in Elections of
Members to Serve in the Commons House of Parliament, was Read the first time,
and ordered to be read again the Monday following, with the Bill for Regulating
Elections of Members to Serve in the said House, formerly mentioned.

This day the Bill against the Duke of York was read the third time, and
passed; The Title whereof was resolved to be, An Act for Securing of the
Protestant Religion, by Disabling James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial
Crown of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging. And it was ordered that the Lord Russel should carry it up to the
Lords, for their Concurrence.

The Bill sent down by the Lords for Freeing the City of London from Popish
Recusants, was read the first time on Friday, 12. Nov.
and Ordered a second reading in a full House.

This day the Commons sent a Message to the Lords, to Acquaint them with their
Intentions to begin with the Viscount Stafford, and to desire them to appoint a
Convenient time for the Trial, and that the Lords in the Tower might be
Confined and kept from holding Correspondence with one another, as persons
impeached and committed for High Treason by Law ought to be.

The Lords answered, As to the latter part of this Message, They had taken Care
already in it; and as to the former, They appointed Tuesday the Thirtieth day
of the same Month.

And they further resolved to Address to his Majesty for a Sum of Money for
defraying the Charges of Summoning of Witnesses and other Expenses Incident to
the Prosecution and Trials of the Lords in the Tower, and appointed Mr. Charles
Clare to Receive and Expend the same; for which purpose his Majesty gave Order
that 100 l. should be Issued out of the Exchequer.

On Saturday the 13th of November,

Sir Robert Yeomans being upon his own Petition called to the Bar, he
Acknowledged his offense, and was ordered to receive the Censure of the House
upon his Knees; to which he submitted, and was discharged, paying his Fees.

The Lords returned the Bill against Importing of Irish Cattle agreed to
Commons the same day.

The City of London having Petitioned the House against Sir George Jeffereys
their Recorder, and it being referred to a Committee, they passed this Vote,

Resolved,

That this Committee is of Opinion, That by the Evidence given to this
Committee, it does appear that Sir George Jeffereys, Recorder of the City of
London, by traducing and obstructing Petitioning for the Sitting of This
Parliament, has betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

To which the House agreed, and Ordered, That an Humble Address be made to his
Majesty, to remove him out of all Public Offices; and appointed a Committee to
draw up the same. As if it had been likely his Majesty would have so far
complied with them, as to have punished the Recorder for obeying his Laws and
Proclamation, against a Tumultuous and Seditious Sort of men.

But however his Majesty might Act, they had another aim in this, for they
Voted, That the Members of their House that Served for the City of London,
should communicate this Vote and Resolution of their House, to the Court of
Aldermen for the City of London.

This was a sure way to bespeak a Party in the City to Join with the House
against the Abhorrers.

They further Ordered, That this Committee should enquire into all such persons
as have been Advising, or Promoting of the late Proclamation, styled, A
Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitioning.

Thus having passed thus far without any check from any person, they thought
they might proceed as far further as they pleased. And it is very probable that
they were spurred on to this by their Friends and Enemies; the one designing to
make them Terrible; and the other, being willing to make them Hated. However, I
am sure they they became more hated than feared by this and many other such
proceedings.

As the Parliament, that is, the Commons, Courted the City, so the City was as
kind to them, and Calling a Common Council, Voted an Address to his Majesty to
declare their Loyalty; and to Petition him that the Parliament might Sit until
Protestantisme was Secured; I believe they might mean innocently, tho I am well
Secured that this would have perpetuated them to the End of the World, if some
amongst them might have been Judges of the time when this great work was
perfected.

But this did not Edify with his Majesty, who penetrated to the bottom of these
little Projects, and was not over-pleased with this Correspondency betwixt this
and the Commons, remembering what ill effects this Conjunction had in the Reign
of his Father. So he Advised the Common Counsel to meddle with those things
that lay before them, and assuring them, That he would Labor to maintain the
Protestant Religion as it was Established by Law; (which was more than they
desired,) he dismissed them.

On Monday the 15th day of November.

A Bill against the Importation of Cattle from Scotland was Read the first
time, and Ordered a Second Reading the Saturday following at Ten of the Clock.

This day was delivered the following Message to the Commons.

CHARLES R.
HIS Majesty did in his Speech, at the Opening of this Session of Parliament,
desire your Advice and Assistance, in relation to Tangier: the Condition and
Importance of the Place obliges his Majesty to put this House in mind again,
That He relies upon them for the Support of it, without which it cannot be much
longer preserved. His Majesty does therefore Earnestly Recommend Tangier again
to the due and speedy Consideration and Care of this House.


A Debate thereupon arising in the House, they Voted, That they would proceed
in the Consideration of this Message the next Wednesday Morning at Ten of the
Clock.

A Bill sent down from the Lords, Entitled, An Act for the better Regulating
the Trials of the Peers of England, was Read the Second time, and Committed
upon the Debate of the House.

This day the Bill for Disabling the Duke of York was Read the first time in
the House of Peers; and the question being put, Whether it should be read
again? the House divided.

Noes, 63. Yeas, 30.
So it was Thrown out; the Bishops all appearing against the Bill, Except
three, for which some of the Commons Reflected upon them, with great Liberty,
as if no body could be for the Duke but he must be for Popery.

The House of Commons taking notice of this, were so discomposed, that they
Adjourned themselves on Tuesday Morning, and did nothing that day.

And the day following meeting in a very bad and discontented humor, and
taking into Consideration the Message about Tangier, They Resolved upon an
Address to his Majesty upon the Debate of the House, Humbly representing to him
the dangerous State and Condition of the Kingdom.

And then it appearing that George Earl of Hallifax had been very Active in the
House of Lords against the Bill for Dis-inheriting the Duke, they Resolved also
upon another Address to his Majesty, to remove the Earl from his Majesty's
Presence and Councils for Ever. And this was all they did the Second day after.
The House being in a perfect Fret, and the Country-Party Heating themselves by
their Speeches to that height, they were scarce able to Consider what was fit
to be said or asked.

And now that the Peers of England have passed their Judgment concerning this
Bill, I will add some short Reflections upon the Bill, which I shall shall
submit to my Reader, as it is fit I should.

First, Then, I do acknowledge it is a great affliction to any Protestant
Country to fall into the Hands of a Popish Prince; and worse for England then
for most other, because of the great and implacable Malice the Jesuits and the
whole Church of Rome have ever born to the Religion Established amongst us,
which is more easily defended against them, then any other Reformed Church, as
being founded upon greater Antiquity, and more conformable to the Primitive
Church of the Three or Four first Centuries, then either the Church of Rome, or
any of the Reformed Churches in these Western Parts of the World: and therefore
they of the Church of Rome Have left no stone unturned, to Subvert her,
employing all their own Wit and Power against her ever since the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth began; and sticking neither at Perjury, Treason, Murder, nor any
other Villainy that they thought might conduce to that End: and when God had by
his Gracious Providence defeated all these their Damnable Projects, They
Transformed themselves into the shapes of our own Protestant Dissenters, and so
promoted a Rebellion which ended in the seeming Ruin of this Religion and
Government, to their mighty Content and Satisfaction; but tho his Majesty at
his Return re-settled this Church, yet they did not give over, but by a
Toleration by spreading Pamphlets written in the Style of the Dissenters, and
so very acceptable to them, by discouraging all that opposed our Intestine
Divisions, and a multitude of such other frauds, they have in Twenty Years time
so shaken her foundations again, that his Majesty can hardly now preserve and
uphold her against the Popish Party on the one hand, and the Dissenters on the
other.

So that if this poor persecuted Church should fall into the hands of a Prince
of their Communion, She is to Expect whatever the most Enraged Malice armed
with his Authority, can inflict upon her, and She has all the reason in the
world to expect the Dissenters will join with them to afflict and ruin her.
Not out of any Kindness to Popery, but out of an implacable hatred they two
have Conceived against her. So that I must and will Conclude the Church of
England has the greatest reason in the world to dread that day that shall put
her into such hands.

But yet still with this limitation notwithstanding, that by Avoiding one
Mischief, she should not plunge her Self into a greater; that is, by flying a
Persecution from men, to fall into a Rebellion against her God and Savior, by
whose Providence Kings and Princes (of what Religion soever they be) rule; and
by whom they have in all Ages been so Ordered, Disposed and Governed, as He in
his Divine and Holy Wisdom Saw most Expedient for the Prosperity or
Chastisement of his Church, to the greater increase of her Glory and Happiness
in the world to come.

Two things I will lay down as Undoubted Rules or Maxims.

1. That the Kingdom of England is an Hereditary Kingdom or Monarchy, which for
many Ages has gone to the Next Heirs, be they Males or Females, of the Blood
Royal; without any Election or Consent of the People, otherwise then by
acknowledging their Lawful Right derived from God, by their Blood to them.

The Second is, That this Hereditary Monarchy was set up at first, and has
been since upheld and maintained by the Providence of God.

From which two I will infer this Conclusion, That who ever shall attempt to
alter this Right of Succession without a manifest revelation, (which is not now
to be expected) is a Notorious Usurper upon the Right of the Person who is to
Succeed, be the pretense for it what it will; and a Rebel against that
Providence which gave him that Right.

Nor will all the Ancient Rebellions, Usurpations and Disorders, which have
happened in this Kingdom, Justify them that shall begin them again.

Now if it should please God so to order it, that the Duke should at his
Majesty's Death be the Next Heir to his Crown; I cannot see how any humane
Power shall prevent his Succession to it, but by encroaching upon his Right,
and by rebelling against the Divine Providence that gave it to him.

So that be the Inconveniences that shall follow upon such a Succession what
they will or can be, we must submit to them upon pain of Rebellion against both
God and his Anointed our Lawful Prince. And then let any man be judge whether
it is better to fall into the Hands of a Popish Prince, or into the Hands of an
Angry God, who is a Consuming fire; and who is not bound by any Act of
Parliament from afflicting a Sinful and Rebellious People.

So tho the Church of England has all the reason in the world to dread such a
Prince, yet she will have greater reason to dread a Rebellion against him,
because it runs her upon the Divine Vengeance, and is directly contrary to her
Principles, and the Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Church, and is plain
downright Popery. So that I conclude Neither She nor any of her Children, will
be guilty of it, come what will come.

But this is not all, we are already Sworn to Bear Faith and true Allegiance to
the Kings Highness, The Oath of Supremacy.
His Heirs and Lawful Successors, and that to our power we shall assist and
defend all Jurisdiction, Privileges, Pre-Eminences and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Lawful Successors, or United and
Annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; of which that of an hereditary
Succession is one of the principal; and we are Sworn not only to his Majesty,
(whom God Long Continue) but also to his Lawful Successors: with which Oath
none but they that have that Right can dispense; for this being a promissory
Oath made to them as well as him, when their Rights shall fall, his Majesty
cannot remit their Right, nor any of them another; but they have Every of them
in their respective degrees and orders an indispensable Right confirmed to them
by this Oath. Nor would they cease to be Lawful Successors in the Sense of this
Oath, tho a Law were made to prevent, bar, or cut off their Succession; because
all that is meant by the word Lawful, in this place, is to be understood by the
common Rules of Succession Settled by the Common Law of England; viz. the
Eldest Son or Daughter before a Younger of the same Sex, etc. Now if his
Majesty cannot do it, much less can the Lords or Commons do it, because they
are all within the obligation of this Oath, and it is unreasonable that men
should dispense with their own promissory Oaths to others; for this would
destroy all Faith and Confidence amongst men, and pull up the very Roots of all
Society and Government. Nor can any man imagine that this Oath was made in
favor of a Protestant Successor only, H. 8. being a Popish Prince, in whose
time it was Settled at first. And the same in effect is Sworn by the Oath of
Allegiance with this binding Clause, I do believe, and in my Conscience am
resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any other Person whatsoever, has power to
absolve me of this Oath or any part thereof, which I Acknowledge by good and
full Authority to be lawfully Ministered unto me. And by this Oath we are also
bound to bear Faith and true Allegiance (not only) to his Majesty, (but to)
his Heirs and Successors, and Him and Them to Defend to the Utmost of our
power, etc. Which is to be understood according to their several and respective
Rights, and at such times as they shall grow and accrue to them and every of
them. And although this Oath was Introduced by a Protestant Prince, yet is not
made to him as a Protestant, but as Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm; and
who ever is So, has and must have Right to impose it upon us, be his Religion
what it will. So that besides the former Sin of Rebellion against the
Providence of God, Here is an Apparent and Unavoidable Perjury in this Case to
Aggravate the other. And surely no good Religious man will run upon these two
Hideous Sins deliberately, to avoid any temporal affliction whatsoever.

So that were the Case just such as it is represented by the Author of the
Character of a Popish Successor, It would not Justify the Excluding of such a
Successor as he has described, by Force and Arms, against his Right and our
Oaths to the Contrary, tho we were never so certain to Succeed in the Attempt.
But then that wicked man has most falsely represented things to us, and So as it
is impossible they should ever prove in the Event, if we do not give occasion
for it by an improsperous Rebellion; nay I believe I may say if we should.

First it is agreed by All the World, That there are Ten Protestants for one
Papist through all the Dominions of England; So that if such a Successor should
attempt to Extirpate them; the bare refusing to aid or assist him in such an
enterprise, would render it impossible.

Secondly, All our Laws are in favor of that Religion that is Established,
which could never be Repealed but in Parliament; and it is morally impossible
to have a Parliament the major part of which will not be Protestants, who will
never Consent to ruin themselves.

Thirdly, The Revenue of such a Prince will not bear the Charge of so great an
Army as will be necessary to reduce the People to a Religion so generally
detested and hated as this is.

In answer to this, there is Two things pretended. First, That he may have
Foraign Ayds; And Secondly, That he will have means to deter or allure many
from the Protestant Religion to his own.

As to Foraign assistances, no Prince will dare to admit so many as shall
totally overpower his own People, because then they will be able to ruin him,
as the Saxons did the Britains; and he may be sure they will do it. So that
this is a ridiculous Supposition in a Prince of our own Nation that has No
other Dominions but these.

As to any Number of People that he may be able to bring over to his Religion,
they will be very inconsiderable in proportion to those that will never be
brought over, tho we suppose the Number greater then it is like to be; for that
some men have got a way of Reproaching all they hate with the Name of Papists,
because there is none more hated than that; yet even for that case the Number
must be small, being very unwilling to List themselves in a hated Party, Except
they may have great Advantages by it; which are not to be afforded to many (in
proportion to the rest) in one Kings Reign, in so small a Kingdom as England.

Thirdly, The very attempting this with Force and Violence, will drive so many
people out of the Nation, that the Prince will destroy both his Revenue, and
Security; which we may believe no man will do for his own sake.

To this we may add, That it is three to one whether we have any such Prince.
Who but God can tell whether ever the Duke shall Survive his Majesty. Whether,
if he do, he shall be the Next Heir; and whether, if he be So, his Interest,
the Grace of God, or mere humane inconstancy, may not work upon him to return
to that Religion he was first principl'd in, and for which his Royal Father
most Gloriously Laid down his Life.

And after all this, Supposing he should Succeed and be Zealous for his
Religion, and Suppose that to be Popery; there is no necessity that he must Act
all the worst Principles of Popery to the Utmost degree. I am sure it is not
usual so to do, tho the difficulty be not so great as here it will be.

And after all, does not the Providence of God govern the Popish as well as
Protestant Princes? Is the Arm of the Almighty shortened that he can neither
Deliver nor Support his Church? or has he forsaken her in her Old Age, who
preserved her with So much Care and Power in her Infancy under Heathen Princes
for above Three hundred Years? and under Arrian Princes (which were as bad as
the worst Papists) a long time after that. Do we believe this Protestant
Religion is acceptable to him? Are the far greatest part of them that profess
it, Sincere or False in their pretenses? If all these be answered one way, we
have Something to rely upon that is more Steady, than the Faith and Religion of
Princes. If in the other, it will be but a folly to pretend to Secure by humane
Arts, that which God is resolved to destroy.

But the reason upon which the Bill of Exclusion is built, is worse than the
thing. First they Vote, That the Dukes being a Papist, and the Hopes of his
Coming such to the Crown, has given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement
to the present Designs and Conspiracies against the King and Protestant
Religion.

They Vote the Duke a Papist, which is more than any man living can tell but
himself; and if it should be granted that he is So, what then? Then this has
given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement to the present Designs and
Conspiracies against the King and Protestant Religion; and then the Conclusion
is, That therefore he must be dis-inherited. To me it seems better Logic to
say, Then all possible Care and Art is to be employed to reduce him back to our
Church; whereas this way of proceeding with him can end in nothing but the
enraging and exasperating of him against the Protestant Religion.

But then the Duke's being a Papist has not given the greatest, nor, if we may
believe Mr. Oats, hardly any Encouragement to the Plot: for he tells us,
Article 60.
that when he urged, That he feared the Death of the King would scarely do the
business and effect the Design, unless his R. H. would pardon those that did
the business, and stand by them in it. Keines replied, That the Duke was not
the Strength of their Trust; for they had another way to effect the setting up
the C. R. etc. And if James did not Comply with them, to pot he must go also.
And Article 29. If the Duke shall set his face in the least measure to follow
his Brothers footsteps, his Passport was made to Lay him asleep. And Article
24. They the Jesuits aver, That although the Duke was a good Catholic, yet he
had a tender affection for the King, and would scarcely be engaged in that
Concern; and if they should once intimate their Designs and Purposes unto him,
they might not only be frustrated of their Design, but also might lose his
Favor. Art. 16. He says he putting this question, What if the Duke should
prove Slippery? They replied, His Passport was ready when ever he should Appear
to fail them. And page the 64. He tells us, He (the Pope) has ordered, That in
case the D. of York will not accept these Crowns as forfeited by his Brother
unto the Pope, as of his Gift, and settle such Prelates and Dignities in the
Church, and such Officers in Commands and Places Civil, Naval, and Military, as
he has Commissioned, Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and in order thereunto
Ex post facto; Consent the Assassination of the King his Brother, Massacre of
his Protestant Subjects, Firing of his Towns, etc. by Pardoning of the
Assassins, Murderers and Incendiaries, that then he also be Poisoned or
destroyed, after they have for some time abused his Name and Title to
Strengthen their Plot, etc. All which Passages in his and other of the
Narratives show plainly the D. being a Papist was not the greater, nay it was
hardly any encouragement to the Plot: and tho some of them have gone farther
than Mr. Oats, yet that shows the Jesuits had different opinions of His R.
Highness; and therefore had no assurance: but if the Plot upon the Life of the
King had succeeded, he might have revenged it upon them tho he were of their
Religion as they believed.

But because these things may be disputed both ways, Suppose I should grant the
Hopes of his Coming a Papist to the Crown, did really give the greatest
Encouragement to the Plot; will dis-inheriting him defeat those hopes? No, but
it will rather whet them on to do their utmost to Murder the King to prevent
or revenge that injury to the Duke: and of this the House was so sensible, that
the same day they passed this Vote, they Added to it this that follows.

Resolved N. C.

That in Defense of the Kings Person and Government, and of the Protestant
Religion, this House does declare, That they will Stand by His Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes; and that if his Majesty shall come by any Violent
Death, (which God forbid) they will revenge it to the Utmost upon the Papists.

This latter Vote they have annexed to the former every time they have passed
it, which shows they are sensible Revenge and Despair are full as likely to
push them on, as Hope, to this Horrid attempt: and in that case this Vote will
never hinder them, but it may encourage the Scotch Assassins to do it if they
can; Knowing the Papists are to Suffer, who ever does the fact.

So that to me it seems the Reasons upon which the Bill is founded, are weak
and unconcluding, and that no Malice could have Contrived a more effectual way
to hasten those Calamities upon us it pretends to prevent, and to ascertain
what is full as likely never to happen without it.

So I conclude the Lords did well and wisely in rejecting the Bill, and the
Bishops in joining with them so to do.

And now I will proceed with the rest of the Votes, having made this short
Digression to Express my thoughts on this great affair, which I submit to the
Judgment of wiser men; and shall willingly retract or amend any thing if I have
erred; for I seek nothing by all this but the Peace and Prosperity of my
Country.

There being little done of importance on Thursday the 18th day of November,
the next day the Commons fell upon the business of the Abhorrers of the
Petitions; and began with the Grand-Juries for the Counties of Somerset and
Devon, which had both detested and abhorred the said Tumultuous Petition. So
they Ordered, That Sir Giles Philips and William Coleman, being the Fore-men of
the said Grand-Juries, should be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending their House, to answer at the Bar of their House, for Breach of
Privilege by them committed against their House.

Before in Sir George Jeffereys Case, it was for betraying the Rights of the
Subject, and Now it is become a Privilege of Parliament for the People to
Petition by Hundreds and Thousands for the Sitting of a Parliament. At this
rate of Proceeding, there will be Privileges of Parliament enough at last.

At the same time they ordered Captain William Castle and Mr. John Hutchinson,
and Mr. Henry Walrond, the two last being of the said Grand-Juries, to be Sent
for in Custody too. So this was a pretty handsome beginning.

But the next day they found that Mr. William Stawell was Foreman for the
Grand Jury for Devon, and not Mr. Coleman, so they ordered his Name to be put
out of the Warrant, and Mr. Stawell's to be put in. This shows with what heat
and haste they managed this affair.

But why should the Fore-men of the Grand-Juries be sent for, rather than all
or any of the rest; the Foreman having no more Authority than the Last man, nor
being any way enabled by his place to Help or Hinder any thing, but being
Concluded by the Major part, be his own Opinion what it will? but they could
not tell who promoted this affair, and therefore Right or Wrong, Singled them
out to be made Examples, not thinking it convenient to send for the whole
Number, who yet, were punished in these; and not only they that suffered, but
every Gentleman in the Nation suffered in them; their Liberties being at the
Mercy of every Corporation, who when they please may send Tailors, Grocers,
etc. to enjoy these exorbitant privileges, and Send for the best Knights and
Gentlemen in England, for not, having paid respects great enough to them.

The Bill of Importation of Cattle from Scotland was read the second time, and
Committed.

Then they proceeded in the business of the Abhorrers, and Voted, That one
Thomas Herbert Esquire; should be sent for in Custody, for prosecuting John Arnold
Esquire; at the Council Table, for promoting the said Petition, and procuring
Subscriptions.

To him they added Sir Thomas Holt, Sergeant at Law, and Mr. Thomas Staples, as
Betrayers of the Liberties of the Subject.

The same day one Eld was discharged out of Custody; who had been taken for not
Making a good Search for Arms at the Lord Aston's House at Taxall in
Staffordshire. Notice being taken that he was a Sober Protestant, (what that
means I must leave to my Reader; for I never heard that any sort of Protestants
made Drunkenness, or Debauchery, or any other sort of Insobriety a part of
Protestantisme, and I should have liked it better if it had been a Confiding
Man,) and an Enemy to the Popish Faction: It were worth the while to enquire
how he stood affected to the Puritan Faction.

On Monday the 22 of November,

Two Bills for Regulating Elections were read the second time, and Committed to
a Committee to unite or divide them as they should see cause.

The day following Sir Thomas Holt petitioning the House, was called in and
Censured upon his Knees, and Discharged.

The same day a further Address was Voted, to Petition his Majesty to remit a
Fine of 500 l. that had been set upon Mr. Benjamin Harris, for Printing
Seditious Libels. Such men were not to be discouraged, in an Age when so few
were to be found, who would undertake that dangerous Employment for the good of
the Nation.

The same day a Bill was brought in for Repeal of an ACT made in the 35 of
Eliz. Cap. 1. Against Seditious and Disloyal Sectaries and Conventicles; this
Bill passed both Houses, but was taken away, before it was Signed by the King.
So that Statute Escaped then; to the terror of those Protestants.

There having been a design to Indict the Duke of York for a Popish Recusant in
Trinity Term this Year, and the same being prevented by the Court of
Kings-Benches discharging the Grand Jury before they had found the same, the
House made this Vote,

That the discharging of a Grand Jury by any Judge before the end of the Term,
Assizes or Sessions, whilst Matters are under their Consideration, and Not
presented, is Arbitrary, Illegal and Destructive to public Justice, a manifest
Violation of his Oath, (what Oath) and is a Means to Subvert the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to Examine the Proceedings of the
Judges in Westminster Hall, etc.

On Wednesday, November 24.

After Orders for the sending for George Bell an Attorney at Law, Arthur
Yeomans, William Jordan, John Laws, and Henry Aulnett, for Breach of Privilege
of Parliament, without assigning wherein; Order was given to bring in a Bill,

1. To Supply the Laws against Bankrupey.

2. And another to take away the Court held before the Lord President and
Council in the Marches of Wales.

Then the Bill for Repeal of the 35 Eliz Cap. 1. was read the Second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Ordered, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty from this House, by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire his Majesty to give Orders, That all Protestant Dissenters, who are
prosecuted upon any Penal Laws made against Popish Recusants, in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth and King James, may be Admitted to a Composition in the
Exchequer, without paying any Fees. Which was granted by his Majesty.

Ordered, That Leave be given to bring in a Bill declaring that those Laws
shall not be Extended to P. Dissenters; and that it be referred to the
Committee appointed to bring in the Bill for the better Uniting of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects. The Attorney General being ordered formerly to
attend, and This day Called in and Examined touching the Manner of Issuing
forth of the P. styled, A Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitions, and Giving
an Account to the House, That Sir Fra. North Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, was Advising and Assisting in the drawing up and passing of the
said Proclamation; and a Debate thereupon arising in the House, they Resolved
N.C. That it was sufficient Ground for the House to proceed upon an Impeachment
against him for High Crimes and Misdemeanors; and order taken for an
Impeachment accordingly.

Thus the Dissenters are encouraged to go on and break the Laws, and the Judges
punished for Executing them.

On Thursday the 25 of November, Nothing Extraordinary was done, but the
Exhibiting Articles against Edward Seymour Esquire, formerly Speaker of the
House; to Each of which he being required to make a distinct answer, there
arising a Debate upon the first Article, the whole was adjourned to the next
day.

Samuel Verdon Undersheriff of Norfolk, was ordered to be sent for into
Custody, upon a Complaint of several Crimes and Misdemeanors by him committed:
For a Notorious Breach of Privilege of Parliament by him committed against
their House; No such thing being mentioned in the Complaint.

Friday, November. 26. The Bill of Repeal of the 35 of Eliz. was read the third
time, and passed.

And the House resolved to Impeach Mr. Seymour upon 4 Articles, and appointed a
Committee to draw up those Articles accordingly, and Referred it to them to
consider of Precedents concerning the Committing of Members to Custody when
Impeached in Parliament.

On Monday the 29 day of November, the House attended his Majesty with their
Address concerning Tangier; which being very long, I will not trouble the
Reader with it at Large.

The whole is a Tragical representation of the Advantages that Popery had
gotten over the Religion and Government, Assisted (as they tell us) by the
Treachery of perfidious Protestants, which must be the Dissenters, by whose
assistance they obtained the Toleration, broke several Sessions of the Long
Loyal Parliament, if Coleman's Letter to Monsieur Le Chese may be Credited; and
it may truly be averred, that the Papists have not obtained any Advantage
without the Dissenters, nor the Dissenters without them.

They say further, That the ACT of Parliament enjoining a Test to be taken by
all persons admitted into any Public Office, and intended for a Security
against Papists coming into Employment, had So little effect, that either by
dispensations, obtained from Rome, they Submitted to those Tests, and held
their Offices themselves. or those put into those Places, wore so favorable to
the same Interest, that Popery it self has rather gained than lost ground since
that ACT.

Now Supposing it true, that some of them did obtain such dispensations, what
was this to his Majesty; and if any of them that gat their Offices were apt to
afford them unlawful favors, they might have called them to account for it,
with much more general Satisfaction than they did the Abhorrers: but let any
man that Knows any thing of the World, Judge whether the Malice or falsehood
of the Conclusion be greatest.

They tell the King a dreadful Story of the defeating of the Presentment
intended against his Majesty's Brother the Duke of York, under whose
Countenance all the rest (of the Papists) shelter themselves, as they say. But
surely his Majesty was not to be informed what they thought of this, who could
not but be well informed of the Fact long since; and so they descend to the
business of the Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, which Exposes Popery ( as
it deserves, say they) as Ridiculous to the People; and they tell his Majesty,
That a New and Arbitrary Rule of Court was made in his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench, That the same for the future should not be Printed by any person
whatsoever. But then they take no Notice how that Author has made many Odious,
False, and Scandalous, Reflections upon the Religion and Government by Law
Established; which was the cause why it was Suppressed, and not any talent he had
of writing against Popery.

Finally, They tell the King that they have freed themselves from the guilt of
that blood and desolation which is like to ensue: which is an Expression in
that place that looks like a kind of Threat or Menace; for there was then No
prospect of blood or desolation that could arise from any cause or persons but
what must be Countenanced by the Dissenters.

The Conclusion is; But our Only hope, next under God, is in Your Sacred
Majesty, that by your Great Wisdom and Goodness we may be effectually Secured
from Popery, and all the Evils that attend it, and that none but persons of
Known Fidelity to Your Majesty, and Sincere Affection to The Protestant
Religion, What Religion?
may be put into any Employment Civil or Military. That whilst we shall give a
Supply to Tangier, we may be assured we do not Augment the Strength of our
Popish Adversaries, nor increase our own Dangers; which Desires of your
Faithful Commons if Your Majesty shall Graciously vouchsafe to grant, we shall
not only be ready to assist Your Majesty in defense of Tangier, but do
whatsoever else shall be in our power to enable Your Majesty to Protect the
Protestant Religion and Interest at home and abroad, and to resist and repel
the Attempts of Your Majesty's and the Kingdoms Enemies.

But His Majesty notwithstanding continued without any Supply, and by the
Blessing of God preserved the Town. Now it is very observable, that in the
former Parliament there being a Report, That Tangier should be Sold to relieve
the Necessities of the Crown, they then Voted, April 9. 1679.
That the House was of Opinion, That those who should Advise His Majesty to
part with Tangier to any Foraign Prince or State, or be Instrumental therein,
ought to be accounted Enemies to the King and Kingdom: And yet now that it was
in apparent hazard to be lost to the Moors, the Sworn Enemies of all
Christians, they would grant nothing to preserve it; and many of the Commons in
their Speeches were of Opinion, that it was the best way to desert the Town. So
that if any did Advise his Majesty to Sell the Place, they were Enemies to the
King and Kingdom; but if it were lost or deserted, So the King had nothing for
it, the Matter was not much, so that the King might bear the blame, tho the
Commons were in the fault.

On TVESDAT the 30th of November, the Trial of William Viscount Stafford was
began, which lasted till the 7th of December, of which I shall take no Notice,
it being printed by it Self. During all which time there was nothing material
done by the House of Commons except that business.

Wednesday the 8th, and Thursday the Ninth of December, were spent in Reporting
of Elections, and discharging persons out of the Custody of the Sergeant, and
Ordering others to be taken in to Supply their places.

But very remarkable was their Severity against Mr. Sheridon and Mr. Day, who
were Ordered to be taken into Custody, their Papers to be Searched, and that No
person should be Admitted to come to them, but such as should have occasion to
bring them Necessaries.

On Friday the 10th of December, Captain Castle was found, and Voted guilty of
offending against the Rights of the Subject, by Obstructing Petitioning to His
Majesty for the Sitting of that Parliament.

The same day the Commons Ordered an Impeachment to be prepared against Sir
Francis North Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, for High Crimes and
Misdemeanors, viz. for Advising the Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitions.

Then they Voted, That the Imprisonment of one Peter Norris at Dover by the
Order of Sir Leoline Jenkins, was Illegal and Arbitrary, and an Obstruction to
the Evidence, for the Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plott. This was the
business for which Sheridon and Day were imprisoned.

On Monday the 13th, A Bill for Exportation of Cloth and other Woollen
Manufactures into Turkey, being read the second time, and a Debate arising
thereupon, it was Ordered that it should lie upon the Clerks Table.

They Ordered also, That the Committee appointed to look into and prepare
Evidence against the Lords in the Tower, do Examine the Evidence against all
persons concerned in the Popish Plot. And they were to report the Names of such
persons, together with their Opinions therein, to the House upon the Debate.

And also that Leave should be given to bring in a Bill, for Banishing of all
Papists, and suspected Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster, and
XX miles of the same, with Clauses therein for disarming of all Papists, and
for Pains and Penalties against all such Papists, or suspected Papists, as
should Ride, Go, or be Armed. And that Lists of them should be brought in by
the Members.

When ever any Law pass against suspected Papists, great care ought to be taken
to limit that Loose term, or great Mischiefs will ensue.

On Tuesday the 14th of December, Complaint was made, That one Herbert Herring
who had been ordered to be taken into Custody for a Breach of Privilege, did
abscond himself to avoid the Execution of the said Order: whereupon it was

Resolved, That if he did not render himself by Saturday, that House would
proceed against him by Bill in Parliament, for endeavoring by his absconding
to Avoid the Justice of the House. This was a way never to want Work, if every
Fugitive Attorney or Porter that had broke the Privilege of the House, was to
be brought in by Bill.

Sir Robert Peyton, a Member of their House, was the Next that fell under their
displeasure, being said to Have had Secret Negotiation with the Duke of Y. by
the Means of the Earl of Peterborough, Mrs. Cellier, and Mr. Gadbury, at such
time as they were turning the Popish Plot upon the Protestants, i. e. the
Presbyterians, it seems they are THE Protestants. For which he was Ordered
(after his defense) to be Expelled the House, and to be brought to the Bar to
receive the Censure of the House upon his Knees from the Speaker.

Which was done with so little respect to the Quality of the person; that after
the Dissolution of the Parliament, he sent the Speaker a Challenge, for which
he was Committed, having been before committed to the Sergeant, for not being
at hand when it should have been first done, by the Speaker. So he was twice
Committed and Expelled too, but by what Law, the House of Commons proceeded, I
know not.

It is the Interest both of the Members and of Us whom they represent, to take
care that this be not left to them; for here was a Member Expelled not for
being a party to that Conspiracy of the Papists, but for having Secret
Negotiations with the Duke of York at that time: and if this be allowed, that
they may Expel for what cause they please, be there Law, or be there none, then
have the greater part of the House an Absolute and Arbitrary power over the
lesser part; and if either Side do by accident get the Advantage of the other
by a Single Vote, they may Expel them as they please: which must Necessarily
end in Confusion and Slavery.

On Wednesday the 15th of December, the House resolved into a Committee of the
whole House, to Consider of Ways and Means to Secure this Kingdom against
Popery and Arbitrary Power; and Resolved upon two Votes, viz.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That this House does agree with the Committee,
That one Means for the Suppressing Popery is, That a Bill be brought in to
banish, immediately, all the Considerable Papists of England out of the Kings
Dominions.

Resolved N. C. That this House does agree with the Committee, That a Bill be
brought in for an Association of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for the
Safety of his Majesty's Person Note, here is no mention of his Majesty's
Government in this Association.
, the Defense of the Protestant Religion, and the Preservation of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, against all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever, and for
preventing the Duke of York or any Papist from Succeeding to the Crown.

And ordered a Committee to be appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill
pursuant to the first of the said Resolves.

The latter was taken up to Supply the Bill of Exclusion which bad been thrown
out by the Lords, and was never prosecuted any further; for when they came to
draw the Bill, it was found impracticable, without involving us presently in a
Civil War.

For an Association signifies nothing without a Head to govern and direct it;
if the King be made the Head, then we are where we were, and it is to no
purpose; If another person be made So, then there is two distinct Governments
in the same Kingdom, which can never stand together a Month without imbroyling
themselves and the People. This the Holy League of France proved Experimentally
true; and the same Event will always follow.

Besides, there was no reason to Expect that either his Majesty or the House of
Lords would yield to this way of Exclusion, which was worse than the former;
Tho if that had passed, it would have signified nothing without an Association
or a Standing Army, as the Author of the Seasonable Address to both Houses of
Parliament has well proved.

This day also His Majesty made a Speech to both the Houses, which I will
insert when I come to the Answer of the Commons to it.

On Thursday the 16th of December, A Petition of Diverse Inhabitants in the
County of Surry, Complaining of the proceedings in an Ecclesiastical Court
against them, being read, it was referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill or
Bills for Regulating the proceedings of such Courts.

A Petition of Joshua Brook and other Merchants against the African Company was
also read, and referred to a Committee.

Mr. Booth reporting from the Committee to whom the Bill for the better
Regulating the Trials of the Peers of England was committed, An Amendment to be
made, and a Clause to be Added, and thereupon a Motion being made to bring in a
Clause for Repeal of the Laws de Scandalis Magnatum, It was Ordered, That a
Committee should be appointed immediately to withdraw and prepare such a
Clause; Which was done, and passed the same day.

If the Peers had passed this Clause, they had reduced themselves into the
Condition of the Gentry and Commoners, and a man might have called the greatest
Lord in England, Knave, more Safely perhaps than his Tailor; but if they did
not, then that Excellent Bill was to be lost to which they had tacked this
Clause; which was quite of another Nature.

And it ought to be Considered also, That the Lords were Soon Voted down by the
Commons once before, when by Separating themselves from the Crown, they had
lost their Support; and they may be sure the same thing will follow again, when
ever the Commons shall prevail so far upon them, as to bring the Peerage into
as Low a Condition as the Gentry, their Privileges being, to speak the truth,
too little already to support and maintain their Dignity and Honor: but of
this I need say no more.

The Bill for Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects to the Church of
England, was read the first time, and ordered to be read again the Monday
following after Ten of the Clock in a full House.

Another Bill for Exempting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from
the Church of England, from the penalties of the Laws against Popish Recusants,
was read the first time, and ordered to be read at the same time with the
former again.

Friday December. 17th.

Captain Castle petitioning to be discharged, was Censured on his Knees at the
Bar of the House; and dismissed, paying his Fees.

A Petition of one Richard Haines, desiring Leave that a Bill should be brought
in for restraining Vngrants, and promoting the Woollen Manufactures, was read,
and committed to a Committee to prepare the said Bill.

Leave also was given to bring in a Bill for the more easy Collecting of the
Hearth-Money.

The Additional ACT for Burying in Woollen was read and passed, and sent up by
Sir George Downing to the Lords for their Concurrence.

A Bill for Continuance of two Acts, The one Entitled, An Act for preventing
the planting of Tobacco in England, and Regulating the Plantation Trade. The
Other, An Act for Exporting Beer, Ale and Mum, was read a second time and
committed.

Then the House agreed the Articles of Impeachment against Edward Seymour Esquire;
a Member of their House, and Ordered him to be taken into Custody of the
Sergeant, till he should give Sufficient Security to their House to answer the
said Impeachment: and the Sergeant at Arms was Ordered to take the said
Security.

The Bill for restraining Papists from coming or residing within the Cities of
London or Westminster, etc. was read the second time, and committed.

Then the House resolved into a Committee of the whole House, and passed these
three Resolves.

1. That a Bill be brought in for the more effectual Securing of the Meeting
and Sitting of Frequent Parliaments, as one means to prevent Arbitrary Power.

2. That a Bill be brought in that the Judges hereafter to be made and
Appointed, may hold their Places and Salaries quam diu se been gesserint; and
also to prevent the Arbitrary Proceedings of the Judges.

3. That a Bill be brought in against Illegal Exaction of Money upon the
People, and to make it High Treason.

And a Committee was appointed to bring in a Bill or Bills pursuant to the said
Resolves.

It may appear from hence, great care was taken to put the Monarchy out of a
possibility of Arbitrary Power; but what then; is it impossible that there
should be any Such Thing as Arbitrary power Exercised by any but a Monarch? Is
not a Commonwealth or a House of Commons as capable of Arbitrary power, as a
King? Were the Proceedings of the Long Rebel-Parliament Arbitrary or No? Were
not Some of the Actions of this very House of Commons Arbitrary? I dare Say
those that suffered by them thought them so, and the rest will be of the same
mind if ever it comes to be their Turns to be so treated, which they are not
sure but at one time or other may happen. At least I am sure the pulling down
the Monarchy did Once before bring in Arbitrary power with a Vengeance; and
those that had clamoured against it (as they do now) when there was no cause
for it, durst not mutter a Syllable when there was: and if they did really
believe there were any danger of it Now, we should hear much less than we do of
it.

On Saturday the 18th of December.

The Bill for taking away the Court holden before the President and Council in
the Marches of Wales, was read the third time, and passed, and sent up to the
Lords.

The rest of this day was spent in returning an Answer to his Majesty's Speech.

On Monday following a Bill to prohibit the Importation of Foreign Guns, was
read the first time, and Ordered a second reading.

And Mr. Aulnutt and Mr. Herbert were Ordered to be discharged, being first
Censured on their Knees, and paying their Fees.

And that Sir John Lloyd Mayor, and William Jackson and William Clutterbuck
late Sheriffs of Bristol, be sent for into Custody.

On Tuesday the 21 of December, The Bill for Uniting his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects to the Church of England, was read the second time, and committed upon
the Debate of the House.

And it was Ordered, That Leave be given to bring in a Bill or Bills for
Inspecting and Correcting Pluralities and Non-Residences relating to
Ecclesiastical Benefices.

The same day they delivered their Answer to his Majesty's late Speech on
Wednesday the 15th of December; which I will here insert according to my
promise.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
AT the Opening of this Parliament, I did acquaint you with the Alliances I had
made with Spain and Holland, as the best Measures that could be taken for the
Safety of England and the Repose of Christendom.

But I told you withal, That if Our Friendship became Unsafe to trust to, it
would not be wondered at, if Our Neighbors should begin to take new
Resolutions, and perhaps such as might be fatal to Us.

I must tell you, That Our Allies cannot but see how little has been done
since this Meeting, to Encourage their Dependence upon Us; and I find by them,
That Unless We can be So United at home, as to make Our Alliance valuable to
them, it will not be possible to Hinder them from Seeking some other Refuge,
and making Such New Friendships, as will not be Consistent with Our Safety.
Consider, that a Neglect of this Opportunity is Never to be repaired.

I did likewise lay the Matter plainly before You, touching the Estate and
Condition of Tangier, I must Now tell you again, That if that Place be thought
worth the Keeping, you must take such Consideration of it, that it may be
speedily Supplied, it being impossible for Me to Preserve it at an Expense so
far above My Power.

I did promise you the fullest Satisfaction your Hearts could wish, for the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and to Concur with you in any Remedies,
Which might consist with Preserving the Succession of the Crown in its Due and
Legal Course of Descent: and I do again with the same Reservations, renew the
same Promises to You.

And being thus ready on My part to do all that can reasonably be Expected from
Me, I should be glad to Know from You, as Soon as may be, how far I shall be
Assisted by You, and what it is you desire from Me.

The Answer to this Speech was as follows.

May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, have taken into our Serious Consideration, Your Majesty's
Gracious Speech to both your Houses of Parliament on the 15th of this Instant
December, and do with all the grateful Sense of Faithful Subjects, and Sincere
Of what Sort?
Protestants, acknowledge Your Majesty's So great Goodness to us, in renewing
the Assurances You have been pleased to give us of your readiness to Concur
with us in any Means for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and your
Gracious Invitation of us to make our Desires Known to Your Majesty.

But with grief of Heart we cannot but observe, that to these Princely Offers,
Your Majesty has been Advised, (by what Secret Enemies to Your Majesty and
your People, we Know It is probable His Majesty's constancy in this denial,
proceeds from his own Prudence and Natural Affection, to his Royal Brother, at
least it may be So for ought any thing they Know to the contrary.
not) to Annex a Reservation, which if insisted on, in the instance to which
alone it is Applicable, will render all your Majesty's other Gracious
Inclinations of no effect or advantage to us. Your Majesty is pleased thus to
limit your Promise of Concurrence in the Remedies which shall be proposed, that
they may Consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its Due and
Legal Descent. And we do Humbly Inform your Majesty, That No Interruption of
that Descent For the present; but if this be granted once, who Knows when it
may?
has been endeavored by us, Except only the Descent upon the Person of the
Duke of York, who by the wicked Instruments of the Church of Rome has been
manifestly perverted to their Religion. And we do Humbly represent to Your
Majesty, as the Issue of our most deliberate Thoughts and Consultations The
contrary of which is believed true, not only by the House of Lords; but by
almost all the Gentry and better Part of the Nation, who have another Title
besides that of Protestants at Large; viz. By Law Established, which these men
durst never own.
, That for the Papists to have their Hopes Continued, That a Prince of that
Religion shall Succeed in the Throne of these Kingdoms, is Utterly inconsistent
with the Safety of Your Majesty's Person, the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Property, Peace and Welfare of your Protestant Subjects.

That your Majesty's Sacred Life is in Continual Danger under the Prospect of a
Popish Successor, is evident, not only from the Principles of those devoted to
the Church of Rome, which allow that an Heretical Prince (and such they term
all Protestant Princes) Excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, may be
Destroyed and Murdered; The same Principles varied in but one circumstance,
are owned by the Dissenters and Commonwealth Party, who are set up by the
Exclusion as much as the Papists are defeated, which ought to be considered at
the same time.
but also from the Testimonies given in the prosecution of the Horrid Popish
Plot, against diverse Traitors Attainted for designing to put those accursed
Principles into practice against Your Majesty.

From the Expectation of this Succession, has the Number of Papists in Your
Majesty's Dominions so much increased within these few Years, and so many been
prevailed with to desert the true Protestant Religion, that they might be
prepared for the Favors of a Popish Prince as soon as he should come to the
possession of the Crown: The same inconveniences have arisen from the
Expectation of another Commonwealth and Presbytery.
and while the same Expectation lasts, many more will be in the same danger of
being perverted,

This is that has hardened the Papists of this Kingdom, Animated and
Confederated by their Priests aod Jesuits, to make a Common Purse, Provide
Arms, Make Application to Foreign Princes, and Solicit their Aid, for imposing
Popery upon us; and all this even during Your Majesty's Reign, and whilst Your
Majesty's Government and the Laws were our Protection.

It is Your Majesty's Glory and True Interest to be the Head and Protector of
all Protestants, It is mpossible for his Majesty to preserve this Glory, but by
preserving his Kingly Dignity and Power, which is the foundation of the other;
and the Attempts of the Commonwealth Party and the Dissenters, has more
discouraged his Majesty's Allies abroad, and his true Loyal Subjects at home,
Then either the Number of Popish Converts, the Plot, or the Fears or Hopes of a
Popish Successor.
as well Abroad as at Home: but if these Hopes remain, what Alliances can be
made for the Advantage of the Protestant Religion and Interest, which shall
give Confidence to Your Majesty's Allies, to join so vigorously with your
Majesty, as the State of that Interest in the World now requires, whilst they
see this Protestant Kingdom in so much danger of a Popish Successor, by whom
at the present all their Councils and Actions may be Eluded, as hitherto they
have been, and by whom (if he should Succeed) they are Sure to be destroyed.

WE have thus humbly laid before your Majesty, some of those great Dangers and
Mischiefs which evidently accompany the Expectation of a Popish Successor. The
Certain and Unspeakable Evils which will come upon Your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects and their Posterity, if such a Prince should Inherit, are more also
than we can well enumerate.

Our Religion, No, may not the Providence of God, and the Number and Constancy
of its Professors defend and preserve the best Religion in the World during the
Reign of one Popish Prince, when Popery has preserved it Self under Four
Princes together of our Religion?
which is now so dangerously shaken will then be totally Overthrown; Nothing
will be left, or can be found to protect or defend it.

The Execution of all Old Laws must cease, and it will be in vain to Expect New
Ones. The most Sacred Obligations of Contracts and Promises (if any should be
given) that shall be judged to be against the Interest of the Romish Religion,
This Violation is not necessary, no nor probable, considering the vast
disproportion betwixt the Papists and Protestants.
will be violated, as is undeniable, not only from Argument and Experience
elsewhere, but from the Sad Experience this Nation once had on the like
occasion.

In the Reign of such a Prince the Pope will be acknowledged Supreme, What
shall the Pope be acknowledged as the King now is Supreme in all Causes, as
well Temporal as Ecclesiastical? Can any man that will stick to his Oath, be
forced to acknowledge this New minted Papal Supremacy, which never had any being
but only in St. Peter's Patrimony, where the Pope is a Temporal Prince? Must
all Cases forthwith be drawn under his Jurisdiction? Then Woe be to
Westminster Hall.
(though the Subjects have Sworn the contrary) and all Causes either as
Spiritual, or in order to Spiritual things, will be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives Had the House any Prophets amongst them to foresee this? If a
Protestant Prince should have a mind to play such a Freake, it would not be
possible to effect it; whence then shall the Popish one get so much more Power?
Liberties, and Estates of all such Protestants, as value their Souls and their
Religion more than their Secular Concernments, will be Adjudged forfeited.

To all this we might Add; That it appears in the Discovery of the Plot, Who
invited these Princes Assistance? Who used these Arguments? From whom is the
performance to be Expected? In all the Discovery, I never see the Duke Himself
Charged to have Done or Said any of these things; and if Coleman and the
Jesuits have Treated about them in his Name, but without his Order, from them
only the performance is to be Expected, who have no power; but if the Duke had
promised these things himself, the impossibility of the thing will Excuse him
Sufficiently from the obligation of so wicked and foolish an Engagement.
That Foreign Princes were Invited to Assist in Securing the Crown to the Duke
of York; with Arguments from his great Zeal to establish Popery, and to
Extirpate Protestants (whom they call Heretics) out of his Dominions; and Such
will expect performance Accordingly.

We further humbly beseech Your Majesty in your Great Wisdom to Consider, It is
not likely but that his Majesty did think of this before this Address had a
being; and they should do well to Consider, That the Nature and Temper of the
English Nation is Such, as Experience showed us in the late Times, That an
absolute Monarchy may be much more Easily Set up and Continued amongst us, than
a Commonwealth; and therefore it is as possible that in case of Such an
Opposition, the Duke may prevail and become Absolute it he please, as that he
should be Overcome; and it is much more probable that this Royal Line will
finally prevail, if he do not, and obtain the Succession, then that an Oliver
Cromwell will be able to Settle it in a New Family, whom all will Hate and
Envy. And it ought also to be Considered, France may Strike in and Settle The
Monarchy, Duke, Popery and Arbitrary Government, in case of opposition, which
is not likely without it: Or it May be may endeavor to get the Crown for
himself or his Brother. However, Rebellion and Civil War are as destructive as
Popery, and therefore Never to be chosen.
Whether in Case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom, should descend
to the Duke of York; the opposition which may possibly be made to his
possessing it, may not only Endanger the further descent in the Royal Line,
But even Monarchy it self.

For these Reasons we are most humble Petitioners to Your most sacred Majesty;
I shall in the Conclusion show his Majesty had much better Reasons in tender
Commiseration to his Poor Protestant Subjects, to deny their Petition and stick
to the Reservation, tho I believe he may grant their Bill when it be tendered
in a Parliamentary way. But as for the Association, I suppose His Majesty will
desire to be Excused as long as ever he is able to remember how the Associated
Counties and London defended His Fathers Person, and the Protestant Religion
and Kingdom, and how difficult it will be to give him a Competent Security,
That this Association against his Royal Brother, shall not be turned at one
time or other, upon one pretense or other against himself, or his Government,
(of which no care it seems is to be taken) Especially after Such a Menace to
the Monarchy: which I believe may be Immortal, if it remains till such an Act
of Parliament pass.
That in Tender Commiseration of your Poor Protestant People, Your Majesty will
be Graciously pleased to depart from the Reservation in your said Speech; and
when a Bill shall be tendered to Your Majesty in a Parliamentary way, to
Disable the Duke of York from Inheriting the Crown, Your Majesty will give your
Royal Assent thereto; and as Necessary to fortify and defend the same, That
Your Majesty will likewise be Graciously pleased to Assent to an ACT, whereby
Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to Associate themselves for
the defense of Your Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Security
of Your Kingdoms.

These Requests we are Constrained Humbly to make to Your Majesty as of
absolute Necessity for the Safe and Peaceable enjoyment of Our Religion. That
is, come what will of Tangier and Flanders, the Peace of Christendom and the
Power of France, till Your Majesty grant us these, we are resolved to concern
our selves for Nothing. And when his Majesty has granted them, and what
follows, he need as little concern himself for the remainder.


Without these things the Alliances of England will not be Valuable, nor the
People encouraged to Contribute to Your Majesty's Service.

And as some further Means for the preservation both of our Religion and
PROPERTY, we are Humble Suitors to Your Majesty, These two Paragraphs smell so
strong of the 19 Propositions at Vxbridge, that I wonder more at them then all
the rest of this Address; for tho they do not in terms ask the Nomination of
all these Civil, Military and Naval Officers, yet that must be the Consequence
of it; for if His Majesty be Judge of the Qualities of the Men which he
imployes, he may say they are at present all of them so qualified as they
desire, and then there is no Need of this Address in that particular: or if on
such general terms they may be allowed to have these Changed, and His Majesty
shall consent to it, they may Except in the same manner against any other men
his Majesty shall appoint, ad infinitum, till his Majesty shall Nominate
themselves; or such men as they shall please to Nominate and Appoint: and they
that shall be so Nominated by the Commons, will without doubt pay their
respects and obedience to them from whom they receive their preferment: and all
others that hope to succeed them that are So appointed at first; will regard
the profit arising from such preferments, more than the glittering splendour of
a Crown; and so his Majesty being deprived of the dependence, and Consequently
of the defense of these Officers, shall be Exposed Naked and Friendless to the
Fury of those Reipublicans that Murdered his Royal Father, and the Religion by
Law Established, to the Mercy of those that have Sworn the Ruin of it: And
finally, the Property and Liberty of the Subject shall be Exposed to those men
who have given the World too good an Account already what Trusty Guardians of
them they are; ever to be trusted with them again, till the Memory of the late
Times shall perish not only as to the Memories of Men, but Books and Records.
But yet after all this, the branding those Gentlemen that were brought in
(without the Least Exception) to Supply the places of those that were turned
out of the Commission of the Peace and Lieutenancy, with the odious Titles of
Men of Arbitrary Prineciples, and Favorers of Papists and Popery, is in my
poor Judgment Much worse; and as it was impossible the Major part of the House
should think so of them all, so I am fully persuaded if Passion had not had too
great a dominion over them, they would Never have vented so Crude an Assertion
in So August a place, in So Serious a Manner, to his Majesty and the whole
World; they may be pleased to think of this again Now the heat perhaps is over:
for as they have worded it, it can never be maintained; it being impossible to
be known or proved, nor is any favorable Construction to be allowed to an
Expression and Declaration so publicly and deliberately made by so many men,
in so public a Trust.
That from henceforth such Persons only may be Judges within the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales, as are men of Ability, Integrity and Known
Affection to the Protestant Religion, and that they may hold their Offices and
Salaries quam diu se been gesserint. That (several Deputy Lieutenants, and
Justices of the Peace, fitly qualified for those Employments, having been of
late displaced, and others put in their room, Who are MEN of Arbitrary
Principles, and Countenancers of Papists and Popery) Such only may bear the
Office of a Lord Lieutenant as are persons of Integrity and Known Affection to
the Protestant Religion; That Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace may
be also So qualified, and may be moreover Men of Ability, of Estates and
Interest in their Country.

That none may be employed as Military Officers, or Officers in Your Majesty's
Fleet, but Men of Known Experience, Courage and Affection to the Protestant
Religion.

These our Humble Requests being obtained, we shall on our parts be ready to
Assist Your Majesty for the preservation of Tangier, and for putting your
Majesty's Fleet into Such a Condition as it may preserve your Majesty's
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be for the Defense of the Nation.

If Your Majesty has or shall make any Alliances for Defense of the Protestant
Religion, and Interest and Security of this Kingdom, this House will be ready
to Assist and Stand by your Majesty in the Support of the same.

AFTER this our Humble Answer to Your Majesty's Gracious Speech, Doubtless
after all this fine Language and strong Reason, if any Evil Instrument, any man
of Arbitrary Principles, or favourer of Papists or Popery, or finally if his
Majesty or any Considerable part of the Nation, should through humane infirmity
happen to Suspect either your Prudence in delaying the Care of these Great
Things to so long a day, or your Loyalty in making these demands of your
Natural Sovereign; or your Charity and Candor in bestowing Commendations on
your fellow Subjects his Majesty's Officers at the rate you have done; I say,
if any such misfortune should happen; you are not to Wonder much at it, for
great Merits and great Virtues, great Attempts and Heroic Undertakings are
Seldom well received at present, but Posterity will Admire and Applaud them
according to their Deserts.
we hope no Evil instruments whatsoever shall be able to lessen your Majesty's
Esteem of that Fidelity and Affection we bear to Your Majesty's Service; but
that Your Majesty will always retain in your Royal Breast that Favorable
Opinion of Us your Loyal Commons, that those other good Bills which we have now
under Consideration, Conducing to the great Ends we have before Mentioned, as
also all Laws for the Benefit and Comfort of Your People, which shall from time
to time be tendered for Your Majesty's Royal Assent, shall find acceptance with
Your Majesty.


I will here insert those Reasons I mentioned above against the Bill of
Exclusion, which were delivered in the House of Commons the Fourth day of
November before this Address, by a Great Person, a Member of that House, Sir L.
J. by which letters I understand Sir Leoline Jenkins, one of the Principal
Secretaries of State.

Sir,
I have spent much of my time in studying the Laws of this Land, and I pretend
to know something of the Law of Foreign Countries, as Well as of our own; and I
have upon this occasion well considered of them, but cannot find how we can
Justify the passing of this Bill, rather much against it.

First, I think it contrary to Natural Justice, that We should proceed to
Condemnation not only before Conviction, but before we have heard the Party, or
Examined any Witness about him, I am sure none in his defense. And to do this,
by making a New Law of purpose, when you have Old Laws in being that have
appointed a Punishment to his Crime, I humbly conceive is very Severe, and
contrary to the usual Proceedings of this House, and the Birthright of every
Englishman.

Secondly, I think it is Contrary to the Principles of Our Religion, that we
should dispossess a man of his Birthright, because he differs (from us) in
point of Faith. For it is not agreed by all, that Dominion is sounded in Grace.
For my part, I think there is more of Popery in this Bill, than there can
possibly be in the Nation without it; for none but Papists and
Fifth-Monarchy-men did ever go about to dis-inherit men for their Religion.

Thirdly, I am of opinion that the Kings of England have their Right from God
alone, and that no Power on Earth can deprive them of it. And I hope this House
will not attempt to do any thing, which is so precisely contrary not only to
the Law of God, but the Law of the Land too. For if this Bill should pass, it
would Change the Essence of the Monarchy, and Make the Crown Elective. For by
the same reason that this Parliament may dis-inherit this Prince for his
Religion; other Parliaments may dis-inherit another, upon some other pretense
which they may Suggest, and so Consequently by such Exclusions elect whom they
please.

Fourthly, It is against the Oath of Allegiance, taken in its own sense,
without Jesuitical Evasions: For by binding all persons to the King, his Heirs
and Successors, the Duke as Presumptive. Heir must be understood. And I am of
opinion that it cannot be dispensed withal. Sir, I will be very cautious how I
dispute the Power of Parliaments. I know the Legislative is very great, and it
ought to be so: But yet I am of opinion, That Parliaments cannot dis-inherit
the Heir of the Crown, and that if such an ACT should pass, it would be invalid
in it self. And therefore I hope it will not seem strange, that I should offer
my Judgment against this Bill, while it is in Debate, in which I think I do
that which is my Duty as a Member of this House.

Henry the Fourth of France was a Protestant, his People most Papists, who used
some endeavors, to prevent his coming to the Crown; but when they found they
were not likely to perfect their design without occasioning a Civil War, they
desisted, concluding, that a Civil War would probably bring on them more misery
than a King of a different Religion, and therefore Submitted. Sir, I hope we
shall not permit our Passions to Guide us instead of Reason, etc. Thus far that
Great Person.


To these Reasons if we please to add this other, That it is so far from
preventing our Calamities, that it will Ascertain them at his Majesty's Death
with the Addition of a Civil War, and in all likelihood bring that upon us
before that time; for so soon as ever the Bill pass, the Duke will have a Right
to make a War upon England even in his Majesty's Lifetime; and what may be the
event of that, God only Knows. However, to prevent Surprise, there must be A
Standing Army or an Association Kept up as long as the Duke Lives; and what the
Consequences of them are, may be foreseen without difficulty; the first Ruining
the Liberties of the People, and the Second Endangering the Prerogatives of the
Crown; and both of them in the divided Condition England now is, in point of
Religion, tending to raise such Fears and Jealousies, as will be almost as
Uneasy and as Unsafe as a Popish Successor; and all this brought upon us
immediately; whereas the other is future and Contingent.

On Thursday the 23d. of December,

The Commons Ordered, That the Thanks of the House should be given to Dr.
Burnett for his Sermon Preached the day before, and likewise for his Book
relating to the History of the Reformation of the Church of England; and that
he be desired to Print his said Sermon, And on Thursday the 5th of January
following, they Voted that he should be desired to proceed with and Complete
that good Work by him begun, in Writing the History of the Reformation of the
Church of England.

They Ordered, That Leave should be given to bring in a Bill or Bills to
Correct and Punish Atheism, Blasphemy, Swearing and Debauchery, and for the
better Observation of the Lords Day.

These and several other Crimes have grown and prevailed upon this Nation for
want of a Church Discipline, and by reason of the Divisions amongst us in
Points of Religion; and till these things be taken care of, all Laws against
them will signify Nothing. Yet it might deliver the Government from the guilt
of them, and therefore it is heartily to be wished, that Care may be taken to
perfect this good Design; and when further Care is taken of the Lords Day, some
care would be taken of the other Feasts and Fasts by Law Established in the
Church of England.

This day also the Lords returned the Additional Act for Burying in Woollen,
passed without Amendment.

And by another Message Certified to the Commons, That at their Rising they
would Adjourn to the Next Monday Seven-night after.

And by another Message they sent down Mr. Seymour's Answer to the Articles of
Impeachment against him.

The same day the Commons also passed a Vote of an Extraordinary Nature, which
was as follows.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That Mr. Joseph Brown ought to
be restored to all the Offices and Places which were taken from him, by
occasion of a Judgment given against him in the Court of King's Bench in Trinity
Term 29 Caroli Secundi, upon an Information for publishing an Unlicensed Book,
called, The Long Parliament Dissolved. These Sorts of Writers were Now to be
encouraged what might be, but what Benefit Brown had by this Vote, I never
heard.

But the Next day being the 24th of December, they took occasion to Chastise
one Richard Thompson Clerk, very Severely; for he having been Complained of by
some of the Dissenters who were Now the White Boys, and the Sober Loyal
Protestants; and it having been remitted to a Committee to enquire into his
Misdemeanors, the House upon the return of the Committee, passed these Votes.

Reselved N. C. That Richard Thompson Clerk, has publicly defamed His Sacred
Majesty, Preached Sedition, Vilified the Reformation, Promoted Popery by
Asserting Popish Principles, Decrying the Popish Plot, and turning the same
upon the Protestants, and endeavored to Subvert the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament; and that he is a
Scandal and Reproach to his Function.

Resolved, That he be Impeached, and a Committee appointed to prepare the said
Impeachment, and that the Report and the Resolution of the House thereupon be
forthwith Printed.

This Thompson was accused for several Expressions both in Preaching and
Discourse: But they mostly fixed upon a Sermon Preached the 30th of January,
1679. See the Printed Papers.
wherein he said (it seems) the Presbyterians were such persons as the Devil
Blushed at Accused Hamden for chocsing to Rebel rather than pay the Ship Money;
which he said was the King's Right by Law. Accused Mr. Calvin to have been the
first that Preached the King-Killing Doctrine: And from thence inferred, That a
Presbyterian qua talis is as great a Traitor as any Priest or Jesuit: But one
Witness says he said, Worse. And that he had also frequently cast Evil
Aspersions against Several Divines at Bristol of Great Note, viz. Mr. Chetwind,
Mr. Standfast, Mr. Crossman, and Mr. Palmer and others, saying, That such as
went to their Lectures were the Brats of the Devil.

2. That he had spoken in Sermons and elsewhere, several hard Things against
the Petitions for the Sitting of the Parliament; as, That it was the Seed of
Rebellion, and like to 41. etc.

3. That he had said, There was great Noise of a Popish Plot, but there was
Nothing in it but a Presbyterian Plot, etc.

4. He was Accused to have approved of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
the Points of Justification, Auricular Confession, Penance, Extreme Unction,
and Crisme, in Baptism, and the Single Life of the Clergy; saying, That if he
were as well Satisfied of other things as he was of these, he would not have
been so long Separated from the Catholic Church.

5. He had spoken (as they said) some ill things of Queen Elizabeth, and Henry
the 8th, as Church-Robbers; and against his Majesty too; which tho I care not
to repeat, yet they are nothing in comparison to what the Dissenters have
published in Print against his Majesty.

What Answer the Man would have made for himself, I know not, for the
Parliament never brought him to an hearing.

But upon inquiry, I find, notwithstanding all this Clamor, the Man has a
great and good Report, for his Piety, Learning and Prudence; but his Zeal for
the Religion Established, drew this Storm upon him from the Exasperated
Dissenters; who never stick thus to blast the Fame of Good Men when it serves
their ill designs.

But to return from this Digression. The Bill for Exempting his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England from the Penalties of
Certain Laws, was read a second time, and Committed upon a Debate of the House
to the Committee to whom the Bill for Uniting of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects was Committed upon a Debate of the House.

Then the Bill for Banishing the Papists out of the King's Dominions, was read
a second time, and committed upon the Debate of the House.

Then the House adjourned till Thursday the 30th of December.

That day the House met and Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare
Evidence against the 4. Popish Lords in the Tower, should look into the
Evidence, and Report their Opinions to the House in Order to the further
Directions and Proceedings of the House against them.

Resolved, That the several Writings, Papers and Proceedings relating to such
Members of the late Long Parliament as received Allowances out of the Moneys
appointed for Secret Services, be produced to this House.

Resolved N. C. That no Member of this House shall accept of any Office or
Place of Profit from the Crown without Leave of the House, or any Promise of
any such Office or Place of Profit during such time as he shall continue a
Member of the House, and that the offenders herein shall be Expelled.

It seems they had discovered that some of their Zealous men were Selling
themselves to the Court-Party for Preferment, and prepared this Vote to keep
the Party together.

Friday the 31th of December.

The Bill for prohibiting the importation of Foreign Guns, was read the second
time and rejected.

Leave was also given to bring in a Bill for Regulating the abuses in making
Casks, Barrels, and other Vessels. And

A Committee appointed to peruse the Laws relating to Weights and Measures, and
to report their Opinions in the same, and to bring in a Bill or Bills for the
better Regulating and Ascertaining the same.

Ordered also, That Leave be given to bring in a Bill for a General
Naturalization of Alien-Protestants, and allowing them liberty to Exercise
their Trades in all Corporations.

A Bill for Relief of the Subjects against Arbitrary Fines, was read a second
time and committed.

Then the House Adjourned till Monday the 3d. of January.

Which day An Act for limiting the times of Importation of Cattle from
Scotland, being read the third time, passed, and was sent up to the Lords. Then

A Bill for Repealing an Act made in the 13th Year of his Now Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An ACT for the Well-Governing and Regulating of Corporations, was
read the first time, and Ordered to be read again.

A Bill for the better discovery of Settlements to Superstitious Uses, was read
the first time, and Ordered a second reading the Friday following at Ten of the
Clock in a full House.

The same day the Lords sent down a Bill to the Commons, Entitled, An Act for
distinguishing Protestant Dissenters from Popish Recusants. To which they
desired the Concurrence of the House.

The Lords sent down another Message, to put the Commons in mind of the Bill
for the Better regulating of the Trials of the Peers of England.

And Another Message to acquaint them, That their Lordships had received a
Petition from Mr. Seymour, for a speedy Trial. Upon which the Commons read his
Answer to their Impeachment, which had lain by them some time; and ordered a
Committee to prepare Evidence against him, and Manage it at his Trial.

On Tuesday the 4th of January.

His Majesty sent the Commons another Message, which is as follows.

CHARLES R.
HIS Majesty received the Address of this House with all the disposition they
could wish, to comply with their reasonable desires; but upon perusing it, he
is Sorry to See their Thoughts so wholly fixed upon the Bill of Exclusion, as
to determine that all other Remedies for the Suppressing of Popery will be
ineffectual; His Majesty is Confirmed in his Opinion against that Bill by the
Judgment of the House of Lords, who rejected it. He therefore thinks there
remains Nothing more for him to say in answer to the Address of this House, but
to recommend to them the Consideration of all other Means for the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion, in which they have no reason to doubt of his
Concurrence, when ever they shall be presented to him in a Parliamentary way;
and that they would Consider the present State of the Kingdom, as well as the
Condition of Christendom, in Such a Manner as may enable him to Preserve
Tangier, and Secure his Alliances abroad, and the Peace and Settlement at home.


This Message being read in the House, they Resolved to take into Consideration
the Friday following in a full House.

The same day the Lords sent down a Vote which they made that day.

Die Martis 4 January, 1680.
Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That
they do declare that they are fully Satisfied, that there now is, and for
diverse years last past there has been, a Horrid and Treasonable Plot and
Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in Ireland,
for Massacring the English, and Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the
ancient Established Government of that Kingdom; To which their Lordships
desired the Concurrence of the Commons.

On Wednesday the 5th of January.

Richard Thompson was Ordered upon his Petition to give sufficient Security for
his forthcoming to the Sergeant at Arms attending that House, to Answer to the
Impeachment against him; and so was discharged of his Imprisonment.

I can see No reason why he should be prosecuted by an Impeachment in
Parliament. It being beneath the Dignity of the Houses to Concern themselves
with such a man as Mr. Thompson must needs be, who might much better have been
proceeded against in the Spiritual or Civil Courts, (if the Accusations were
all True;) but that his Blaspheming Calvin and the Loyal Presbyterian
Protestants, would have signified Nothing there; as I believe they would not
before the Lords, if he had been Tried.

Formerly the Commons impeached none but such as were too great to be
prosecuted any where else; and that but rarely, and upon great Necessity: This
made them Venerable and Dreadful; but this Course for Small or No faults to
impeach and imprison great Numbers of Mean People which they followed in this
Session, tended to Nothing but the Wasting their time: and Hindering greater
Affairs to the damage of the King and Kingdom.

The same day the Commons agreed an Impeachment against Sir William Scroggs
Knight, Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench; and Ordered others to be
drawn against Sir Francis North Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Thomas Jones, one of the Justices of the King's Bench, and Sir Richard Weston,
one of the Barons of the Exchequer. So they were resolved to find themselves
work, tho they had refused to do the King's Business till that was granted,
which was impossible to be had this Session of Parliament.

Thursday, the 6th of January, A Bill for the more Easy Collecting the Duty of
Hearth-Money was read a second time and committed upon the Debate of the House,

A Bill for Repealing the Act for the Well-Governing of Corporations, was read
the second time and committed.

Sir Philip Skippon was Excused from being taken into Custody for his Default
in not attending the House in the Call there of the Tuesday before.

Colonel Birch reporting from the Committee appointed to receive Informations
relating to the Popish Plott in Ireland, That the Committee, having proceeded
upon the Matters to them referred, had taken several Examinations, and received
the Answer of Sir John Davis, and had also perused several Informations
transmitted from the House of Lords relating to the said Plott. All which he
read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table,
where the same were again read.

The House then took into Consideration the Message sent from the Lords the
Tuesday before, wherein they desired the Concurrence of the House, and Resolved,

That the House did agree with the Lords, with the addition of these Words,
That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the Expectation of his coming to the
Crown, has given the Greatest Countenance and Encouragement thereto, as well
as to the Horrid Popish Plot in this Kingdom of England. And they resolved to
deliver the said Vote to the Lords at a Conference, and Appointed a Committee
to draw up Reasons to be offered at the said Conference.

Ordered, That the several Informations of John Macnamara, Maurice
Fitz-Gerrald, and James Mash, that day read to the House, relating to the Irish
Plot, be forthwith Printed.

Resolved, That Rich. Pour Earl of Tyrone in the Kingdom of Ireland, be
Impeached of High Treason; And that the Lord Dursley do go up to the Bar of the
Lords and Impeach him, etc. and pray that he may be Committed to Safe Custody.

And further Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare the Evidence
against the Popish Lords in the Tower, do prepare the said Impeachment.

Ordered, That the further Consideration of the said Report in relation to
Arthur Earl of Anglesey and Sir John Davis, be Adjourned to Saturday Morning
next at Ten of the Clock in a full House. When it was Adjourned to Monday
following, which was their last day, and gave them occasion for other Thoughts.

On Friday the 7th day of January.

The engrossed Articles of Impeachment against Sir William Scroggs were Read,
and sent up to the Lords by the Lord Cavendish.

A Bill to prevent Vexatious Actions, was read the first time, and Ordered a
second reading.

A Bill to prevent the Symony of one person from prejudicing another, was read
the first time, and Ordered a second reading.

The Bill of Discovery of Settlements of Estates for Superstitious Uses, was
read the second time and committed upon the debate of the House.

Then the House according to their Order, entered into Consideration of his
Majesty's Message sent to the House the Tuesday before; and Voted as follows.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That there is no Security or
Safety for the Protestant Religion, the King's Life, or the Well Constituted
and Established Government of this Kingdom, without passing a Bill for
disabling James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of England and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and to rely
upon any other means or remedies, without such a Bill, is not only
Insufficient but dangerous.

Resolved, That his Majesty in his last Message having assured this House of
his readiness to Concur in all other means for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, this House does declare, That until a Bill be likewise
passed for Excluding the Duke of York, this House cannot give any Supply to his
Majesty, without Danger to his Majesty's Person, Extreme Hazard of the
Protestant Religion, and Unfaithfulness to Those by whom this House is trusted.

It seems the loss of Tangier and of all our Alliances abroad, did not at all
Hazard the Protestant Religion, or Endanger his Majesty's Person.

Resolved, That all Persons who Advised his Majesty in his last Message to this
House, to insist upon an Opinion against the Bill for Excluding the Duke of
York, Have given pernicious Counsel to his Majesty, and Are Promoters of
Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That George Earl of Halifax, Henry Marquess of Worcester, Henry Earl
of Clarendon, in the Opinion of this House are persons who Advised his Majesty
in his last Message to this House, to insist upon an Opinion against the Bill
for Excluding the Duke of York, and have therein given pernicious Counsel to
his Majesty, and are Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That an Humble Address be presented to his Majesty, to remove
Lawrence Hide Esquire: from his Majesty's Councils and Presence, and from his
Office in the Treasury for ever.

Resolved, That an Humble Address be presented to his Majesty, to remove Henry
Marquess of Worcester, from his Presence and Councils, and all the Offices and
Employments of Honor and Profit, for ever.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That Lewis Earl of Feversham
is a Promoter of Popery and of the French Interest, and a Dangerous Enemy to
the King and Kingdom. Resolved, That an Humble Address be made to his Majesty,
to remove him from all Military Offices and Commands, and from all other
Public Offices and Employments, and from his Majesty's Councils and Presence
for ever.

But here was no Addresses Voted against George Earl of Halyfax, nor Henry Earl
of Clarendon.

A Motion being made also for an Address to his Majesty, to remove Edward
Seymour Esquire; from his Majesty's Council and Presence; it was Adjourned to the
Monday following.

Having taken all this care to Chastise the Great Men, who as they believed had
opposed them in this great business; in the Next place they undertook to
Chastise his Majesty Himself, and if their design had taken effect, as it is to
be hoped it Never will, his Majesty and all his Successors should have Known
what it is to Anger a House of Commons. However they meant well; for they

Resolved, That whoever should hereafter Lend or cause to be lent by way of
Advance, any Money upon the Branches of the King's Revenue arising by Customs,
Excise or Hearth-Money, (that is, all the principal Branches) shall be Adjudged
to hinder the Sitting of Parliaments, and shall be responsible for the same in
Parliament.

Resolved, That whoever shall accept or buy any Tally of Anticipation upon any
part of the King's Revenue; or whosoever shall pay such Tally hereafter to be
struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the Sittings of Parliaments, and shall be
responsable therefore in Parliament.

First they Resolve they would give nothing themselves, and then they terrify
all others as much as in them lies from Lending or Advancing any Money to him;
which was not according to their Writ of Election to Advise his Majesty, but by
duress to force and compel him to Submit to their better Judgment as became
Loyal and Dutiful Subjects.

So that his Majesty might well say of these Votes, That instead of giving him
assistance to Support his Allies, or enabling him to Preserve Tangier, they
tended rather to disable him from contributing toward either, by his own
Revenue or Credit, not only exposing him to all Dangers that might happen
either at home or abroad; but endeavoring to deprive him of the possibility of
Supporting the Government it Self, and to reduce him to a more helpless
condition than the meanest of his Subjects. A Sad and a very Just Complaint,
and Accordingly resented by that vast Number of People that have since
Addressed to thank his Majesty for that Declaration.

On Saturday the 8th of January.

The Lords sent a Message to the Commons to acquaint them that their Lordships
had appointed that day Sevennight for hearing the Cause upon the Impeachment of
Mr. Seymour, and that their House might reply if they thought fit, but they had
no leisure to take notice of it.

Information being given to the House by the Sergeant at Arms that Sir John
Lloyd, Sir Edward Philips, Herbert Herring, Miles Baspole, (...) Isles, and
Arthur Yeomans, who for diverse great Misdemeanors by them committed (as was
pretended) against the Privilege of their House, were Ordered to be taken in
Custody of the said Sergeant, did Abscond themselves, that the said Order could
not be put in Execution against them; hereupon they

Ordered, That an Humble Application should be made to his Majesty from their
House, by Such Members thereof as were of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council; desiring his Majesty to Issue out his Royal Proclamation for the
Apprehending the said several persons, in case they should not render
themselves to the Sergeant by a certain day therein to be limited. The same day
they Ordered, That a Committee should be Appointed to inspect the Journals of
their House, and of the House of Lords, and Precedents, to Justify and
Maintain, That the Lords ought to Commit Persons to Safe Custody when Impeached
for High Treason by the Commons in Parliament, and to make report thereof to
the House. Which Vote had relation to Sir William Scroggs.

And so we are come to the day that finally put an End to all their
Proceedings, which was Monday the 10th day of January; and a great Wonder it
was that his Majesty could endure them so long.

They began the day with a Vote, which shows the Meaning and Tendance of all
the rest.

Resolved, That whosoever Advised his Majesty to Prorogue this Parliament to
any other purpose than in order to the passing of a Bill for the Exclusion of
James Duke of York, is a betrayer of the King, the Protestant Religion, and of
the Kingdom of England, A Promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner to
France. They Knew then that they were to be Prorogued, but they Knew not by
whose Advice; and so if his Majesty did it without any Advice, then all these
Hard words were thrown at him: but by whomsoever it were done, this Vote could
have no good meaning or effect, and must end in Smoke or Tumults; and Confusion.

2. Resolved, That the Thanks of this House be given to the City of London for
their Manifest Loyalty to the King, their Care, Charge and Vigilance for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person, and of the Protestant Religion.

Ordered, That the Members that Serve for the City of London, do accordingly
give them the Thanks of the House.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That the City of London was
Burnt in the Year 1666, by the Papists, designing thereby to Introduce
Arbitrary Power and Popery into the Kingdom.

Resolved, That the Commissioners of the Customs and other Officers of the
Custom-House, have Wilfully broken the Law prohibiting the Importation of
French Wines, and other Commodities; and that if they shall hereafter Wilfully
or Negligently break that Law; they shall be questioned therefore in Parliament.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That James Duke of Monmouth
has been removed from his Offices and Commands by the Influence of the Duke of
York.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made to his Majesty from this House, by
such Members thereof as are of his Majesty's Honorable Privy Council, to
desire his Majesty to restore the said James Duke of Monmouth, to his said
Offices and Commands.

This was excellently timed, and they had so obliged his Majesty, they might be
sure he would not deny them.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time Grievous to the
Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, and encouragement to Popery,
and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom. Here their Mouths were stopped by a
Message from the King, by Edward Carteret Usher of the Black-Rod, Acquainting
them that the King Commanded them to Attend him immediately in the House of
Peers. And there his Majesty Prorogued them to the Thursday Sevennight, being
the 20th of that Instant January, 1680.

1. His Majesty gave his Royal Assent to the Act Prohiting the Importation of
Cattle from Ireland.

2. To the Act for Supplying the late Act for Burying in Woollen.

3. And to an Act To rectify Errors in Sir Charles Houghton 's Settlement.

There was another Act for Repeal of the Act of the 35 of Elizabeth ready to be
passed, and it was Lost No body knew how, and was never tendered to his Majesty.

Soon after this Parliament was Dissolved by Proclamation, to the great
Satisfaction of all but the Dissenters, who (if they had been able to consider
things Aright) had as little reason to be pleased with their Proceedings as any
of the rest; for they did them no other Service then to Exasperate the King and
the Government against them and have made them to be more prosecuted and less
pitied than they were before.

The Popish Party received almost as little damage by them as the Dissenters
did Advantage; for they bending their force Equally against the Succession and
Popery, all their Designs (if they had any beyond clamor) against the Papists
were broken.

Their Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings against the Abhorrers of the
Tumultuous Petitions for the Sitting of the Parliament, procured more Friends
to the Duke of York, then perhaps he would otherwise have had, and gave the
English Gentry an Excellent Prospect what they might Expect from these Warm
Gentlemen if ever they fell into their hands.

The King had a fair Warning also to look to Himself, and the Religion by Law
Established, when he saw with how little Reverence these Protestants at Large
treated him, while his Prerogatives were entire, and wholly in his Own Hands;
and had he but yielded to them in the Point of the Duke of York, they would
Soon have taught him, how little was to be gotten by Complying with men of
their temper.

The only Service they did was to the French King: for our Allies beyond Seas
seeing that No Assistance was to be Expected from England, Surrendered their
strongest Towns to him for the Asking, and so suffered the worst effects of War
in Peace.

The City of London Lost the hopes of having any more Parliaments amongst them
till Times be better and more Settled, by their grateful Applications to them
for their Loyalty and Care of the Protestant Religion at Large.

The Trade of a Considerable part of the Nation is ruined, not for want of
Laws, but by too many, which have restrained that intercourse and freedom that
ought to be betwixt Us and our Neighbor Nations: yet I cannot say that this
Parliament would have relieved the Nation in that point if they had Continued
Longer, when it is considered with what care and industry the Act for the
prohibition of Irish Cattle was carried against all opposition, tho it is
damageable to a very considerable part of the Nation, if not to the whole; and
had these Gentlemen been equally concerned for the Suppressing of Popery, as
they were for this ACT; Some of those Bills at least, that were sent down from
the Lords, or began by the Commons, might have been ready as well as this for
the Royal Assent.

Yet they had some very good Bills relating to Trade under consideration, but
they were not so Zealous in that Concern as they ought to have been: but rather
seemed to fear the State of the People on that account should be made too easy
before they had obtained their other Ends of his Majesty and the Government,

Of this their Vote about the Act for prohibition of the French Trade may be an
instance; for however that Act might be of great use, if the Dutch would
consent to prohibit all Trade with them as well as We: yet as Long as they go
on to Trade with them, and we do not, it only tends to impoverish the King and
Us; and Enrich them; and therefore ought to have been left at liberty till they
and we can mutually agree to stop it.

Nor did the Protestant Religion by Law established, fare any better, for that
being equally opposed by the Dissenters on one hand, and the Papists on the
other, under pretense of Uniting us against the latter, the former were
encouraged by their Votes and Bills to endeavor her ruin.

The Bill for Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, is a perfect
Toleration of almost all other Religions which are or shall be amongst us,
except Popery; and had it, and the other Bill for Exempting them from the
Penalties of the Laws made against the Popish Recusants passed, it would not
have been possible to have Executed them or any other against the Papists. For
it cannot be imagined that the Papists could not have been able to have got
themselves Listed amongst some of our Dissenters or other, and then upon making
the Declaration, and producing two Persons as Witness, that they believed them
to be Protestant Dissenters, they would have had the liberty to have inflamed
both those Dissenters that were Comprehended, and those that were Tolerated
against the entire Conformists, and these again against them. And so both
Popery should have gone unpunished, and the Feuds amongst our selves would have
grown to that height, that nothing but a standing Army would have been able to
have kept us in any tolerable quiet.

If the Ministers of the Church of England had been part of them entire
Conformists, and part of them Presbyterians, those that were of the first sort,
would have kept up the Religion Established as high or higher then now, and the
other Party must have laid aside totally the use of the Common Prayer as well
as the Surplice, Cross, and Kneeling at the Lords Supper, or else their whole
Party which now follow them, would have all left them, and so another Faction
would have risen in the Church of Semi-Conformists, and all those that are
without the Church would have continued, as now they are, under other Teachers,
only more insolent, and more turbulent; and so instead of uniting us against
the Papists and Popery, which is the pretended cause of the Act, we should have
been more divided and Animated against each other then now we are.

It was one of the Rules prescribed by that Bill, That no person should be
admitted to take the Declaration, who refused the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy when tendered unto him. Now this would have left all the Quakers,
Anabaptists, and several other Sects in the same state of Persecution (as they
call it) as they now are; and great Numbers of the Other Sects too, when they
had considered of it, would have Scrupled it, as well as they in Scotland have
done: and so those that were totally Excluded, would have been enraged against
those that had been tolerated, as having betrayed them first, and then left
them to the Severity of the Law, and by that time all these Parties, viz. the
Rigid Conformists. 2. Semi-Conformists. 3. Tolerated, and Non-Tolerated
Protestants, all enraged against each other, had for some time been fermented
by the Jesuits and Popish Party, a man may guess what kind of Union there would
have been amongst Protestants in England.

And when they had gained all this, what Security could have been given that
they would have rested here? that Act which one Parliament makes, another may
Repeal: and they would never have been Secure of Keeping what they had gained,
but by taking care to fill the House of Commons in every Parliament with the
most Factious men they could pick out; and they could never have maintained
their reputation with the Party, but by pushing things forward, and so every
Sessions something more must have been granted for the better Security of the
Union, and removing of Fears and Jealousies, till at last we had been brought
to the same state of Confusion his Majesty found us in at his Return.

That a considerable number of these Dissenters are as much against Monarchy as
Conformity, is Apparent by their Books, discourses, and former practice. Now
what Security should his Majesty have had, that when this Party had by impunity
and time been strong enough to have dealt with the Loyal Party, they would not
have endeavored to be dispensed with from obeying him or any other King but
Christ Jesus? and then Nothing could have united Protestants and Secured us
against Popery, but the Laying aside the Kingly Government, and the Setting up
a Commonwealth; and of this they have already given some Notable hints in
their Pamphlets: and when they are told the Exclusion of the Duke of York will
only Secure them once from a Popish Prince, and make them that follow more
Cautious how they discover themselves too soon; and that if any Actual King of
England should turn Papist, which is as possible and more probable then that
another Heir should do it, they would then be in the same state as if the Duke
Succeeded: They constantly reply, That it is unreasonable it should be in the
power of one man to reduce us to Popery; that is, It is not reasonable that
Kingly Government should be any Longer Continued amongst us.

From all which I conclude, That the project of Uniting Protestants by
remitting the Laws against the Dissenters, is impossible; and that these
Consequences being Obvious and Apparent beforehand; there could be no other
design in the Attempt but the ruin of the Monarchy, and the introducing
Confusion, and War amongst us; at least these would certainly have followed.

So that the day a Toleration, or which is all one, an Union amongst
Protestants upon the terms propounded, is settled, the Monarchy must be made
Absolute, or it will not Stand: And Provision must be made to maintain a
Standing Army bigg enough eo Keep all Parties Quiet, how much soever they are
averse to it, or our Peace at home will not be Maintained And as to all Foreign
affairs, England must look on, and suffer all things to go as they will; for
Neither King nor Commonwealth will be in a Condition to do any thing abroad in
that unsettled state things will be at home; and by that time England comes to
settle, France (if God interpose not by Miracles) will have brought under So
many of its Neighbors, that England will be able to make no effectual
resistance if it should be attacked by that Potent Kingdom.

Conclusion.
My dearest Countrymen, I humbly beg you would be pleased to reflect Seriously
upon this in time, if it be not Now too late, and Unite heartily with His
Majesty our most Gracious and Sweet-Natured Sovereign, and the Religion
Established, and not suffer your selves to be led by pretended Fears into real
and unavoidable Slavery and Consusion; attended with all the Miseries of War,
and which (as much as Man can foresee) must end in Popery and a French Conquest
of us.

I have laid the Matter plainly before you, not Knowing what may follow as to
my Self; but this I am sure of, that Advantage I can have none by it. I am a
private person, and I Expect so to live and die. I have no aim at any Public
Employment or Place of Trust, nor any means to attain it if I had: I am
Contented with the State God has Set me In. And the Utmost I wish for is; to
Leave things to my Posterity as they ought Now to be, if the Laws had their due
Effects; and therefore I am compelled by Nothing but my Zealous affection for
my Country, which (next God and my own Soul) I love above all things, to run
the hazard of giving you this Advice, and thereby drawing upon me the Malice
and Revenge of all those that seek to Ruin and Enslave You.

As to those Gentlemen of the House of Commons, who may possibly take offense
at What I have written, (for all I am sure will not) I desire they would in
cool blood Consider what they have done, and then let them think of Me what
they please: For if ever Faction, Anger, and ill designs were entertained by so
great a Body of Men as the Major part of this House was, it is Apparent they
were here. And I will instance in but a few Particulars, tho I might in more.

Can any mortal man produce either Precedent or Law to Justify the
Imprisonment of the Gentlemen called the Abhorrers? Have the meanest people of
England a right to Petition the King against his Express Command, in a thing of
which he is the Sole Judge, by all our Laws; and that by Multitudes of Hands
procured by men that have no authority for that purpose; and may not
Grand-Juries, Justices of the Peace, and other such like persons oppose them,
or which is less, disown it? But suppose they did more than they ought, was it
fit to imprison them before they were allowed to defend themselves? Gentlemen,
it served your turn now, but it may one day be turned against you, and then
consider how you will take it. The Corporations do Now most of them send
Gentlemen, but they may when they please lay You by; and send Mechanics,
Tradesmen, Shopkeepers, How would your high spirits brook it to be sent for
in Custody, and made to Kneel (without being Suffered to Speak, and only for
doing your duties) to such men, and so be sent home again? I am sure no English
Gentleman can brook this indignity but with such inward Resentments as befit
the Generosity and Temper of that Nation, or otherwise I must think we are
prepared for Slavery; and all that Manly Courage that has made our People
Renowned in all Countries in the World, is degenerated into the Most Shameful
Effeminacy and Cowardice. Only in this case Religion and Loyalty made them
yield, even to Injustice and Oppression. As long as his Sacred Majesty thought
fit to Suffer it, they Submitted, but with such Thoughts as would have taught
you more Justice and Moderation, if this had not been in the case.

Your styling all those Gentlemen that had been brought in to the Commission of
the Peace in the room of some others displaced, MEN of Arbitrary Principles,
and Countenancers of Papists and Popery; and if you could have invented more
Odious Names and Words than these, you might with as much truth and ingenuity
have bestowed them upon them. Was it fairly done, or was it not? Is it one of
the Privileges of your House to Vote Me a Jew or a Turk, or that I was one of
those men that occasioned the Breach betwixt Charles the First and his
Parliament? If it be, then I will say no more, but that I beg your Pardon; and
Kneel down at the Bar of a House of Commons with the same Submission, as if I
believed the Speaker Infallible, and every Member an Angel. But if your Votes
ought to be not only Consonant to Law, but agreeable to the truth of things,
then that Passage was hastily and passionately written, and not well
Considered; and care ought to be taken for the future to Write more Cautiously,
and Speak and Vote like Men that had a little respect to your Places.

Your Votes of the 7th of January 1680. concerning his Majesty's Revenues and
borrowing of Money upon them, are they justifiable or no? may I not lend the
King 100 l. if I please without your leave, and not incur the danger of being
reputed an Enemy to the Sitting of Parliaments? Suppose the French should Land
in England or Ireland, or the Papists or Dissenters rise, and the King Want
Money to suppress the one, or drive out the other, must we hazard his and our
Ruin, rather then supply him by a Lone in the Intervals of Parliament, have we
a Property in what is our own, and may we not use it as we see cause, without
breach of Privilege of Parliament?

Your Vote of the 10th of January, That the Prosecution of the Protestant
Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, was at that time Grievous to the Subject, a
Weakening of the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and Dangerous
to the Peace of the Kingdom; is as little understood as any of the rest. Why
was it made? To what Subject is it Grievous? To the Dissenters? Why then let
them leave their Dissenting to the Church of England and all will be well. What
Protestant Interest does it weaken, for there are more Protestant Interests
then one in the Nation? does it weaken that Protestant Interest which is
Settled by Law? Then say so. But how it does encourage Popery, or endanger the
Peace of the Nation, is yet Harder to be understood: but Suppose it did; what
then? You may repeal the Laws, and Bills you had afoot, that would have
Repealed them if they would have passed; but you were to be adjourned, and had
not time to finish them: And did you think to have laid them asleep by your
Single Vote, without the Consent of the Lords or the King? You should have done
well then to have told the Nation that you have the whole Legislative Power in
your hands, and that it is Contrary to Law for any man to Act against a Vote of
the House of Commons, tho in Obedience to an Act of Parliament.

But that I may not seem to set up my own Single Judgment against a Whole House
of Commons, I will insert an Authority or two Equal to them, in better Times
tho they be Long. The first of which shall be an Address of the House of
Commons the 28. of Febr. 1663.

May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all
Fidelity and Obedience Considered of the Several Matters Comprised in Your
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of the 26. of December. Last, and your most
Gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session.

Do in the first place for our Selves, and in the Names of all the Commons of
England, render to your most Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty
Thanks for all that infinite Grace and Goodness wherewith Your Majesty has
been pleased to publish your Royal Intentions of adhering to your Act of
Indemnity and Oblivion, by your Constant and Religious observance of it. And
our Hearts are further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings, when we
Consider Your Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon
the Affections of your People, and Abhorring all Sort of Military and Arbitrary
Rule. But above all, we can never enough remember, to the Honor of Your
Majesty's Piety, and our own unspeakable Comfort, those Solemn, and most
endearing Invitations of us Your Majesty's Subjects, to prepare Laws to be
presented to Your Majesty, against the Growth and increase of Popery; and
withal to provide more Laws against Licentiousness and Impiety, at the same
time declaring Your Own Resolutions for Maintaining the Act of Uniformity. And
it becomes us always to acknowledge and Admire Your Majesty's Wisdom in this
your Declaration, whereby Your Majesty is pleased to resolve not only by
Sumptuary Laws, but by your Own Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that
Excess in men's Expenses, which is grown so general and so exorbitant, and to
direct our endeavors to find out fit Laws for Advancement of Trade and
Commerce,

After all this, We humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, that it is with
Extreme Unwillingness and Reluctance of Heart that we are brought to differ
from any thing which your Majesty has thought fit to propose. And though we do
no way doubt but that the unreasonable distempers of Men's Spirits, and the Many
Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on during the late Interval of
Parliaments, did reasonably incline Your Majesty I suppose here is a word
wanting.
to ill humors, till the Parliament assembled, and the hopes of an Indulgence,
if the Parliament should Consent to it; Especially seeing the pretenders to
this Indulgence did seem to make some title to it by virtue of Your Majesty's
Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects, who are Now returned to Serve in Parliament from those Several Parts
and Places of Your Kingdom for which we were Chosen, do humbly offer to Your
Majesty's Great Wisdom, That it is in No Sort Advisable, that there be any
Indulgence to such persons who prefume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity
and Religion Established, for these Reasons.

We have Considered the Nature of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda, and
are Humbly of Opinion that Your Majesty ought not to be pressed with it any
further.

Because it is not a Promise in it Self, but only a Gracious declaration of
Your Majesty's Intentions to do what in you lay, and what a Parliament should
Advise Your Majesty to do; and No such Advice was ever given or thought fit to
be offered, nor could it be otherwise Understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, Note this.
Which Could not be dispeused with but by Act of Parliament. They who do
pretend a right to that Supposed Promise, put their right into the Hands of
their Representatives whom they chose to Serve for them in this Parliament, who
have passed, and your Majesty Consented to the ACT of Uniformity. If any shall
presume to Say, That a right to the benefit of this Declaration does still
remain after this Act passed; it tends to dissolve the very Bonds of
Government, and to Suppose a disability in Your Majesty, and your Houses of
Parliament to make a Law contrary to any part of your Majesty's Declaration,
though both Houses should Advise Your Majesty to it.

We have also Considered the Nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those Consequences which must Necessarily attend it.

It will Establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of No Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament* to pass a Law at
One Session for Uniformity, and at the Next Session, the reason for Uniformity
Continuing still the same, to pass another Law to frustrate or Weaken the
Execution of it.

It will Expose Your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single person also, that shall presume to dissent from
the Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose Numbers will
weaken the true Protestant profession so far, that it will at last become
difficult for it to defend it self against them. And which is yet further
Considerable, those Numbers which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can Arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their Numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which Your
Majesty has declared against, and in time, some prevalent Sect will at last
Contend for an Establishment, which for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of
Convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the Method and Proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly, it is humbly Conceived, That the Indulgence proposed will be so far
from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance.

And on the Contrary, That the Asserting of the Laws and the Religion
Established according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable Means to
produce a Settled Peace and Obedience through the Kingdom; because the Variety
of Professions in Religion, when Openly indulged, does directly distinguish men
into Parties, and withal gives them Opportunities to count their Numbers, which
considering the Animosities that out of a religious Pride will be kept on foot
by the several Factions, does tend directly and inevitably to open disturbance:
Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the
Several Factions, which are all governed by a Several Rule, shall be consistent
with the Peace of the Kingdom.

And if any person shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do in
all humility declare, That we will for ever, and upon all occasions be ready
with our Utmost Endeavors and Assistance, to Adhere to, and Serve Your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

The Reason and Loyalty of this Address prevailed with his Majesty at that
time, to lay aside all his Thoughts of an Indulgence; and well had it been for
him and us, if he had never reassumed them: for from his forsaking this Advice
in the Year 1671. Sprung all those Miseries that now so much threaten him and
us. But tho his Majesty Changed, the Parliament kept their grounds; for in an
Address dated the 14th of Feb. 1672. they assert against His Majesty's
Declaration of Indulgence dated the 15th of March before, That Penal Statutes
in Matters Ecclesiastical, cannot be suspended but by Act of Parliament. We
therefore (say they) the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, do most humbly beseech Your Majesty, That the said Laws may have
their Free Course, until it shall be otherwise provided by Act of Parliament;
and that Your Majesty would Graciously be pleased to give such Directions
herein, that no Apprehensions or Jea ousies may remain in the Hearts of Your
Majesty's good and faithful Subjects.

The King not being Satisfied with this, but still insisting that he had a
Right by his Supremacy to Suspend the Execution of Penal Laws in Ecclesiastical
Affairs; They replied the 26th of Feb. following, That no such Power was ever
Claimed or Exercised by any of his Majesty's Predecessors; and if it should be
admitted, might tend to the Interrupting of the Free Course of the Laws, and
altering the Legislative Power, which has always been acknowledged to reside
in his Majesty, and the Two Houses of Parliament. Therefore they did with an
Unanimous Consent become again Humble Suitors unto his Sacred Majesty, That he
would be pleased to give them a full and Satisfactory Answer to their first
Petition and Address; and that his Majesty would take such effectual Order,
That the Proceedings in this Matter might not be for the future drawn into
Example.


To which said last Address, his Majesty was pleased to Condescend so far, as
to Order his Declaration of Indulgence to be taken off the File and Cancelled.

Now the use I make of all, is to show first, That the Opinion of an Excellent
and Wise House of Commons was, That an Indulgence, Toleration or Union, as they
now call it, was of a Mischievous Nature, and would finally end in Confusion
and Popery. Secondly, That if it should be thought necessary to grant one, it
being a Legislative Act, it must be by the Joint Consent of the King and the
Two Houses, and not by any one of them. And therefore I will Leave it to the
Consideration of the Gentlemen of that House to Judge, Whether they did well in
passing the Vote of the 10th of January aforesaid, for the Suspension of all
Penal Laws which relate to the Protestant Dissenters.

Some pretending to Excuse them, have said it was a Vote only in order to a
Bill to be brought in for the taking those Laws away. But I answer, There were
several other Bills for that purpose depending; and therefore this was in vain.
Secondly, There is no mention of a Bill to be brought in in the Conclusion of
the Vote. Thirdly, They knew they were to be Prorogued, as appears by their
first Vote, and therefore Such a Design would have been impossible.

Now if they had carried those few Points in this Session, First not only to
Deny the King any Supply, but to make it Criminal for any man to Lend him any
Money upon his Revenues; they might then in another Session have gone further,
and have made it Punishable for any man to have paid him his Just Settled,
Legal Dues; and that would have made them able to have Forced this King or his
Successors to what ever they had pleased.

Secondly, If they might have gone on to imprison his Majesty's Subjects in an
Illegal and Arbitrary way, for Matters that had no relation to Privileges of
Parliament, they might afterward have Extended this to as many Persons and
Things as they had pleased, and so No man would have dared to have stood by His
Majesty against a House of Commons, tho they had attempted to Depose his
Majesty. Nor would his Majesty in a short time have been able to have Protected
his Subjects against any injury that they or any of them had been pleased to
have done them; which would infallibly have Subverted the Monarchy, and have
introduced a Commonwealth.

Thirdly, If they had got that great Branch of the Legislative Power into their
hands, of suspending the Execution of Laws by their Vote, they might have
driven it as far as they pleased, and so have once more Outed the King and the
House of Lords, as a former Parliament did by the Same Means. I will conclude
this with the Judgment of a Great and a Learned Man. Clarendon's Answer to
Hobbs, p. 127, 128.
No Orders made by A House of Commons in England, are of any Validity or Force,
or receive any Submission, longer then that House of Commons Continues; and if
Any Order made by them be against any Law or Statute, it is Void when it is
Made, and receives no Obedience.

His Majesty then had both Law and Reason on his Side, when he ended his Speech
to the Next Parliament at Oxford, with these Words:

I WILL Conclude with this one Advice to you, That the Rules and Measures of
all your Votes, may be the Known and Established Laws of the Land, which
Neither Can, nor Ought to be Departed from, nor Changed, but by Act of
Parliament: And I may the more reasonably Require, That You make the Laws of
the Land your Rule, because I am Resolved they shall be Mine.

FINIS.
ADVICE TO THE READER.
HAving received the following Papers just as this Tractate was finished and
Printed off, I thought my self obliged to Comply with the reasonable Request of
so many Persons of that Worth and Quality the Subscribers are: Tho at the same
time I must confess, that neither I, nor this Treatise, do or can deserve that
Character their Civility and Goodness have bestowed on us.

Sir,
BEing Informed that you are upon a Continuation of that Excellent Work,
Entitled, An Address to the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation; and that
the Third Part of it is now in the Press, we take the Freedom to Trouble you
with this our Joynt-Request: That if you take any Notice of the Case of Mr.
Richard Thompson of Bristol Clerk, in the Series of your Narration, you will be
pleased to give Credit to the Report which we shall here offer you; And (if you
think fitting) to Communicate it to the Public in his Justification and
Defense. The Particulars hereof we have partly upon very Good Authority; And we
are able to Testify the Truth of the rest upon our own Knowledge and
Experience as to the Character, Life, and Conversation of This Worthy Gentleman.

He was Born of Protestant Parents, and Educated in the Methods and Principles
of the Church of England. He received his Orders of Priesthood from the Hands
of Dr. Fuller Bishop of Lincoln, in the year 1670. Immediately upon this
Qualification, he was sent by the Reverend Dr. Pierce to serve in his Cure of
Brington in Northamptonshire; where he continued some Years with a very Fair
Reputation.

About the year 1675. He removed from thence to Salisbury upon the Invitation
of the said Dr. Pierce, then Dean of Sarum, where he lived with him in his own
House.

In the year 1676. The Dean bestowed upon him first a Prebend; And then a
Presentation to St. Marie's in Marlborough.

In 1677. He Travailed with Mr. Jo. Norborne of Calne in Wiltshire; but within
less than a Twelvemonth he was Recalled, upon the Vacancy of Bedminster by
Bristol his Present Living.

When he was abroad, he neither Studied at St. Omers, nor Douay, (as was
suggested:) Nor ever saw those Places, nor passed into any part of Flanders or
Italy, but France alone.

He spent near Seven Months of his time at Paris; and in the Academy of
Monsieur Fonbert, a Protestant, still frequenting the English Ambassador's
Chapel, and receiving the Sacrament there: And during his stay he Preached
twice, and read Prayers often in That Chapel.

At Guien upon the Loyre, he sojourned all his time there with Monsieur Du
Paizy the Protestant Minister, Frequenting the Protestant Church, and that
only; Receiving the Sacrament also from the hands of Monsieur Du Paizy, to put
those Men out of hope of Gaining him over that had already Solicited him by
fair Promises of Advantage to the Communion of the Church of Rome.

At Blois he kept himself also upon the same Reserve, avoiding even to Lodge in
the House of a Romanist, but upon Absolute Necessity.

He was not yet so Rigorous as not to allow himself in a Curiosity to make an
Acquaintance as well with Persons Eminent in their several Orders of the Church
of Rome, as with the Famous Men of the Protestant Churches.

He does not deny but that he had twice or thrice seen Mass performed while he
was abroad, but it was Curiosity, not Religion that carried him thither: And
that he is so far from being staggered in his Faith by any thing he saw abroad,
that he is the more Confirmed in it. And that he would rather Beg within the
Communion of the Church of England, than be the greatest Person the Church of
Rome could make him out of it,

Since his Return in 1678. No man has kept himself more strictly to the Orders
of the Church of England. He has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
at least Eight several times; Preaching and Acting in Conformity thereunto. He
never Refused any Test of Fidelity to the Government, and Declares himself
Ready to take any farther Tests that shall be lawfully imposed upon him.

Sir,

We have Extracted these Particulars from Evidences Uncontestable; and we
reckon it our Duty to God, to the Church, to Common Justice, and to Persecuted
Innocence, to Present This Account to your self, in hopes that you will
Transmit it with your own Ingenious Reflections to the View, and Consideration
of the World.

We have Annexed hereunto a short Summary of what will be Attested on his
behalf since he came to Bristol. And we have thereunto subjoined several Fair
and Ample Certificates in his Vindication and Defense. We could have added many
more, as particularly, A Certificate of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop
(Now) of Chichester, late of Bristol, who has been pleased to Certify Mr.
Richard Thompson, to be (in these very words) A Person of much more then
ordinary Endowments for Learning, an Excellent Preacher, and which Crowns both
the Former, a Man of a Clean Life, and Vnreproveable Conversation. A Person
free from Novelties in Religion, but very sound and Orthodox in the Doctrines
he Preaches; and thoroughly Conformable as to Discipline, etc. And then
afterward, his Lordship Concludes thus.

I know no Young Man of his Years that better deserves very Good Preferment in
our Church then This Young Man does. And this I do Testify sincerely from my
Heart, and give under my Hand, this Fourteenth day of September, in the year of
our Lord 1679. at my Palace in Chichester.

For the Truth and Authority of the whole Matter, we are willing and ready to
become Answerable, and shall take it for a singular Kindness if you will be
pleased to let These Testimonials pass into the World at the instance of

Sir, Your humble Servants, Thomas Eston, Mayor. Sir Richard Crump, Knight. Sir
John Knight, Knight. James Twyford. Walter Gunter. Thomas Davidge. John Yeomans.



Touching Mr. THOMPSON's Care and Pains at BRISTOL in the Discharge of his
Function there: And his Reputation among the Inhabitants of the said City.
1. IT is Undeniably known, That he has brought over many Anabaptists, and
Quakers to the Church of England there, and Baptized them Publicly.

2. That he has Instructed, and Grounded many Hundreds of Children (who were
afterward Confirmed by the Bishop of the Place) in the Catechism of the Church
of England.

3. It is certain that he is never without a Full Auditory, whenever he
Preaches, or when he Reads the Prayers only: And that he has in his time
much increased the Number of Communicants.

4. There are many most Worthy Gentlemen in That City, that will not be Ashamed
to own their Establishment in the Church of England, to the great Pains which
he has taken With, and Among them.

Lastly, In Testimony of the High Esteem that the Inhabitants of That City had
of This Gentleman, they Met him, with a great many Horsemen, at his Return from
his Persecution in London; and bad him Wellcom again to the Place of his
Residence, with the Highest Expressions of Joy, and Acclamation.

Sir John Lloyd's Certificate concerning Mr. Thompson, under the Seal of the
Office of his Majoralty.
WHereas Richard Thompson, Vicar of St. Mary Redcliff, and St. Thomas, two
Eminent Churches within the City of Bristol, even from the time of his first
appearance to officiate in those Churches, has been privily traduced, and now
of late openly and maliciously branded, by the multiforme Fanatics of this
City, for a Church-Papist and Jesuit, for the Rector of St. Omers, so
Nick-naming St. Thomas, and with many like Terms of Obloquy and Slander, the
Invention whereof may be reckoned upon as the very first and peculiar gift of
that Party, whose great and only Masterpiece it has been and still is, by
like Maliciously Witty and Wicked Methods and Artifices to expose alike His
Loyalty and Ministry, and to lessen that Esteem and Reputation he has thereby
gained in the Hearts and Affections of all the Kings Majesty's Loyal and Loving
Subjects within this City.

These are therefore at the Request of and just Due to the said Richard
Thompson, to Certify unto all, unto whom these Presents shall come, that the
said Richard Thompson, is well known to me John Lloyd, Knight, and Major of the
said City, and to all the Kings Majesty's Loyal and Loving Subjects therein, to
be a Person of most Innocent and Exemplary Life and Conversation, a most
Constant and Careful Dispenser of God's most Holy Word unto the People under
his Charge, a most Diligent and Zealous Assertor of the Kings Majesty's
Supremacy in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, in opposition to all
Schismatical and Factious Persons and Principles, under what Names soever they
pass or prevail amongst us, and also of all the Christian Doctrines, together
with the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as they are now Owned
and Established by Law.

In Testimony whereof I have caused the Seal of my Office of Majoralty to be
affixed, Dated the Eighteenth Day of September, Anno Dom. 1679 John Lloyd,
Major.

The Dean and Chapter of Sarum, their Certificate.
OMnibus quorum interest innotescat per Praesentes; Ricardum Thompson in
Artibus Magistrum, and Vicarium de Bedminster juxta Bristoliam, quamdiu apud
nos commoratus est, pie vitam, sobrieque and laudabiliter trad^xisse. In
concionibus saepe habendis sedulo curam adhibuisse, strenue studiis Theologicis
navasse operam; Nec unquam (quod scimus) docuisse quicquam vel tenuisse, quod
Ecclesia Anglicana non etiam appobut atque tuetur. Cujus praesertim Disciplinae
and superioribus quibuscunque ab omni part conformem morigerumque se praestit
it. In quorum omnium Testimonium, and fidem iisdem faciendam, nomina nostra and
cognomina, plane and ex animo apposuimus, Sept. 13. Annoque Salutis reparatae.
1679.

Thomas Pierce Dec. Sarum Daniel Whitby Praecentor Sarum Ricardus Drake
Cancellarius Sarum Ricardus Hill Can. Resid. Sarum Franciscus Horton Can.
Resid. Sarum.


A Certificate Signed by several of his Auditors upon the Thirtieth of January,
1679. being Persons of great Reputation for Loyalty as well as Fortune.
THese are to Certify all whom it may concern, That we whose Names are
hereunto Subscribed, were present at the Parish Church of St. Thomas within the
City of Bristol, on the Thirtieth Day of January, 1679. where we then heard Mr.
Richard Thompson Preach very solemnly on the Occasion of that Days Fast. To
which Sermon every one of us for himself does Declare, he was very attentive.
And we do all hereby Certify and Declare that we do not remember that the said
Mr. Thompson, did then say in his Prayer, or Sermon, That there was no Popish
Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot, or any thing to that or the like effect. And we
are ready to make Oath of the same, if required. But on the contrary, we have
heard him detest and abhor the Popish Plot. And we do further Certify, That
the said Mr. Thompson, is, and by all the time we have known him, has been a
True and Loyal Subject to our Most Gracious Sovereign, and of a very Sober and
Pious Life and Conversation amongst us, every way suitable to his Function.
Witness Our Hands this Thirteenth day of November, 1680.

John Hicks, Alderman. Sir Richard Crump, Ald. Sir John Knight, Knight. George
Morgan. Thomas Davidge, Edmond Brand, John Broadway, Walter Gunter, John
Hellier, John Oliff, John Yeomans, John Combs, Sheriff. George Boucher, Thomas
Turner, George Heart, Sheriff. James Millerd, Ralph Oliff, James Twyford, Daniel
Pym, Thomas Hartwell, Edmund Arundel; Richard Benson, Francis Yeomans, Thomas
Durbin, Charles Allen.


THE END.

