The Second SHEET FOR Poor Families.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR A HOLY LIFE.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street: and for Nevill Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster. 1665.

The Second Sheet for Poor Familes: INSTRUCTIONS FOR A Holy Life.
ALL is not done when men have begun a Religious life: All Trees that blossom
prove not fruitful: Colos. 1.23. Hebrews 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.20. 1 Cor. 3. Gal. 3.
and 4. Matthew 13.41. and 18.7.
and all fruit comes not to perfection. Many fall off, who seemed to have good
beginnings: And many dishonor the Name of Christ, by their scandals and
infirmities: Many do grieve their Teachers hearts, and lamentably disturb the
Church of Christ, by their ignorance, errors, self-conceitedness, unruliness,
headiness, contentiousness, sidings and divisions: In so much that the scandals
and the fewds of Christians, are the great impediment of the Conversion of the
I^fidel and Heathea world, Phil. 3.21. Acts 20.30.
by exposing Christianity to their contempt and scorn, as if it were but the
error of men as unholy and worldly and proud as others, that can never agree
among themselves: And many by their passions and selfishness are a trouble to
the Families and Neighbors where they live: And more by their weaknesses and
great distempers, are snares, vexations and burdens to themselves. Whereas
Christianity in its true constitution, is a life of such Holy Light and Love,
Matthew. 5.16. 1 Pet. 3 1. 1 Pet. 2.15. and 1.8. 2 Cor. 1.12.
such Purity and Peace, such fruitfulness and Heavenlyness, as if it were
accordingly showed forth in the lives of Christians, would command admiration
and reverence from the world, and do more to their conversion, than swords, or
words alone can do: And it would make Christians useful and amiable to each
other; and their l^ves a feast and pleasure to themselves. I hope it may prove
some help to these excellent ends, and to the securing men's salvation, if in a
few sound experienced Directions, I open to you the Duties of a Christian life.

I. Keep still the true form of Christian Doctrine, Desire and Duty orderly
printed on your m^nds: 2 Timothy 1.13. and 3.7. Heb. 5.12. Phil. 1.9. Romans 15.14.
that is, Understand it clearly and distinctly, and remember it. I mean the
great points of Relig^on contained in Catechismes: you may still g^ow in the
clearer understanding of your Catech^smes, if you live an h^ndred years: Let
not the words only but the matter, be as familiar in your minds, as the rooms
of your house are. Such ^olid knowledge will establish you against seduction
and unbelief, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Colos^. 1.9. and 2.3. and 3.10. 1 Timothy 6.4.
and will be still within you a ready help for every Gra^e, and every duty, as
the skill of an Artificer is for his work: And for want of this, when you come
among Infidels or Heretics, their reasonings may seem unanswerable to you, and
shake, if not overth^ow your says: And you will easily err in ^esser po^^^,
and trouble the Church with your dreams and wranglings. This is the calamity of
many Professors; that while they will be most censorious Judges, in every
controversy about Church Matters, they know not well the Doctrine of the
Catech^sm.

II. Live day'y by faith on Jesus Christ, as the Mediator between God and you:
John 17.3. Ephesians. 3.17, 18. Matthew. 28.19. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and 4.6.16. Romans 5.
2 Cor. 12.9. John 16.33. 1 John 5.4. Heb. 4 14.16. Col. 3 3, 4. Acts 7.59.
Being well grounded in the Belief of the Gospel, and understanding Ch^ists
Office: make use of him still in all your wants. Think on the Fatherly Love of
God as coming to you through him alone: and of the Spirit as given by Him your
Head; and of the Covenant of Grace as enacted and sealed by him; and of the
Ministry as sent by him; and of all time, and helps, and hope as procured and
given by him: When you think of sin, and infirmity, and temptations, think also
of his sufficient pardoning, justifying and victorious grace. When you think of
the world, the flesh and the Devil, think how he overcomes them. Let his
doctrine and the pattern of his most perfect life, be always before you as
your Rule. In all your doubts, and fears, and wants, go to Him in the Spirit
and to the Father by Him, and Him alone. Take him as the root of your life and
mercies, and Live as upon him and by his life. And when you die, resign your
souls to Him, that they may be with Him where he is, and see his Glory To live
on Christ, and use Him in every want and address to God, is more then a General
consufed believing in him.

III. So Believe in the Holy Ghost, as to Live and work by Him, as the Body
does by the soul. You are not Baptized into his name in Vain: Gal. 5.16.25.
Matthew. 28.19 John 16.13. Heb. 2 3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Romans 8.9.13. John 3.5,
6.
(But too few understand the sense and reason of it.) The Spirit is sent by
Christ for two great works: 1. To the Apostles (and Prophets) to inspire them
infallibly to preach the Gospel, and confirm it by miracles, and leave it on
record, for following ages in the Holy Scriptures: 2. To all his members, to
illuminate and sanctify them, to believe and obey this Sacred Doctrine (beside
his common gift to many to understand and preach it.) The Spirit having first
indicted the Gospel, does by it, first Regenerate, and after Govern all true
Believers. He is not now given us; for the revealing of new doctrines, but to
understand and obey the doctrine revealed and sealed by him long ago. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16. Jude 19, 20. Ezech. 36.27. Isa. 44.3. Romans 8.1.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. Zech.
14.20.
As the Sun does by its sweet and secret influence, both give and cherish the
natural life of things Sensitive and Vegetative; so does Christ by h^s Spirit
our spiritual life. As you do no work but by your natural life, you should do
none but by your spiritual life: you must not only Believe and Love and pray by
it; but manage all your Callings by it: For Holiness to the Lord must be
written upon all: All things are sanctified to you, because you being
sanctified to God, devote all to Him, and use all for Him: and therefore must
do all in the strength and conduct of the Spirit.

IV. Live wholly upon GOD, as All in All: As the first Efficient, principal
Dirigent, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 10.31. 2 Cor. 5 7, 8. ^ John 3.1. Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Matthew. 22.37. Ephesians. 1.6. 2 Cor. 5.19. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6.
and Final Cause of all things. Let Faith, Hope and Love be daily feeding on
Him. Let [Our Father which art in Heaven] be first inscribed on your hearts,
that he may seem most amiable to you, and you may boldly Trust him, and filial
Love may be the spring of duty. Make use of the Son and Spirit to lead you to
the Father; and of Faith in Christ to kindle and keep alive the Love of God.
The Love of God is our Primitive Holiness, and specially called, with its
fruits [Our Sanctification,] which Faith in Christ is but a Means to. Let it be
your principal end in studying Christ, to see the Goodness Love and Amiableness
of God in him: A condemning God is not so easily loved, as a Gracious
Reconciled God. You have so much of the Spirit, as you have Love to God: This
is the proper gift of the Spirit to all the Adopted Sons of God, to cause them
with filial affection and dependence, to cry Abba Father. Know not, desire not,
love not any creature, but purely as subordinate to God! Without him, let it be
Nothing to you; But as the Glass without the face; or scattered Letters without
the sense; or as the corpse without the soul. Call nothing Prosperity or
pleasure but his Love; Psalm 30.5.
and nothing adversity or misery, but his displeasure, and the cause and fruits
of it. When any thing would seem Lovely and desirable which is against him
call it Dung! Psalm 63.3. Phil. 3.7, 8. Matthew. 16.23. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. 2 Cor.
13.14.
And hear that man as Satan or the Serpent, that would entise you from Him: and
count him but Vanity, a Worm, and dust, that would affright you from your duty
to Him. Fear him much, but Love him more! Let Love be the soul and End of every
other duty: It is the end and Reason of all the rest: but it has no End or
Reason, but its Object. Think of no other Heaven, and End, and Happiness of
man, but LOVE the final act, and GOD the final object: Place not your Religion
in any thing but the Love of God with its means and fruits. Own no grief,
desire, or joy, but a Mourning, a Seeking, and a Rejoicing Love.

V. Live in the Belief, and Hopes of Heaven, and seek it as your part and end;
and daily Delight your souls in the forethoughts, Col. 3.1, 2, 4. Mat. 6.19,
20, 1.33. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. and 5.7. Luke 12.20. Heb. 6.20. 1 Cor. 15.28. Ephesians.
4.6. and 1.23. Phil. 3.18.20. Ps. 73.25, 26. John 18.36.
of the endless sight and Love of God. As God is seen on earth but as in a
glass, so is he proportionably enjoyed. But when mourning, seeking Love has
done, and sin and enemies are overcome, and we behold the Glory of God in
Heaven, the Delights of Love will then be perfect. You may desire more on
Earth, than you may Hope for. Look not for a Kingdom of this world, nor for
Mount Zion in the wilderness. Christ Reigns on Earth, as Moses in the Camp,
to guide us to the Land of Promise: Our perfect blessedness will be, where the
Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, and God is All in All. A doubt, or a
strange heartless thought of Heaven, is Water cast on the Sacred fire, to
quench your Holiness and your Joy. Can you travel one whole day to such an End;
and never think of the place that you are going to? which must be intended in
every righteous act (either notedly, or by the ready unobserved act of a potent
habit.) When Earth is at the best, it will not be Heaven. You live no further
by Faith like Christians, then you either live for Heaven in seeking it, or
else upon Heaven in Hope and Joy.

VI. Labor to make Religion your pleasure and delight. Look often to God, to
Heaven, to Christ, to the Spirit, to the Promises, to all your mercies; call
over your experiences, Psalm 1.2, 3. and 84.2.10. and 63.3.5. and 37.4. and
94.19. and 119.47.70. Isa. 58.14. Psalm 112.1. Romans 14.17. and 5.1, 3, 5. 1
Pet. 1.8. Mat. 5.11, 12. Psalm 32.11.
and think what matter of high Delight is still before you: And how unseemly it
is, and how injurious to your profession, for one that says he Hops for
Heaven, to live as sadly, as those that have no higher Hopes than Earth? How
should that man be filled with joy, who must live in the joys of Heaven for
ever? Especially rejoice when the messengers of Death, do tell you that your
Endless Joy is near. If God and Heaven, with all our mercies in the way, be not
Reason enough for a joyful life, there can be none at all. Abhor all
suggestions which would make Religion seem a tedious inksome life. And take
heed that you represent it not so to others: For you will never make them in
Love with that, which you make them not perceive to be delectable and lovely.
Not as the Hypocrite, by forcing and framing his Religion to his Carnal mind
and pleasure; but bringing up the heart to a holy suitableness, to the
pleasures of Religion.

VII. Watch as for your souls, against this flattering tempting world; Gal.
6.14. 1 Ioh 2.15, 16. James 1.27. and 4.4, 5. 1 John 5.4, 5. Romans 12.2. Gal.
1.4. Titus 2.12. Mat. 19.24. Luke 12.16.21. and 16.25. James 1.11. and 5.1.2.4.
Luke 8.14. H^b. 11.26.
especially when it is represented as more sweet and delectable, than God, and
Holiness, and Heaven. This world with its Pleasure, Wealth, and Honors, is it
that is put in the balance by Satan, against God and Holiness and Heaven: And
no man shall have better than he chooses and prefers. The bait takes
advantage of the brutish part, when Reason is asleep; and if by the help of
sense it get the Throne, the Beast w^ll ride and rule the Man; and Reason
become a slave to Sensuality. When you hear the Serpent, see his sting: and see
Death attending the forb^dden fruit. When you are Rising, look down and see how
far you have to fall! His Reason as well as faith is weak, who for such
fool-gawds, as the pomp and vanities of this world, can forget God and his
soul, and death and judgment, Heaven and Hell, yea and deliberately command
them to stand by. What K^owl^dg^ or Experience can do good on that man, who
will venture so much for such a world, which all that have ^^yed it call Vanity
at the last? How deplorate then is a worldlings case? O fear the world, when it
smileth, or seems sweet and amiable. Love it not, if you Love your God and your
salvation.

VIII. Fly from temptations, and crucify the flesh, Romans 8.1.13. Gal. 5.24.
Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.17. Jude 8.23. 2 Pet. 2.10: Ephesians. 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.11. Mat.
6.13. and 26.41. Luke 8.13.
and keep a constant Government over your appetite and senses. Many who had no
designed stated vice, of worldly interest, have shamfully fallen by the sudden
surprise, of appetite or lust. When custom has taught these to be greedy and
violent, like a hungry Dog, or a lusting Bore, it is not a fl^ggish wish or
purpose, that will mortify or rule them! How dangerous a case is that man in,
who has so greedy a Beast continually to restrain? that if he do but neglect
his watch one hour, is ready to run him headlong into hell? Who can be safe,
that stands long, on so terrible a precipice? The tears and sorrows of many
years, may perhaps not repair the loss which one hour or act may bring. The
case of David and many another, are dreadful warnings. Know what it is that you
are most in danger of; whether lust, or idleness, or excess in meat, or drinks,
or play; and there set the strongest watch for your preservation. Make it your
daily business to mortify that lust; and scorn that your brutish sense or
appetite, should conquer reason. Yet trust not purposes alone; but away from
the temptation; Touch not, yea look not on the tempting bait: Keep far enough
off, if you desire to be safe. What miseries come from small beginnings!
Temptation leads to sin, and small sins to greater, and those to Hell! And sin
and Hell are not to be played with. Open your sin or temptation to some friend,
that shame may save you from the danger.

IX. Keep up a constant skillful Government, James 1.19. Iam 3.13.17. 1 Pet.
3.4. Mat 5.5. Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Col. 3.12. James 1.26. and 3.5, 6.
over your Passions and your Tongues. To this end, keep a lender Conscience,
which will smart when in any of these you sin. Let Holy Passions be well
ordered: and selfish carnal passions be restrained. Let your Tongues know their
duties to God and man, and labor to be skilful and resolute in performing
them. Know all the sins of the Tongue, that you may avoid them; for your
innocence and peace do much depend on the prudent Government of your Tongues.
Psalm 34.13. Prove. 18.21.


X. Govern your Thoughts with constant skilful diligence. In this, Deuteronomy. 15.9.
2 Cor. 10.5. Gen 6.5. Psalm 10.4. Psalm 94.19. Psalm. 119.113. Prove 12.5. and
15.26.
right Hab^ts and Affections will do most by e^clining them unto Good. Its
easy, to Think on that which we Love. Be not unfurnished of matter for your
Thoughts to work upon! And often retire your selves for serious meditation: Be
not so solitary and deep in musings, as to over-stretch your thoughts, and
confound your minds, or t^ke you off from necessary converse with others: But
be sure that you be Consid^rate, and dwell much at home, and converse most with
your consciences and your God! with whom you have the greatest business Leave
not your thoughts unimployed, or ungoverned: scatter them not abroad upon
impertinent vanities: O that you knew what daily business you have for them!
Psalm. 119 59. Prove. 30.32. Ier 4.14. Deuteronomy. 32.19.
Most men are wicked, deceived and undone, because they are inconsiderate! and
dare not or will not retiredly, and soberly use their Reason; or use it but as
a slave in chains, in the service of their passion, lust and interests. He was
never wise, or good, or happy, who was not soberly and impartially considerate.
How to be good, to do good, and finally enjoy good, must be the sum of all
your Thoughts. Keep them first Holy, then charitable, clean and chaste. And
quickly check them when they look toward sin.

XI. Let Time be exceeding precious in your eyes, and carefully and diligently
Redeem it. Ephesians. 5.16. Ioh 14 1, 2. Acts 17.21. 1 Cor. 7.29. 2 Cor. 6.2. John
9.4. Luke 19.42.44. Psalm 39 4. Mat. 25.10.12.
What haste does it make! and how quickly will it be gone? and then how highly
will it be valued, when a minute of it can never be recalled. O what important
business have we, for every moment of our Time, if we should live a thousand
years! Take not that man to be well in his wits, or to know his God, his End,
his work, or his danger, who has time to spare. Redeem it, not only from
needless sports, and plays, and idleness, and curi^^^^, and complement, and
excess of sleep, and chatt, and worldliness; but also from the entanglement of
^^ss^^ good, which would hinder you from greater. Spend Time as men that are
ready to pass into another world; where every minute must be accounted for; and
it must go with us for ever as we lived here. Let not Health deceive you, into
the expectation of living long, and so into a senseless negligence: See your
glass running, and keep a reckoning of the expense of Time: and spend it just
as you would review it when it is gone.

XII. Let the Love of all in their several capacities, become as it were your
very Nature: 1 Timothy 1.5, 6. Mat. 19.19. Romans 13.10. 1 John 4.16. Ephesians. 4.2.15,
16. Col. 2.2. and 1.4. 1 Timothy 6.11. James 3.17. Phil. 2.1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
John 13.35. Mat. 5.44, ^5. 1 Cor. 13. James 4.11. Gal. 6 10. Titus 2.14. Phil.
2.20, 21. Romans 15.1.3.
and doing them all the good you can be very much of the business of your
lives. God must be loved in all his creatures: His natural Image on all men;
and his spiritual Image on his Saints. Our Neighbor must be Loved as Our
selves: that is, our natural neighbor as our natural self, with a Love of
Benevolence; and our spiritual neighbor as our spiritual self, with a Love of
Complacence. In opposition to complacence, we may hate our sinful neighbor, as
we must our selves (much more:) But in opposition to Benevolence we must
neither hate our selves, our neighbor, or our enemy. O that men knew how much
of Christianity does consist in Love, and doing good? With what eyes do they
read the Gospel, who see not this in every page? Abhor all that selfishness,
pride, and passion which are the enemies of Love, and those opinions, and
factions, and censurings and backbitings, which would destroy it. Take him that
speaks evil of another to you, without a just cause and call, to be Satan's
messenger, entreating you to hate your Brother, or to abate your Love. For to
persuade you, that a man is bad, is directly to persuade you so far to hate
him. Not that the good and bad must be confounded: but Love will call none Bad
without constreining evidence. Rebake backbiters: Hurt no man, and speak evil
of no man; unless it be not only just, but necessary to some greater good. Love
is lovely: They that Love shall be beloved. Hating and hurting makes men
Hateful. Love thy neighbor as thy self; and, Do as thou would be done by;
are the golden Rules of our duty to men; which must be deeply written on your
hearts. For want of this, there (...) nothing so false, so bad, so cruel, which
you may not (...) drawn to Think, or Say, or Do against your Bre^^^^ SELFISHNES
and WANT of LOVE, do (...) ^^turally tend to Ambition and Covetousness, and
(...) to cruelty against all that stand in the way of (...) ^^^^es, as the
nature of a Wolf to kill the Lambs. (...), and contentions, and persecutions in
the (...) ^^oceed from selfishness, and want of charity. (...) malice is the
Devilish nature. Be as zea^^^ (...) ^^^ng good to all, as Satan's servants are
in (...). Take ^t as the use of all your talents, and (...) ^^em as ^o^ would
hear of it at last. Let it be your business, and not a matter on the by:
Especially for public good, and men's salvation. And what you cannot do your
selves, persuade others to. Give them good Books; and draw them to the means,
which are most like to profit them.

XIII. Understand the right terms of Church Communion: especially the Unity of
the Universal Church, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.3.16. Col. 1.4. Heb. 10.25. Acts 2.41.
and 8.37.12, 13.
and the Universal Communion which you must hold with all the parts; and the
difference between the Church as Visible and Invisible. For want of these, how
woeful are our divisions? Read often, 1 Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4.1. to 17. John 17.21,
22, 23. Acts 4 32. and 2.42. 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 13. and 3.3. Romans 16.17. Phil.
2.^, 2, 3, 4. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Acts 20 30. 1 Cor. 11.19. Titus 3 10. James 3.
Study these well. You must have Union and Communion in Faith and Love, with all
the Christians in the world. And refuse not local communion when you have a
just call; so far as they put you not on sinning. Let your usual meeting be
with the purest Church, if you lawfully may, 1 Cor. 1.2. and 11.18 21. and 3.3,
4. and 1.12, 13.
(and still respect the public good.) But sometimes occasionally communicate
even with defective faulty Churches, so be it they are true Christians, and put
you not on sin: that so you may show, that you own them as Christians, though
you disown their corruptions. Think not your presence makes all the faults of
Ministry, Worship, or people to be yours (for then I would join with no Church
in the world.) Know that as the mystical Church consists of
Heart-Covenanters, so does the Church as Visible consist of Verbal-Covenanters,
which make a credible profession of Consent: And that Nature and Scripture
teaches us to take every man's word as credible, till perfidiousness forfeit
his Credit; which forfeiture must be proved, before any sober Profession can be
taken, for an insufficient title. Grudge not then at the Communion of any
Professed Christian in the Church Visible (Though we must do our part to cast
out the obstinately impenitent by Discipline; Mat. 13.41.
which if we cannot do, the fault is not ours.) The presence of hypocrites is
no hurt, but often a mercy to the sincere. How small else would the Church seem
in the world? John 16.2. 1 Cor. 1.10. Romans 16.17. James 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Outward privileges belong to outward Covenanters: and inward mercies to the
sincere. Division is wounding, and tends to death. Abhor it as you love the
Churches welfare or your own: The wisdom from above is, first pure, and then
peaceable. Never separate what God conjoineth. It is the Earthly, sensual,
devilish wisdom, which causes bitter envying, and strife, and confusion and
every evil work. Blessed are the Peacemakers. 1 Timothy 3.6. Col. 2.18. 1 Cor.
8.1. 1 Cor. 4.6. 1 Timothy 6.4. 1 Pet. 5.5. James 3.1.17.


XIV. Take heed of Pride and Self-conceitedness in Religion: If once you
overvalue your own understandings, your crude conceptions, and gross mistakes,
will delight you as some supernal light: and instead of having compassion on
the weak, you will be unruly and despisers of your Guides, and censorious
contemners of all that differ from you; and persecutors of them if you have
power; and will think all intolerable, that take you not as Oracles, and your
words as Law. Forget not that the Church has always suffered by censorious,
unruly professors on the one hand, (and O what divisions and scandals have they
caused!) as well as by the profane and persecutors on the other. Take heed of
both: And when contentions are afoot, be quiet and silent, and not too forward;
and keep up a zeal for Love and Peace. Ephesians. 5. and 6. Col. 3. and 4. Romans
13.1.7. 1 Pet. 2.13.15.


XV. Be faithful and conscionable in all your Relations. Honor and obey your
Parents, and other superiors: Despise not, and resist not Government: If you
suffer unjustly by them, be humbled for those sins, which cause God to turn
your Protectors into Afflicters: and instead of murmuring and rebelling against
them, reform your selves, and then commit your selves to God. Princes and
Pastors I will not speak to: Subjects, and servants, and children, must obey
their superiors as the Officers of God.

XVI. Keep up the Government of God in your families: Command. 4. I^s. 24.15.
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. Daniel 6.
Holy Famil^es must be chief preservers of the interest of Religion in the
world. Let not the world turn Gods service into a customary lifeless form. Read
the Scripture, and edifying Books to them: Talk with them serio^sly about the
state of their souls, and everlasting life: Pray with them fervently: Watch
over them diligently: Be angry against sin, and meek in your own cause! Be
examples of Wisdom, Holiness and Patience: And see that the Lords Day be spent
in holy preparation for Eternity.

XVII. Let your Calling be managed in Holiness and Laboriousness. H^b. 13.5.
Command. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.12. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. 1 Timothy 5.13. Proverbs 31. 1 Cor.
7.29.
Live not in idleness: Be not slothful in your work; whether you be bound, or
free: In the swear of your brows you must eat your bread, and labor the six
days, that you may have to give to him that needs! slothfulness is
sensuality as well as filthier sins. The body (that is able) must have fit
employment as well as the soul; or else body and soul will fare the worse. But
let all be but as the labor of a Traveller, and aim at God and Heaven in all.

XVIII. Deprive not your selves of the benefit of an able faithful Pastor, M^l.
2.7. Eccles. 4.10, 11. Prove. 12.1. and 15.5.10.31. H^b. 3.13.
to whom you may open your case in secret: or at least of a holy faithful
friend: And be not displeased at their free reproofs. Woe to him that is alone!
How blind and partial are we in our own cause! And how hard is it to know our
selves without an able faithful helper? You forfeit this great mercy, when yo^
love a flatterer, and angr^ly defend your sin.

XIX. Prepare for sickness, sufferings, and death: Overval^e not prosperity,
Luke 12.40. 2 Pet. 1.10.
nor the favor of man! If s^lfish men p^ove false and cru^l to you, even those
of whom you have deserved best, marvel not at it; but pray for your enemies,
persecutors and slanderers, Phil. 1.21, 23. Ierem. 9 4, 5. Mat. 7.4, 5. 2 Cor.
5.1, 2, 4, 8.
that God would turn their hearts and pardon them. What a mercy is it to be
driven from the world to God? When the Love of the world is the greatest danger
of the soul? Be ready to die, and you are ready for any thing: Ask your hearts
seriously, what is it that I shall need at a dying hour? and let it speedily be
got ready, and not be to seek in the time of your extremity.

XX. Understand the true method of Peace of Conscience, Exodus 34.6. Heb. 7.25.
John 4.41. John 3.16. 1 Timothy 4.10. and 2.4. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Rev. 22.17.
Isaiah 55.6, 7.
and judge not of the state of your souls upon deceitful grounds: As
presumptuous hopes do keep men from Conversion, and embolden them in sin; so
causless fears do hinder our Love and praise of God, by obscuring his
Loveliness; And they destroy our Thankfulness, and our Delight in God, and make
us a burden to our selves, and a grievous stumbling block to others: The
General grounds of all your comfort, are 1. The Gracious Nature of God: 2. The
sufficiency of Christ, and 3. The Truth and Universality of the Promise, which
gives Christ and Life to All if they will Accept him: But this Acceptance is
the proof of your particular title; without which these do but aggravate your
sin. Consent to Gods Covenant is the true Condition and proof of your title to
God as your Father, Savior and Sanctifier, and so to the saving blessings of
the Covenant: which Consent, if you survive, must produce the duties which you
consent to. He that Heartily consents, Luke 14.26.33. 1 John 2.15. Mat. 6.19,
20, 21.33. Coloss. 3.1.4. Romans 1.8.13.
that God be his God, his Savior and Sanctifier, is in a state of life. But
this includes the rejection of the world. Much knowledge, and memory, and
utterance, and lively Affections, are all very desirable! But you must judge
your state by none of these; for they are all uncertain: But 1. If God and
Holiness and Heaven have the highest estimation of your practical judgment, as
being esteemed Best for you; 2. And be preferred in the Choice and Resolution
of your Wills, and that Habitually, before all the pleasures of the world: 3.
And be first and chiefly sought in your endeavors; this is the infallible
proof of your sanctification.

Christian, upon long and serious study and experience, (...) dare boldly
commend these Directions to thee, as the way of God, which will end in
Blessedness. The Lord Resolve and Strengthen thee to obey them.

This is the true Constitution of Christianity: This is true Godliness; and
this is to be Religious indeed! And all this is no more than to be seriously
such as all among us in general words, profess to be. This is the Religion
which must difference you from Hypocrites; which must settle you in peace, and
make you an honor to your profession, and a blessing to those that dwell about
you! Happy is the Land the Church, the Family, which does consist of such as
these! These are not they that either Persecute or Divide the Church; or that
make their Religion a servant to their Policy, to their Ambitious designs, or
fleshly lusts; nor that make it the bellows of Sedition, or Rebellion, or of an
envious hurtful zeal; or a snare for the innocent; or a Pistol to shoot at the
upright in heart: These are not they that have been the shame of their
profession, the hardening of ungodly men and Infidels, and that have caused the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. If any man will make a Religion of, or for
his Lusts; of Papal tyranny, or Pharisaical formality, or of his private
opinions, or of proud censoriousness, and contempt of others, and of faction
and unwarrantable separations and divisions, and of standing at a more
observable distance from common professors of Christianity, than God would have
them; or yet of pulling up the hedge of Discipline, and laying Christ's Vineyard
common to the Wilderness; the storm is coming, when this Religion founded on
the sand will fall, and great will be the fall thereof: When the Religion which
consists in Faith, and Love to God and Man, in mortifying the flesh, and
crucifying the world, in Self-denial, Humility, and ^atience, in s^ncere
obed^ence, and faithfulness in all Relations, in watchful se^f-government, in
doing good, and in a Divine and Heavenly life, though it will be hated by the
ungodly world, shall never be a dishonor to your Lord, nor deceive or
disappoint your souls.

May 10. 1665.
FINIS.

