THE Last Work OF A BELIEVER.

His Passing-Prayer, recommending his departing Spirit to Christ to be Received
by him.

Prepared for the Funerals of Mary the Widow first of Francis Charlton Esquire and
after of Thomas Hanmer Esquire: And partly Preached at St. Mary Magdalens Church in
Milk-street, London, And now, at the desire of her Daughter, before her Death,
reprinted.

By Richard Baxter.

Joh. 12. 26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my Servant be: and If any man serve me, him will my Father Honor.
LONDON: Printed by B. Griffin, for B. Simmons at the three Golden Cocks, at the
West End of St. Paul's. 1682.

The Contents of the last work of a Believer.
THE Occasion of this Discourse, page 1. The opening of the Text, p. 3. Doct.
1. and 2d passed by [that Christ is exalted in glory] and [is to be prayed to]
p. 5. Doct. 3. Man has a spirit, as well as a body: And what the soul is, p.
6. Doct. 4. The spirit of man does survive the body: It dies not, nor is
annihilated, nor sleeps, p. 11. Doct. 5. Christ does receive the spirits of
his Saints, when they leave the flesh. What his Receiving them is? p. 14. Doct.
6. A dying Christian may confidently and comfortably commend his spirit to
Christ to be Received by him, p. 19. The Doctrine applied to the unregenerate
unprepared soul, p. 20. Whom Christ will Receive, and whom he will not refuse,
p. 26. Considerations to move them to prepare so as to be Received, p. 30.
Applied to Believers, p. 37. Encouraging proofs os Christ's receiving their
departed soul, p. 39. Other Uses of the Doctrine, p. 57. For the abatement of
sorrow for the Death of our departed friend, p. 61. The evidences of her
happiness, in the Graces in which she was eminent and exemplary, p. 63. The use
of her example to them that survive, p. 70. Doct 7. Prayer in General, and this
prayer in particular, That Christ will receive our departing souls, is a most
suitable conclusion of all the action of a Christians life, p. 72.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE person whose Death did occasion this Discourse, was one that about five
years ago removed from her ancient habitation (at Appley in Shropshire)* to
Kederminster, where she lived under my Pastoral care till I was come up to
London: and before she had lived there a twelvemonth (for thither she removed)
she died of the Fever, then very common in the City. She lived among us an
example of Prudence, Gravity, Sobriety, Righteousness, Piety, Charity and
Self-denial: and was truly what I have described her to be, and much more: For
I use not to flatter the living, much less, the dead. And though I had personal
acquaintance with her for no longer a time than I have mentioned, yet I think
it worthy the mentioning, which I understand by comparing her last years with
what is said of her former time, by those that were then nearest to her, and so
were at her Death, that whereas (as I have said) sudden Passion was the sin
that she was wont much to complain of, she had not contented her self with mere
complainings, but so effectually resisted them, and applied Gods remedies for
the healing of her nature, that the success was very much observed by those
about her, and the change and cure so great herein, as was a comfort to her
nearest Relations, that had the benefit of her converse: Which I mention as a
thing that shows us, 1. That even the Infirmities that are founded in nature
and temperature of body, are curable so far as they fall under the dominion of
a sanctified will. 2. That even in age, when such Passions usually get ground,
and infirmities of mind increase with infirmities of body, yet Grace can
effectually do its work. 3. That to attend God in his Means, for the subduing
any corruption, is not in vain. 4. That as God has promised growth of Grace,
and flourishing in old age, so in his way we may expect the fulfilling of his
promise. 5. That as Grace increases, infirmities and corruptions of the Soul
will vanislh.

This makes me call to mind that she was once so much taken with a Sermon which
I preached, at the Funerals of a holy aged woman Good old Mris. Doughty,
sometime of Shrewsbury, who had long walked with God, and longed to be with
him; and was among us an excellent example of holiness, blamelesness, contempt
of the world, constancy, patience, humility, and (which makes it strange) a
great and constant desire to die, though she was still complaining of doubtings
and weakness of assurance.
and so sensibly often recited the Text it self as much affecting her, (2 Cor, 4.
16, 17. For which cause we faint not; but tho our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is rerenewed day by day, etc.) that I am persuaded both the Text it
self, and the example opened (and well known) to her did her much good,

Her work is done: Her enemies are conquered; (except the remaining fruits of
Death upon a corrupting Body, which the Resurrection must conquer). Her danger,
and temptations, and troubles, and fears, are at an end: She shall no more be
discomfited with evil tidings; nor no more partake with a militant Church in
the sorrows of her diseases or distresses: We are left within the reach of
Satan's assaults and malice; and of the rage and violence which pride, and
faction, and Cainish envy, and enmity to serious holiness, do ordinarily raise
against Christ's followers in the world: We are left among the lying tongues of
slanderous malicious men; and dwell in a Wilderness among Scorpions; where the
Sons of Belial, like Nabal, are such that a man cannot speak to them. 1 Samuel*
25. 17. The best of them is as a briar; the most upright sharper than a thorn
hedge: Mic. 7. 4. ( But the Sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns
thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall
touch them must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear, and they shall
be utterly burnt with fire in the place, 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7.) We are left among
our weak, distempered, sinful, afflicted, lamenting friends; the sight of whose
calamities, and participation of their sufferings, makes us feel the strokes
that fall upon so great a number, that we are never like to be free from pain.
But she is entered into the Land of Peace, where Pride and Faction are shut out;
where Serpentine enmity, malice and fury never come: where there is no Cain to
envy and destroy us; no Sodomtes to rage against us* and in their blindness to
assault our doors: No Ahitophels to plot our ruin: No Judas to betray us: No
false-witnesses to accuse us: No Tertullus to paint us out as pestilent fellows
and movers of sedition among the people: No Rehum, Shimshai, or their society,
to persuade the Rulers that the servants of the God of heaven are hurtful unto
Kings, and against their interest and honor, ( Ezra 4. 9, 12, 13, 14, 22. and
5. 11.): No rabble to cry away with them, it is not fit that they should live:
No Demas that will forsake us for the love of present things: No such
contentious censorious friends as Jobs to afflict us, by adding to our
affliction: No cursed Cham to dishonor parents: No ambitious rebellious
Absalom to molest us, or to lament: No sinful, scandalous, or impatient friends
to be our grief: And which is more than all, no earthly, sinful inclinations in
our selves; no passions or infirmities; no languishings of soul, no deadness,
dullness, hard heartedness, or we aknesses of grace* no backwardness to God, or
estrangedness from him, nor fears or doubtings of his love, nor frowns of his
displeasure: None of these do enter into that serene and holy region, nor ever
interrupt the joy of Saints.

The great work is yet upon our hands, to fight out the good fight, to finish
our course, to run with patience the remainder of the race that is before us:
And as we must look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, as our great
exemplar, so must we look to his Saints and Martyrs as our encouraging examples
under him. Put the case you were now dying, (and O how near is it, and how
sure!) What would you need most if the day were come? That is it that you need
most now: Look after it speedily while you have time! Look after it seriously,
if you have the hearts of men, and sin have not turned you into Idiots or
blocks. What a disgrace is it to mankind, to hear men commonly at death cry
out, O for a little more time, and O for the opportunities of grace again! and
O how shall I enter upon eternity thus unprepared!] As if they had never heard
or known that they must die till now! Had you not a life's time to put these
questions? and should you not long ago have got them satisfactorily resolved?
And justly does God give over some to that greater shame of humane nature, as
not to be called to their wits even by the approach of death it self, but as
they contemned everlasting Life in their health, God justly leaves them to be
so sottish, as to venture presumptuously with unrenewed souls upon death, and
the conceit that they are of the right Church, or party, or opinion; or that
the Priest has absolved them, does pass with them for the necessary
preparation; and well were it for them, if these would pass them currantly into
heaven: But O what heart can now conceive, how terrible it is, for a new
departed soul to find it self remedilesly disappointed, and to be shut up in
flames and desperation, before they would believe that they were in danger of
it?

Reader, I beseech thee, as ever thou believe that thou must shortly die,
retire from the crowd and noise of worldly vanity and vexation: O bethink thee
how little a while thou must be here, and have use for honor, and favor, and
wealth; and what it is for a soul to pass into heaven or hell, and to dwell
among Angels or Devils for ever; And how men should live, and watch, and pray,
that are near to such a change as this* Should I care what men call me (by
tongue or pen)? Should I care whether I Live at liberty or in prison, when I am
ready to die, and have matters of infinite moment before me, to take me up?
Honor or dishonor, liberty or prison, are words of no sound or signification
scarce to be heard or taken notice of, to one of us that are just passing to
God and to everlasting life! The Lord have mercy upon the distracted world! how
strangely does the Devil befool them in the daylight, and make them needlessly
trouble themselves about many things, when one thing is needful; and Heaven is
talked of (and that but heartlesly and seldom) while fleshly provision only is
the prize, the pleasure, the business of their lives! Some are diverted from
their serious preparation for death, by the leastly avocations of lust and
g^wdiness, and meats, and drinks, and childish sports: and some by the
businesses of ambition and covetousness, contriving how to feather their nests,
and exercise their Wills over others in the world! and some that will seem to
be doing the work, are diverted as dangerously as others, by contending about
formalities and Ceremonies, and destroying Charity and Peace, rending the
Church, and strengthening factions, and carrying on Interests hypocritically
under the name of Religion, till the Zeal that Saint James describes, ( Jam.
3. 13, 14, etc.) having consumed all that was tike to the Zeal of Love and
Holiness in themselves, proceed to consume the Servants and interest of Christ
about them and to bite and devour, till their Lord come and find them in a day
that they locked not for him, smiting their fellow servants, and eating and
drinking with the drunken, and cut them asunder, and appoint them their portion
with the hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew, 24.
49, 50, 51.

O study, and preach, and hear, and pray, and live, and use your brethren that
differ from you in some opinions, as you would do if you were going to receive
your doom, and as will then be most acceptable to your Lord! The guilt of
sensuality, worldiness, ambition, of uncharitableness, cruelty and injustice,
of losing time, and betraying your souls by negligence, or perfidiousness and
wilful sin, will lie heavyer upon a departing Soul, then now in the drunkenness
of prosperity you can think: Christ will never receive such Souls in their
extremity, unless upon repentance by faith in his blood, they are washed from
this pollution. It is unspeakably terrible to die, without a confidence that
Christ will receive us: And little knows the graceless world what sincerity and
simplicity in holiness is necessary to the soundness of such a confidence.

Let those that know not that they must die, or know of no life hereafter, hold
on their chase of a feather, till they find what they lost their lives, and
Souls, and labor for: But if thou be a Christian, remember what is thy work!
Thou will net need the favor of man, nor worldly wealth to prevail with Christ
to Receive thy spirit: O learn thy Last Work, before thou art put upon the
doing of it. The world of spirits to which we are passing, does better know
than this world of fleshly darkened sinners, the great difference between the
Death of a Heavenly Believer, and of an earthly sensualist. Believe, it is a
thing possible to get that apprehension of the Love of Christ, that confidence
of his Receiving us, and such familiar pleasant thoughts of our entertainment
by him, as shall much overcome the fears of Death, and make it a welcome day to
us when we shall be admitted into the Celestial society. And the difference
between one man's Death and another, depends on the difference between Heart
and Heart, Life and Life, Preparation and Vnpreparedness.

It you ask me, How may so happy a Preparation be made? I have told you in this
following Discourse, and more fully else where formerly. I shall add now these
few Directions following.

1. Follow the flattering world no further: Come off from all expectation of
felicity below: Enjoy nothing under the Sun; but only use it in order to your
enjoyment of the real sure delight: Take heed of being too much pleased in the
creature. Have you houses, and lands, and offices, and honors, and friends
that are very pleasing to you? Take heed; for that is the killing snare! Shut
your eyes, and wink them all into nothing; and cast by your contrivances, and
cares, and fears, and remember you have another work to do.

2. Live in Communion with a suffering Christ: study well the whole life and
nature of his sufferings; and the reason of them; and think how desirable it is
to be conformed to him: Thus look to Jesus, that for the joy that was set
before him, despised the shame, and endured the Cross, and the contradiction of
sinners against himself. Dwell upon this example that the image of a humbled
suffering Christ being deeply imprinted on thy mind, may draw thy heart into a
juster relish of a mortified state: Sure he is no good Christian that thinks it
not better to live as Christ did (in holy poverty and sufferings in the world)
then as Croesus or Caesar, or any such worldling and self-pleasure lived. Die
daily, by following Jesus with your Cross, and when you have a while suffered
with him, he will make you perfect, and receive your spirits, and you shall
reign with him: It wonderfully prepares for a comfortable Death, to live in
the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ: He is most likely to die quietly,
patiently and joyfully, that can first be poor, be neglected, be scorned, be
wronged, be slandered, be imprisoned, quietly, patiently and joyfully. If you
were but at Jerusalem; you would with some love and pleasure go up Mount
Olivet, and think, [Christ went this very way] You would Love to see the place
where he was born, the way which he went when he carried his Cross, the holy
grave where he was buried, (where there in a Temple which Pilgrims use to
visit, from whence they use to bring the mark as a pleasing badge of honor.)
But how much More of Christ is there in our suffering for his Cause and Truth?
and in following him in a mortified self-denying life, then in following him in
the path that he has trodden upon earth? His enemies saw his Cross, his Grave,
his Mother, his person: This did not heal their sinful Souls and make them
happy. But the Cross that he calls us to bear, is, a life of suffeing for
Righteousness sake, in which he commands us to rejoice and be exceeding glad,
because our Reward is great in Heaven, though all manner of evil be spoken of
us falsely by men on earth, Mat. 5. 11, 12. This is called a being pertakers of
Christ's sufferings, in which we are commanded to rejoice; that when this glory
shall be revealed, we may be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13. And as the
sufferings of Christ abound toward us, so will our Consolation abound by
Christ; 1 Cor. 1. 5. Till we come up to a life of willing mortification, and
pleased contented suffering with Christ, we are in the lower form of his
School, and as Children, shall tremble at that which should not cause our
terror, and through misapprehensions of the case of a departing soul, shall be
afraid of that which should be our joy. I am not such an enemy to the esteem of
relics, but if one could show me the very stock that Paul and Silas sat in
when they sung Psalms in their imprisonment, Acts 16. I could be contented to
be put (for the like cause) into the same stocks, with a special willingness
and pleasure: How much more should we be willing to be conformed to our
suffering Lord, in a Spirit and life of true mortification?

3. Hold Communion also with his suffering Members: Desire not to dwell in the
tents of wickedness, nor to be planted among them that flourish for a time,
that they may be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 6, 7. I had rather have
Bradford's heart and faggot, than Bonners Bishopric. It was holy Stephen, and
not those that stoned him, that saw Heaven opened, and the Son of Man sitting
at the right hand of God, Acts 7. 56. and that could joyfully say, Lord Jesus
Receive my Spirit. He lives not by Faith (though he may be a hanger on that
keeps up some profession for fear of being damned) who chooses not rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, and esteems not the very reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of the world, as having respect to the recompense of reward, Heb.
11. 25. 26.

4. Live as if Heaven were open to your sight: and then dote upon the delights
of worldlings if you can: Then love a life of fleshly case and honor better
than to be with Christ, if yon can. But of this I have spoken at large in other
writings.

Christian, make it the study and business of thy Life, to learn to do thy Last
Work well; that Work which must be done but once; that so Death which transmits
unholy Souls into utter darkness and despair, may deliver thy Spirit into thy
Redeemers deemers hands to be Received to his Glory; according to that blessed
promise, John 12. 26. And while I am in the flesh, beg the same mercy for

Thy Brother and Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ. Richard Baxter.
London, Jan. 31. 1661^^
A BELIEVERS Last Work.
ACTS 7. 59. Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit.
THE Birth of Nature, and the New Birth of Grace, in their measure resemble the
Death of Saints, which is the Birth of Glory. It is a bitter-sweet day, a day
that is mixed of sorrow and joy, when Nature must quit its familiar Guest, and
yield to any of these Changes. Our Natural Birth is not without the throws and
pain, and groanings of the Mother, though it transmit the Child into a more
large, and lightsom, and desirable Habitation: Our Spiritual Birth is not
without its humbling and heart-piercing sorrows: and when we are brought out of
darkness into the mavelous light, we leave our old Companions, in
displeasure, whom we forsake, and our Flesh repining at the loss of its sensual
delights: And our passage into Glory is not without those pangs and fears which
must needs be the attendants of a pained Body, ready to be dissolved, and a
Soul that is going through so strait a door, into a strange though a most
blessed place; And it leaves our lamenting Friends behind, that feel their
loss, and would longer have enjoyed our Company, and see not(though they
believe) the Glory of the departed Soul. And this is our case, that are brought
hither this day, by an act of Providence sad to us, though joyous to our
departed Friend; by a Voice that has called her into Glory, and called us into
this Mourning plight: Even us that rejoice in the thoughts of her Felicity, and
are not so cruel as to wish her again into this corruptible Flesh and
calamitous World, from the glorious presence of the Lord; and yet should have
kept her longer from it, for our own and others sakes, if our Wisdom had been
fit to rule, or our Wills to be fulfilled, or if our Prayers must have been
answered, according to the measure of our sailing Apprehensions, or precipitant
Desires. But Folly must submit to the Incomprehensible Wisdom; and the Desire
of the Creature must stoop to the Will of the Creator The Interest of Christ
must be preferred, when he calls for his own; and our temporary Interest must
give place: Flesh must be silent, and not contend; and Dust must not dare to
question God: He knows best when his Fruit is ripe; and though he will allow
our moderate Sorrows, he will not so much damnifie his Saints, as to detain
them with us from their Joyful Rest, till we are content to let them go.

Thus also did Blessed Stephen depart from Glory to Glory; from a distant sight
of the Glory of God, and of Jesus standing at his right hand, into the
immediate presence and fruition of that Glory: But yet he must pass the narrow
Port; enraged Malice must stone him till he die; and he must undergo the Pains
of Martyrdom, before he reach to the Glory which he had seen: And when he was
arrived in safety, he leaves his Brethren scattered in the Storm, and Devout
men make great lamentation at his burial. Acts 9. 2. Though it is probable by
the ordinary acceptance of the Word [(...)] that they were not professed
Christians, but devout Proselytes, (such as Cornelius and the Ethiopian Eunuch
were) that buried and thus lamented Stephen, as knowing him to be an excellent
Person, cruelly murdered by the raging Jews; yet their Example, in a Case not
culpable, but commendable, may be imitated by Believers; upon condition that,
with our sense of the Excellency of the Persons, and of our loss by their
removal, we exceed them that had but a darker Revelation, in our joyful sense
of the felicity of the translated Souls.

The occasion of the Death of this Holy Man, was partly that he surpassed
others, as being full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost; and partly, that he
plainly rebuked the blind and furious persecuting Zeal of the Jews, and bore a
most resolute Testimony of Christ. It is an ill time when Men must suffer
because they are good, and deserve not suffering, but reward: And they are an
unhappy People that have no more Grace or Wit, but to fight against Heaven, and
set themselves under the Strokes of God's severest Justice, by persecuting them
that are dear to Christ, and faithfully perform their Duty. It is no strange
thing for the ZEAL and INTEREST of a FACTION to make Men mad; so mad, as
implacably to rage against the Off spring of Heaven, and to hate Men because
they are faithful to their great Master, and because they are against their
Faction; so mad, as to think that the Interest of their Cause requires them to
destroy the best with the greatest malice, because they stand most in their
way; and to forget that Christ, the Revenger of his Elect, does take all as
done to him that is done to them; so mad, as to forget all the terrible
Threatenings of God, and terrible Instances of his avenging Justice, against the
Enemies of his Servants, whom he takes as his own; and to ruin their own
Reputations, by seeking to defame the Upright, whose Names God is engaged to
honor, and whose Righteousness shall shine forth as the Sun, when foolish
Malignity has done its worst. When Christ had pleaded his Cause effectually
with Saul, that was one of the Persecutors of Stephen, he makes him confess
that he was [(...)] exceedingly, excessively, or beyond measure mad against the
Christians.

But this Blessed Protomartyr, in despite of Malice, does safely and joyfully
pass through all their Rage to Heaven: By killing him they make him more than
Conqueror, and send him to receive his Crown: And he shuts up all the Action
of his Life, in imitation of his suffering Lord, with a twofold Request to
Heaven; the one for himself, that his Spirit may be received; the other for his
Persecutors, that this sin may not be laid to their charge, Acts 7. 59, 60. For
so you may find Christ did before him, Luke 23. 34, 46. Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do:] and, [ Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit.] Only Christ directs his Prayer immediately to the Father, and
Stephen to Christ, as being one that had a Mediator, when Christ had none, as
needing none; and being now bearing witness, by his suffering, to Christ, and
therefore it was seasonable to direct his Prayer to him; but especially because
it was an Act of Mediation that he petitioneth for, and therefore directs his
Petition to the Mediator.

This first Request of this dying Saint, which I have chosen to handle, as
suitable and seasonable for our Instruction at this time, in a few Words
contains not a few exceeding useful wholesome Truths.

As, 1. It is here plainly intimated, that [ Jesus Christ is exalted in Glory,]
in that he has power to receive departed Souls.

2. That Christ is to be prayed to,] and that it is not our Duty to direct all
our Prayers only to the Father. Especially those things that belong to the
Office of the Mediator, as interceding for us in the Heavens, must be requested
of the Mediator: And those things which belong to the Father to give for the
sake of the Mediator, must be asked of the Father for his sake. I cannot now
stay to tell you in particular what belongs to the one, and what unto the
other.

3. That Man has a Spirit, as well as a Body: of which, more anon.

4. That this Spirit dies not with the Body (unless you will call a mere
separation a dying.)

5. That Christ does receive the Spirits of his Saints, when they are separated
from the Body.

6. That a dying Christian may confidently and comfortably commend his Spirit
to Christ, to be received of him.

7. That Prayer in general, and this Prayer in special, That Christ will
receive our departing Souls, is a most suitable Conclusion of all the Actions
of a Christian's Life.

THe first and second of these Doctrines, offered us by this Text, I shall pass
by.

The third is not questioned by any that knows himself to be a Man: But that
we may understand it and the rest, we must consider what the Word [ Spirit]
does here signify. By [ Spirit] here can be meant nothing but the Rational
Soul, which is the principal constitutive part of the man. For, though the word
do sometime signify the Wind or Breath, and sometime the moral and
intellectual Qualifications, and have diverse other senses, I need not stay to
prove that it is not here so taken: Stephen prays not to Christ to receive
his Breath, his Graces, or the Holy Ghost; but to receive his Rational immortal
Soul.

It is not only the Soul, but God himself, that is called [ a Spirit]: And
though the Name be fetched from lower things, that is because that as we have
no adequate positive conception of God or Spirits, so we can have no adequate
proper names for them, but must take up with borrowed Names, as answerable to
our Notions.

Sometime the Word Spirit (as Heb. 4. 12. etc.) is distinguished from the Soul:
And then it either signifies the superior Faculties in the same Soul, or the
same Soul as elevated by Grace.

Do you ask, What the Soul is? You may also ask, What a Man is. And it is pity
that a Man should not know what a Man is. It is our Intellectual Nature,
containing also the Sensitive and Vegetative: The Principle or first Act, by
which we live, and feel, and understand, and freely will. The Acts tell you
what the Faculties or Powers are, and so what the Soul is. If you know what
Intellection, or Reason and Free Will are, you may know what it is to have a
spiritual Nature, essentially containing the Power of Reasoning and Willing. It
is thy Soul by which thou art thinking and asking, What a Soul is! And as he
that reasons to prove that Man has no Reason, does prove that he has Reason
by reasoning against it; so he that reasons to prove that he has no Soul.
does thereby prove that he has a Reasonable (though abused) Soul.

Yet there are some so blind as so question, Whether they have Souls, because
they see them not: Whereas if they could see them with Eyes of Flesh, they were
no Souls: For Spirits are invisible. They see not the Air or Wind, and yet they
know that Air or Wind there is. They see not God or Angels, and yet they are
Fools indeed if they doubt whether there be a God and Angels. If they see not
their Eyes, yet they know that they have Eyes, because with those Eyes they see
other things. And if they know not directly and intuitively that they have
Rational Souls, they might know it by their knowing other things, which without
such Souls cannot be known. It is just with God, that those that live as
carnally, and brutishly, and neglegently, as if they had no Souls to use or
care for, should at last be given up to question whether they have Souls, or no.

O woeful Fall! depraved Nature! O miserable Men, that have so far departed from
God, as to deny both themselves and God! or to question, Whether God be God,
and Man be Man! Return to God, and thou will come to thy self; Forget not, Man,
thy Noble Nature, thy chiefest Part: Think not that thou art only Shell,
because thou see not through the Shell. It is Souls that converse by the
Bodies while they are in Flesh. It is thy Soul that I am speaking to, and thy
Soul that understands me: When thy Soul is gone, I will speak to thee no
more. It is thy Soul that is the Workmanship of God by an immediate or special
way of Fabrication, Isa. 57. 16. The souls that I have made.] Genesis 2. 7. He
breathed into man the breath of life, and he became a living soul.] It is thy
Soul that is said to be made after God's Image; in that thou art ennobled with
a capacious Understanding, and Free Will: And it is thy Soul that is the
immediate subject of his Moral Image, even spiritual Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Holiness: God has not Hands, and Feet, and other Members, as thy Body has.
How noble a Nature is that which is capable of knowing not only all things in
the World (in its measure) but God himself, and the things of the world that is
to come; and capable of loving and enjoying God, and of seeking and serving him
in order to that Enjoyment! Christ thought not basely* of a Soul, that redeemed
Souls at such a price, when he made his soul an offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10.
Were it not for our immortal Souls, would God ever honor us with such
Relations to him, as to be his Children? (For he is first the Father of
Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. and then the Father of Saints.) Should we be called the
Spouse and the Members of Christ? Would he be at so much cost upon us? Should
Angels attend us as ministering Spirits, if we had not Spirits fit to minister
to God? Would the Spirit of God himself dwell in us, and quicken and beautify
us with his Grace? Should a world of Creatures (whose Corporeal Substance seems
as excellent as ours) attend and serve us, if we were but an ingenuous sort of
Brutes, and had not rational immortal Souls? Should such store of Mercies be
provided for us? Should Ministers be appointed to preach, and pray, and labor
for us, if we had not Souls to save or lose? They watch for your souls, as
those that must give account, Heb. 13. 17. Why should they preach in season and
out of season, and suffer so much to perform their Work, but that they know
that [ He that wins souls is wise,] Prove. 11. 30. and that [ he which
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, does save a soul from death,
and hide a multitude of sins.] Jam. 6. 20. The Devil himself may tell you the
worth of Souls, when he compasses the earth (Job 1. 7.) and goes about night
and day to deceive them and devour them, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And yet can he make you
believe that they are so worthless, as to be abused to the basest drudgery, to
be poisoned with sin and Sensuality, to be ventured for a thing of naught.

O, Sirs, have you such immortal Souls, and will you sell them for a Lust, for
a beastly Pleasure, for liberty to glut your Flesh, or for the Price that Judas
sold his Lord for? Is thy Soul no more worth than Honor, or Wealth, or foolish
Mirth? Is thy Soul so base, as not to be worth the care and labor of a Holy
Life? Is the World worth all thy Care and Labor, and shall less be called too
much ado, when it is for thy precious Soul? Alas! one would think by the
careless felshly Lives of many, that they remember not that they have Souls.
Have they not need in the depth of their Security, in the height of their
Ambition, and in the heat of Fleshly Lusts, to have a Monitor to call to them,
Remember that thou art a man, and that thou have a Soul to save or lose. What
think thou of thy negligence and carnal Life, when thou read that so holy
a Man as Paul must keep under his body, and bring it into subjection, lest he
should be a castaway after all his Labors! 1 Cor. 9. 25. 26, 27. O live not
as if the Flesh were the Man, and its Pleasure your Felicity; but live as those
that have Spirits to take care for.

DOCT. 4
THe spirit of man does survive the Body. It dies not with it: It is not
annihilated: It is not resolved into the essence of some common element of
souls, where it loses its specific form and name: It was still the Spirit of
Stephen that was received by Christ. It sleeps not: To confute the dream of
those that talk of the sleeping of Souls, or any Lethargich, unintelligent or
unactive state, of so excellent, capacious and active a nature, were but to
dispute with sleeping men. When we say it is Immortal, we mean not that it or
any creature has in it self a self-supporting or self-preserving sufficiency;
or that they are Necessary Beings, and not Contingent; or Primitive Beings, and
not Derived from another by Creation: We know that all the world would turn to
nothing in a moment, if God did but withdraw his preserving and upholding
influence, and but suspend that Will that does continue them: He need not exert
any Positive Will or Act for their destruction or annihilation. Though ejusdem
est annihilare, cujus est creare; none can annihilate but God; yet it is by a
Positive efficient act of Will that he creates; and by a mere cessation of the
act of his preserving Will, he can annihilate. I mean not by any change in him;
but by willing the continuance of the creature but till such a period. But yet
he that will perpetuate the Spirit of Man, has given it a nature (as he has
done the Angels) fit to be perpetuated: A Nature not guilty of composition and
elementary materiallity which might subject it to corruption: so that as there
is an Aptitude in Iron, or Silver, or Gold, to continue longer than Grass, or
Flowers, or Flesh; and a reason of its duration may be given a natura rei, from
that aptitude in subordination to the Will of God; so there is such an Aptitude
in the Nature of the Soul to be Immortal, which God makes use of to the
accomplishment of his will for its actual perpetuity.

The Heathenish Socinians that deny the Immortality of the Soul, (yea worse
than Heathenish, for most Heathens do maintain it) must deny it to Christ
himself, as well as to his Members: For he used the like recommendation of his
Soul to his Father, when he was on the Cross, as Stephen does here to him. If [
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit] be words that prove not the surviving of the
Spirit of Stephen; then [ Father, into they hands I commend my Spirit] will not
prove the surviving of the Spirit of Christ: And then what do these infidels
make of Christ, who also deny his Deity; and consequently make him nothing but
a Corpse, when his body was in the grave! How then did he make good his promise
to the penitent malefactor, [ This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.] But
he that said. [ Because I live, ye shall live also] John 14. 19. did live in
the Spirit, while he was put to death in the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 18. and receives
the Spirits of his Servants unto life eternal, while their flesh is rotting in
the grave: This very Text is so clear for this, if there were no other, it
might end the controversy with all that believe the Holy Scriptures.

I confess these is a sleep of Souls: A Metaphorical sleep in sin and in
security: Or else the drowsy opinions of these Infidels, had never found
entertainment in the world: A sleep so deep, that the voice of God in the
threatenings of his Word, and the alarm of his Judgments, and the thunder of his
warnings by his most serious Ministers, prevail not to awaken the most. So dead
a sleep possesses the most of the ungodly world, that they can quietly sin in
the sight of God, at the entrance upon eternity, at the doors of Hell, and the
calls of God do not awaken them: So dead a sleep that Scripture justly calls
them dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. 5. And Ministers may well call them dead; For alas it is
not our voice that can awake them. They are as dead to us; we draw back the
curtains to let in the light, and show them that Judgment is at hand, and use
those true but terrible arguments from wrath and hell, which we are afraid
should too much frighten many tender hearers: and yet they sleep on, and our
loudest calls, our tears and our entreaties cannot awaken them. We cry to them
in the name of the Lord, [ Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light] Ephesians. 5. 14. This Moral sleep and death of Souls,
which is the forerunner of everlasting death in misery, we cannot deny. But
after Death even this sleep shall cease; and God will awaken them with his
vengeance, that would not be awaked by his Grace. Then sinner, sleep under the
thoughts of sin and Gods displeasure if thou can* There is no sleeping Soul
in Hell: There are none that are past feeling. The mortal stroke that lays
thy flesh to sleep in the dust, lets out the guilty Soul into a World where
there is no sleeping; where there is a Light irresistible, and a Terror and
Torment that will keep them waking. If God bid thee awake by the flames of
Justice, he will have no nay. The first sight and feeling which will surprise
thee when thou have left this Flesh, will awake thee to Eternity, and do more
than we could do in Time, and convince thee that there is no sleeping state for
separated Souls.

DOCT. 5.
CHrist does receive the Spirits of his Saints when they leave the Flesh.

Here we shall first tell you what Christ's receiving of the Spirit is. The Word
signifies to take it as acceptable to himself; and it comprehends these
Particulars.

1. That Christ will not leave the new-departed Soul to the will of Satan its
malicious Enemy. How ready is he to receive us to perdition, if Christ refuse
us, and receive us not to Salvation? He that now seeks as a roaring Lion
night and day, as our adversary, to devour us by deceit, will then seek to
devour us by execution. How glad was he when God gave him leave but to touch
the goods, and children, and body of Job? And how much more would it please his
enmity, to have power to torment our Souls? But the Soul that fled to the arms
of Christ by Faith in the day of trial, shall then find it self in the arms of
Christ in the moment of its entrance upon Eternity. O Christian, whether thou
now feel it to thy comfort or not, thou shall then feel it to the ravishing of
thy Soul, that thou did not fly to Christ in vain, nor trust him in vain to
be thy Savior: Satan shall be for ever disappointed of his desired Prey. Long
wast thou combating with him; frequently and strongly wast thou tempted by him:
Thou often thoughtest it was a doubtful Question who should win the day, and
whether ever thou should hold out and be saved: But when thou passest from
the Flesh, in thy last Extremity, in the end of thy greatest and most shaking
Fears; when Satan is ready, if he might, to carry thy Soul to Hell; then, even
then shall thou find that thou have won the day. And yet not thou, but Christ
is he that has been victorious for thee (even as when thou livedst the life of
Faith, it was not thou, but Christ lived in thee, Gal. 2. 20.) Thou may fear
at thy departure, and leave the Flesh with terror, and imagine that Satan will
presently devour thee: But the experience of a moment will end thy Fears, and
thou shall triumph against thy conquered Foe. He that saved thee from the
dominion of a tempting Devil, will certainly save thee from him when he would
torment thee. Here he would have us that* he may sift us, and get advantage on
our weakness; but Christ prays for us, and strengthens, us, that our faith
may not fail, Luke 22. 31. And he that saves us from the sin, will save us
from the punishment; and from Satan's fury, as he did from his fraud.

2. Christ's Receiving us, does include his savourable entertainment and
welcoming the departed Soul. Poor Soul, thou wast never so welcome to thy
dearest Friend, nor into the arms of a Father, a Husband, or a Wife, as thou
shall be then into the presence and embracements of thy Lord. Thou hear, and
read, and partly believe now how he loves us, even as his Spouse and
Members, as his Flesh and Bone, Ephesians. 6. But then thou shall feel how he loves
thee in particular: If the Angels of God have joy at thy Conversion, what joy
will there be in Heaven at thy entrance into that Salvation! And sure those
Angels will bid thee welcome, and concur with Christ in that triumphant joy. If
a returning Prodigal find himself in the arms of his Fathers Love, and welcomed
home with his kisses, and his robe and feast; What welcome then may a cleansed
conquered Soul expect, when it comes into the presence of Glorious Love, and
is purposely to be received with such demonstrations of Love, as may be fitted
to magnify the Love of God, which exceeds all the Love of man, as
Omnipotency does exceed our Impotency; and therefore will exceed it in the
effects! Though thou have questioned here in the dark, whether thou were
welcome to Christ when thou came to him in prayer, or when thou came to his
holy Table; yet then doubt of thy welcome if thou can.

O had we but one moments sense of the delights of the embraced Soul, that is
newly received by Christ into his Kingdom, it would make us think we were in
Heaven already, and transport us more than the Disciples that saw the
Transfiguration of Christ; and make us say, in comparing this with all the
Glory of the World, [Master, it is good for us to be here;] but in
consideration of the full, to say, [It is better to be there.] But it must not
be: Earth must not be so happy as to have a moments sense of the unconceivable
Pleasures of the received Soul; that is the Reward and Crown, and therefore not
fit for us here in our Conflict.

But low things may by dark resemblance a little help us to conceive of
something that is like them in a low degree. How would you receive your Son, or
Husband, the next day after some bloody Fight, where he had escaped with the
Victory? Or your Child, or Friend, that arrived safely after a long and a
dangerous Voyage? Would you not run and meet him, and with joy embrace him, if
he had been many years absent, and were now come home? I tell thee, poor Soul,
thy Savior has a larger heart, and another kind of Love than thou, and other
Reasons of greater force to move him to bid dice Welcome into his Presence.

3. Christ's Receiving the departed Soul includes the State of Blessedness
into which he does receive it. If you ask, What that is? I answer, It is unto
himself, to be with him where he is: And that in general is full of comfort, if
there were no more: For we know that Christ is in no ill place; He is glorified
at the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3. And that the Souls of the
Righteous, and at last their Bodies, are received to himself, he often tells
us: John 12. 26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my servant be*] John 14. 2, 3. And if I go to prepare a place for
you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you
may be also.] And in the mean time, when we once are absent from the body, we
are present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and that is in [ the building of God,
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, V. 1. Paul therefore desired to
depart and be with Christ, as being far better,] Phil. 1. 23. And Christ
promises the converted Thief, [This day shall thou be with me in Paradise,]
Luke 23. 43. And our State after the Resurrection has the same description, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. [And so shall we ever be with the Lord:] And what it shall be, he
declares himself, John 17. 24. Father, I will that they whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me. The Soul of Lazarus, Luke 16. was received into Abraham's bosom, where he is
said to be comforted. The heavens receive Christ, Acts 3. 21. and therefore the
heavens receive the spirits that go to him: even the spirits of the just made
perfect, Heb. 12. 23. that is, that are crowned with Christ in Glory, and freed
from the Imperfections and Evils of this Life. And so that 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. is
plain, though some would pervert it, [That whether we wake or sleep, we may
live together with him]: Not [Whether we wake to righteousness, or sleep in
sin]; for such Sleepers live not with him: Nor [whether we wake by solicitude,
or sleep in security]: Nor [Whether we naturally wake or sleep] only: But
whether we live, or die, and so our Bodies sleep in death, yet we live together
with him. In a word, Christ will receive us unto a participation of his Joy and
Glory; into a Joy as great as our Nature shall be capable of, and more than we
can now desire, and that the largest Heart on Earth can justly conceive of or
comprehend. And because all this tells you but to the ear, stay yet but a
little while, and experimental sight nnd feeling shall tell you, What this
Receiving is; even when we receive the kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.
28. and when we receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, 1
Pet. 1. 9.

DOCT. 6.
A Dying Christian may confidently and comfortably commend his Spirit to Christ
to be received by him.

Though he have formerly been a grievous sinner; though at the present he be
frail and faulty: though he be weak in faith, and love, and duty; though his
body by sickness be become unfit to serve his Soul, and as to present
sensibility, activity, or joy, he seem to be past the best, or to be nothing;
though the Tempter would aggravate his sins, and weakness, and dullness to his
discouragement; yet he may, he must with confidence recommend his Spirit to
Christ to be Received by him.

O learn this Doctrine Christians, that you may use it in the hour of your last
distress: The hour is near: the distress will be the greatest that ever you
were in: As well as we seem now while we are hearing this, our turn is nigh:
The Midwife is not so neccssary to the life of the Child, that Receives it
into the world, as Christ's Receiving will be then to our everlasting life. To
say over heartlesly these words [Lord Jesus receive my Spirit] will be no more
than a dead hearted Hypocrite may do: such formal lip-service in life or at
death, does profit nothing to salvation; Now make such necessary preparation,
that at Death you may have well-grounded confidence, that Jesus Christ will
receive your Spirits

1. And first, let me bring this to the carnal unprepared sinner.

Poor sinner, What thoughts have thou of thy dying hour, and of thy departing
Soul! I wonder at thee, what thoughts thou have of them, that thou can sin so
boldly, and live so carelessly and talk or hear of the life to come so
senselesly as thou do! Thou might well think I wronged thee, if I took
thee to be such a brute as not to know that thou must die! Thy Soul that
brought thy body hither, that causes it now to hear and understand, that
carries it up and down the world, must very shortly be required of thee, and
must seek another habitation. What thoughts have thou of thy departing Soul!
Will Christ receive it? Have thou made sure of that? Or have thou made it thy
principal care and business to make sure! O what does intoxicate the brains of
sensual worldly men, that they drown themselves in the Cares of this Life, and
ride and run for transitory Riches, and live upon the Smoke of Honor and
Applause, and never soberly and seriously bethink them, whether Christ will
receive their departed Souls! That they can fill their minds with other
thoughts, and fill their mouths with other talk, and consume their time in
other inconsiderable employments; and take no more care, and spend no more
thoughts, and words, and time, about the entertainment of their departing
Souls! When they are even ready to be gone, and stand as it were on tip-toes;
when Fevers, and Consumptions, and many hundred Diseases are all abroad so
busily distributing their Summons; and when the Gates of Death have so many
Passengers crowding in, and Souls are making such haste away, will you not
consider what shall become of yours? Will you say, that you hope well, and you
must venture? If God had appointed you nothing to do, to prepare for your safe
passage and entertainment with Christ, you might then take up with such an
Answer: But it is a mad adventure to leave all undone that is necessary to your
salvation, and then to say, You must put it to the venture: If you die in and
unrenewed and unjustified state, it is past all ventures; for it is certain
that Christ will not receive you: You may talk of hoping, dut it is not a
matter to be hoped for. Hope that God will make good every word of his Promise,
and spare not: But there is no more Hope that Christ will Receive the souls of
any but of his members, than there is that he will prove a liar. He never
promised to save any others: and that is not all; but he has declared and
professed frequently that he will not. And you are no Believers if you will not
believe him: And if you believe him, you must believe that the unbelievers, the
unregenerate, the unholy and the workers of iniquity, shall not be received
into the Kingdom of Heaven: For he has professed it, John 3. 3, 36. Heb. 12.
14. Matthew. 7. 23.

If Christ would Receive the souls of all, your venture then had reason for it:
Or if he had left it as a thing that depended only on his unrevealed will, and
not on any preparations of our own, we might then have quit our selves of the
care, and cast it all on him, as being his part, and none of ours: But it is
not so: I hope I need not tell you that, it is not so: Believe it, the Question
must be Now resolved, and resolved by your selves, whether Christ shall Receive
your departed souls, or cast them off as firebrands for Hell? He has made the
Law, and set down the terms already to which he will unalterably stand, and
which we must trust to. It is now that you must labor to be accepted of him:
For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad,] 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. O Sirs, this is the reason of our importunity
with you: Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men, says the Apostle
in the next words, verse. 11. We know that the sentence will be just, and that
it is now in your own hands what judgment then shall pass upon you! And if just
now your souls were passing hence, before you went from the place you sit in,
would you think any care could be too great, to make sure that they should go
to happiness! O that you would consider how much it is your own work, and how
much it rests on your selves what Christ shall then do with you! Then you
will cry to him for mercy, [O cast not away a miserable soul! Lord, receive me
into thy Kingdom.] But now he must entreat you to be saved, and to be the
people that he may then Receive, and you will not hear him: And if you will not
hear him, when he calls on you, and beseeches you to Repent and to prepare;
as sure as Christ is Christ, he will not hear you when you cry and call for
mercy too late in your extremity. Read Prove. 1. and you will see this is true.
It is you that are to be entreated that Christ may receive you; for the
unwillingness and backwardness is on your part: You are now poisoning your
souls by sin, and when we cannot entreat you either to forbear or to take the
Vomit of Repentance: yet when you are gasping and dying of your own willful
self-murder, you will then cry to Christ, and think he must receive you upon
terms inconsistent with his justice, holiness and truth. But flatter not your
selves; it will not be: This is the accepted time: behold now is the day of
salvation: refuse it now, and it is lost for ever. O Sirs, if this were the
hour, and you were presently to be received or refused, would you blame me to
cry and call to you with all the fervor of my soul, if I knew that it were in
your own choice, whether you would go to Heaven or Hell? Why, now it is in your
choice! Life and Death are set before you. Christ will receive you if you will
but come within the capacity of his acceptance. If you will not, there will
then be no remedy: It is a doleful thing to observe how Satan does bewitch poor
sinners! That when time is gone, and the door of mercy is shut against them,
they would think no cries too loud for mercy, and no importunity too great: for
Christ tells us, Matthew. 25. 10, 11. that they they will cry [ Lord, Lord,
open to us:] And yet now when the door stands open, no arguments, no
earnestness, no tears can entreat them to enter in; Then there is not the most
senseless sinner of you all, but would cry more strongly than Esau for the
blessing, (when his tears could find no place for repentance, Heb. 12. 16, 17.)
[ Lord receive a miserable soul! O whither shall I go, if thou receive me not!
I must else be tormented in those scorching flames:] And yet now you will sell
your birthright for one morsel; for a little of Judas, or Gehezi's gain, for
the applause of worms, for the pleasing of your flesh that is turning to
corruption; for the delights of gluttony, drunkenness, sports or lust. There is
not a man of you but would then pray more earnestly than those that you now
deride for earnest praying, as if they whined and were ridiculous: And yet now
you will neither be serious in prayer, nor hear Christ or his messengers, when
he makes it his earnest request to you to come in to him, that you may have
life, John 5. 40. Then you will knock when the door is shut, and cry [ Lord
open to a miserable sinner:] and yet now you will not open unto him, when by
his word and spirit, her mercies and afflictions, he stands at the door of
your stubborn hearts, and calls on you to repent and turn to God; Now our
entreaties cannot so much as bring you on your knees, or bring you to one hours
serious thoughts, about the state of those souls that are so near their doom. O
Sirs, for your souls sake, lay by your obstinacy: Pity those souls that then
you will beg of Christ to pity. Do not you damn them by your sloth and sin, in
the day of your visitation, and then cry in vain to Christ to save them, when
it is too late. Yet the door of grace is open: But how speedily will it be
shut? One stroke of an Apoplexy, a Consumption, a Fever, can quickly shut it;
and then you may tear your hearts with crying [ Lord open to us] and all in
vain. O did you but see departed souls, as you see the corpse that is left
behind! Did you see how they are treated at their removal from the flesh? how
some are taken and others left! how some are welcomed to Christ, and others are
abhorred, and turned over to the tormenter, and thrust out with implacable
indignation and disdain ( Luke 13. 28. Prove. 1. 24, 26, 27.) sure you would
enter into serious consideration this day, What it is that makes this
difference; and why Christ so uses the one and the other; and what must be
done now, by the soul that would be received then? Alas, men will do any thing,
but that which they should do! Among the superstitious Papists, the conceit of
a deliverance from Purgatory makes them bequeath their Lands and Moneys to
Priests and Friars to pray for them when they are dead, and to have other men
cry to Christ to receive them, and open to them, when time is past: And yet now
in the accepted time, now when it is at your choice, and the door is open, men
live as if they were past feeling, and cared not what became of them at the
last, and would not be beholden to Christ to receive them, when the deceitful
world has cast them off.

And now, Beloved Hearers all, I would make it my most earnest request to you,
as one that knows we are all passing hence, and foreseeth the case of a
departed soul, that you would now without any more delay, prepare and make sure
that you may be received into the everlasting habitations: And to this end, I
shall more distinctly, though briefly tell you, 1. What souls they are that
Christ will receive, and what he will not: and consequently, what you must do
to be received. 2. What considerations should stir you up to this preparation.

I. Nothing is more sure than that Christ will not receive, 1. Any
unregenerate, unconverted soul, John 3. 3, 5. Matthew. 18. 3. that is not renewed
and sanctified by his spirit, Romans 8. 9. Heb. 12. 14. Acts 26. 18. They must
have the new and heavenly nature that will ever come to Heaven: Without this
you are morally incapable of it. Heaven is the proper inheritance of Saints,
Col. 1. 12. This heavenly nature, and spirit, is your earnest: If you have
this, you are sealed up unto salvation, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30.

2. Christ will receive none but those that make it now their work to lay up a
treasure in heaven, rather than upon the earth, Matthew. 6. 20, 21. and that seek
it in the first place, Mat. 6. 33. and can be content to part with all to
purchase it, Matthew. 13. 44, 46. Luke 14. 33. and 18. 22. An earthly-minded
worldling is incapable of heaven, in that condition, Phil. 3. 17, 18. Luke 16.
13. You must take it for your portion, and set your hearts on it, if ever you
will come thither; Matthew. 6. 21. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.

3. Christ will Receive no soul at last, but such as sincerely received him as
their Lord and Savior now, and gave up themselves to him, and received his
Word, and yield obedience to it, and received his Spirit, and were cleansed by
him from their iniquities, John 1. 11, 12, Luke 19. 27. 2 These. 2. 10, 12. [
That all they might be damned that believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.] (They are God's own words: be not offended at them, but
believe and fear.) He hates all the workers of iniquity, and will say to them,
Depart from me, I know you not, Psalm. 5. 5. Matthew. 7. 23.

4. He will receive none but those that loved his servants, that bore his holy
image, and received them according to their abilities, Matthew. 25. 40, 41, etc.
And if he will say to those that did not entertain them [ Depart form me ye
cursed into everlasting fire,] what will he say to those that hate and
persecute them? 1 John 3. 14. and 5. 2.

5. He will receive none but those that live to him in the body, and use his
gifts and talents to his service, and make it their chief business to serve,
and honor, and please him in the world, Matthew. 25. 21, 26. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 15.
Gal. 6. 7, 8. and live not to the pleasing of the flesh, but have crucified it
and its lusts, Romans 8. 1, 13. Gal. 5. 24.

Examine all these Texts of Scripture (for the matter is worthy of your study)
and you will see what souls they are that Christ will then Receive, and what he
will reject. You may see also what you must now be and do, if you will be then
Received. If you are not regenerate by the Spirit of God, (though you may be
Sacramentally regenerate in Baptism;) If you are not justified by Christ,
(though you may be absolved by a Minister;) If If you seek not Heaven with
higher estimation and resolutions that any felicity on earth, and take not God
for your satisfying portion; (though you be never so Religious in subserviency
to a fleshly worldly happiness;) If you Receive not Christ as your only
Savior, and set him not in the Throne and Government of your hearts and lives
(though you may go with men for current Christians;) If you hate not sin, if
you love not the holy image, and children of God, and use them not accordingly;
If you crucify not the flesh, and die not to the world, and deny not your
selves, and live not unto God, as making it your chief business and happiness
to please him: I say, if this be not your case, as sure as you are men, if you
died this hour in this condition, Christ will not own you, but turn you off
with a [ Depart ye cursed:] You may as well think of reconciling light and
darkness, or persuade a man to live on the food of beasts, or the stomach to
welcome deadly poison, as to think that Christ will receive an ungodly,
earthly, guilty soul.

Deceive not your selves sinners: If God could have entertained the ungodly,
and Heaven could hold unholy souls, answer me then these two or three Questions.

1. What need Christ then to have shed his blood, or become a sacrifice for
sin? if he could have received the ungodly, he might have done it upon cheaper
rates. This feigneth him to have died to no purpose; but to bring the
unsanctified to heaven, that might have been as well entertained there without
his sufferings.

2. To what use does Christ send the Holy Ghost to sanctify his Elect? Or send
his Word and Ministers to promote it, if they may come to heaven unsanctified?

3. If the ungodly go to Heaven, what use is Hell for? There is no Hell if this
be true! But you will quickly find that to be too good news to the ungodly to
be true.

II. In Luke 16. Christ teaches us our duty by the parable of the Steward,
that asks himself beforehand, What he shall do when he must be no longer
Steward? and contriveth it so that others may receive him when he is cast off:
And he applies it to us hat must now so provide, that when we fail, we may be
received into the everlasting habitations. This is the work that we have all to
mind! We always knew that this world would fail us: O how uncertain is your
tenure of the dwellings that you now possess! Are you provided, certainly
provided whither to go, and who shall Receive you when your Stewardship is
ended, and you must needs go hence? O think of these considerations that should
move you presently to provide.

1. Your Cottages of earth are ready to drop down; and it is a stormy time,
there are many sicknesses abroad: One blast may quickly lay them in the dust;
and them the flesh that had so much care, and was thought worthy to be
preferred before the soul, must be laid and left to rot in darkness, to avoid
the annoyance of the living: And when you may justly look every hour when you
are turned out of these dwellings that you are in, is it not time to be
provided of some other?

2. Consider, if Christ should not receive thy spirit, how unspeakably
deplorable thy case will be? I think there is no man in all this Assembly so
mad, that would take all the world now, to have his soul refused then by
Christ; that would professedly make and subscribe such a bargain: And yet alas,
how many are they that will be hired for a smaller price, even for the pleasure
of a sin, to do that which Chirst himself has told them, will cause him to
Refuse them? O Sirs, for ought you know, before to morrow, or within this week,
you may be put to know these things by trial, and your Souls may be refused or
received: And woe to you that ever you were Men, if Christ receive you not.

Consider, 1. If Chirst receive thee not, thou have no Friend left then to
receive thee. Thy House, and Land, an Riches, and Reputation, are all left
behind; none of them will go with thee; or if they did, they could afford thee
no relief. Thy Bosom-friends, thy powerful Defenders, are all left behind; or
if they go before or with thee, they can do nothing there, that could do so
much for thee here. No Minister so holy, no Friend so kind, no Patron so
powerful, that can give thee any entertainment, if Christ refuse to entertain
thee. Look to the right hand or the left, there will be none to help thee, or
care for thy forsaken Soul. Then thou will find, that one Christ had been a
better Friend, than all the Great ones upon Earth.

2. If Christ then receive not thy departed Soul, the Devils will receive it. I
am loath to speak so terrible a word, but that it must be spoken, if you will be
awaked to prevent it. He that deceived thee, will then plead Conquest, and
claim thee as his due, that he may torment thee. And if the Devil say, This
Soul is mine; and Christ do not rescue and justify thee, but say so too, no
heart is able to conceive the horror that will then overwhelm thee: Does not
the reading of the Sentence make thee tremble, Matthew. 25. 41. [Depart from me
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels]? This
is that dreadful delivering up to Satan, when the Soul is excommunicated from
the City of God. O therefore if thou be yet unreconciled to God, agree with him
quickly, while thou art here in the way, lest he deliver thee to this terrible
Jailer and Executioner, and thou be cast into the prison of the bottomless pit:
Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have
paid the uttermost farthing, Mat. 5. 25, 26.

3. The greatness of the change will increase the amazement and misery of thy
Spirit, if Christ receive it not. To leave a World that thou wast acquainted
with, a World that pleased thee and entertained thee, a World where thou had
long thy business and delight, and where (wretched man!) thou had made thy
chief provision, and laid up thy treasure; this will be a sad part of the
Change. To enter into a World where thou art a stranger, and much worse, and
see the company and the things that before thou never saw, and to find
things go there so contrary to thy expectation; to be turned with Dives from
thy sumptuous Dwelling, Attendance, and Fare, into a place of easeless torment;
this will be a sadder part of thy Change. Here the Rich would have received
thee, the Poor would have served and flattered thee, thy Friends would have
comforted thee, thy Play-fellows would have been merry with thee: But there,
alas, how the case is altered! All these have done; the Table is withdrawn, the
Game is ended, the Mirth is ceased; and now succeeds, [ Son, remember that
thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus evil things: but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented,] Luke 16. 25. O dreadful Change to
those that made the World their home, and little dreamed (or did but dream) of
such a day! Never to see this World again, unless by such reviews as will
torment them! never to have sport or pleasure more; and for these to have such
Company, such Thoughts, such Work and Usage, as God has told us is in Hell!

4. If Christ receive thee not, the burden of thy sins will overwhelm thee, and
conscience will have no relief. Sin will not then appear in so harmless a shape
as now; it will then seem a more odious or frightful thing. O to remember these
days of folly, of careless, sluggish, obstinate folly, of sottish negligence,
and contempt of Grace, will be a more tormenting thing than you will now
believe. If such Sermons and Discourses as foretell it are troublesome to thee,
what then will that sad Experience be?

5. The wrath of an offended God will overwhelm thee. This will be thy Hell. He
that was so merciful in the time of Mercy, will be most terrible and implacable
when that time is past, and make men know that Christ and Mercy are not
neglected, refused, and abused at so cheap a rate, as they would needs imagine
in the time of their deliration.

6. It will overwhelm the Soul, if Christ receive it not, to see that then art
entering upon Eternity, even into an everlasting state of Woe. Then thou will
think, O whither am I going? What must I endure? And how long! How long! When
shall my misery have an end! and When shall I come back! and How shall I ever
be delivered! O now what thoughts will thou have of the wonderful Design of God
in Man's Redemption! Now thou will better understand what a Savior was worth,
and how he should have been believed in, and how his Gospel and his saving
Grace should have been entertained.

O that the Lord would now open your hearts to entertain it, that you may not
then value it to your vexation, that would not value it now to your relief!
Poor sinner, for the Lord's sake, and for thy Souls sake, I beg now of thee, as
if it were on my knees, that thou would cast away thy sinful Cares and
Pleasures, and open thy Heart, and now receive thy Savior and his saving
Grace, as ever thou would have him then receive thy trembling departed Soul!
Turn to him now, that he may not turn thee from him then: Forsake him not for a
flattering World, a little transitory vain Delight, as ever thou would not
then have thy departed Soul forsaken by him! O delay not, Man; but now, even
now receive him, that thou may avoid so terrible a danger, and put so great a
question presently out of doubt, and be able comfortably to say, [ I have
received Christ, and he will receive me; if I die this night, he will receive
me.] Then thou may sleep quietly, and live merrily, without any disparagement
to thy Reason. O yield to this Request, Sinner, of one that desires thy
Salvation. If thou were now departing, and I would not pray earnestly to Christ
to receive thy Soul, thou would think I were uncharitable: Alas! it will be
one of these days: and it is thee that I must entreat, and thy self that must
be prevailed with, or there is no hope: Christ sends me to thy self, and
says, that he is willing to receive thee, if now thou will receive him, and be
sanctified and ruled by him: The matter stops at thy own regardless wilful
heart. What say thou? Will thou receive Christ now, or not? Will thou be a
new creature, and live to God, by the Principle of his Spirit, and the Rule of
his Word, to please him here, that thou may live with him for ever? Will thou
take up this Resolution, and make this Covenant with God this day? O give me a
word of comfort, and say, Thou art resolved, and wilt deliver up thy self to
Christ. That which is my comfort now on thy behalf, will be ten thousand-fold
more thy comfort then, when thou partakest of the Benefit: And if thou grieve
us now, by denying thy Soul to Christ, it will be at last ten thousand-fold
more thy grief. Refuse not our requests and Christ's requests now, as ever thou
would not have him refuse thee then, and thy requests. It is men's turning
away now from Christ, that will cause Christ then to turn from them, Prove. 1.
31. 32. The turning away of the simple slays them, and they then eat but the
fruit of their own way, and are filled with their own devices.] See then that
ye now refuse not him that speaks: for there is no escaping if you turn away
from him that speaks from heaven,] Heb. 12. 25.

What would you say your selves to the man that would not be dissuaded from
setting his House on fire, and then would pray and cry importunately to God
that he would keep it from being burnt? Or of the man that will not be
dissuaded from taking Poison; and then when it gripeth him, will cry to God to
save his life: Or of the man that will go to Sea in a leaking broken vessel,
yea himself will make those breaches in it, that shall let the Water in, and
when it is sinking, will cry to God to save him from being drowned? And will
you do this about so great a matter as the everlasting state of your immortal
Souls? Will you now be wordlings, and sensualists, and ungodly, and undo your
selves, and then cry [ Lord Jesus receive my Spirit] at the last? What! receive
an unholy Spirit? Will you not knock till the door is shut? when he tells
you, Math. 7. 21. That it is not every one that will cry Lord, Lord, that shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of his Father which
is in Heaven.]

Lastly, consider with what unspeakable joy it will fill thy Soul, to be then
received by the Lord. O what a joyful word will it be, when thou shall hear, [
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.] If thou will not have this to be thy case, thou shall see those received to the
increase of thy grief, whom thou refusedst here to imitate: There shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and those that from East, West, North
and South shall sit there with them, and thou thrust out,] Luke 13. 27, 28, 29.

I have been long in this part of my application, having to do with Souls that
are ready to depart, and are in so sad an unprepared state, as is not to be
thought on but with great compassion: I am next to come to that part of the
application, which I chiefly intended; to those that are the Heirs of Life.

II. O You that are members of Jesus Christ, receive this Cordial which may
corroborate your hearts against all inordinate fears of Death: Let it come when
it will, you may boldly recommend your departing Souls into the hands of
Christ. Let it be by a lingering disease, or by an acute, by a natural or a
violent death, at the fullness of your age, or in the flower of your youth,
death can but separate the Soul from Flesh, but not from Christ, Whether you
die poor or rich, at liberty or in prison, in your native Country or a foreign
Land, whether you be buried in the Earth or cast into the Sea; death shall but
send your Souls to Christ. Though you die under the reproach and slanders of
the world, and your names be cast out among men, as evil doers, yet Christ will
take your Spirits to himself. Though your Souls depart in fear and trembling,
though they want the sense of the Love of God, and doubt of pardon and peace
with him, yet Christ will receive them.

I know thou will be ready to say, that thou art unworthy, [Will he receive so
unworthy a Soul as mine?] But if thou be a member of Christ, thou art worthy in
him to be accepted. Thou have a worthiness of Aptitude, and Christ has a
worthiness of merit.

The day that comes upon such at unawares that have their hearts overcharged
with surfeiting, drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and as a snare
surprizeth the inhabitants of the earth, shall be the day of thy great
deliverance: Watch therefore and pray always that you way be accounted worthy
to escape all those things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the son
of man; Luke. 21. 34, 35, 36. They that are accounted worthy to obtain that
world, can die no more; for they are equal to the Angels, and are the children
of God, Luke 20. 35, 36.

Object. O but my sins are great and many; and will Christ ever receive so
ignorant, so earthly and impure a Soul as mine?

Answ. If he have freed thee from the reign of sin, by giving thee a Will that
would fain be fully delivered from it, and given thee a desire to be perfectly
holy, he will finish the work that he has begun; and will not bring thee
defiled into Heaven, but will wash thee in his Blood, and separate all the
remnant of corruption from thy Soul, when he separateth thy Soul from flesh:
There needs no purgatory but his blood and Spirit in the instant of death shall
deliver thee, that he may present thee spotless to the Father.

O fear not then to trust thy Soul with him that will Receive it: And fear not
death, that can do thee no more harm. And when once thou have overcome the
fears of death, thou will be the more resolute in thy duty, and faithful to
Christ, and above the power of most temptations, and wilt not fear the face of
man, when Death is the worst that man can bring thee to. It is true, Death is
dreadful: but it is as true that the arms of Christ are joyful. It is an
unpleasing thing to leave the Bodies of our friends in the earth: but it is
unspeakable pleasure to their Souls, to be Received into the Heavenly society
by Christ.

And how confidently, quietly, and comfortably you may commend your departing
Spirits to be received by Christ, be informed by these considerations following.

1, Your Spirits are Christ's own: And may you not trust him with his own? As
they are his by the title of creation, (All Souls are mine, says the Lord
Ezekiel. 18. 4.) So also by the title of redemption: We are not our own, we are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

Say therefore to him, [ Lord I am thine much more than my own; Receive thine
own; Take care of thine own! Thou drewest me to consent to thy gracious
Covenant, and I resigned my self and all I had to thee! and thou swarest to me,
and I became thine, (Ezekiel. 16. 8.): and I stand to the Covenant that I made,
though I have offended thee! I am sinful, but I am thine, and would not forsake
thee! and change my Lord and Master for a world: O know thine own, and own my
Soul that has owned thee, though it has sinned against thee: Thy sheep know
thy voice, and follow not a stranger: Now know thy poor sheep, and leave them
not to the devourer: Thy Lambs have been preserved by thee among Wolves in the
world: Preserve me now from the enemy of souls. I am thine, O save me, (Psalm
119. 94.) and lose not that which is thine own.

2. Consider that thou art his upon so dear a purchase, as that he is the more
engaged to receive thee. Has he bought thee by the price of his most precious
blood, and will he cast thee off: Has he come down on earth to seek and save
thee, and will he now forsake thee? Has he lived in flesh a life of poverty,
and suffered reproach, and scorn, and buffetings, and been nailed to the Cross,
and put to cry out, [ My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me!] And will he
now forget his love, and sufferings, and himself forsake thee after this? Did
he himself on the Cross, commend his spirit into his Father's hands, and will
he not receive thy spirit when thou at death commendest it to him? He has
known himself what it is to have a humane soul separated from the body, and the
body buried in a grave, and there lamented by surviving friends: And why did he
this, but that he might be fit to receive and relieve thee in the like
condition? O who would not be encouraged to encounter death, and lie down in a
grave, that believes that Christ did so before him, and considers why he
went that way, and what a Conquest he has made.

I know an Argument from the Death of Christ, will not prove his love to the
souls of the ungodly, so as to infer that he will receive them: but it will
prove his Reception of Believers souls: [He that spared not his own Son, but
gave him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things!] Romans 8. 32. is an infallible argument as to Believers, but not as to
those that do reject him.

Say therefore to him, [O my Lord! Can it be that thou could come down in
flesh, and be abused, and spit upon, and slandred, and crucified! that thou
could bleed, and die, and be buried for me, and now be unwilling to receive
me! that thou shoulds pay so dear for souls, and now refuse to entertain them!
that thou should die to save them from the devil, and now wilt leave them to
his cruelty: that thou have conquered him, and yet wilt suffer him at last to
have the prey! To whom can a departing soul fly for refuge and for
entertainment, if not to thee that diedst for souls, and sufferedst thine to be
separated from the flesh, that we might have all assurance of thy compassion
unto ours!] Thou did openly declare upon the Cross, that the reason of thy
dying was to Receive departed souls, when thou did thus encourage the soul of
a penitent Malefactor, by telling him, [ This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.] O give the same encouragement or entertainment to this sinful soul
that flies unto thee, and trusts in thy death and merits, and is coming to
receive thy doom.]

3. Consider that Jesus Christ is full of Love, and tender compassion to souls:
What his tears over Lazarus compelled the Jews to say, John 11. 36. [ Behold
how he loved him!] the same his incarnation, life and death should much more
stir us up to say, with greater admiration, [Behold how he loved us!] The
foregoing words, though the shortest verse in all the Bible, [vers. 35. Jesus
wept,] are long enough to prove his love to Lazarus: and the Holy Ghost would
not have the tears of Christ to be unknown to us, that his love may be the
better known. But we have a far larger demonstration of his love: He loved us,
and gave himself for us, Gal. 2. 20. And by what gift could he better testify
his love? He loved us, and washed us in his blood, Rev. 1. 5. He loves us as
the Father loves him, John 15. 9. And may we not comfortably go to him that
loves us? will Love refuse us when we fly unto him?

Say then to Christ [O thou that have loved my soul, Receive it! I commend it
not unto an enemy: Can that Love reject me and cast me into hell, that so often
embraced me on earth, and has declared it self by such ample testimonies?]

O had we but more love to Christ, we should be more sensible of his love to
us, and then we should trust him, and love would make us hasten to him, and
with confidence cast our selves upon him.

4. Consider that it is the Office of Christ to save souls, and to receive
them, and therefore we may boldly recommend them to his hands. The Father sent
him to be the Savior of the world, 1 John 4. 14. And he is effectively the
Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. And may we not trust him in his undertaken
office, that would trust a Physician or any other in his office, if we judge
him faithful? Yea, he is engaged by Covenant to Receive us: When we gave up our
selves to him, he also became ours; and we did it on this condition, that he
should receive and save us: And it was the condition of his own undertaking: He
drew the Covenant himself, and tendered it first to us, and assumed his own
Conditions, as he imposed ours.

Say then to him, [My Lord, I expect but the performance of thy Covenants, and
the discharge of thine undertaken Of^^ce: As thou have caused me to believe in
thee, and ^^^e and serve thee, and perform the conditions which ^^ou laidst on
me, though with many sinful failings which thou have pardoned: so now let my
soul that has trusted on thee, have the full experience of thy fidelity, and
take me to thy self according to thy Covenant. O now remember the word unto thy
servant, upon which thou have caused him to hope! ( Psalm 119. 49.) How many
precious promises have thou left us, that we shall not be forsaken by thee, but
that we shall be with thee where thou art, that we may behold thy glory! For
this cause art thou the Mediator of the New Covenant, that by means of death
for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance: (Heb.
9. 15.) According to thy Covenant, Godliness has the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and when we have done thy
will (notwithstanding our lamentable imperfections) we are to receive the
promise, Heb. 10. 36. O now receive me into the Kingdom which thou have
promised to them that love thee, James 1. 12.

5. Consider how able Christ is to answer thine expectations: All power is
given him in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. 19. and All things are given by the
Father into his hands, John 13. 3. All Judgment is committed to him, John 5.
22. It is fully in his power to receive and save thee: And Satan cannot touch
thee but by his consent: [Fear not then, he is the First and Last, that lives,
and was dead, and behold he lives for evermore, Amen; and has the Keys of
Hell and Death.] Rev. 1. 17, 18.

Say then, If thou will Lord, thou can save this departing soul! O say but
the word, and I shall live: Lay but thy rebuke upon the destroyer, and he shall
be restrained: When my Lord and dearest Savior has the Keys, how can I be
kept out of thy Kingdom? or cast into the burning lake? Were it a matter of
Difficulty unto thee, my soul might fear lest Heaven would not be opened to it:
But thy Love has overcome the hindrances: and it is as easy to receive me as
to Love me.]

6. Consider how perfectly thy Savior is acquainted with the place that thou
art going to, and the company and employment which thou must there have: and
therefore as there is nothing strange to him, so the ignorance and strangeness
in thy self should therefore make thee fly to him, and trust him, and recommend
thy soul to him, and say, [Lord, it would be terrible to my departing soul, to
go into a world that I never saw, and into a place so strange, and unto company
so far above me; but that I know there is nothing strange to thee, and thou
know it for me, and I may better trust thy knowledge than mine own: when I
was a child, I knew not my own inheritance, nor what was necessary to the daily
provisions for my life; but my parents knew it, that cared for me: The eyes
must see for all the body, and not every member see for it self; O cause me as
quietly and believingly to commit my Soul to thee, to be possessed of the Glory
which thou see and possessest, as if I had seen and possessed it my self: ad
let thy knowledge be my trust.]

7. Consider, That Christ has provided a glorious receptacle for faithful
Souls; and it cannot be imagined that he will lose his preparations, or be
frustrate of his end. All that he did and suffered on earth, was for this end.
He therefore became the Captain of our salvation, and was made perfect through
sufferings, that he might bring many sons to glory, Heb. 2. 10. He has taken
possession in our Nature, and is himself interceding for us in the Heavens,
Heb. 7. 25. And for whom does he provide this Heavenly Building not made with
hands, but for Believers? If therefore any inordinate fear surprise thee,
remember what he has said, John 14. 1, 2, 3. [ Let not your hearts be
troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me: In my Fathers house are many
mansions; if it were nor so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for
you: And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Say therefore, [Lord, when thou had made this lower narrow world, thou
would not leave it uninhabited: for Man thou made it, and Man thou placedst
in it. And when thou have prepared that more capacious glorious World, for thy
redeemed flock, it cannot be that thou will shut them out. O therefore receive
my fearful Soul, and help me to obey thine own command, Luke 12. 32. Fear not,
little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom.] O
let me hear that joyful Sentence, Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.]

8. Consider, That Christ has received thy Soul unto Grace, and therefore he
will receive it unto Glory. He has quickened us who were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein in time past we walked, etc. But God, who is rich in mercy, for
his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins and
trespasses, quickened us together with Christ, and raised us up together, and
made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. The State of Grace is the kingdom of heaven, as well as the State of
Glory, Matthew. 3. 2. and 10. 7. and 13. 11, 24, 31, 33, 44, 45, 47. By Grace
thou have the heavenly birth and nature: We are first born to trouble and sorrow
in the World; but we are new born to everlasting joy and pleasure. Grace makes
us Heirs, and gives us Title; and therefore at death we shall have possession.
The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to his abundant mercy, has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Peter 1. 3, 4. The great work was done in
the day of thy Renovation: Then thou wast entered into the household of God, and
made a fellow Citizen with the Sants, and receivedst the Spirit of adoption,
Ephesians. 2. 19. Gal. 4. 6. He gave thee life eternal when he gave the knowledge of
himself and of his Son, John 17. 3. And will he now take from thee the Kingdom
which he has given thee? Thou wast once his Enemy, and he has Received thee
already into his favor, and reconciled thee to himself: and will he not then
receive thee to his Glory? Romans 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. God commends his Love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us: Much more
then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life: And not only so,
but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement.] And when we have peace with God, being justifiied by
faith, ( Romans 5. 1.) why should we doubt whether he will receive us? The great
impediments and cause of fear are now removed: Unpardoned sin is taken away:
Our debt is discharged. We have a sufficient Answer against all that can be
alleged to the prejudice of our Souls; yea, it is Christ himself that
answers for us, It is he that justifies, Who then shall condemn us? Will he
not justify those at last, whom he has here justified? Or will he justify
us, and yet not receive us? That were both to justify and condemn us.

Depart then in peace, O fearful Soul: Thou fallest into his hands that has
justified thee by his Blood; will he deny thee the Inheritance of which he
himself has made thee Heir? yea, a Joynt-heir with himself, Romans 8. 17. Will
he deprive thee of thy Birthright, who himself begot thee of the incorruptible
Seed? If he would not have received thee to Glory, he would not have drawn thee
to himself, and have blotted out thine Iniquities, and received thee by
reconciling Grace. Many a time he has received the secret Petitions,
Complaints, and Groans which thou have poured out before him, and has given
thee access with boldness to his Throne of Grace, when thou could not have
access to Man; and he has taken thee up, when Man has cast thee off. Surely
he that received thee so readily in thy distress, will not now at last repent
him of his love. As Manoah's Wife said, Judges 13. 23. If the Lord were pleased
to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and a meat offering at
our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things.] He has received
thee into his Church, and entertained thee with the delights and fatness of his
House ( Psalm, 36. 8.) and bid thee welcome to his Table, and feasted thee,
with his Body and his Blood, and communicated in these his quickening Spirit:
And will he then disown thee* and refuse thee, when thou drawest nearer him,
and art cast upon him for thy final doom? After so many receptions in the way
of Grace, do thou yet doubt of his Receiving thee?

9, Consider, How nearly thou art related to him in this state of Grace: Thou
art his Child; and has he not the bowels of a Father? when thou did ask
bread, he was not used to give thee a stone: and will he give thee Hell, when
thou ask but the entertainment in Heaven, which he has promised thee? Thou
art his friend, John 15. 14. 15. and will he not receive his friends? Thou art
his Spouse, betrothed to him the very day when thou consentedst to his
Covenant; and where then should thou live but with him? Thou art a member of
his body, of his flesh and bone, Ephesians. 5. 30. and no man ever yet hated his own
flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church, ver. 29.
As he came down in flesh to be a Suitor to thee, so he caused thee to let go
all for him; and will he now forsake thee? Suspect it not; but quietly resign
thy soul into his hands, and say,

[Lord take this Soul, that pleads Relation to thee: It is the voice of thy
Child that cries to thee: The name of a Father, which thou have assumed
toward me, is my encouragement: When thou did call us (...) out of the world
unto thee, thou said, [ I will receive you, and I will be a Father to you,
and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18, O our Father which art
in Heaven, shut not out thy Children; the Children of thy love and promise: The
compassion that thou have put into Man, ingageth him to relieve a Neighbor,
^ea an Enemy; much more to entertain a Child: Our Children and our Friends dare
trust themselves upon our kindness and fidelity; and fear not that we will
reject them in their distress, or destroy them, though they do sometime offend
us: Our kindness is cruelty in comparison of thine: Our Love dserveth not the
name of Love, in comparison of thy most precious Love: Thine is the love of
God, who is Love it self, (1 John 4. 8, 16.) and who is the God of Love? (2
Cor. 1. 13, 11.) and is answerable to thine Omnipotency, Omniscience, and other
Attributes? But ours is the love of frail and finite sinful men: As we may pray
to thee to Forgive us our trespasses, for we also forgive those that have
trespassed against us: So we may pray to thee to receive us, though we have
offended thee; for even we receive those that have offended us: Has thy Love
unto thine own its breadth and length, and height, and depth, and is it such as
passes knowledge (Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.) and yet can thou exclude thine own,
and shut them out that cry unto thee? Can that love which washed me, and took
we home, when I lay wallowing in my Blood, reject me, when it has so far
recovered me? Can that Love now thrust me out of Heaven, that lately fetched me
from the gates of Hell, and placed me among thy Saints? Whom thou love, thou
love to the end, John 13. 1. Thou art not as man that thou should repent,
(Number. 23. 19.) with thee is no variablenes or shadow of turning: (Jam. 1. 17.)
If yesterday thou so freely lovedst me, as to adopt me for thy child, thou will
not to day refuse me and cast me into Hell. Receive Lord Jesus a member of thy
body: A weak one indeed, but yet a member, and needs the more thy tenderness
and compassion, who have taught us not to cast out our Infants, because they
are small and weak: We have forsaken all to cleave unto thee, that we might
with thee be one flesh and spirit, Ephesians. 5. 31. 1 Cor. 6. 17. O cut not off
and cast not out thy members that are engrafted into thee! Thou have dwelt in
me here by faith; and shall I not now dwell with thee? (Ephesians. 3. 17.) Then
have prayed to the Father, that we may be one in thee, and may be with thee to
behold thy Glory, (John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.) And will thou deny to receive
me to that glory, who pray but for what thou have prayed to thy Father? Death
makes no separation between thee and the members: It dissolveth not the union
of souls with thee, though it separate them from the flesh: And shall a part of
thy self be rejected and condemned?

10. Consider, That Christ has sealed thee up unto salvation, and given thee
the earnest of his Spirit; and therefore will certainly receive thee, 2 Cor. 1.
22. and 5. 5 Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and 4. 30. Say therefore to him, [Behold Lord, thy
mark* thy feal, thine earnest: Flesh and blood did not illuminate, and renew
me: Thy spirit which thou have given me, is my witness that I am thine, Romans 8.
16 And will thou disown and refuse the soul that thou have sealed?]

11. Consider, That he that has given thee a Heavenly mind, will certainly
Receive thee into heaven: If thy treasure were not there, thy heart would never
have been there, Mat. 6. 21. Thy weak desires do show what he intends thee he
for, kindled not those desires in vain. Thy Love to him (though too small) is a
certain proof that he intends not to reject thee: It cannot be that God can
damn, or Christ refuse a Soul that does sincerely Love him: He that Loves,
dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 15, 16. And shall he not then dwell
with God for ever? God fitteth the nature of every creature to its use, and
agreeably to the element in which they dwell: And therefore when he gave thee
the heavenly nature, (though but in weak beginnings) it showed his will to make
thee an inhabitant of heaven.

Say therefore to him, [O Lord, I had never loved thee if thou had not begun
and loved me first: I had not not minded thee, or desired after thee, if thou
had not kindled these desires: It cannot be that thy Grace it self should be
a deceit and misery, and intended but to Tantalizeus; and that thou have set
thy Servants Souls on longing for that which thou will never give them. Thou
would not have given me the wedding garment, when thou did invite me, if
thou had meant to keep me out: Even the grain of mustard seed which thou
sowedst in my heart, was a kind of Promise of the Happiness to which it
tends* indeed I have loved thee so little, that I am ashamed of my self, and
confess my cold indifferency deserves thy wrath: But that I Love thee and
desire thee is thy gift, which signifies the higher satisfying gift: Though I
am cold and dull, my eyes are toward thee; It is thee that I mean when I can
but groan: It is long since I have bid this world away; It shall not be my home
or portion: O perfect what thou have begun: This is not the time or place of my
perfection: And though my life be now hid with thee in God, when then
appearest, let me appear with thee in glory, Col. 3. 4. and in the mean time
let this soul enjoy its part, that appears before thee: Give me what thou
have caused me to Love, and then I shall more perfectly love thee, when my
thirst is satisfied, and the water which thou have given me, shall spring up to
everlasting life, Joh. 4. 14.

12. Consider also, That he that has engaged thee to seek first his Kingdom,
is engaged to give it them that do sincerely seek it. He called thee off the
pursuit of vanity, when thou wast following the pleasures and profits of the
world; and he called thee to labor for the food that perishes not, but
endures to everlasting life, John 6. 27. Since then it has been thy care and
business, (notwithstanding all thine imperfections) to seek and serve him, to
please and honor him, and so to run that thou might obtain.

Say then, [Though my sins deserve thy wrath, and nothing that I have done
deserve thy favor, yet Godliness has thy Promise of the Life to come; and
thou have said, that he that seeks shall find, Matthew. 7. 7. 8. O now let me
find the Kingdom that I have sought, and sought by thy encouragement and help:
It cannot be that any should have cause to repent of serving thee, or suffer
disappointment that trusts upon thee: My labor for the World was lost and
vain; but thou did engage me to be steadfast and abound in thy work, on this
account that my labor should not be in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Now give the full
and final answer unto all my Prayers: Now that I have done the fight, and
finished my course, let me find the Crown of righteousness which thy mercy has
laid up, 2 Timothy 4. 8. O Crown thy graces, and with thy greatest mercies
recompense and perfect thy preparatory mercies, and let me be Received to thy
glory, who have been guided by thy counsel, ( Psalm. 73. 24.)

13. Consider, That Christ has already received millions of Souls, and never
was unfaithful unto any, There are now with him the spirits of the just made
perfect, that in this life were imperfect as well as you. Why then should you
not comfortably trust him with your Souls? and say, [ Lord thou art the Common
Salvation and refuge of thy Saints: Both strong and weak, even all that are
given thee by the Father shall come to thee; and those that come thou will in
no wise cast out: Thousands have been entertained by thee, that were unworthy
in themselves as well as I: It is few of thy members that are now on earth, in
comparison of those that are with thee in Heaven: Admit me Lord into the new
Jerusalem: Thou will have thy house to be filled: O take my Spirit into the
number of those belssed ones, that shall come from East, West, North and South,
and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom, that we may together
with eternal joys, give thanks and praise to thee that have redeemed us to God
by thy blood.

14. Consider, That it is the will of the Father himself that we should be
glorified: He therefore gave us to his Son; and gave his Son for us, to be our
Savior, that whoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life: All our Salvation is the product of his Love, Joh. 3. 16, 17. Ephesians. 2. 4.
Joh. 6. 37. Joh. 16. 26, 27. I say not that I will pray the Father for you; for
the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, etc.] John 14. He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
my self to him.

Say therefore with our dying Lord, [Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit: By thy Son who is the way, the truth and the life, I come to thee, (
Joh. 14. 6.) Fullness of joy is in thy presence, and everlasting pleasures at
thy right hand ( Psalm. 16. 11.) Thy love redeemed me, renewed and preserved
me: O now receive me to the fullness of thy Love: This was thy will in sending
thy Son, that of all that thou gave him he should lose nothing, but should
raise it up at the last day. O let not now this Soul be lost that is passing to
thee through the straits of death! I had never come unto thy Son, if thou had
not drawn me; and if I had not heard and learnt of thee, John 6, 44, 45. I
thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have revealed to me a
babe, an idiot, the blessed mysteries of thy Kingdom: ( Luke 10. 21. Acts 4
13.) O now as the vail of flesh must be withdrawn, and my soul be parted from
this body, withdraw the vail of thy displeasure, and show thy servant the glory
of thy presence: that he that has seen thee but as in a glass, may see thee
now with open face: and when my earthly house of this Tabernacle is dissolved,
let me inhabit thy building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor.
5. 1.

15. Lastly consider, That God has designed the everlasting glory of his name,
and the pleasing of his blessed will, in our salvation: And the Son must
triumph in the perfection of his conquest of Sin and Satan, and in the
perfecting of our Redemption. And doubtless he will not lose his Fathers glory
and his own: Say then with confidence, [I resign my soul to thee O Lord who
have called and chosen me, that thou might make known the riches of thy
glory on me, as a vessel of mercy prepared unto glory, ( Romans 9. 23.) Thou have
predestined me to the adoption of thy child by Christ unto thy self, to the
praise of the glory of thy grace, wherein thou have made me accepted in thy
beloved, ( Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 11, 12) Receive me now to the glory which thou have
prepared for us, Mat. 25. 34.) The hour is at hand, Lord glorify thy poor
adopted child, that he may for ever glorify thee ( Joh. 17. 1.) It is thy
Promise to glorify those whom thou do justify, (Romans 8. 30.) As therere is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ, ( Romans 8. 1.) so now let him present
me faultless before the presence of the glory with exceeding joy, And to thee
the only wise God our Savior, be the glory, Majesty Dominion and Power for
evermore, Amen.: Jude v. 23, 24.

WHat now remains, but that we all set our selves to learn this sweet and
necessary task, that we may joyfully perform it in the hour of our extremity,
even to recommend our departing Souls to Christ, with confidence that he will
receive them! It is a lesson not easy to be learnt: For Faith is weak, and
doubts, and fears will easily arise; and nature will be loath to think of dying;
and we that have so much offended Christ, and lived so strangely to him, and
been entangled in too much familiarity with the World, shall be apt to shrink
when we should joyfully trust him with our departing Souls. O therefore now set
your selves to overcome these difficulties in time! You know we are all ready
to depart: It is time this last important work were thoroughly learned, that our
death may be both safe and comfortable.

There are diverse other Uses of this Doctrine that I should have urged upon
you, had there been time. As, 1. If Christ will Receive your departing Souls,
then fear not death, but long for this Heavenly entertainment.

2. Then do not sin for fear of them that can but kill the body, and send the
Soul to Christ.

3. Then think not the righteous unhappy, because they are cast off by the
world; neither be too much troubled at it your selves, when it comes to be your
case: but remember that Christ will not forsake you, and that none can hinder
him from the Receiving of your Souls: No malice nor slanders can follow you so
far as by defamation to make your justifyer condemn you.

4. If you may trust him with your Souls, then trust him with your friends,
your Children that you must leave behind, with all your concernments and
affairs; and trust him with his Gospel and his Church; for they are all his
own, and he will prevail to the accomplishment of his blessed pleasure.

But, 5. I shall only add that Use which the sad occasion of our meeting does
bespeak. What cause have we now to mix our sorrows for our deceased friend,
with the joys of faith for her felicity! we have left the body to the earth,
and that is our lawful sorrow; for it is the fruit of sin: But her spirit is
Received by Jesus Christ: and that must be our joy, if we will behave our
selves as true Believers. If we can suffer with her, should we not rejoice also
with her? And if the joy be far greater to the Soul with Christ, than the
ruined state of the body can be lamentable; it is but reason that our joy
should be greater for her joy, than our sorrow for the dissolution of the
flesh. we that should not much lament the passage of a friend beyond the Seas,
if it were to be advanced to a Kingdom, should less lament the passage of a
Soul to Christ, if it were not for the remnant of our woeful unbelief.

She is arrived at the everlasting Rest, where the burden of corruption, the
contradictions of the flesh, the molestations of the Tempter, the troubles of
the world, and the injuries of malicious men, are all kept out, and shall never
more disturb her peace. She has left us in these storms, who have more cause
to weep for our selves and for our Children that have yet so much to do and
suffer, and so many dangers to pass through, than for the Souls that are at
Rest with Christ. We are capable of no higher hopes than to attain that state
of blessedness which her Soul possesses: And shall we make that the matter of
our lamentation as to her, which we make the matter of our hopes as to our
selves? Do we labor earnestly to come thither, and yet lament that she is
there? You will say, It is not because she is clothed upon with the house from
Heaven, but that she is uncloathed of the flesh: But is there any other passage
than Death unto immortality? Must we not be uncloathed, before the garments of
Glory can be put on? She bemoaneth not her own dissolved Body: The glorified
Soul can easily bear the corruption of the flesh: And if you saw but what the
Soul enjoys, you would be like minded, and be moderate in your griefs. Love
not your selves so as to be unjust and unmerciful in your desires to your
friends! Let Satan desire to keep them out of Heaven, but do not you desire it.
You may desire your own good, but not so as to deprive your friends of theirs;
yea of a greater good, that you may have a lesser by it. And if it be their
company that you desire in reason you should be glad that they are gone to
dwell where you must dwell for ever, and therefore may for ever have their
company: Had they stayed on earth, you would have had their company but a
little while, because you must make so short a stay your selves. Let them
therefore begin their journey before you, and grudge not that they are first at
home, as long as you expect to find them there. In the mean time, he that
called them from you, has not left you comfortless: He is with you himself,
who is better than a Mother, or than ten thousand friends: When grief or
negligence hinders you from observing him, yet he is with you, and holds
you up, and tenderly provideth for you: Though turbulent passions injuriously
question all his Love, and cause you to give him unmannerly and unthankful
words; yet still he bears with you, and forgiveth all, and does not forsake
you for your peevishness and weakness, because you are his Children, and he
knows that you mean not to forsake him: Rebuke your passions, and calm your
minds; Reclaim your thoughts, and cast away the bitterness of suspicious
quarrelsome unbelief; and then you may perceive the presence of your dearest
friend and Lord, who is enough for you, though you had no other friend. Without
him all the friends on earth would be but silly comforters, and leave you as at
the gates of Hell: Without him all the Angels and Saints in Heaven would never
make it a Heaven to you. Grieve not too much that one of your Candles is put
out, while you have the Sun: Or if indeed it be not day with any of you, or the
Sun be clouded or ecclipsed, let that rather be the matter of your grief: Find
out the cause, and presently submit, and seek reconciliation: Or if you are
deprived of this Light, because you are yet asleep in sin, hearken to his call,
and rub your eyes, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Romans 13. 11, 12, 13, 14. Knowing that
it is now high time to awake out of sleep, our salvation being nearer than when
we first believed: the night is far spent, the day of eternal light is even at
hand: cast off therefore the works of darkness, and put on all the armor of
light: walk honestly and decently as in the day. And whatever you do, make sure
of the friend that never dies, and never shall be separated from you, and when
you die, will certainly Receive the souls which you commend unto him.

And here, though contrary to my custom, I shall make some more particular
mention of our deceased friend, on several accounts. 1. In prosecution of this
Use that now we are upon, that you may see in the evidences of her happiness,
how little cause you have to indulge extraordinary grief on her account, and
how much cause to moderate your sense of our loss with the sense of her
felicity. 2. That you many have the benefit of her example for your imitation,
especially her Children that are bound to observe the holy actions as well as
instructions of a Mother. 3. For the honor of Christ, and his Grace, and his
Servant: For as God has promised to honor those that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
and Christ has said, If any man serve me, him will My Father honor, John 12.
26. So I know Christ will not take it ill to be honored in his members, and to
have his Ministers subserve him in so excellent a work: It is a very
considerable part of the love or hatred, honor or dishonor that Christ has
in the world, which he receives as he appears in his followers. He that will
not see a cup of cold water given to one of them go unrewarded, and will tell
those at the last day that did or did not visit and relieve them, that they did
or did it not to him, will now expect it from me as my duty, to give him the
honor of his Graces in his deceased servant, and I doubt not will accordingly
accept it, when it is no other indeed than his own honor that is my End, and
nothing but the words of Truth and Soberness shall be the means.

And here I shall make so great a transition as shall retain my discourse in
the narrow compass of the Time in which she lived near me and under my care,
and in my familiar acquaintance, omitting all the rest of her life, that none
may say I speak but by hearsay of things which I am uncertain of: and I will
confine it also to those special gifts and graces in which she was eminent,
that I may not take you up with a description of a Christian as such, and tell
you only of that good which she held but in common with all other Christians.
And if any thing that I shall say were unknown to any Reader that knew her, let
them know that it is because they knew her but distantly, imperfectly, or by
reports; and that my advantage of near acquaintance did give me a just
assurance of what I say.

The Graces. which I discerned to be eminent in her, were these. 1. She was
eminent in her contempt of the Pride, and Pomp, and Pleasure, and Vanity of the
World, and in her great averseness to all these. She had an honest impatiency
of the life which is common among the rich and vainglorious in the world:
Voluptuousness and Sensuality, Excess of Drinking, Cards and Dice, she could
not endure, what ever names of good housekeeping or seemly deportment they
borrowed for a mask: In her Apparel she went below the garb of others of her
rank; indeed in such plainness as did not notify her degree: but yet in such a
grave and decent habit, as notified her Sobriety and humility: She was a
Stranger to Pastimes, and no Companion for Time-wasters, as knowing, that
Persons so near eternity, that have so short a life and so great a work, have
no time to spare. Accordingly in her latter days, she did (as those that grow
wise by experience of the vanity of the world) retire from it, and cast it off
before it cast off her: She betook her self to the society of a people that
were low in the world, of humble, serious, upright lives, though such as had
been wholly strangers to her: And among these poor inferior strangers she
lived in contentent and quietness; desiring rather to converse with those that
would help her to redeem the time, in prayer and edifying conference, than with
those that would grieve her by consuming it on their lusts.

2. She was very prudent in her converse and affairs (allowing for the passion
of her sex and age); and so escaped much of the inconveniences that else in so
great and manifold businesses would have overwhelmed her: As a good man will
guide his affairs with discretion, Psalm 112. 5. so discretion will preserve
him, and understanding will keep him, to deliver him from the way of the evil
man, who leaves the paths of uprightness to walk in the way of darkness,
Proverbs 2. 11, 12, 13.

3. She was seriously Religious, without partiallity, or any taint of siding or
faction, or holding the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons: I
never heard speak against men, or for men, as they differed in some small and
tolerable things: She impartially heard any Minister that was able, and godly,
and sound in the main, and could bear with the weaknesses Ministers when they
were faithful: Instead of owning the names or opinions of Prelatical,
Presbyterian, Independent, or such like, she took up with the name and
profession of a Christian, and loved a Christian as a Christian, without much
respect to such different tolerable opinions. Instead of troubling her self
with needless scruples, and making up a Religion of opinions and singularities,
she studied Faith and Godliness, and lived upon the common certain truths, and
well-known duties, which have been the old and beaten way, by which the
universal Church of Christ has gone to heaven in former Ages.

4. She was very impartial in her judgment about particular cases: being the
same in judging of the case of a child and a stranger: and no interest of
children or other relations, could make her swerve from an equal judgment:

5. She very much preferred the spiritual welfare of her children before their
temporal; looking on the former as the true felicity, and on the later without
it, but as a pleasant voluntary misery.

6. Since I was acquainted with her, I always found her very ready to good
works, according to her power. And when she has seen a poor man come to me,
that she conjectured solicited me for relief, she has reprehended me for
keeping the case to my self, and not inviting her to contribute: And I could
never descern that she thought any thing so well bestowed, as that which
relieved the necessities of the poor that were honest and industrious.

7. She had the wonderful mercy of a man-like Christian patient spirit, under
all afflictions that did befall her, and under the multitude of troublesome
businesses, that would have even distracted an impatient mind. Though sudden
anger was the sin that she much confessed her self, and therefore thought she
wanted patience, yet I have often wondered to see her bear up with the same
alacrity and quietness, when Jobs messengers have brought her the tidings that
would have overwhelmed an impatient soul. When Lawsuits and the great
afflictions of her children have assaulted her like successive Waves, which I
feared would have born her into the deep, if not devoured all her peace; she
sustained all, as if no great considerable change had been made against her,
having the same God, and the same Christ, and promises, and hope, from which
she fetched such real comfort and support, as showed a real serious faith.

8. She was always apt to put a good interpretation upon Gods providence;
like a right Believer, that having the spirit of Adoption, perceives Fatherly
love in all: She would not easily be persuaded that God meant her any harm: She
was not apt to hearken to the enemy that accuses God and his ways to man, as
he accuses man and his actions to God: She was none of those that are
suspicious of God, and are still concluding death and ruin from all that he
does to them, and are gathering wrath from mis-interpreted expressions of his
love: who weep because of the smoke, before they can be warmed by the fire. Yet
God is good to Israel; and it shall go well with them that fear before him, (
Psa. 73. 1. Eccles. 8. 12, 13.) were her conclusions from the sharpest
providence: She expected the morning in the darkest night: and judged not of
the end by the beginning; but was always confident, if she could but entitle
God in the case, that the issue would be good. She was not a murmurer against
God, nor one that contended with her Maker; nor one that created calamity to
her self by a self-troubling unquiet mind: She patiently bore what God laid
upon her, and made it not heavier by the additions of uncomfortable
prognostics, and misgiving or repining thoughts. She had a great confidence in
God, that he was doing good to her and hers in all; and where at present she
saw any matter of grief, she much supported her soul with a belief that God
would remove and overcome it in due time.

9. She was not troubled (that ever I discerned) with doubtings about her
interest in Christ, and about her own Justification and Salvation: but whether
she reached to assurance or not, she had confident apprehensions of the Love of
God, and quietly reposed her soul upon his grace. Yet not secure through
presumption or self esteem; but comforting her self in the Lord her God: By
this means she spent those hours in a cheerful performance of her duty, which
many spend in fruitless self-vexation for the failings of their duty, or in
mere enquiries, Whether they have Grace or not? and others spend in wrangling
perplexed Controversies about the manner or circumstances of duty: And I
believe that she had more comfort from God by way of reward upon her sincere
obedience, while she referred her soul to him, and rested on him, than many
have that more anxiously perplexed themselves about the discerning of their
holiness, when they should be studying to be more holy, that it might discover
it self. And by this means she was sit for praises and thanksgiving, and spent
not her life in lamentations and complaints: and made not Religion seem
terrible to the ignorant, that judge of it by the faces and carriage of
professors: She did not represent it to the world, as a morose and melancholy
temper: but as the rational creatures cheerful obedience to his maker, actuated
by the sense of the wonderful Love that is manifested in the Redeemer, and by
the hopes of the purchased and promised felicity in the blessed sight and
fruition of God. And I conjecture that her forementioned dispositiou to think
well of God and of his providence, together with her long and manifold
experience; (the great advantage of ancient tried Christians) did much conduce
to free her from doubtings and disquieting fears, about her own sincerity and
Salvation. And I confess, if her life had not been answerable to her peace and
confidence, I should not have thought the better, but the worse of her
condition; nothing being more lamentable than to make have to Hell, through a
wilful confidence that the danger is past, and that they are in the way to
Heaven as well as the most sanctified.

10. Lastly, I esteemed it the height of her attainment, that she never
discovered any inordinate fears of death; but a cheerful readiness, willingness
and desire, to be dissolved and be with Christ. This was her constant temper
both in health and sickness, as far as I was able to observe: She would be
frequently expressing how little reason she had to be desirous of longer life,
and how much reason to be willing to depart. Diverse times in dangerous
sicknesses I have been with her, and never discerned any considerable
aversness, dejectedness or fear. Many a time I have thought how great a mercy I
should esteem it, if I had attained that measure of fearless willingness to lay
down this flesh, as she had attained. Many a one that can make light of wants,
or threats, or scorns, or any ordinary troubles, cannot submit so quietly and
willingly to death: Many a one that can go through the labors of Religion, and
contemn opposition, and easily give all they have to the poor, and bear
imprisonments, banishment or contempt, can never overcome the fears of Death:
so far even the Father of lies spoke truth, Joh. 2. 4. Skin for Skin: yea all
that a man has will he give for his Life. I took it therefore for a high
attainment, and extraordinary mercy to our deceased friend, that the King of
Terrors was not terrible to her: Though I doubt not but somewhat of aversness
and fear is so radicated in natures self-preserving principle, as that it is
almost inseparable; yet in her I never discerned any troublesome appearances of
it. When I first came to her in the beginning of her last sickness, she
suddenly passed the sentence of death upon her self, without any show of fear
or trouble; when to us the disease appeared not to be great: But when the
disease increased, her pains were so little, and the effect of the Fever was so
much in her head, that after this she seemed not to esteem it mortal, being not
sensible of her case and danger: And so as she lived without the fears of
death, she seemed to us to die without them: God by the nature of her disease
removing death as out of her sight, when fhe came to that weakness, in which
else the encounter was like to have been sharper than ever it was before. And
thus in one of the weaker sex, God has showed us that it is possible to live
in holy confidence, and peace, and quietness of mind, without distressing
griefs or fears, even in the midst of a troublesome world, and of vexatious
businesses, and with the afflictions of her dearest Relations almost
continually before her: And that our quiet or disquiet, our peace or trouble
depends more upon our inward strength and temper, then upon our outward
state, occasions, or provocations: And that it is more in our hands, than of
any or all our friends and enemies, whether we shall have a comfortable, or
uncomfortable life.

What remains now, but that all we that furvive, especially you that are her
Children, do follow her as she followed Christ? Though the Word of God be your
sufficient Rule; and the Example of Christ be your perfect pattern; yet as the
Instructions, so the Example of a parent must be a weighty motive, to quicken
and engage you to your duty; and will else be a great aggravation of your sin:
A holy Child of unholy parents, does no more than his necessary duty; because
whatever parents are, he has an holy God: But an unholy Child of holy parents,
is unexcusable in sin, and deplorably miserable; as forsaking the Doctrine and
pattern both of their Creator and their Progenitors, whom Nature engages them
to observe: And it will be an aggravation of their deserved misery, to have
their Parents witness against them, that they taught them, and they would not
learn, and went before them in a holy life, but they would not follow them,
Prove. 1. 8. My Son hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the law
of thy Mother; for they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy head, and chains
about thy neck. Read and consider Prove. 30. 17. and 15. 20. and 23. 22, 25.
sins against Parents have a special curse affixed to them in this life (as the
case of Cham shows): And the due obsevrance and honoring of Parents has a
special Promise of Temporal Blessings, as the fifth Commandment shows, Ephesians.
6. 1, 2, 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord for it is right: Honor thy
Father and Mother, (which is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be
well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.] The Histories of all
Ages are so full of the instances of Gods judgments in this life upon five
sorts of sinners, as may do much to convince an Atheist of the Government and
special Providence of God; that is upon Persecutors, Murderers, Sacrilegious,
False-witnesses (especially by Perjury) and Abusers and Dishonourers of
Parents. And the great Honor that is due to Parents when they are dead, is to
give just honor to their Names, and to obey their Precepts, and imitate their
good examples: It is the high commendation of the Rechabites, that they
strictly kept the ^recepts of their Father, even in a thing indifferent, a mode
of living; not to drink wine, or build houses, but dwell in tents: an God
annexeth this notable blessing, [ Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of
Israel, because ye have obeyed the commandemtent of Jonadab your Father, and
kept all his Precepts, and done according to all that he has commanded you,
Therefore thus siath the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab the Son of
Rechab shall not mant to stand before me for ever.] Jer. 36. 6, 7. 18. 19. But
especially in the great duties of Religion, where Parents do but deliver the
mind of God, and use their authority to procure obedience to Divine authority;
and where the matter it self is necessary to our Salvation, the obligation to
obedience and imitation is most indispensable; and disobedience is an
aggravated iniquity, and the notorious brand of infelicity, and Prognostic of
ensuiing woe: The ungodly Children of godly Parents being the most deplorable,
unhappy, unexcusable persons in the World, (if they hold on.)

There is yet another Doctrine, that I should speak to.

Doct. 7.
PRayer in general, and this prayer in particular, that Christ will Receive our
dep^rting souls, is a most suitable conclusion of all the action of Christians
life.

Prayer is the breath of a Christians life: it is his work and highest
converse, and therefore fittest to be the concluding action of his life; that
it may reach the end at which he aimed: We have need of Prayer all our lives,
because we have need of God, and need of his manifold and continued Grace: But
in our last extremity we have a special need: Though sloth is apt to seize
upon us, while prosperity hinders the sense of our necessities, and health
persuades us that Time is not near its journies end; yet it is high time to
pray with doubled fervor and importunity, when we see that we are near our
last: when we find that we have no more time to pray, but must now speak our
last for our immortal Souls, and must at once say all that we have to say and
shall never have a hearing more; O then to be unable to pray, or to be
faithless, and heartless, and hopeless in our prayers, would be a calamity
beyond expression.

Yet I know (for ordinary observation tells it us) that many truly gracious
persons may accidentally be undisposed and disabled to pray, when they are near
to death: If the Disease be such as does disturb the Brain, or take them up
with violence of pain, or overwhelm the mind by perturbation of the passions,
or abuse the imagination, or notably waste and debilitate the spirits it cannot
be expected that a body thus disabled should serve the Soul, in this or any
other duty. But still the praying Habit does remain, though a distempered body
do forbid the exercise: The Habitual desires of the Soul are there: and it is
those that are the soul of Prayer.

But this should move us, to pray while we have time, and while our Bodies have
strength, and our spirits have vigor and alacrity to serve us, seeing we are
so uncertain of bodily disposition and capacity, so near our end: O pray, and
pray with all your hearts, before any Fever or Deliration overthrow your
understandings or your memories; before your thoughts are all commanded to
attend your pains; and before your decayed spirits fail you, and deny their
necessary service to your suits; and before the apprehensions of your speedy
approach to the presence of the most Holy God, and your entrance upon an
endless state, do amaze, confound and overwhelm your Souls with fear and
perturbation. O Christians, what folly, what sin and shame is it to us, that
now while we have time to pray, and leave to pray, and helps to pray, and have
no such disturbing hindrances, we should yet want hearts; and have no mind, no
life and fervor for so great a work! O pray now, lest you are unable to pray
then: And if you are then hindered but by such bodily undisposedness, God will
understand your habitual desires, and your groans, and take it as if you had
actually prayed; Pray now, that so you may be acquainted with the God that then
you must fly unto for mercy, and may not be strangers to him or unto Prayer;
and that he may not find then that your prayers are but the expressions of your
fears, and not of your Love, and are constrained and not voluntary motions unto
God: Pray now in preparation to your dying prayers. O what a terrible thing it
is to be to learn to pray in that hour of extremity; and to have then no
principle to pray by but natural self-love which every Thief has at the
gallows! To be then without the Spirit of prayer, when without it there cannot
an acceptable word or groan be uttered, and when the rejection of our suits and
person, will be the prologue to the final judicial rejection, and will be a
distress so grievous as presumptuous Souls will not believe, till sad
experience become their Tutor: Can you imagine that you shall then at last, be
taught the art of acceptable Prayer, merely by horror, and the natural sense
of pain and danger, as Seamen in a storm, or a Malefactor by the rack, when in
your health and leisure you will not be persuaded to the daily use of serious
Prayer, but number your selves with the families that are under the wrath of
the Almighty, being such as call not on his name, Jer. 10. 25. Psalm 79. 6.

Indeed there are many prayers must go before, or else this Prayer [ Lord Jesus
receive my spirit] will be in vain, when you would be loath to find it so. You
must first pray for renewing Sanctifying grace, for the death of sin, and the
Pardon of sin, for a holy life and a Heavenly mind, for obedience, patience and
perseverance; and if you obtain not these, there is no hope that Jesus Christ
should receive your Spirits, that never received his sanctifying spirit.

How sad is it to observe that those that have most need of Prayer, have least
mind to Pray, as being least sensible of their needs? Yea, that those that are
the next step to the state of Devils, and have as much need of Prayer as any
miserable souls on earth, do yet deride it, and hate those that seriously and
fervently perform it: a man of prayer being the most common objct of their
malicious reproach and scorn! O miserable Cainites, that hate their brethren
for offering more acceptable sacrifice then their own! little do they know how
much of the very Satanical nature is in that malice, and in those reproachful
scorns! and little do they know how near they are to the curse and desparation
of Cain, and with what horror they shall cry out, [ My punishment is greater
then I can bear] Genesis 4. 11, 13. If God and Good men condemn you for your
lip-service, and heartless devotions, and ungodly lives; will you therefore
hate the holy nature and better lives of those that judge you, when you should
hate your own ungodliness and hypocrisy? Hear what God said to the leader of
your sect, Gen 4. 6. Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies
at the door.] Have you not as much need to pray as those that you hate and
reproach for praying? Have you not as much need to be often and earnest in prayer
as they? Must Christ himself spend whole nights in prayer, Luke 6. 12. and
shall an ignorant sensual hardened sinner think he has no need of it, though
he be unconverted, unjustified, unready to die, and almost past the opportunity
of praying? O miserable men, that shortly would cry and roar in the anguish of
their Souls, and yet will not pray while there is time and room for prayer!
Their judge is willing now to hear them, and now they have nothing but
hypocritical lifeless words to speak! Praying is now a wearisom, tedions and
unpleasant thing to them, that shortly would be glad if the most heart-tearing
lamentations could prevail for the crumbs and drops of that mercy which they
thus despise, Luke 16. 24. Of all men in the world, it ill becomes one in so
deep necessities and dangers to be prayerless.

But for you Christians, that are daily exercised in this holy converse with
your Maker, hold on, and grow not strange to heaven, and let not your holy
desires be extinguished for want of excitation: Prayer is your ascent to
heaven; your departure from a vexatious world, to treat with God for your
Salvation: your retirement from a World of dangers into the impregnable
fortress where you are safe; and from vanity unto felicity; and from troubles
unto Rest: Which though you cannot come so near, nor enjoy so fully and
delightfully as hereafter you shall do, yet thus do you make your approaches to
it, and thus do you secure your future full fruition of it. And let them all
scoff at hearty fervent Prayer as long as they will, yet Prayer shall do that
with God for you, which health, and wealth, and dignity, and honor, and carnal
pleasures, and all the World shall never do for one of them. And though they
neglect and villifie it now, yet the hour is near, when they will be fain to
scamble and bungle at it themselves; and the face of death will better teach
them the use of prayer, than our doctrine and example now can do. A departing
Soul will not easily be prayerless; nor easily be content with sleepy prayers:
But alas! it is not every Prayer that has some fervency from the power of
fear, that shall succeed: Many a thousand may perish for ever that have prayed
[ Lord Jesus receive my Spirit] But the Soul that breaths after Christ, and
is weary of sinning, and has long been pressing toward the mark, may receive
encouragement for his last petitions, from the bent and success of all the
foregoing prayers of his life: Believe it Christians, your cannot be so ready
to beg of Christ to Receive your souls, as he is ready and willing to receive
them. As you came praying therefore into the world of Grace, go praying out of
it into the world of Glory. It is not a work that you were never used to
(though you have had lamented backwarness, and coldness, and omissions): It is
not to a God that you were never with before: As you know whom you have
believed, so you may know to whom you pray: It is indeed a most important suit
to beg for the Receiving of a departing soul: but it is put up to him to whom
it properly does belong; and to him that has encouraged you by answering many
a former prayer with that mercy which was the earnest of this; and it is to him
that loves souls much better than any soul can love it self. O live in prayer,
and die in prayer: And do not as the graceless witless world, despise prayer
while they live, and then think a Lord have mercy on me, shall prove enough to
pass them into heaven: Mark their Statutes and Monuments in the Churches,
whether they be not made kneeling and lifting up the hands, to tell you that
all will be forced to pray, or to approve of prayer at their death, whatever
they say against it in their life. O pray and wait but a little longer, and all
your danger will be past, and you are safe for ever! Keep up your hands a litte
longer, till you shall end your conflict with the last enemy, and shall pass
from Prayer to everlasting Praise.

FINIS.

