THE VINDICATION OF Slingsby Bethel Esquire One of the SHERIFFS OF London and
Middlesex: Against the several SLANDERS Cast upon him Upon the occasion of his
being proposed, for one of the BURGESSES to Serve in the late PARLIAMENT.

FOR THE Borough of Southwark.

London, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, 1681

The Vindication OF Slingsby Bethel Esquire. One of the SHERIFFS of LONDON and
MIDDLESEX: AGAINST The several Scandals cast upon him, etc.
SO long as I kept my private Station (in which I have spent a great part of my
Life:) I thank God I can say, That though my Dealings in the World have been
considerable, I have had my Conversation so, as not to meet with, or deserve
(as I reasonably hope) any Reproach from man.

But no sooner was I (contrary to my Inclinations and Humor) called forth by
my Fellow-Citizens, to a Public Employment, than the Envy and Malice of
ill-minded Men was awakned, so, as that (to use the Prophets words) They bent
their Tongues like their Bow, for lies against me.

This I found in a great measure upon my Election to the Place I now bear in
this City; but when I was Nominated at the late Election, for one of the
Burgesses for Southwark, This Malevolent Spirit (being grown outrageous)
mustered up all its Force, and poured forthwith upon me whole Volleys of as
Spiteful Calumnies as Wit, sharpened by the keenest Malice, could invent.

Notwithstanding all which, I considered, That this was not my Case alone, but
a common Accident attending Persons standing in Competition for Places of so
great Honor and Trust; and especially, where the Election is to be determined
by the Suffrages of a great Body of People, divided by their several Parties
and Interests; amongst whom will be still found some Ill Men, who preferring
their Private Interests before the Public Service, will not baulk the foulest
Practices, for the obtaining of their own Ends; and therefore I was at the
first Resolved to sit down quietly under the Satisfaction and Assurance of mine
own Innocence, rather than to foul my Fingers by Raking into that filthy
Dunghill of Reproaches cast up against me, without the least Color of Truth or
Reason.

But being told by diverse of my Fellow-Citizens that I ought to do something as
well to Vindicate the Honor of the Place I now bear amongst them, as to
Justify their Choice of me to that Office: And also, that those of the
Neighboring Borough, may not be thought to have been mistaken, and deceived
in the Person whom (since that time) they preferred to a place of so great
Trust: I thought fit to do them and my self so much Right, as to Publish that
which here follows, for the detecting of the Malicious Falsehood of those
impudent Slanders, which have been set on Foo^ on purpose to disable me from
holding any place of so great Trust.

First, Then it was Objected, that I am a Papist and a Jesuit and (to give that
lie the better Credit,) that upon some variance happening between me and Dr.
Oats, he did declare that he knew me beyond the Seas to be such.

This indeed would have been a sufficient bar, to my admission to any place of
Public Trust, and much more to my Sitting in the Parliament, who have showed
so great a Zeal to the Protestant Religion, and would have forfeited my Head
also, had the same been true. But (not to mention here the Tests that I have
lately taken to the contrary,) as those that have known my constant
Conversation, or what I have Writ and Published, will not believe that I have
any kindness for that Religion, so the Doctor is ready to declare to any one
that desires information in that point, that he was never the Author of any
such Report; nor could he know me beyond Sea, under any Character whatsoever;
for I do affirm, That I was never out of England since One thousand six hundred
seventy two, and I doubt not but the Doctor will satisfy any, that shall ask
the question, that he never went beyond the Seas till the Year One thousand six
hundred seventy seven. Nevertheless, the Doctor not being in Town, to
contradict this Story at the time of the Poll in Southwark, it was well enough
Designed to serve that turn.

Secondly, It was said, that I was a Soldier in the Parliament Army in the
time of the late Wars, and was most Cruel and Unmerciful in the exercise of
Arms.

This, as it seems inconsistent with the former Character, so has it in it
self as little of Truth; but among a divided Multitude, in a jealous Age, when
the generality of Men are more prone to believe any thing of ill that they
hear, than to be at the trouble to examine the Truth of what is said, it
matters not whether Reports be true or probable, so as they be delivered with
sufficient Confidence, and the more variety there is in those Stories (however
inconsistant they may be) the better are they fitted to the various and
different Humors and Interests of Mankind: And the bold and industrious
Calumniator by this Method of Proceeding, does often prevail so far upon some
of all Parties, as to bring the person he has a mind to oppose, under their
dislike; And although (the matter of this Election remaining under question,) I
shall not say, that this Project had its full effect in my Case; yet to
demonstrate, that the last mentioned Objection was a mere Fiction; designed
only to serve this occasion, and could not be justly reflected on me: I do
affirm, and several Hambrough Merchants now living may remember, and the
Registries of their Courts will plainly show, That I went to Hambrough in the
Year One thousand six hundred thirty seven, and lived there in continual
employment, until December, One thousand six hundred forty nine; so as I could
have no hand in the War, or change of Government which happened in England
within that time: And though after my return into England, I did with others
submit to the Government I found there, yet did I never Embrace any other then
Civil Offices; in which, I hope I may say without Arrogancy, I demeaned my
self with that Integrity, Indifferency, and Moderation, that I may justly
challenge the greatest of my Enemies, to instance in, or to name any one Act of
Severity, Injustice, or Partiality, that I ever showed toward any Party or
Person whatsoever.

Thirdly, That being at Hambrough at such time as the late Kings Death was
resolved of in England, I did there say, That rather than he should want an
Executioner, I would come thence to perform the Office.

Although I do resent this most odious, and malicious Slander, with the highest
Indignation imaginable, yet having brought my Action at Law, for Vindication of
my self in this Point, I shall not in this place, discourse any thing of that
Subject, lest I should seem to anticipate Public Justice, or in any sort
gratify my Adversaries, by letting them know, what I have to give in Evidence,
to prove the wilful Malice of those that cast this Reproach upon me; or what I
have to offer in aggravation of this Scandal: Nevertheless, I shall take that
liberty here, to say I was born a Gentleman, and have had my Education
accordingly, and am of too great a Spirit to stoop to an Office of so base a
nature to serve the greatest Prince or State in the World.

Fourthly, That I was (...) only one of the late Kings Judges, but one of those
two persons in Vizards, that Assisted on the Scaffold at his Death.

This I may call a home thrust, a blow levelled, not at my Honor and
Reputation only, but (since the Persons so Characterized are Excepted out of
the Act of General Pardon and Oblivion,) at my Life and Fortune also, and ought
more deservedly to be Vindicated by some solemn course of Law, then the
forementioned Scandal: but the Promoters of this loud Cry, being lost in a
Crowd of People, I cannot give my self, or others, that Public satisfaction
that the Merits of the Cause requires, and therefore I am necessitated to give
my self and the World, the best satisfaction in this Point that I can.

And since Malice is so bold and daring, I do bless that good Providence of
God, that set me in such Circumstances at that time, when such Matter is
Charged to be done; that although I am of the Negative part, I am able to
convince the Author of that Report, to the satisfaction of all Mankind, of a
most foul and malicious Slander; and it is shortly thus, Except I could be at
Hambrough in Germany, and at Westminster in England, at one and the same time,
(which all will agree is wholly impossible) the odious Matter Charged upon me
in this Article cannot be true; and to prove that I was at Hambrough at the
same time that the Matters Charged in this Article were Transacted at
Westminster, I vouch the same Evidence, which I have Cited in my Defense upon
the Second Article.

And as the Malice of this Design against my Honor, will plainly appear by
what is already said, so that these several Slanders were broached and sent
abroad on set purpose to way-lay me in my Election for one of the Burgesses for
Southwark will yet further appear by that Scandalous Libel that goes abroad
under the Name of How and Rich, wherein the Author (pretending) to give an
impartial Account of that Election, after he had given a worthy Character of
the rest of the Competitors suming up all the forementioned Reports which are
sounded forth at large against me in a few softer words, is pleased by an
Elegant Irony to Characterize me as a Person sufficiently Eminent for the
Figure I made in the late Revolutions. And that this Character may find the
better Credit with the World, and that I may be thought still a Man of the same
Spirit, the Libellers adds, That at the Election, I threatened to pull one of
the Kings Water-mens Coats over his Ears; and that he thereupon Replied to me,
Aye Sir, so perhaps you would my Masters too, if it were in your Power. All
which is most notoriously false, and without any color or ground of Truth.

Fifthly, The next exception they take to my Nomination to serve as a Burgess
in the present Parliament is, That being one of the present Sheriffs for the
Renowned City of London, I live in a Garret, and keep no House.

Were this admitted to be wholly true, yet will it not be allowed (as I
conceive,) for a good exception in the Case of a Burgess to serve in
Parliament, if I be otherwise qualified for so great a Trust; it being a
Maxim, That those that are most saving of their own Estates, will be most
careful of the Peoples: But since it does cast some Reflection on me in the
Office I now bear, I confess it will require a further Answer.

I say then, that (though this be not altogether true, yet) having less of
Malice then the former, I can the better bear it.

In the former matters Charged, my Adversaries run upon me as if they designed
nothing less then to tear me in pie^^^; by this, they seem desirous only to
pull me down, and degrade me: by those they gave me the Character of a very bad
Subject; by this, they would have me thought no good Citizen.

And as I have disclaimed those, with that just abhorrencie, that the Merits of
the Case required; so I doubt not, but upon a due Consideration of so much of
the aforesaid Exception as shall be found true, as also, of that which follows,
they will admit of so fair an Apology, as will not leave me under the guilt of
any misdemeanour.

But before I enter upon the Examination and Answer of Particulars, I shall
here enter my Protest, That I have a true and real Veneration and Esteem for
that Renowned City, and have been ready to express the same upon all occasions,
both at home and abroad; even before I had the Honor to be Called to the
Office I now bear amongst them.

That I am always ready to pay that due observance and respect to the
Government thereof that the Laws ordained for that purpose do require. That
though for many years last past I have not had any private Interest and Concern
by way of Trade, not expect hereafter any benefit or advantage thereby, yet I
have as hearty good wishes for the Trade, Welfare, and Prosperity of the said
City, as any Citizen whatsoever.

And as I have been always ready and willing in my place and station to promote
those good ends, so I brought the same resolutions with me into that Office
which I now bear, and shall endeavor to discharge with all integrity,
governing myself therein (so far as I am able) by the Laws of the City, and of
the Land, (to both which, I acknowledge my self to be a Servant) as my best
Warrant, as well as safest Guides. And if in any thing I shall chance to fail,
or fall short of this, it shall not be through any willful miscarriage or
neglect, but from mistake, which may easily happen to one of my Education in
the manage of an Office of that importance.

And now to return to that which is objected to my disparagement, it is said,
That I live in a Garret, and keep no House: and this they aggravate by
suggesting that for this reason I have been denied several Privileges granted
to other Sheriffs, not having done the City that honor, in this respect, as
others in my place have done.

Ill will, as it never speaks well, so it seldom speaks true; as it makes the
worst Construction of all Actions, so it commonly mis-reports all Persons
against whom it has any pique or prejudice; this seems to be my Case, and how
I come to fall under these Circumstances will best appear by that which follows.

The Truth is, being a single Person (as I have been for many years) and having
neither the Concerns of a Family nor of Trade lying upon me, that I might have
a settled and known Being for such time of the Year as I commonly spend in Town,
without the trouble and inconveniency which commonly attends the shifting of
Lodgings: I took the House I now live in, (not the Garrets but) all save the
Garrets, Cellars, and one small Room upon the first Floor, with accommodations
sufficient for a Gentleman of better Quality than my self; and this I have kept
for Ten years last past, as my Landlord and many other persons, if need be,
will testify.

Being Chosen into this Office (not having then any knowledge of those
Sumptuary Laws which our wise and prudent Ancestors had enacted for the
limiting and bounding the Extravagancies of Entertainments as well as other
exorbitances) submitting to that grand Imposer, Custom, I kept those Feasts
which the Sheriffs have Commonly made in the beginning of their year (which I
find were two Feasts (of great Charge) more than those Laws will Warrant) and I
have not heard, that any one man has complained, that I was over sparing in my
Provisions and Expenses upon those occasions.

And being misguided by the same Error (having agreed for a House for that
purpose) I resolved (as some others in my Office had done before me) to settle
my Tables so as to begin Housekeeping at Christmas, which was as soon as I
could well settle my own private Affairs, and Underofficers; so as the weighty
concern of my Office might not suffer, and that I might be at leisure to give
my self to the daily attendance upon the honorable Employment of an Host.

But it fell out (most unluckily for this purpose) that the Alderman of the
Ward wherein I live, dying, and that Ward (as big as five or six of some other
Wards,) having (it seems) a better opinion of me, then those that have made
this outcry against me, thought fit by general Consent to choose me for one of
the two Persons who were to be offered to the Court of Aldermen as Candidates
for that Office; and the competition for the second place being between Sir
Richard How, and Mr. Pilkinton, and the latter carrying it upon the Poll, and
we two being accordingly presented to the Court of Aldermen, they thought fit,
(contrary to their own (...) and customs in that Case) to wave me in the
choice, and to take Mr. Pilkinton (a then Commoner) to supply that place
amongst them, and this I take to be principally meant by the Privileges which
the Exception charge to be forfeited by my not keeping House.

This accident so falling out, and the good and wholesome Laws before mentioned
coming to my Knowledge, (and I think no Laws are more properly called
wholesome, than those that prohibit the excess of Feasting) these two Accidents
(I say) gave no small check to my complacent humor, and soon induced me to
change my former purpose and intention of Housekeeping.

Since those Gentlemen showed so great a dislike of my Company, besides other
slightings and disrespects I found from them, which I had not known offered to
any before in my place, and especially, of my Age; I thought my self in no sort
obliged to carress them by the usual voluntary Treats and Entertainments; nor
so far to forsake my wonted privacy, as to incumber my self with more
magnificent Accommodations for so short a time as I was to abide in Office
amongst them, resolving nevertheless to maintain such an Equipage as should be
suitable to my Office, and to pay such services to the City as their Laws and
the duty of my place requires.

I would not be thought in what I have said to design in the least to detract
from the worth of that Gentleman the Bench of Aldermen thought fit to prefer
before me in that Choice, or to show any regret I have for missing of that
preferment: I acknowledge the Gentleman they have Chosen to that place, to be a
very worthy Citizen, and well deserving of that Honor, as well as of being one
of their Representatives in Parliament.

But being to vindicate my self against the Exceptions taken to me upon this
account, I think I may, upon this occasion (without prejudice to that worthy
Gentleman or my self) borrow a distinction from the Papists (though I am none
of their belief) which I conceive with greater reason may be applicable to my
Case, then to the purpose they commonly use it. They say, There is a merit of
Congruity, as well as of Condignity; and if any such distinction can be made, I
think I may say, (without any show of Arrogance) that though the Person
preferred to that place, may be of greater Personal and Inherent Worth then I
can challenge to my self, yet the advantageous Circumstances by which I came
recommended to the Court of Aldermen being duly considered, I might well expect
in Congruity with those common Rules of Civility, by which that Court had wont
to Govern themselves in that Affair, to have been preferred in the Choice. And
if those that presented me missed of their aim in that point, I think those of
the Neighboring Borough had as little reason to reflect it upon me, to my
dishonor, as that Court had to give them the occasion to do it.

But when this is said, least by arguing the Case so Nicely, it should be
thought that I am more concerned for the loss of the place, then for those
Reflections that were cast upon me upon that occasion; or that I send this
Paper a begging for Preferment: I shall here most freely declare, That as I had
not the least Ambition for that Office, so I lay as little weight upon those
Arguments I have used to justify my pretentions to it. I think in themselves
they have but little force, though I esteem them very cogent and proper to be
turned upon those men with whom I have to do in this matter.

As I rest satisfied, that I had the Concurrent Votes of so many worthy
Citizens for that place, and do think my Reputation well secured thereby, so I
am very well contented, that I have missed the preferment; and shall be as well
pleased (since it appears so practicable in my case) that those Courtly Rules
by which that Court has formerly governed themselves in their choice of
Magistrates, may for the future be set aside as over-partial, and that for ever
hereafter those persons only may be Elected into Places in the City, that shall
be found to be of greatest integrity, and of best ability for the discharge
thereof, without any regard to be had to any of those ranks and orders of men,
who from those External Qualifications only, do expect the Complement of
preferrence in the Choice.

For my part (being for many years last past delivered from the Encumbrances of
Trade and public Business,) I have tasted too much of the Pleasures and
satisfaction of a private Life, to be fond of any Public Trust. I have known
what it is to enjoy the sweet repose of quiet sleep, after the divertisements
of the Day, whilst that Care and Anxiety that commonly attend those in Public
Places do not seldom render their very Beds uneasy to them. And for that
reason, I should not have accepted of the Office I now hold, could I honestly
have declined it; but I thought I could not fairly desert those many worthy
Citizens, who after a full and free choice of me to that place, endured the
fatigue of many days throng and sweat, in Justifying of their Election by the
Poll. And if I can in any measure answer their Expectations in this service, I
shall be very well pleased, without giving them any future trouble of the like
kind.

And now I have spoken in general to the Exception taken against me, for not
keeping house, and to the disrespects incurred by me upon that occasion; It
remains that I should say some thing to that other point of the exception,
whereby they would aggravate this neglect of mine, as redounding to the
dishonor of the City, from whom I have received the honor of being preferred
to this Office.

I confess, I should deem my self very unhappy if I should deservedly fall
under this Censure but Custom (which I have said before is a grand Imposer)
exercises its Tyranny in nothing more than in Creating in Man a habit of
Understanding things much other wise then the reason of the thing will bear;
and many practices (upon this account) that in themselves are very unbecoming
and unwarrantable, are not seldom urged and enforced as most commendable and
necessary, And I doubt not, but that upon a due consideration of this matter,
this will appear to be our Case.

This City is indeed a great and opulent City, full of People and Trade; a City
eminent for the great Charters, Privileges, and Immunities with which it is
Invested; Renowned for its many Courts, and Counsels, Companies, and Societies,
and for the good Laws therein Instituted and Ordained for the better Government
of the several Ranks and Orders of men amongst them, whereby they are enabled
to obtain their own Justice, maintain their own Peace, and pursue all the good
and advantageous ends of Trade, with the better success and greater security.

And as the happiness and good estate of this City does depend upon the right
use and improvement of these advantages, and upon a due and righteous Execution
of those good Laws, so the honor and esteem which this great City most justly
finds from all men both at home and abroad, does principally result and arise
from hence.

I confess there is another thing that does well befit this great City, which
we call State and Grandeur, which (though it is far below, and differs in the
esteem of wise men, as much from that honor which I have before described, as
my Lord Mayors Horse accoutred with his richest Furniture and Trappings, does
from that honorable Person that sits upon him, clothed with eminency of
Power and Authority) is found nevertheless most necessary to attract that
Reverence from the Vulgar and common People toward so August a Government;
which they (giving Judgment of things more by outward appearance then by
intrinsic worth, and real value) would otherwise hardly give to the greatest
Potentates.

To this end the City has its several Ensigns of Authority and Power fitted to
all Degrees of Magistracy, and showing the place they bear in the Government
with becoming greatness. They have their solemn Processions and Cavalcades, set
forth with Habits, Equipage, Attendants, and other Ornaments, suitable to the
several degrees and orders of Men, for the greater State.

They have also their Public Shows and Triumphs upon set times and occasions,
edorned with much splendour, to entertain and divert the People with Gaze and
Admiration.

And they have (besides these) their Public Feasts upon set times and solemn
occasions of Assembling and rejoicing together for their refreshment. And I do
agree, that as these being practiced with that moderation, and within those
limits which the Laws of the City upon great reason have wisely Ordained, may
be of good use to the ends aforesaid; so I have not been wanting in performing
my part therein, unless it shall be said, That I have not attended those
Cavalcades and Processions, which were made last Easter to those Sermons which
ought to have been at the Spittle.

And for this I shall only say, that though I did intend to bear my part in
those Solemnities also, yet my Lord Mayor (on whose Person only I am obliged to
attend upon all Public occasions within the Liberties of London) not being in
a Condition to go abroad, and the rest (who I thought would have been more
tender impreserving that ancient Custom which had been but once Changed in
Three hundred years, (and then upon an extraordinary occasion) as I could ever
hear) being pleased (for what private reason I know not) to stear another
Course, I did not think I was obliged to suffer my self to be led by the Nose
by those that thought me unfit to be privy to their Councels, or to know the
reasons of so mysterious a Resolution for the alteration of that Ancient
Practice.

But let the Consequence of this Accident be what it will, I conceive it falls
not within our present question: as to the matter of the Sheriffs ordinary
course and way of Housekeeping, the neglect of which, is here to be Answered:
And therefore, to speak more directly to the point, I say, First, that this
(not being accounted amongst those Public Solemnities which (as I have before
noted) make up the Cities Grandeur) I conceive detracts nothing from the honor
of the City, whatever reflection it may have upon my own personal Reputation.

In the next place I do little doubt, but that the common course, and method of
the Sheriffs Housekeeping, upon due consideration will appear to be of so
little Honor, that on the contrary it will be found a great prejudice to the
City, and a real scandal to the Government that allows it; as well as an
unbecoming and unreasonable burden and slavery to him that bears it.

In this Method of Housekeeping they divide the Week into certain and set
days, some whereof are called Public days, which they employ in Feasting of
the Companies of the City, and other grand Feasts; the other called private
days, are commonly spent in Treating of particular Friends and Relations, and
such as come upon occasional Visits.

As to that of the Feasting of the Companies (of which the greatest Observation
is made) I think nothing can be less honorable to the Sheriffs, and nothing
more inconvenient to the Citizens, and prejudicial to that sober Industry by
which a Trading City thrives best.

As to the honor that accrues to the Sheriffs thereby I cannot well understand
it, since (according to the usual practice in this case) the Companies
Generally Invite themselves to the Sheriffs, and as a token of their Respects
present them with two or three Guineys toward the Charge of a double Treat;
one in Winter of the Livery Men alone, with such other persons as may
accidentally come to fill up the Tables, and the other in Summer of the same
Persons with their Wives. I must Confess as often as I consider this, it seems
to me much like that Custom in some Countries where two poor Servants being
newly Married keep a Bride Chamber (as it is Called) and making a Provision for
that purpose, Invite some of the best of the Neighborhood to a Treat, the
Issue of which imports a Gift of Money, Houshold-goods, Stock or Cattle, or
some such like Present to set up the New Housekeepers, which much exceeds the
Value of the Treat. And if in our Case the exorbitant expenses, (in which the
Sheriffs of late have generally striven to exceed one another) bring it to an
indifferent Club, I cannot see that any great honor redounds to the Sheriffs
thereby, and it is so far from obliging the Citizens, that it is become a
considerable yearly Tax upon them, which many cannot so well spare, nor would
so easily pay, were they not solicited by the Masters and Wardens of their
several Companies, urging this unreasonable Custom as the Argument for the
Payment of this Tribute.

And how great an Enemy this great expense of time, in Luxurious Eating and
Drinking is, to that sober Industry, which is the rise and glory of a Trading
City, is easily seen, and the less to be excused, since those days for
Assembling and Feasting in their several Companies at their respective Halls,
are sufficient for their reasonable Repast, and Divertisement as well as for
maintaining that Amity and Friendship, which is one of the ends of those
meetings.

And lest there should be sufficient Matter wanting for the increasing of the
Slaverie, as well as the Expense of the Sheriffs, and that this Extravagant
Course may continue the whole Year, invitations are provided for the filling up
of those Public days which are not spent in Feasting of the Companies, wherein
by an unwarrantable sort of Emulation, Men seem often to Vie one with the other
in lavishness of Expense. And others less able, being Ambitious to keep pace
with those that went before them, do not only Squander many a good Child's
Portion, but transgressing those good Laws made for the bounding of their
Expense, sometime spend in one year half, (if not the whole, of that which
they) or their Parents have been many years getting with sore labor and
travail, as manifestly appears by those who not long after they have born these
grand Offices dye Beggars, or spend the remaining part of their Lives in a Goal.

And it may be further noted, as a bad Consequence attending this
Extravagancie, to the no little detriment of the City, and diminution of its
greatness, That since Magistracy by this means is rendered so over-burdensome,
many Rich and Prudent Men, otherwise well qualified for Places of Public
Trust, and who (as matters were formerly ordered) would have embraced the
freedom of the City as a matter of Honor and great Privilege, by a wise
foresight have thought fit rather to decline it, than submit to those grand
inconveniences, which (through the neglect of those good Laws, and the Preval
ency of bad Customs) seem to be entailed on it; for which reason likewise, many
Freemen that are in all respects well qualified for so great a Trust, being
called upon for that purpose, choose rather to purchase their own Liberty, by
Paying a considerable Fine, than to bear any place in the Government; or run
the hazard of those Clamours that they should find by a more Frugal management
thereof.

In the mean time, I hope I shall endeavor to govern my self so in this
Affair, as neither to be wanting in any thing that shall be Essential to the
Duty of my place, nor to exceed so far, as for the vanity of one years jollity
or applause, to disappoint or discourage the hopes of those that may reasonably
expect some considerable share of the Fruits of my former Labors, which
(considering my Age, and that the time for the increasing of my Estate is long
since gone) ought the rather to be regarded. And I pray God, that Pride,
fullness of Bread, and Idleness, which was charged upon Sodom, and Jerusalem,
as the Cause of Gods Judgments, may not grow to that height of Excess in this
City, as to become the Ruin and Destruction of it.

There remains one part of the Objection in the matter of Housekeeping yet
behind; that is, That I keep no settled House, nor a set Table: to which,
(though I lightly touched it before) I shall give this further Answer, and I
think my Cirmstances considered, it will admit of a very easy excuse.

I conceive that my Condition, as being called out of the Country (where my
concerns lie) to serve this Office in the City, (where for many years last past
I have had no settled Habitation or Dealing) does much resemble that of some
Citizens, that having their settled aboade and business in the City, in respect
of their Estates in the Country are many times put to bear the Office of
Sheriff there; in which Case, they do not look upon themselves as obliged, nor
is it expected from the Country, that they should keep a constant House and
Table there, as they are wont to do which have their constant Residence amongst
them. And if they do attend the Judges, and the business of the County with a
sufficient Retinue, and with due Care, and make such solemn Entertainments as
the Law requires upon those occasions, no exception is taken to them; and why
more should be expected from me in the like Case, I do not well understand.

Had I a settled House and Family in this City (as commonly those that are
Chosen to this Office have) of Course I should have kept a House, and a set
Table, and should not have grudged to have enlarged it in some measure upon
this occasion; and there is this further in my Case, that being a single
Person, without Wife or Family that might require a House, and which, (besides
the divertisement of their Company) would be assisting to me in the Management
thereof, I thought I had the less reason to take upon me that melancholy piece
of trouble; and I am well assured, that those friends that would have looked
upon themselves as obliged to Visit me upon this occasion, and are the only
persons concerned in this part of the exception, will not have the worse
thoughts of me upon this account, but had rather that I should enjoy them with
wonted freedom, than out of mere Formality be confined for a year, to so great
a trouble and inconveniency, for the sake only of receiving their Visits.

The last exception that is taken to me, is that according to the example of my
Predecessors, I do not voluntarily contribute to the Necessities of the Poor
Prisoners belonging to the City Prisons, and County-Goal.

Those Capital Crimes that have been before objected, carryiing with them no
color of Truth; I take this Objection (that has much of Truth ^n it) to be
more pressing then all the rest, there being more to be pleaded for Acts of
Charity, than for profuseness.

My Contest is not with the Poor Prisoners, to whom Bowels of Compassion ought
to be shown, but with that Maladministration that has occasioned this
Grievance. The Lawyers say, That a particular mischief ought rather to be born,
then a general and public inconveniency admitted. And as those Laws which
provide for the Government of the Prisons have been much neglected by occasion
of the Sheriffs taking upon themselves this Charge, so I know not but the
putting a stop to these Payments (which are but voluntary) may give a good
occasion for enquiry into those Laws, and to the restoring of them to a due
execution, which would be of greater advantage to the Poor Prisoners than any
thing that is now done, and would also encourage others to such Charitable
Benevolencies, and Legacies, as have been formerly given for their better
support, and also prevent the loss of those charitable Donations which its said
have happened by want of due care in the Execution of the said Laws.

As the Laws of the Land do provide, that the Counties shall maintain their
Prisoners, so the Laws of this City both Ancient and Modern do place the
Government and Care of the Prisons in the Court of Aldermen and a Committee of
the City, to be Annually appointed by and out of the Common Council, as the
best Expedient our Wise and Prudent Ancestors could find, for preventing those
inconveniences under which the Poor Prisoners now groan.

And if by holding of my hand, and by those Arguments I have given to excuse my
sparingness in this and other matters, I should prove so happy as to give an
occasion for Retrieving of those good Laws which the Ancient Prudence of this
City has most plentifully Provided for preserving and promoting the good
Estate of Her Citizens, so as they may no longer lie Dormant amongst their
Records, but be put in due Execution; I think neither Prisoner, nor any Freeman
will hereafter find any just cause to complain of me.

And in effecting so good a Work, as the World would easily believe that I
should have greater satisfaction in my self, so I should not doubt in the end
of my Year, notwithstanding the great Cry that has been made against me with
so little reason, to have more thanks from the greatest part of my fellow
Citizens, upon that account; and that the Obligation would last longer with
them, then if I had according to late Example spent Eight or Nine thousand
pound in the Year of my Shrievaltie.

But this is but a good wish, that fell out occasionally in the Current of my
Discourse, a matter, rather to be desired, than effected by any thing that I
can say, or do; it is not for me to think I can bear back the strong Torrent of
Custom, when the Laws of the City are not strong enough to do it: If I shall
by this essay be able in any measure to stem that Tide of Reproach which runs
upon me with that violence, that it threatens to over-set and make Shipwreck of
my Honor and Reputation, (which is the proper Design of this Paper) I shall
deem my self in no small measure Happy and Successful.

A good name is as precious Ointment, and as I ought to Value it, so (methinks)
I should now at length be able to prevail with the World to be so just, as to
consider what real grounds or reasons there may be for so great a Noise and
Clamor; and the better to enforce this Justice, I shall lay before them, the
great example of the All-righteous Judge.

When the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was very great, and their Sin very grievous
calling for Vengeance from Heaven against the Unrighteous Inhabitants thereof,
he would not streight-way rain down Fire and Brimstone upon them; but said, I
will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the
Cry of it, which is come unto me, and if not, I will know. And we find, that he
gave Abraham leave to make the best Defense he could for them before the
Judgment came.

The Sin of Sodom was very Great and Notorious, and the Cry of it came up to
Him that could not be deceived by false Reports; therefore his Design in this
was not to salve his own Justice, but to give the credulous and ill-natured
World (which is apt to believe all the ill that is said, rather than to examine
the Truth of things:) this Great, and Early Example, as a most Sacred and
Divine Rule to Govern themselves by in all cases, of this Nature.

And if by what I have said, and here offered, I shall be able to prevail with
a too censorious World, to leave the Judgment Seat a little while, and come
down and see, whether the Matters Charged against me, be according to the Cry
thereof that is come unto them, or not, before they give final Judgment: I
think in what I have here said, I shall not have troubled my self, nor them in
vain.

FINIS.

