THE SPIRIT OF Christianity.

depiction of two flying storks or cranes fighting for a snake or worm; in the
background a town in the countryside; the whole framed by a snake with its tail
in its mouth (worm ouroboros), forming a circle (similar to the printer's
device of Sebastien Nivelle, 1523/5-1603 and Sebastien Cramoisy, 1585-1669) S.G.


LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
AS welcome as the Argument of this Treatise always is to Your Majesty, and as
happy as the Author has been to please You with his managing it, I do not
Present it yet without a great deal of diffidence. It Is now I fear too coursly
Dressed to thrust it into the Presence. I might peradventure with as good a Grace
make Your Majesty a Present of withered Flowers, or Fruit blown down and
bruised with the Fall. But Scriblers are possessed with the Spirit of
Presumption, and make bold with the Names of Princes at every turn and to every
Trifle: with which their Goodness has had so long patience, that Men offend now
by Prescription. And I perhaps most of all, who sin knowingly; and with a
strong check from the persuasion I have, that the importunity of officious
Impertinence is not the lightest of the many Burdens which sit so heavy on
Greatness. But it is mine and all Your Subjects comfort, that Your Majesty can
pardon greater Faults: And that he is secure enough from being ill received,
who entertains You with Christianity, though in never so plain a Fashion. This
comfort has flattered me into the boldness of gratifying my Ambition, by owning
to all the World how much I glory in the happiness of being

Your Majesty's Most humble, most faithful and most dutiful Subject Walter
Kirkham Blount.

TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. IN what consists the true Spirit of Christianity. Page 1. CHAP. II.
Of the Nature and Qualities of this Charity in which consists the Spirit of
Christianity; and the Idea of a Christian. Page 25. CHAP. III. Of the true
practice of Charity, according to the Spirit of Christianity. Page 38. CHAP.
IV. In what Order Christian Charity ought to be practiced. Page 53. CHAP. V. Of
the several Illusions to which the Practice of Charity is subject. Page 65.
CHAP. VI. Of the Means to acquire Christian Charity. Page 101. CHAP. VII. Three
powerful Motives to excite a Christian to acquire the Virtue of Charity. Page
110. CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion of this Discourse by way of Exhortation, to
move Christians to Charity. Page 124.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 18. read blood shed. p. 19. l. 8. r. coveted to. p. 60. l. 6. r.
one soul. p. 69. l. 3. r. too much. p. 70. l. 25. r. as we ought. p. 87. l. 18.
r. Command. p. 93. l. 21. r. is it self. p. 94. l. 6. r. Devotion; p. 96. l. 5.
r. they advance. p. 97 l. 24. r. reflect on: p. 100. l. 10. r. opened to. l.
20. r. Is it as much. l. 26. r. the mean? p. 120. l. 26. r. reign so. p. 118.
l. 17. r. life the.

THE SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY.
CHAP. I. In what consists the true Spirit of Christianity.
THe Name of Christian, a Name sanctified by the Lives of the Apostles, who
were the first Faithful, and consecrated by the blood of so many Martyrs, a
Name so divine, that it filled the World heretofore with the fame of its glory,
is at present but as a glimmering light just going out, and as a faint shadow
of what it was in its infancy. It Is true, that there never was, perhaps, so
much talk of Christianity as in these latter Times; for every place now rings
with the Duties of a Profession so holy; Nothing is in our mouth, but the first
Ages, and purity of the Spirit of the Primitive Church: but after all, we may
say very justly, there were never so few true Christians as now adays. The
looseness, the excess, the corruption of manners in these Times, have so
disfigured in our hearts the features of this most sacred Character, that there
scarce remains the least sign of it. Fain would we enjoy the honor belonging to
this Name, without knowing the price of it; We attribute to our selves this
glorious quality, without concern for what is to be done to deserve it; And we
vainly boast our selves to be, without so much as knowing by what spirit we
ought to be Christians. Thus we lose the advantage of so elevated a dignity,
through the little care we take to learn its obligations. It Is then to be
wished, that to remedy this evil, a Christian be instructed in the nobleness of
his Condition, and holiness of its Duties, by making him comprehend what the
Spirit of Christianity is. It is a Design of such importance, that I should
have been far enough from undertaking it of my self, had not God inspired me to
do it, as much for my own instruction, as the edification of such as shall take
the pains to read this small Treatise.

Although one cannot be a Christian but by Faith: yet one cannot live and act
like a Christian but by Charity; since the Spirit of Christianity consists only
in Charity. To understand this Truth, we need only consider the Motives of the
Incarnation and Passion of Jesus Christ, which are the two fundamental
Mysteries of Christian Religion. In effect, as we are only Christians by the
heavenly alliance of the Son of God with our Nature, and by the inestimable
price of his Blood; we degenerate from that Spirit wherein we were conceived,
if we partake not in the holy motions of that fervent Charity, which was the
principle of these Mysteries. For the Savior of the World became Man merely to
save Man. In his Incarnation he took on himself our infirmities, only to free
us from them. He embraced poverty in his birth, only to enrich us; He suffered
death in his Passion, only to give us life; And what is more to be admired, Man
was worthy of nothing but his hate, when God gave him such signal testimonies
of his love.

Before this ineffable Mystery, we had some Idea of the Greatness, Power, and
Majesty of God; but we had, says S. Paul, no manner of knowledge of his Mercy
and Goodness. The excess of this love has appeared in the sequel, so much above
the wit of Man, that all human reason, as Salvian assures us, has not hitherto
been well able to justify the disproportion of the price of the death of an
innocent Son, which God gave, to redeem guilty Servants. It Is true, that from
the first step the Son of God made, by his Incarnation, toward the Salvation
of Mankind, the whole course of his life appears very opposite to ours. He
would be born in poverty and distress, who might have been born in greatness
and plenty; to teach us, that he seeks us, not our wealth and treasure; and
that he requires nothing of us, but our selves: He concerns himself with
nothing else. He is so far from avoiding our ignominy, that he made himself
like us, only to take it upon him; and divests himself of his Greatness, to
cloth himself with our meanness.

But to give us yet greater testimonies of his love, he transforms himself into
all shapes that tenderness can inspire, to do us good. Now he is a sollicitous
Shepherd, running after the strayed Sheep, to bring him back to the Flock. Then
he is a Father, compassionate of the misery to which debauchery had brought his
Son, whom he reclaims, by managing the spirit of the young Man, with all the
tenderness in the bowels of a Father. A Traveller is wounded by Thieves on the
Road to Jericho, and he becomes a Physician to his Wounds. A Samaritan Woman is
desirous to see Jesus, and he charitably sets himself to instruct her, thereby
to gain her: and that thirst he would quench, by drinking the Water he demanded
from her, is only the figure of a greater thirst and zeal which he had for her
salvation. He humbles himself to appear unto Magdalen, even like a Gardener;
and to comfort her, he converses familiarly with her in so mean an outside. To
be short, he becomes a Traveller with the Disciples going to Emaus, to free
them from that doubt and trouble into which their distrust had thrown them.

The Gospel is full of a thousand other testimonies of his bounty toward us.
When we fly from him, he follows us; He calls us, when we forget him: He
pressingly urges us, when we will not hear him. When we slight him, he
complains kindly of us: And when we return to him, after having offended him,
he seems so sensible, that he takes more pleasure to make his own joy, and that
of his whole celestial Court break out at the repentance of one sinner, then
at the fidelity and perseverance of a great number of Just; because his glory
appears more in pardoning, then punishing. St. John thunders forth nothing but
threats and terrors to his Hearers, because he speaks in the spirit of Elias:
Jesus Christ says nothing but what is sweet and mild; because he speaks
according to his own Maxims, and in his own Spirit, which is that of the law
of Grace.

But never did the love of God toward Man appear more, then at his Passion.
For that very night, wherein Man conspired his death, this God of goodness
thought of nothing but to leave him marks of his mercy and tenderness: And at
the same time that one of his Disciples, by the blackest of Treasons, betrayed
him to his Enemies to be put to death, he gave his most sacred Body for food
for their Souls. He died at last loaded with reproach and ignominy, after
having been dragged from Tribunal to Tribunal, forsaken by his own Disciples,
and abandoned by all the World. He died a public and infamous Death, nailed to
a Cross; amidst the Blasphemies of those that put him to death: But he died
with a silence, a sweetness, a tranquillity, a patience, a peace, and quiet,
which astonished his very Executioners. They reproacht him when he was dying,
that he could save others, but not himself. Nor was this reproach without
reason, because he thought no longer of himself, but only of men. And amidst
the horrors of so cruel a Death, plunged in a sea of grief and bitterness, he
never opened his dying eyes, nor turned them toward heaven, but to implore the
mercy of his Father, even for those that put him to death, saying, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. He shed his Blood, he died for
the salvation of the Executioners that crucified him. What excess of love! How
incomprehensible to our capacity! S. Chrisostom had reason to say, That the
greatest testimony Christ gave of his Divinity, was the extending his love even
to all those who killed him: for, nothing less then God could love at a rate,
so much above the reach of Man.

But though the Expressions of that love which the Son of God had for Man, are
very observable in diverse places of the Old Testament, under the Figures of the
Patriarchs and Prophets: yet are they nowhere more strong and tender, then in
the New Testament, where Christ himself speaks of it, as of one of the most
essential Points of his Doctrine. So as the whole Morality of the Gospel turns
on this Principle, That the true Spirit of Christianity is, to have charity for
on's Neighbor. Every thing conspires to settle there this important Maxim,
which is the fundamental Point of our Religion. For, though the Evangelists
wrote nothing by agreement, and that the Gospel seems to have been published,
rather upon occasion, then by design: yet since it is the Doctrine of their
Master they write, we find therein so great a conformity of Sentiments on this
Principle of Christian Charity, that it sufficiently appears by their manner of
declaring it, there is nothing more essential to Christianity, then the love of
our Neighbor. The whole law, says St. Matthew, is comprehended in this
precept. It Is the most important of all, says St. Mark. Jesus Christ carries it
to a higher pitch of perfection, in St. Luke; where he obliges the faithful,
represented by his Apostles, To love their enemies, to do good for evil, and to
pray for their calumniators. Last of all, St. John, who knew most of his
Masters secrets, and penetrated deepest into his thoughts, places the essential
mark of a Christian, in the love of our Neighbor. By this all men shall know,
says our Savior by the mouth of this Apostle, that you are my disciples, if
you love one another. This is the commandment of the law of Grace, whereunto is
reduced all the perfection of the New Testament; And the Savior of the World
recommended nothing so earnestly to his Disciples, in the last moments of his
life, as Concord and Union: Because this Union was to be the foundation of the
Religion he established.

The Evangelists do not only speak all according to this Principle; but it is
apparent the same Spirit makes them speak. They treat their friends and enemies
both alike in their History. A God murdered by men, and an innocent man
oppressed by calumny, might have afforded their zeal some reason for
exaggeration: yet they allow themselves nothing, which has any show of emotion
or violence. They relate the treason of Judas, the cruelty of the Executioners,
the injustice and violence of the Magistrates, without any touch of bitterness
against their persons. They speak in a way, apt to make one believe, they had
no concern in what they say. A spirit so uninterested is without example, and
whereof the common sort of men are incapable. It Is only Christianity, that is
to say, a Discipline wholly celestial, which can inspire so much moderation.

We see the first fruits of this Spirit in the Acts of the Apostles, which is
the History of the establishment of Christianity. For, as the Historian
relates, the Christians did then live in such a Union, as if they had all one
and the same heart, and one and the same soul The propriety of Goods, which
ordinarily causes dissentions amongst men, was no obstacle to this Union; for
all their Goods were in common: They brought, and laid at the feet of the
Apostles, their Revenues, Rents, Bonds, Contracts, Jewels, and all the Wealth
which each one possessed. This disengagement from all things, united them more
firmly together: They had but one spirit, because they had but one interest.

The first flames of this love broke out at the death of St. Stephen, who had
the glory to lay his life first down for Jesus Christ: Stones flew about him
from all parts; The Plains echoed with the cries of those that encouraged one
another to kill this holy Levite; His face was battered with blows, his ribs
broken, his breast beaten through, his breath even quite gone, and yet he
employed the little strength he had left, in begging Gods pardon for those that
had treated him so cruelly: Lord, says he as he was dying, lay not this sin to
their charge. Thus to forget himself, and employ his last words and sighs, in
soliciting God in behalf of a Crime committed upon himself, was to tread the
very steps of his Master, and to be wholly possessed with his spirit; and to have
no thoughts but these of tenderness, in the very pangs of so cruel and bitter a
death, was to die generously like a Christian. How pure and holy is the Spirit
of Christianity, which inspired so much mercy; and of how great instruction to
Christians, the sacrifice of this first bloodshed for the love of Jesus!

We see in the progress of the same History, the Apostles animated by this
Spirit, to run through the whole World, to preach and teach the Gospel to all
Nations: And that neither the most scorching Sands of Aethiopia, nor the
Deserts of Africa, nor the Frosts of Scythia, nor the remotest parts of India,
nor Seas, nor Tempests, nor Rocks, nor Treasons, nor Calumnies, nor
contradiction of People, nor opposition of Laws, nor Magistrates, nor Governors
of Provinces, nor all the Power of the World, nor Chains, nor Prisons, nor
Gibbets, nor even the most cruel Deaths, were able to withstand their zeal, nor
shake the constancy of their hearts. Dangers encourage them, difficulties
animate them, and their own weaknesses strengthen them: Because the charity by
which they are possessed, renders their own lives inconsiderable, when the
salvation of their Neighbor is in question. The truth is, they did miracles,
which struck people with admiration. They commanded the Winds, and Tempests,
Seasons obeyed them, and even Nature her self in some sort became their Slave:
But after all, the greatest of their Miracles, was their Charity. 'Twas also
this Charity, which made them with pleasure sacrifice their honor and life, to
carry the light of the Gospel to the most remote Nations of the Earth, and draw
them out of the profound blindness, wherein they were. This holy Doctrine flew
through the World, whilst those that preached it, were themselves in Chains and
Prisons: And nothing persuaded so powerfully the embracing of the Gospel, as
the Charity of those that published it. Things in themselves incredible were
believed, though declared by such as were persecuted by the whole World;
because they that told them, did first practice themselves what they taught
others; Nor was it necessary they should Preach at all, says St. Chrysostom,
because their life was a continual Sermon. It Is true, that the Infidels were
scandalized at their Persecutions, their Fetters, their Imprisonments, and
their Sufferings: But the very Union, in which they lived, was so powerful,
that they, who most reviled their Sufferings, submitted to the Gospel.

St. Paul likewise inflamed with the same zeal, could not behold the
reprobation of the Jews, a People heretofore so cherisht by God, without
offering up himself in quality of a Victim, and wishing himself anathematized
for his Brethren. He, who had so highly protested, that neither Heaven, nor
Hell, nor any thing created, should be able to separate him from Jesus Christ;
now begs to be separated from him, for the salvation of his People. St. John,
that beloved Disciple of our Lord, had nothing so deeply engraven in his heart,
as this love for his Neighbor. This was the only practice of virtue he preached
to his Disciples, as an abridgment of the whole Law of Grace, as St. Jerome
assures us. Love one another, says he, my dear children, it is the only thing I
have to tell you, because it is the only thing needful to be done. He of all
others speaks most clearly of this Doctrine, because he had the advantage of
others, to sound the Sentiments of his Master, by reason of the confidence
Jesus Christ was pleased to honor him with above his other Apostles.

Throughout the whole course of Ecclesiastical History there are found such
eminent tracts of this Spirit, that it seems as if the Christians endeavored
only by Charity to distinguish themselves from Pagans. In their lives there
appeared such visible marks of that new fire, which Christ came to bring into
the World, that Christians were known by their Union: And this fire, wherewith
their hearts were full, flamed with such a light, that it could not be darkened
with Calumny, nor extinguished by Persecution. It was likewise that voice of
Love and Charity, which in preaching of the Gospel, was understood by the
fiercest and most barbarous Nations, and afterward did chiefly contribute to
the establishment of Faith. The Heathens said, speaking of the Faithful, They
are obliging, charitable, always doing good; therefore they are Christians: for
their Belief, their Morality, and their Gospel, is to love their Neighbor, and
do good to every one. They believed this new Religion true, because it
commanded one Man to love another, which is the most reasonable and just
Command of all others. They became Christians, perceiving in how perfect an
Union the Christians lived. Their meekness, goodness, affability, moderation,
and inclination to oblige every one, more powerfully moved the Heathens to
embrace the Doctrine which professed so well-doing a Virtue, then all they did.
And the Faith advanced the faster, by the good opinion people had conceived of
his holiness, who was author of so pure a Law: according to the Prayer himself
had made to his Father, speaking of the Faithful; to the end, says he, they may
be united in us, and that the world touched with this Union, may believe that it
is you, my Father, who has sent me. The Union wherein Christians ought to live,
is the chief Reason Christ uses to authorize his Mission, and excite peoples
Faith.

In effect, this Union was so great in the first Ages, that St. Clement, a
Disciple of the Apostles, relates in one of his Epistles, that he had known
diverse Christians in his time, who themselves became Slaves, to free their
Brethren out of Slavery; and that he had seen others, who in a painful and
laborious life, fed with the labors of their Hands those that were in
necessity. St. Justin, in the Apology he made for Religion, before the
Emperors, to give those Princes a great Idea of Christianity, mixes throughout
his Discourse, the holy Ordinances which Jesus Christ gave the Christians, to
be charitable and well-doing; like their heavenly Father, who pours forth his
Graces on the good and the bad. Tertullian, in the Defense he made of our
Religion in the Reign of the Emperor Severus, sets forth most admirably well,
the great Love and Union among Christians, whereby they gained the esteem of
the People.

It Is true, that in the Reign of the Emperor Vespatian, the Christians did so
often and liberally assist the imprisoned Martyrs with their temporal Goods,
that notorious Thieves counterfeited themselves Christians, and cast themselves
into Prison, that so they might partake of their succor. A while after the
Disorders were so great in Africa, that a Bishop of Carthage to remedy them,
was necessitated to forbid the Christians to give these Alms, because the
Heathens themselves did privately scoff at the Abuses they committed therein.

But in process of time, these Succors becoming more needful, through the
great number of Martyrs, which increased with the Persecution, the Alms were so
regulated by St. Cyprian, that he took away the abuse, without diminishing the
abundance. The same S. Cyprian did by his Discourses, so inflame the Charity of
the Carthaginians, that he gathered a vast sum of Money, and therewith redeemed
a great number of Christian Captives, whom the Barbarians had carried into
Slavery, when they entered the Confines of Numidia.

The Charity of the Christians was more conspicuous under the Emperor
Gallienus, in the heat of that Civil War, which had almost ruined the City of
Alexandria: as Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea relates in his History. The
reciprocal assistance that Christians gave each other, was the more remarkable,
because the City was divided by two Factions, extremely animated against each
other. But this spirit of Union was yet more eminent, in that dismal Plague
which followed the War, and destroyed that City, before most flourishing: They
saw there, says Eusebius, the Christians continually about the Dying, and
courageously exposing themselves to death, in exhorting them to offer up their
lives, in the submission of their heart: And after having received their last
sighs with pleasure, they saw them wash, kiss, and bury their Bodies; Whilst
among the Pagans, Neighbor became jealous of Neighbor, Friend distrusted
Friend; they that were nearest related forsook each other in extremity. The
Father left the Son, and the tenderest Mothers caused the dead Bodies of their
own Children to be cast out of the Windows. In truth, the Christians, that died
in the Duties of such fervent Charity, drew so great veneration from all
people, that the Church of Alexandria registered them among the number of
Martyrs, whereof she keeps a public Festival the last of February: And
Eusebius mentions this Feast in his History.

After all, there is nothing gives so lively a character of the Charity which
then flourished among Christians, as what happened to St. Pacomius. He being
yet a Heathen, and having Listed himself into the Troops of the Emperor
Licinius, after a long and troublesome Journey, arrived at last at Thebes. When
all the Army came thither, the Christians of that City brought them, with great
joy and forwardness, all sort of Refreshments. This made him enquire who those
charitable People were, that came thus thronging to relieve every one? They
answered him, they were Christians, who professed 'twas their duty to do good
to all the World. Metaphrastus testifies, that Pacomius was so touched with this
spirit of well-doing, that he ardently courted to be one of those so holy men,
and he obtained his desire: for shortly after this accident he obtained the
Grace of God to become a Christian. Evagrius makes an admirable description of
that Union wherein the Christians lived at Thebes, where the Faith was still in
its primitive fervor.

Eusebius tells us, in the Life of Constantine, that the humility of
Christianity had in such manner annihilated in the soul of this Prince that
pride, which Sovereignty inspires, that when he became Master of the Empire, he
no longer looked on his Subjects as his Slaves, as the other Emperors had done,
but he regarded them as his Brothers, and Fellow Servants of the same Master,
and same God that he adored: And he made no other use of his Imperial Purple,
then to fortify his Authority, that he might make holy Ordinances for the ease
of his People, and satisfy his great inclination to do good to such as God had
put under his Power.

The Forces of the Emperor Theodosius being arrived at Antioch, to punish those
that had thrown down his Statues, the Hermits of the neighboring Mountains and
Deserts round about, appeared all at once issuing out of their solitary
Dwellings and Caves, to implore clemency of the Emperors Officers, for such as
had offended. Our Prince (cried out these holy Hermits) is a Christian, he will
have compassion when he shall know our Complaints: and we ought not to suffer
you to embrue your Hands in the blood of our Brethren. These holy Men, being
repulsed by the Soldiers, addressed themselves to the Officers, and obtained a
delay of the punishment. They immediately put to Sea, and being arrived at
Constantinople, cast themselves at the Emperors feet, and offered their own
Heads to save those that were guilty. The whole Court admired the zeal of so
fervent a Charity: And St. Chrysostom assures us, that the Emperor having
pardoned their Offense, gained more honor by this act of his clemency, then he
ever did by the luster of his Diadem. This great Saint could not cease from
praising the Law of Jesus Christ, which had been so powerful to suppress the
rage of so mighty a Prince, and to inspire him with such a mild temper, as few,
even private, persons are capable of.

It Is by the fervor of this Spirit too, that so many illustrious Ladies, who
in the first Ages were the greatest Ornaments of Christianity, the Paula's, the
Marcella's, the Albina's, the Melania's, the Flaccilla's, the Paulina's, did
more honor to Religion, then by the nobleness of their Blood and Birth, or the
splendor of their Fortune. The stream of Ecclesiastical History is filled with
Examples expressing this Character, which then was found in Emperors and
private persons, in great and in little, in Men and Women; for in effect, this
was the true Spirit of Christianity, which in following Ages was found more or
less fervent, according as Religion flourished more or less. True it is, that
this Charity never showed its self in its full purity, but at its birth: and
its brightness appeared so much the greater at the beginning, as the Grace that
encouraged it was more strong and more abundant: But although it seem, that
Christianity is become more weak and faint, as it runs on farther from its
Source, through the course of so many Ages; yet from time to time some sparks
have showed themselves of this divine fire of Charity, which is the soul of it.

In these latter Times, as well as in the first Ages, Paulin's have been seen
selling their own Liberties, to deliver their Brethren from Servitude. There
has been found more then once a John Calabite, and a John Almoner, who have
divested themselves of all things, to give all to the Poor. It Is read in St.
Anselm, that Elphegus Archbishop of Canterbury, who lived in the beginning of
the eleventh Age, being taken Prisoner by the Enemy, chose rather to die, then
consent his Flock should be overcharged for the ransom of his life. I say
nothing of St. Bernardin of Siena, nor of St. Charles, who so Christianlike
exposed their lives, to assist at their death those infected with the Plague. I
do not mention St. Francis Xaverius, who left his Country, House and Hopes, to
run to the utmost parts of the World after Salvages and Barbarians, to instruct
them in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And amidst the deplorable remisness of the Manners of this Age, how many great
Interests, great Honors, great Reputations, great Hopes, have we seen
sacrificed in the generous exercise of Christian Charity? How many Persons of
Quality, how many eminent Wits, with sublime Talents, how many tender and
delicate Ladies, have submitted themselves most willingly to the pains of a
laborious and obscure life, to succor their Neighbors? We have seen in the
old Age of Christianity, and in the corruption of this Age, Apostolical Men
cross the Seas, to go and instruct Infidels, and bring them into the right way.

To conclude, this Spirit of the Apostles, which God has revived in some
measure in these latter Times, and this so fervent zeal for the salvation of
Souls, is so apparently the true Spirit of Christianity, and the essential
distinction between the Children of the Church and others which are not of it;
That though it be above an Age since some of our Neighbors, who have unhappily
left the Faith, run into all parts of the World, there to plant Traffic and
Commerce, which flourish amongst them: yet there has not yet appeared any one
Pastor of their Communion, that has had the virtue and courage to give his life
to Baptize one Salvage, and Convert one Infidel. So true it is, that the
disinteressedness and purity of Christian Charity, cannot be so much as
counterfeited by Heretics; who impudently boast themselves to inherit the
Faith of the Apostles: when in reality they have not any mark of their Zeal, or
sign of their Spirit; since they can behold without any concern, the People
with whom they Traffic continually, in a profound ignorance of things
necessary to their salvation. For what means the indifferency of these false
Pastors, who, without the least compassion, see the Flock of Jesus Christ
scattered and straying? What means this so cold tranquillity, but what our Lord
himself said, That the true Pastor, (whereof himself was the Model) is always
ready to give his life for his Flock; and that the mercenary Pastor concerns
not himself for the Flock of Jesus Christ, because he is an Hireling? Its in
Charity then alone consists the true Spirit of Christianity we seek after. She
is that precious Jewel of the Gospel, which must be purchased at any rate, to
become the truly rich of the new Law. Let us then renounce our Interests and
Pleasures, if they are obstacles to our possessing it. But to animate our
selves still more to acquire it, let us look into its value, by considering its
nature and qualities. Its that must be examined in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the nature and qualities of this Charity, in which consists the
Spirit of Christianity; and the Idea of a Christian.
IT IS natural for Man to love Man; But it is a great virtue to love him for his
virtues sake: for love that is founded on honesty, wisdom, good inclination,
fidelity, or any other real merit, is a virtue, and it is laudable to love these
qualities, which are themselves worthy of praise. But after all, thus to love,
is to love but like a Heathen: for the Pagans love those that love them, and
such as have qualities worthy their love. What is it then to love like a
Christian? It Is to love without hearkening to Nature, which wills that we love
our like; It Is to love, even without consulting our Reason, which requires that
we love what is worthy to be beloved. Nature and Reason do not comprehend this
Secret: The Gospel must speak, and it is Jesus Christ himself must teach it. To
love like a Christian, is to love that which has nothing amiable; It Is to have
a kindness and tenderness for those that have all unkindness and rigor for us:
In fine, to love like a Christian, is to desire the good of those that wish us
nothing but ill.

This Virtue was unknown to the Morals of Socrates and Moses, to Philosophy and
the old Law. The Precept to love our Enemies, is of the new Law; And this so
holy Maxim could not come but out of the School of God, so much it is raised
above Man. It Is indeed Jesus Christ is the Author of it, and himself in Person
that instructs us: But I say to you, love your Enemies, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them that calumniate, and persecute you. These are the
words of the Savior of the World: Behold our Belief, our Gospel, our Morality,
and the true Character of our Religion. The other marks of a Christian, as
Devotion, Penance, Hope in God, Humility, and even Martyrdom it self, may be
equivocal marks: It Is only the love of our Enemies that is not: It Is hereby
alone that a Christian can distinguish himself; and to embrace the Faith, is to
embrace the obligation to love the Persecutor, in loving the Persecution.

But how can a man love that which merits his hate, when he has scacre power to
love that which deserves to be beloved? What violence must not he use to
himself before he gains that Point? He needs not use any; for from the instant
that he sincerely becomes a Christian, he loves his Enemies as really as his
Friends; And the same Motive that makes a Christian love God, the same also
makes him love his Neighbor as a Child of God; for he sees reflect on him a
beam of the same light, that makes himself know God. Although his Brother be
his Enemy; from the time that he regards him as a Member of Jesus Christ,
sprinkled with his Blood, fed with his Flesh, enlivened with his Spirit,
destined to his Glory; that he professes the same Law and Religion as he does;
that they have both the same Hopes, the same Pretensions, the same Sacraments;
and when he considers Jesus Christ in his Neighbor, as the motive of his
Charity, he loves him: And Flesh, Blood, Nature, Reason, Interest, and Passion,
are too weak Considerations to disunite Hearts tied together by so holy an
Union; that is to say, by all that is supernatural and divine in Christianity.
So, the motive of the love of our Neighbor being the same with the motive of
our love of God, as St. Leo teaches; both the one and the other being grounded
on the same principle, and tending to the same end; a Christian cannot be
failing in the one, without failing in the other; since the same ray of Faith
which enlightens his spirit to know God, ought to inflame his heart to love his
Neighbor. For with what sincerity can he boast he loves God whom he does not
see, and not love his Neighbor whom he sees, and who represents to him that
same God he boasts that he loves, as the Apostle says? Behold what is the nature
of Christian Charity, that in effect cannot love her Neighbor, but with the
same love wherewith she loves God: which made St. John say, That he who has
charity is in God, and God in him: Let us then examine the qualities of this
Charity.

The First quality of this Virtue is, that it is Universal, and cannot suffer to
be bounded in the extent of its love: for it loves the little and the great,
the poor and the rich, the wretched and the happy, the peevish and the
complaisant, the stranger and the domestic, him that merits to be beloved, and
him that deserves not. Wherein it is in some sort like God, who shares his gifts
to the worthy and unworthy, and pours forth his light on the just and unjust.
In fine, this Virtue embraces equally the whole World: It Is an universal
spirit, that knows none of those carnal and Heathenish distinctions, of
Engagement, Interest, Party, Cabal, of Paul and Cephas, which divide at present
so many petty spirits in the World. For, according to St. Augustine, To love all
men, and to pretend to except but one, with whom he is not entirely satisfied,
and not able to bear with for some particular reasons; is not to love like a
Christian. A Christian has an universal love, because the motive of it is
general: the change of Times, Places, and Circumstances, can make no alteration
in his love; he loves in sickness and health, in adversity and prosperity, in
affliction and joy, in humiliation and greatness, in dejection and advancement,
in poverty and plenty, to be short, he loves in life and in death; because he
is that sincere Friend of whom the Scripture speaks, who loves at all times. He
fixes his heart on the Persons without regarding the Circumstances, unless it
be to love after a more disinteressed manner, and when necessity more requires
it. Behold the first quality of Christian Charity.

The Second is Sincerity: Let us love, says St. John, but let us testify our
love by effects, and not by words: The Character of humane Love consists only
in Complements, Civilities, tender of Services, protestations of Amity,
strained Complacencies, false Friendships, vain Words, deceitful Promises, and
in all other Dissimulations, which are commonly practiced by those that lead a
worldly life. But Christian Charity never counterfeits: she speaks nothing but
what she thinks: she thinks nothing but what she feels, she feels nothing but
what she would execute: her words never belie her actions, and her actions are
always conformable to her Sentiments; for she is essectially sincere, and has
no other way to explain her self, but by her deeds.

The Third quality of this Virtue, is Purity of spirit, and a perfect
disinteressedness: for true Charity respects God alone, and studies purely to
please him: so as she never acts upon those mean and worldly Considerations of
Interest and Vanity, which set men awork: for Men do seldom good to one
another, but out of hopes of Interest. It Is on these Maxims they would have all
the World know when they do their Friend any service; they are only officious
to gain repute; and oblige only to publish it: If they are silent, it is for
some private reason that they see it fit to hold their tongue. Christian
Charity has a contrary way of proceeding to this worldly Charity: she has no
other design or pretension, because her motive is pure. All her study in doing
good, is how to conceal her doing it: If she gives Alms, she hides them in the
Laps of the Poor, as the Scripture says; she draws a Veil over all her good
Deeds, that they may not be known, and she would hide them even from her own
self, were it possible, to entrust them only to her modesty and silence. The
pleasure she takes in doing good is to her a greater recompense, then all the
applauses of Men. As she does nothing but for God, so she would have no other
witness of her actions. He is the sole motive of the good works she does; and
it suffices he knows them, to be himself their recompense.

The other qualities of Charity St. Paul explicates in the admirable Elogy he
made of this Virtue to the Corinthians: Charity (says this Apostle) is patient,
is benign. Charity envies not, deals not perversely, is not puffed up, is not
ambitious, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinks not evil,
rejoices not upon iniquity, but rejoices with the truth, suffers all things,
believes all things, hopes all things, bears all things: These qualities become
yet more lustrous in the life of a Christian, which is a continual practice and
exercise of this Virtue. It Is good to make hereof some Idea, only to show what
it is in respect to our Neighbors: The lineaments of so admirable a picture,
which length of time has almost decayed, cannot be well traced over again,
without gathering thence some profit.

A Christian is altogether an interior Man, who has nothing of the corruptible
Man in us, but the outward shape: but there appears so much of moderation and
wisdom even in his exterior, and Gods Grace has so powerfully destroyed his
natural inclinations, to sanctify all his interior, that he is a pattern to
other men, because he is more reasonable, and better governed then other men.
His chief character is the spirit of Equity: And of all Virtues, Justice is
that which he most accustoms himself to, because she always serves him to hold
the balance even betwixt himself and his Neighbor. His business is not to
raise his fortune, but his perfection, and to help others to make themselves
perfect: And his ordinary employment is to instruct, help, protect, and serve
his Brethren: but he does it with so much love, so much zeal, and so much
disinteressedness; that there is no man loves himself so well, as a Christian
loves his Neighbor. His Neighbors interest is more dear to him then his own:
and he is less concerned for his own honor then his Brethrens; for he counts
their advantages among his own, he draws his satisfaction from their pleasures:
And by an unparalleled complacency he transforms himself into their humor, and
assumes sometimes even their spirit. He is that universal Man, who, as St.
Paul, is every thing to every one: He is the comfort of the afflicted, the
support of the feeble, the succor of the needy, the refuge of the persecuted,
and the counsel of all those that want it. In fine, there is no weakness that
he does not compassionate, and no misery at which his bowels are not moved. He
is so far from desiring what he has not, like the generality of men, that he is
always ready to give what he has. If modesty appears in his Dress, frugality at
his Table, simplicity in his Household Stuff, and good Husbandry throughout;
it is but, by his contempt of luxury, to save wherewithal he may provide for the
necessity of the Poor, to whom he gives his helping hand in all their wants.
His Estate is the Poor's, because their poverty is his.

The sole luster of Charity shines in every thing he does, without any mixture
of the least smoke of vanity. His modesty throws out all Sentiments of his own
glory, and he knows no other but that of beneficence, and obliging all the
world: So that he does not heap up Wealth to enrich himself, but therewith to
do good to others: It Is not to be knowing he studies, but to serve those that
are not: He has Riches only for the Poor, and Learning for the Ignorant. Nor is
it for himself that he is powerful, wise, understanding, and ready at Business,
but only that by these qualities he may be more beneficial to his Neighbor:
And he has no sagacity, but the better to discern the spirit of others, and to
look on them on the more favorable side. Though amongst the proud he has the
simplicity of the Dove, yet amongst the wicked and impious, according to the
counsel of the Gospel, he has the prudence of the Serpent. He knows how to make
advantage of their defects, and the depravedness of the most corrupted spirits
serve him for instructions; for by their weakness he regulates his power.

When he is raised in Dignity, and his Deserts have placed him above his
Brethren, to govern them; Then is he like the good Pastor of the Gospel, who
felt more grief for the straying of one of his Sheep, then joy for being Master
of a whole Flock. He always looks on a sinner with a Father-like eye, he
bewails him in his disorders, he suffers him with patience, and treats him with
mildness, not oppressing him with the weight of his Authority, that is already
overwhelmed with the pressure of his Crime: He is tenderhearted and
compassionate even when his Duty obliges him to be harsh and severe. His
severities are far more amiable then the caresses of others; for when he
punishes, he does not heed so much the punishment of the Offense, as the
correction of the Offender. So that in his height in respect of other Men, he
is like the Candle in the Gospel, which enlightens the whole House. His
carriage is the model of Christian comportment, and his life a public
instruction for all virtuous People.

He first imposes on himself the whole weight of that yoke which he is obliged
to impose on others; and as zeal in words becomes fruitless, if not supported
by that of actions, himself practices by an exemplary life, what he would
persuade others. Whatever outrage is done him, cannot make him hate the doer.
He understands not returnng injury for injury, nor knows what anger is; and he
is so much master of his resentments, when any injustice is done him, that he
finds it far less difficult to forget, then to remember the offense. But
nothing shows so much his dominion over his own heart, as the quiet he enjoys
in the general agitation and heat which other men discover in their Affairs.
His mildness, his patience, his innocence, and his sincerity, are then all the
crafts and politics he uses. His conscience is not only clear in respect of
the interests he has to determine with others: but his heart clean in the
judgment he makes of them; for he judges every thing without prejudice: All
appears innocent to him, because all he does is without deceit. In fine, his
chief care is to preserve an equality of mind, amidst the inequalities of the
Affairs of the World: which concern him no farther, then the connection they
have with the glory of God, or salvation of his Neighbor.

Behold what it is to be a Christian: and not to counterfeit unseasonably the
zealot about the carriage of others; to be very solicitous for their
perfection, and careless for ones own; to trouble ones head for them, and never
think of ones self; to talk of nothing but the primitive Faithful, cite nothing
but the ancient Canons, and deplore the remisness of the Church: Nor is it in
the refinements of Discipline and Reformation which sound so big every where,
or in those intrigues of dissembled Devotion, in which they place the Virtue of
this Age, that the Spirit of Christianity consists. The true Christian is a Man
simple, retired, little in his own eyes, which he keeps always as open and
observant of his own weaknesses, as closed against those of others. He takes
not any notice of his own advantages, he only observes those of his Neighbor:
because he has only a contempt for himself, and esteem and deference for
others. His conduct edifies all the world, and angers no body: He flies all
plausibleness even in good works; because whatever gains credit is dangerous to
Man, who is subject to mistake himself: He is no backbiter, nor peevish; no Man
of artifice, no doer of shrewd turns. Thus were the Primitive Christians: Nor
is this a vain or fruitless Idea of a Christian, or his Character that I have
drawn: for the Christians lived after this manner in the newness of spirit of
the Primitive Church. What, is this Image entirely defaced? and is this Spirit
retired wholly from us? Blessed Times when they lived thus! when will you
return? But it is not enough to know wherein Christian Charity consists; what
its nature and qualities are: if the art how to practice it be unknown.

CHAP. III. Of the true practice of Charity, according to the Spirit of
Christianity.
THere is no Virtue of a more universal use in Christianity, then Charity: It
may be practiced on all occasions, for the Poor are found every where; and the
detail of miseries, whereunto Man is subject, is of so vast extent, that one
may say it is of all Conditions. Thus Charity may be exercised to the Rich and
Poor, to the contented and discontented, to the happy and unhappy, to the
learned and ignorant, to the proud and humble, to the living and dead. So that
this Virtue may be practiced in public and private, in the light and in the
dark, at home and abroad, in the Court and the Desert, in solitude and
Assemblies; and of all Conditions that is most desirable to a Christian wherein
he has the best means to exercise Charity: as of all Talents that is the most
advantageous, which is most profitable to ones Neighbor.

The better to dispose ones self to practice this Virtue, he ought to begin
with studying the miseries of Man, which are its chiefest object: He ought to
search into the bottom of his nothingness, to know the baseness of his
beginning, the shamefulness of his birth, the poverty of his nature, the
infirmities of his infancy, the passions of his youth, the caducity of his old
age: To these ought be added the diseases and illnesses, the pains, the
incommodities, the fatigues, the accidents, and other miseries to which his
Body is subject. The miseries of his Spirit are still greater; What ignorance,
what blindness, what errors, what doubts, what contradictions in his designs,
what praeoccupation in his thoughts, what falseness in his judgments? What
shall I say of his levities, inconstancies, irresolutions, frailties,
dissimulations, nicenesses, and riots? There may be added to the heap of his
other weaknesses, the discontents and chagrins that devour him, the cares that
distract him, the afflictions that oppress him, his own desires that torment
him, the great propensity he has to evil, and his inability to do good; his
frequent falls and relapses, the number and enormity of his crimes, his abuse
of graces, the irregularity of his conduct, and the general disorder of his
whole life. In fine, S. Augustine says, Man is nothing but indigency,
corruption, and misery. Behold the first ground on which the Charity of a
Christian ought to apply his assistance according to the discretion of his
zeal, and as his Neighbors necessity requires.

But his first care ought to be directed to the more apparent necessities, and
which are obvious of themselves, without his seeking after them. As to give
Bread to him that has none, to cloth the naked, to help the sick, and to visit
the imprisoned. His superfluities may supply him for these assistances; and he
will always have them, if he regulates his vanity, and lives according to the
spirit of the Gospel. After all, if he has little, let him give little, if he
has much, let him give much, according as Tobias advises; for the Riches one
has ought to be the measure of his Alms. I need not mention those that
voluntarily become poor, professing to imitate the poverty of our Lord: Every
one knows what preference they ought to have before others when Alms are
distributed; because Jesus Christ, to whom they are given, is more remarkable
in them then in others.

Besides these visible necessities, which all the world sees, there are diverse
others that are more concealed, which the shame of those that feel them hides
from the knowledge of the most charitable: for there are many, that choose
rather to be miserable, then to declare their miseries. But Charity when
industrious, quickly knows how to find out these wants, let them be never so
secret, and when faithful to provide for them. St. Paul too, desires a
Christian should participate with his Brother in his joy when he is pleased,
and in his displeasure when otherwise; he would have him troubled or quiet,
according as his Neighbor is, and that he should share in his Sentiments as
well as his Interests. Notwithstanding because there are wants more important
then temporal ones, a Christian is also obliged to more pressing and essential
Duties of Charity; which are to provide for spiritual necessities: the extent
whereof is immense, by reason of the quality of Man's mind; and Man being
subject to so many miseries, a Christian, if he be desirous to live like one,
will never want occasions to exercise his Charity. For sometimes he will be
obliged by his mildness and patience, to reduce him that is strayed, into the
way of Virtue; he will strengthen the weak, he will stir up the slothful, he will
encourage the fearful, he will settle the disquiets of a fleeting and irresolute
mind: Then again, by the severity of his Discourse, he will frighten the
obstinate, and by the terror of his threats reclaim the pride of the
presumptuous and intractable. Another time he will make the humble comprehend to
encourage him, that the kingdom of heaven is his inheritance, because he is the
true poor of spirit to whom the Gospel promises it: and he will open the eyes
of the afflicted, to make him see plainly that crown promised to him, who shall
have passed through the trial of tribulation. He Will teach the covetous not to
fix his heart on the perishable vain things of this world. He Will instruct the
voluptuous how to resist his sensual appetite. He Will overthrow the deceitful
peace of the wise worldling, who puts his confidence in the prudence of the
flesh. He Will awake him that is doz'd in sin, by the wholesome terrors of Gods
judgments: By the solidity of his Discourse he will destroy the false reasonings
of the impious; And by the sincerity and disinteressedness of his carriage
silence the libertine, when he shall have the impudence to call him hypocrite
and dissembler, according to the unhappy language of this Age, where impiety,
to signalize it self, has found the art to confound true Virtue with false,
thereby to diminish her credit; because the very example of Virtue becomes
troublesome and vexatious to such as live licentiously.

But, when his Brother, who is unjustly oppressed, shall have his heart
overcharged with grief, he will find some means to ease him of this weight, either
by the aid of some wholesome counsel, or the mildness of some charitable comfort,
that so he may prevent his despair. He Will instruct, even by his example, all
that suffer, to submit to the severest dispositions of Providence, and with
resignation to suffer those amorous chastisements which the hand of God is
pleased to inflict. He Will also accustom himself not easily to be shocked, as
many are, at the defects of others; Nay he will find by using himself to that,
it is more wit and virtue to comply with them, then to please himself in the
good qualities of those he converses with. To be the child of peace in the
Gospel, fit to reconcile those whom animosity or hatred imbitter to one
another, let him not be rash in his judgments, let him avoid even the shadow of
the least suspicion, let him never hearken to detraction and calumny; and to
secure himself against false impressions, let him never assent to any thing
spoken to the disadvantage of others before he has examined it, nor condemn any
upon the ill construction of his intentions.

When by the Functions of his Charge, or the pure duty of Charity, he is
obliged to punish; let him remember that the spirit of sweetness and mildness,
is the first Character of a Christian, and that severity is a mistaken virtue,
otherwise then on the principle of Charity. True Charity is humble and patient
even in choler it self, and is tender and mild in severity. If he must admonish
and reprehend, let a Christian first know the secret how to sweeten his
admonitions, and clear his reprehensions of all that is harsh and vexatious, and
let him mix withal those insinuating ways which are necessary to gain him, whom
one would not have lost. Let him excuse all but sin, which, once known, is
inexcusable. The force and kindness, wherewith our Lord excused Magdalen
against the reproaches of the Pharisee, ought to instruct us, that in certain
occasions, we ought to have kindness to bear with a sinner, and force to defend
him.

But as the World places its Morality in not pardoning, by making Revenge a
Virtue; and the highest pitch of Christian perfection is to love our Enemies:
Herein it is a Christian ought most to signalize himself. Philosophy has not
yet been able to reach so far, and it is the greatest difficulty in
Christianity to practice it. But after that Jesus Christ has both by his
Doctrine and Example taught us his intentions on that Point, a Christian, who
will live like one, ought to lay aside his resentments, and weaknesses, to
pardon any injury done him. It Is confessed, the Heathens have owned some shadow
of this Virtue, amidst the darkness of their Morals, and there appears some
rough draughts of it, in their most illustrious actions; but after all, 'twas
only out of vanity that they pardoned: Their clemency was only a secret pride,
whereby they sought after applause and reputation. On the contrary, Christian
clemency flies nothing so much as vanity, and only seeks the interest and
advantage of whom she pardons.

Besides this, there is another sort of Charity to be practiced; more perfect
then the others, in regard it is more pure and disinteressed: for it is without
hope of any return; since it is done for the Dead, by assisting with our
Prayers those holy Souls, which suffer in Purgatory through those painful
inquietudes, and grievous impatiencies they have, to see themselves separated
from God. These are the Creatures of all the world the most afflicted, through
the cruel torments they suffer; and withal the most worthy to be succored: for
what are not they worthy of, that are cherisht and predestined by God? What
glory is it for a Christian to be Mediator between God, and these holy Souls,
who cease not to love him, though they suffer all the rigor of his Justice, and
to adore even his chastisements, and vengeances? It Is even (if we may so say)
to do God himself a pleasure to succor these Souls, because he loves them; and
his Justice is better satisfied with our Prayers, then their Sufferings,
because our Prayers are voluntary, and their Sufferings not: And thus the
Charity of the Living, eases and sweetens the Pains of the Dead.

But if it be so great a Charity, to help the Souls that are but for some time
separated from God; what will it be then, to be assisting to sinners, who
through their criminal engagements, are in danger to be eternally separated
from him? These wretches do not consider, in how deplorable a condition they
are; and that it is the greatest madness and blindness to prefer a momentary
pleasure before their salvation: how great Charity is it to make them
comprehend this? But what patience, sweetness, prudence and great
circumspection needs there to effect it? It Is a secret, spiritual Directors
scarce remember, to intermix a Fatherly connivance and forbearance with these
so necessary medicinal rigors, for the cure of a sinner seduced by his
ignorance, and abandoned to his weakness. One must study the disposition, the
habitudes, the inclinations of his Penitent, and observe the way of entering
into his heart, to exercise there absolutely this charitable severity which
cures the Soul. But they seldom give themselves this trouble: this mixture of
authority and love, of resolution and compliance, of zeal and patience, of
mildness and austerity, are scarce any longer used in Direction; the business
is precipitated either by composition, or by a false principle of rigor to be
reputed severe; because the World relishes that best. This capacity of a
Doctor, this prudence of a Physician, these bowels of a Father, and this
disinteressedness of a Minister of Jesus Christ, are qualities rarely found in
one and the same Person, to render him a perfect Director. In choosing one, such
as authorize sin by their softness, in flattering a sinner by too much
compliance, and those, who by their severities disproportioned to the weakness
of their Penitents serve only to discourage them, are alike to be avoided; for
they are equally dangerous.

I have stuck a little upon this Point: for it is in this Christian Charity may
be best exercised, and wherein generally it is least practiced; because we are
not sufficiently touched with the deplorable condition of a sinner. Although at
this day there is more pretending to Direction then ever, yet we scarce see any
longer those zealous Directors, who are Christianly obstinate to disarm the
anger of God against sinners by the austerity of their lives, and who draw down
the graces of God upon their Penitents, by the perseverance of their Prayers
and Mortifications. It Is to these charitable Directors we owe those great
Conversions, which God makes be seen from time to time, as striking rays of his
mercy. These are the ordinary fruits wherewith God takes pleasure to bless the
voluntary Penances and Mortifications of those virtuous innocent Souls, who in
the secret of their hearts deplore the sins of their Brethren: which ought to
be a great comfort to those Christians whose Retreat deprives them of the other
occasions to exercise Charity. For a Carthusian, a Carmelite, a Monk the most
retired from commerce with Men, may sometimes do as much good at the foot of
his Crucifix, in assisting his Neighbor by the invisible help of his Prayers,
as the most eloquent Preachers, the most zealous Missioners, and and all those
whose Profession engages them to serve the Public in the direction of Souls.
Besides it is always less dangerous, and often more profitable, to speak of Men
to God in secret Prayer, then to speak of God to Men in the show and tumult of
Preaching.

I say nothing of that eminent Charity practiced heretofore by the Apostles in
the primitive Times of Grace: which the Savior of the World prefers before all
other Charities; because by a generous contempt of death she willingly offers
up her life for the salvation of her Neighbor. I believed I even ought not to
speak of it, because the exercise of this Chatity is above all Rules, and
besides it is one of those extraordinary graces God only bestows on his
favorites: Not but that in these latter Times some sparks of that sacred fire
are seen shining still in Apostolical Men, who travel to the farthest parts of
the World, to water those barren and ungrateful Regions with their sweat, and
even their blood, to draw down on them the blessings of Heaven, and make
Christianity flourish there; but every one does not partake of these graces,
these are the mercies of God, and these mercies are great miracles. Let us
adore the designs of God in those to whom he does these favors; and let us
bless him for vouchsafing to cast his eyes on them, to allow them the honor to
die for him. Happy he, who in guiding of Souls merits to suffer at least some
small persecution, though he be not worthy at the expense of his life to serve
his Neighbor! Happy he, who can contribute his tears and sighs to the
Conversion of Heathens, when he cannot his blood and life! It ought to be the
most ordinary Devotion of all good people to sigh before God, and to offer him
vows for the salvation of all men; that the Death of Jesus Christ may not be
fruitless to them. For the true Christian ought not to confine the whole extent
of his zeal within the narrow circle of his own perfection: he ought to labor
for the perfection and salvation of others. If his Faith be so fervent, and his
Prayer so humble and perseverant as it ought to be, for so important a subject;
what fruit may he not hope? This every one may practice: and the precious Blood
of Jesus Christ which (in those Countries where he is not known) loses its
value, well deserves that a Christian zealous for his glory should affect so
holy and charitable a Devotion.

Behold, throughout the whole Discourse I have made, there is a large way lies
open for Christian Charity, to exercise so many different good works as concern
it. But there remains one work of Charity for a Christian to practice, so much
the worthier to be recommended to him, as no body is aware to think of it:
It Is, to pray often to God for the salvation of the Great ones, and for all
those, whom Providence abandons to the vanity of worldly Honors, and the
covetousness of Riches. Man being always weaker in elevation, and prosperity,
then in depression, and adversity; the greater he is, the more worthy of
compassion. For Greatness is a Shelf, so much the more dangerous, as its
appearance is more deceitful. It is not the vocation of a Christian to be
always happy, and successful: and it often happens that God, through a terrible
order of his Providence, gives up these worldly happy ones, to the wandering of
their hearts, and, by a secret Judgment, suffers them to fall into a blindness,
and obstinacy, which renders them insensible of all the motions of Grace, and
all the inspirations of Heaven.

If we have Charity, let us tremble for those that are in so sad a condition;
Let us implore Gods mercy upon the misery of those falslly happy ones; Let us
give the Potentates of the Earth the same counsel as Daniel heretofore gave
unto one of the greatest Princes of the World: To redeem their injustices by
deeds of mercy, and to blot out their sins by alms. Let us endeavor to make
Great men understand that God bestows neither Greatness nor Power on them to
live in pleasure and delicacies; that their being raised to Offices obliges
them more strictly to be watchful and laborious; that they have no Power and
Authority but to assist more powerfully him that is weak, and deliver him from
the oppression of the strong. Let us put them in mind that they are not great
in the sight of God, but in as much as they are beneficial and helpful to their
Neighbors; that the luster of temporal Honors, and all these external
Greatnesses are but marks of their Servitude, and continual remembrances of
their Duties; That Dignities ought to have no place in Christianity, but more
to set off the Christian; That the Great ones can pretend to Heaven only by
their Alms, for they are scarce capable of any other good; That God, who has no
exception of persons, as the Scripture says, will have no respect to their
Quality, but only to their good works and their Charity, when they shall appear
before his Throne. This is what may in short be said of the practice of this
Virtue, whose extent is beyond measure; But it is not sufficient to know how it
ought to be practiced, unless we also know what method to observe in the
practice of it.

CHAP. IV. In what order Christian Charity ought to be practiced.
AS the whole perfection of Christianity may be said to consist in Charity, so
this Virtue ought to be the most regulated of all Christian Virtues, because
this is the Rule of all the Duties of a Christian. So there is nothing so
essential to Charity, as order: But there is nothing more difficult then
precisely to establish that order wherein Charity ought to be practiced. For
besides that every one, in the exercise of Christian Virtue, frames several
Principles to himself according to his own fancy or reason; and that thence
comes the great diversity of ways we meet with in a spiritual Life: Charity
besides of her self, in the extent of the diverse necessities of our Neighbor,
obliges a Christian to so many different Duties, that it is difficult to give
any exact Rule for distinguishing them justly. This Virtue becomes rash and
indiscreet if not governed by Prudence: and Charity without this Prudence,
which is her principal guide, is not a true Charity. The more fervent the Zeal
is, and the more active the Charity, the more she needs this science, which
knows, says St. Paul, how to husband its heat. It Is for this reason that the
Spouse in the Canticles gives thanks to her Bridegroom; because he had
regulated in her the Duties of Charity. Let us then seek out this Rule so
necessary to this Virtue, to distinguish its obligations; and let us examine
the order wherein it must be practiced: that so the essential Duties may not be
confounded with those that are not.

The first draught of this order ought to be taken from the Gospel, wherein our
Savior himself has laid the model by his own Example: when he forbad his
Disciples to go Preach to the Samaritans and Gentiles, till they had Preached
first to the Jews; and when he refused that help the Cananean Woman (S. Matthew
speaks of) begged of him, because she was a stranger, and he would reserve his
favors for his own People, like a Pastor who minds only his own Flock. The
Apostles did the same: there appears a distinction in their carriage. They
Preached not to the Gentiles, till the Jews had refused to hear them, according
as their Master had ordered them: and notwithstanding the greatness of St.
Paul's zeal to announce Jesus Christ to the whole World, yet all the motions of
that zeal were regulated: He goes not indifferently to all the World; his first
care was of the Jews, wherever he found any of them in all his Voyages, and he
minded not the Conversion of the Heathens, till he had tried in vain all ways
to gain those People whence he sprang.

This conduct remarks to us in general that there are distinctions to be made
in the practice of Charity; where three Difficulties may be found. The First is
to know what side to take, when the interest of God and our Neighbor come
together. The Second is to separate our own interests from our Neighbors. The
Third is in the different interests of our Neighbor to know which to prefer
before the other. Behold, methinks the order that Charity prescribes in these
encounters, and the Rules that may be given of it.

The First Rule, which regards the order to be observed in the Affairs that
concern the interest of God and our Neighbor to carry our selves duly between
one and the other, is of greatest importance in a spiritual Life. The
concurrence of these two interests is often very prejudicial to the zeal of
Charity when not backed with science: for oftentimes we inconsiderately forsake
our Neighbor, when we ought to leave God; and we leave God, when we ought to
forsake our Neighbor. See then how St. Augustine advises us to deport our
selves: The obligation (says he) to love God, in the order of the Precept,
ought to precede the obligation to love our Neighbor; but God will have us, in
the execution, prefer our Neighbor before him. In effect, It is not reasonable
(says this great Saint) that God, who is the Master and ordains all things,
should put himself after our Neighbor in the order of Love; This is the First
Command he gave Man, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thou shall love him
withal thy heart. But this same God, though he be Master, yet when our
Neighbors good comes in question, remits something of his own right as to its
execution. If any coldness has passed between us and our Brethren, wherein our
Union may be wounded, and we are at the foot of his Altars to render God the
Homage due unto him: He then commands us to interrupt his Worship, and suspend
the most holy and august Ceremonies of Religion; to defer till another time the
Honors of the Sacrifice we were about to pay him, and first go and reconcile
our selves to our Neighbor. Let them quit, says he, the Worship they are
rendering to me, and the Sacrifice they are offering up; because the Union among
Brethren is the most agreeable Sacrifice they can offer unto me. He does even
consent that to help the Poor in their greatest miseries we should disfurnish
his very Altars of their outward Ornaments, which are only of use to move the
gross Devotion of carnal People, as St. Bernard says; who condemns the vanity
of those that enrich the Temples of God, and abandon the Poor.

What folly (says he) is it to leave the Children of the Church naked, and to
adorn the Walls so magnificently with Tapestries and other more precious
Ornaments? It Is true, the Church may admit Ornaments in her abundance and
prosperity: But God commands her to relieve the Poor, who are her Children,
when in necessity and public miseries; because her Treasures and Riches would
only serve to shame her, if the Poor were not succored therewith. This Rule
will appear of a very large extent, to such as take pains to consider it; and
the practice of it will be found of much use, when applied to the several
occasions that may offer themselves. But since God through his signal goodness
will have us to love our Neighbor for the love of him: it is but just we should
so govern this love, that if exteriourly we give our charitable help to our
Brethren, at least the intention of our heart, and simple design of our spirit,
be all for God: That we love our Friend in God, and our Enemy for the love of
God, which is the right practice of Charity, as St. Gregory teaches it.

The Second Rule ought to be made use of to distinguish every ones personal
interests from those of his Neighbor, to decide what of right belongs to each.
The Rule I have settled may serve for that purpose. For if God himself does
often yield his right where our Neighbor is concerned, I have the greater
reason to yield up mine on the like occasions. But because this Rule is not
general, but limited to certain Conjunctures, we must seek for another more
universal. The Gospel commands me to treat my Neighbor as my self, since he
ought to be as dear to me as my self; but it does not command me to yield to
him when our interests shock one another; And in other respects there is a
natural equity which teaches me to keep my own, by instructing me to discharge
my self of what belongs not to me. There are likewise certain interests of
Honor which I ought to defend against my Neighbor who would dishonor me:
because Honor is a Depositum God has entrusted to me, which ought to be as dear
to me as that of my life; and because he would scandalize the World by
dishonoring me. But are there any occasions wherein I am obliged to abandon
mine own interests, and sacrifice them to my Neighbor to defend his Reputation
by renouncing my own, and to die to save his life?

It Is evident that Goods purely temporal being of an inferior order to
spiritual, when the salvation of our Neighbor is concerned, which is a
spiritual interest, one is obliged to abandon his temporal; because the
salvation of ones Soul is preferable to all the Goods of the Earth, which are
perishable and corruptible. Thus neither Honor nor Wealth ought to be valued
when the salvation of a Soul is in question. Now it is certain, that a Christian
is obliged, by the Maxims of that Religion he professes, to relieve his
Neighbor in an extreme necessity of life, which is a temporal good, not only
out of his own superfluities, but even what is necessary for himself. Christian
perfection goes yet farther, teaching a Christian that he ought not only to be
severe to himself, in tenderness and compassion to his Brother, and deprive
himself to accommodate him of what is commodious and necessary to himself, but
even to give his liberty, his honor and life, to preserve the life, honor and
liberty of his Neighbor. In fine, he ought to do that for him, which the
Savior of the World did for us: for how many have there been, that have
imitated Jesus Christ in the practice of so generous, so pure, and so
disinteressed a Charity? But these are the wonders of Christian Morality, and
greatest Miracles of our Holy Religion. These Examples are rather to be
admired, then Rules to be indispensably followed, and Duties of obligation to
be practiced.

The Third Rule is, the order that ought to be observed in the different
interests of our Neighbor; that so the impulses of Charity may be followed
without mistaking, and that in two wants, either of the same or a different
nature, we may know which to prefer. In the order of temporal goods Charity
always flies to assist the more urgent wants: for amongst the afflicted, she
runs to him that suffers most; and she leaves him again if his wants be but
temporal, to assist him that is in manifest danger of his salvation. Such was
heretofore the conduct of the Apostles, who in the infancy of the Church
abandoned the care of temporal necessities to attend to spiritual; in quitting
the distribution of Alms to be vacant to preaching the Word of God: because
they esteemed the nourishment of the Soul more important then that of the Body.
So the care a Christian takes to teach and instruct a poor body is more
meritorious before God, then what is bestowed to deliver him from misery: So
the Alms given to convert people to Jesus Christ are far preciouser, then those
which are given for their subsistence; and the sweats, pains and fatigues of
the Missioners who go to preach the Word of God to Infidels in the remotest
Countries, are of far more value, then the Treasures that are sent thither. The
sovereign perfection of Christian Charity is the fervent zeal of these holy
Followers of the Apostles, who quit all, to seek in the most salvage and
barbarous Climates the stray Sheep, and to satisfy the thirst and hunger they
have for the salvation of so many abandoned people, to make them know Jesus
Christ, and to bring them back to his Flock.

In these concurrences of wants, Charity ought to dispose of her help,
according to the different degrees of necessities she finds. But when the want
is equal in two different persons, It is, says St. Augustine, either Proximity
of Blood, or Alliance, or Friendship or Neighborhood, or Society, or Country,
or the Considerations of other Ties that must regulate the preference of
assistance due to one rather then to another. For although Jesus Christ be come
into the World to make, by the Sword of Christianity, division betwixt the
Flesh and the Spirit: yet he is not come to destroy the Duties of Blood, and to
dispense with a Christian for what he ows his Relations; because these Duties
are grounded on Equity, which is their principal foundation. Thus, what we owe
to our Kindred is of a more strict obligation, then that which is due to an
unknown Person and a Stranger: So a Pastor is more obliged to his Flock, a
Superior to those whom God has put under him, a Prince to his own Subjects,
then to all others; and in the order of Christian Charity a Friend ought to be
more dear then one unknown, a Domestic then a Stranger, and a Christian then
an Infidel; and when they are both equally in need, you are obliged to help the
one before the other. This Morality is founded on Justice and Reason, which
orders it thus; and on the conduct of our Lord, who carried himself after this
manner between the Jews and Gentiles. St. Paul thus instructs Christians, St.
Thomas and all Catholic Divines are of this opinion: For the rest, when the
Rules I have established are duly considered, 'twill be found that our Soul,
being our Neighbor a thousand times more intimate then our dearest Friends or
our nearest Relations, our first obligation is to exercise Charity toward her;
which we cannot do as we ought, but by endeavoring her perfection preferably
above all things. For if we neglect her, who will take care of her? And if we
give all but our selves to God, is not that to keep our selves the better
share? because God will have us our selves, and not what is ours: as St. Jerome
says.

The conclusion of this Discourse is, that extreme necessity in temporals, and
the salvation of a Soul in spirituals, ought to have preference in the
strictest obligations of a Christian. So that the most laudable and holy of all
Charities is to provide for spiritual wants; as to procure assistance for
People who are in a deep ignorance of all things relating to their salvation,
and without help: But in assisting Aliens and Salvages, must those be forgotten
that live in the midst of us, and are in the same wants? can we hearken to
what is told us of the miseries of Persons of another World, as one may say,
without beholding what we daily see amongst those we know? It is this obliges
me to repeat, what I have already said, and which is so important that it
cannot be too often repeated: That the greatest Zeal requires the greatest
Knowledge: That if Christian Prudence ought to be animated by Charity, Charity
ought to be governed by Prudence; and justly to discern the order wherein
Charity ought to be practiced, nothing more needs to be recommended to a
Christian, then what the Apostle recommended to those of the City of Philippi,
to whom he Preached this Virtue, That their Charity may more and more abound in
knowledge and in all understanding: To be neither indiscreet, nor rash; because
the greatest defect in Charity is want of light, which renders this Virtue
subject to an infinity of Illusions. But entirely to purify its practice, it is
best to discover the Illusions, that so they may be dissipated.

CHAP. V. Of the several Illusions to which the Practice of Charity is subject.
ALL Christian Virtues are in their Practice subject to Illusions, through the
false Principles every one establishes to himself in the exercise of Piety;
Sometimes out of conceitedness, and oftnest out of weakness and ignorance. But
after all, there is none of them more subject to this then Charity. For as this
Virtue has much luster, it is pretended to upon very many occasions; chiefly
when we think to surprise and dazzle Men, as is usual enough: And it is not to
be wondered at if the spirit of dissimulation, creeps into the exercise of this
Virtue, which is the most pure and sincere of all others; since the corruption
of this Age has so powerfully authorized all Artifices and Disguises: In effect
Self-love, which always seeks its own interest by so many windings about,
cannot better conceal it self then under the veil of Charity. It is through
this Artifice it scrupulously sticks to the Duties of Good-manners, to excuse
it self from essential Duties; It seeks conspicuous Charities to avoid obscure
ones; It Is zealous where there should be no zeal, and remiss where there should
be. Thus the falsely Charitable is uneasy to his own Domestics whilst he is
civil and officious to Strangers; he grounds a tranquillity and satisfaction on
the state of his own pretended perfection, and is only froward and disquieted
at others perfections; he is perpetually praising Christianity, and quits
nothing of his own Rights; He gives Alms, and pays not his Debts; He
maliciously praises false Virtues, to take occasion to authorize real Vices; He
justifies his own ill Conduct, only by censuring that of others; and scattering
Flowers over all he would poison, he wounds the Reputation of every one, under
the deceitful veil of charitable and respectful Words. But to discover
methodically all the Illusions, wherewith the Spirit of Charity is so often
perverted, I reduce them to certain Heads, which are as it were their Sources.

Natural Affection is the First, and withal the most ordinary Illusion which
creeps into the Spirit of Charity: One loves his Neighbor it is true, but it is
only for the good qualities which render him amiable; one looks on him, but on
the most agreeable side, and where he is most pleasing: It is the wit, quality,
humor and disposition one considers; and the tenderer one is to all these
Considerations of Flesh and Blood, the more insensible he is to all those of
Virtue and Grace. One believes it is loving his Neighbor as he ought, and
living charitably with him, to speak nothing vexatious to any one, to be very
regardful and wary of every ones Interests in particular; to do very general
Civilities to all the World by outward demonstrations of Friendship, which all
in reality signify nothing: This is to profane the sacred Name of Charity, to
give it unto actions which are often the motions of a depraved Inclination, and
the effects of a habit merely to follow ones Humor. So that to give Alms out
of a natural pity, to be officious and obliging for humane respects to love his
Friends, his Relations, and Family, because good Breeding enjoins to live well
with all the World; this is but the Charity of a Pagan. The Pagans love those
that love them, consider those that consider them, and carry it fair with those
that do so with them. It Is, if you will, Civility, Good-manners, Inclination,
Complacence, Policy, and Prudence, but it is not Charity at all; It is to have
too low a conceit of so great a Virtue, to give so holy a Name to that which is
but humane and natural. Christian Charity knows not the meaning of all these
Distinctions, and these unjust preferrings of one before another, which the
prudence of the Flesh makes: because a Christian equally considers Jesus Christ
in all his Brethren, whom he never looks on with an eye purely humane; Faith
teaches him that this ignorant Man he instructs, this miserable Wretch he
succors, this poor Man to whom he gives Bread, is Jesus Christ, who is in the
Person of the Necessitous, as a Prince is in the Person of his Ambassador. So
that the more one finds himself naturally inclined to Compassion, the more he
ought to stand upon his guard not to practice Charity so much out of humanity:
for as the Apostle says, he exposes himself to reap only a carnal harvest, when
he does not sow in purity of spirit; And it is but a mistaken Christianity that
is founded upon the Principles of so humane and worldly a Charity.

The Second Illusion is of Pride, which, by a secret presumption, and upon the
foundation of a very frivolous merit, places all the perfection of Man in a
vain Charity. It is upon this ground the Pharisee in the Gospel set himself
above others, whose carriage he reprehended; because he gave great Alms. And
although this Illusion may not be common, yet many Christians are found subject
to it; and who upon the Maxims of a depraved Morality give liberally their
Goods to the Poor; without forsaking the spirit of Injustice by which they
possess them; Their hands are open to Mercy, and their hearts shut to Equity;
They are Envious, Detractors, and Calumniators, upon that misunderstood
Principle, That Charity blots out all iniquities, and that it is sufficient to
be a good Man to be compassionate of the miseries of our Neighbor. They adorn
the outside with works of superficial Charity, and leave all disorder and
corruption within: And what else is this, says St. Gregory, but to give ones
Goods to his Neighbor and his Soul up to Sin; To sacrifice his Riches to God,
and himself to the Devil? They even carry this Illusion much farther. For there
are of those falsely charitable Persons whose Soul is so perverted, that to do
these Works of Mercy which are proper to blot out their Sins, they commit new
ones to have wherewithal to do Works of Mercy. They offer to God, what they
have taken from Men; and frame to themselves an extravagant Devotion to give in
Charity what by violence they have forced from others. How great a Fallacy, to
believe that the bitter and envenomed root of Injustice, is able to produce the
sweet and lovely fruit of Charity! for He, says the Scripture, that offers
sacrifice of poor men's substance, is as he that sacrifices the son in the
presence of his father. We must imitate Zacheus, to practice Charity as me
ought: He began by restoring what he had taken, to give the remainder to the
Poor. In this manner Christian Charity is neither presumptuous nor unjust; and
she is always without Violence, for she is never without humility.

The Third Illusion is Covetousness, which out of a narrowness of heart and
miserableness seeks false reasons, of Family, Children, Parcimony and good
Husbandry, to authorize this false Prudence in Men not to dispossess themselves
of their Goods by giving them to the Poor. But it is a distrust fit for Pagans
to fear falling into want by giving, in the Person of the Needy, to a God whose
riches are inexhaustible: for He that shall give to the poor shall never want
the goods of the earth: as holy Scripture says. Alms, says S. Paul, is a Seed
whence cannot be reaped but a very great Harvest. And as the Husbandman when he
sows much, reaps much; So the faithful shall reap a plentiful Harvest when they
have given great Alms. The fullness of the Charity of a Christian shall make the
fullness of his Recompense. But these are Truths the avaritious Man does not
comprehend, through the shameful fixedness he has to the Goods of this World:
He hoards up his Bonds and Money carefully in the bottom of his Chests, whilst
he persuades others to be Charitable: He strains for poor Pretenees for his not
giving when he is asked: He remits to his Council all Propositions made him for
Charity, to authorize his Avarice, and refuse more methodically what he is
unwilling to grant: He does all he can to excuse his giving, and never gives
but in hopes of receiving: His Charity is a mere Traffic: He so strongly
blinds himself even in his presumption, that he makes a false virtue of his
conduct: He says with a haughty and disdainful air, I have no Goods of another
bodies, nay I do not desire any; I make use of what God has given me, because
he has only bestowed it on me for my use. This was heretofore the Illusion of
that unhappy rich Man, who denied himself nothing that he liked. His Expense
was magnificent at his Table, in his Train, in his Clothes, and his whole
Family bore the marks of his Vanity and Pride: whilst Lazarus died with hunger
at his Door. It Is likewise the most common Illusion of Great Men, that their
licentiousness makes them covetous and insensible of the miseries of the
afflicted. They waste their Estates profusely in criminal Expenses, and refuse
a poor Man a bit of Bread; So that out of a mean Selfishness they extravagantly
squander away those Goods wherewith God had entrusted them to distribute.
Hereunto may be added the mistake of those merciless People, who give no Alms
but with an ill will and grumbling: It is not to the Poor they give, it is to
their importunities, and to the vexation they feel in being pressed by them.
Hence they follow their own humor; not practice Charity. It Is fruitlesly they
give, because they give without any fellow-feeling: So as they experience not
the sweetness which joys his heart that practices Charity; but when one is
fully persuaded that the Poor represent the Person of Jesus Christ, he is
always touched with their miseries, and never shocked with being importuned.

The Fourth is a deceitful Tenderness, perpetually subject to make it ones own
case. This Illusion is common to certain Persons too sensible of Nature, who
have no tenderness to their Neighbor but out of tenderness to themselves: And
duly examining the ground of their pity, they are not compassionate of others
miseries but out of a weakness of mind which makes them fear the like. They do
not commonly reguard their Neighbor but by the resemblance to themselves. They
are not sensible of others Misfortunes, but through the apprehension they have
of the condition of their own Nature, exposed to so many accidents and
miseries. They perceive not this altogether as it is: It is an almost
imperceptible Illusion of Self-love; and though it seldom happens, it suffices
that it may happen, to oblige a Christian to make some reflection on it, and to
disintangle himself from those so humane and self-interested tendernesses.
Christian Charity is of too pure a nature to suffer them; And it is not to be
sincerely and Christian-like Charitable to be so only out of humor and a mere
natural motive.

The Fifth is a false Zeal of Religion and Piety, out of which they pretend to
reprehend the good actions of others, and find something to say against all:
like the Pharisees of whom St. Luke speaks; who were scandalized at Jesus
Christ curing a sick Man presented to him, because 'twas on a Festival Day; And
like that Apostate Disciple who was troubled at the Piety of that holy Woman
who poured out most precious Ointment on our Saviors Feet, pretending it might
have been sold for the relief of the Poor. This likewise is a most ordinary
Illusion of a false Devotion, which often fixes it self to exterior Ceremonies,
and neglects the most essential Duties of Charity; and on certain occasions
transgresses the most sacred Laws, to sustain indiscreetly pretended
Formalities. It is by this Spirit Men prescribe to others what they do not
observe themselves; that they make continual reflections on their Neighbors
conduct, and mind not their own; that they are clear-sighted to the least
defects of others, and perceive not their own disorders; that they take upon
them to give advice to all the World, and smother the dictates of their own
Conscience. It Is an adhesion to their own sense, and a mistaken Zeal which
often reigns amongst the Churchmen themselves; They mention nothing but their
Power, they talk of nothing but their Character, and allege nothing but their
Authority; They believe 'twere dishonouring their Function to accommodate
themselves charitably to the weakness of those whom God has put under their
Charge, and that it is remisness to be condescending: Thus they are all fire to
make their Ordinances be observed, but cool and indifferent for those of the
Gospel. They know all the Regulations that lead to destruction, but do not so
much as know those that lead to edification; and under pretense to establish
the Discipline of the ancient Canons, they abandon oftentimes the true Spirit
of the Church, which is a Conduct of sweetness and condescendency. Behold in
general the Spirit of false Zeal which supports it self ordinarily by the bare
appearance of Virtue. But it is always easy to distinguish the true from the
false: For true Virtue is edified with every thing, and the false takes scandal
at all: and as there is no reputation that does not appear pure to the one; so
there is no carriage, let it be never so irreproachable, but appears defective
to the other.

The Sixth is Envy, which cannot behold without trouble the advantage of on's
Neighbor; for she finds her humiliation in the success and prosperity of
others. And if sometimes the Envious has sufficient moderation, not to pretend
by indirect means to the good of his Brother: yet has he not so much as to hear
without emotion the noise his Reputation makes in the world; He endures his
Neighbors good Fortune, but cannot bear the repute of it. This poison, as
gross as it is, slips sometimes into the Soul of such as profess Virtue. There
are good People, and of a very holy Conversation, who like the Laborers in the
Gospel, after having been faithful to their Ministry, in the exercise of
Charity, permit themselves to be poisoned with Jealousy: they cannot endure
New-comers should share the public Esteem with them. This is a weakness
unworthy a Minister of Jesus Christ; because in following so miserable a
Conduct, They often consummate with the flesh, as the Apostle says, what they
began with the spirit.

The Seventh is the Wisdom and Spirit of the World. It is by this Spirit so
opposite to that of Jesus Christ, that People make profession of Charity, to
get acquainted with Persons of Consideration; and deal in good Works, that they
may have occasion to deal with those who do them: By this means they insinuate
themselves into their Esteems, gain Credit, make Friends, and do their own
Business by acting for other Folks. The small Alms which get them admittance
into this Society of Charity, help sometimes to compass their secret designs of
making their Fortunes. This may serve, if for nothing else, at least to conceal
their Humor, and disguise their Character toward compassing their Ends: By
this means they give themselves out for what they are not, and may pass for
good Men without being concerned whether they are so or no; This is all their
study, and they guide all their Actions by the Maxims of this Pharisaical
Charity, which is only animated by the Spirit of the World and Wisdom of the
Flesh. It Is by the Maxims of this false Charity and a chimerical Zeal, that
under pretext of doing more good they aspire to Places they have not, and omit
the good they could do in the Place they are in. Nay they artificially
endeavor their own Advancement in a more efficacious way, while they seem to
rely on Providence; and quietly expect from God what in reality they mean to
get only by the secret Intrigues of Men. Thus they change the Principles of
Christianity, into those of carnal Morality. If in appearance they have any
moderation toward their Neighbors, it is only the better to act a concealed
Vanity wherewith secretly they satisfy themselves: If they pardon an Injury,
it is to expect a better opportunity of Revenge: If they do good, it is out of
hopes of a Return. All is reduced to the Maxims of this humane Wisdom, so
opposite to the Wisdom of the Gospel. And as by these ways (which tend to God
only in appearance) they go farther from him; they wilfully blind themselves in
their Errors, to the end not to see the disproportion between what they do, and
what they ought to do.

The Eighth is Indiscretion. This breaks the order in which Charity that ought
to be laudable and virtuous should be practiced, and plays all those irregular
Tricks which put this Virtue out of frame. It is by this Illusion that after
public Detractions they make Reparations of Honor more to be feared then the
Detractions themselves, and which for the most part serve but to open again the
Wound they pretend to close. Through this it is Men would succor others when
they are no longer in a Condition to be assisted: like the rich Glutton, who
puts on the Charitable after his death for the salvation of his Brethren, whom
he would have advertised of their licentiousness; though he had never practiced
Charity during his life. It is through this perversion of Reason some give
Alms, and pay not their Debts; visit Prisons, and mind not their domestic
Affairs; by their Wills leave the most Christian-like Legacies in the World at
their Deaths, and destroy the Peace and Union of their Family; refuse one truly
Poor wherewith to draw him out of misery, and without discretion give a
Wanderer and a Vagabond wherewith to maintain them in their idleness. They run
about the World to Convert People, without thinking to Convert themselves; and
sometimes lose themselves in seeking too earnestly after those that have
strayed. To this Illusion may be reduced the mistaken Conduct of those
Directors, who by indiscreet Rigors pervert the Ways of God in driving
sometimes Sinners from their Confessionary Seats, whom his Grace brings
thither; and disheartning the weak, for want of capacity and advice to manage
them in their weakness. I say nothing of the Indiscretion of those Women who
believe themselves Charitable because they do not steal their Neighbors Goods,
while they rob them of their Honor by their Calumnies: They care not for folks
Purses, but fly at the Reputation of all the World; there is no saving on's
self from their Tongues: they examine not a jot all that is said, to have the
more right to believe every thing; and there is none talked of
disadvantageously, but they are presently persuaded all that is said is true. In
fine, it is this Spirit of Indiscretion that breaks all the ordinary measures
of Charity, and takes from it that discernment of knowledge, without which this
Virtue becomes it self inconsiderable: For sometimes it accuses where it ought
to excuse; and on other occasions praises where it ought to reprehend: being
thus often subject to mistake through Precipitation, and the lightness of
Indiscretion.

The Ninth is the Spirit of Severity: for Severity narrows the Heart, and
deprives it of that extent of Soul which is the chief character of Charity.
It Is from this Principle some believe they ought not to indulge any, because
they pardon themselves nothing; and think they have a right to be severe to
others, because they are so to themselves. S. Catherine of Siena avows she was
subject to this fault in her first fervors, out of a false Virtue; and the most
virtuous can hardly guard themselves from this weakness: for it is natural for a
Man to judge of his Neighbor, when he finds himself more perfect then him. The
care one has to live irreprochably in the World, gives a pretense of title to
reproach every thing in others: and one easily persuades himself he owes none
that lenity and indulgence which he refuses to himself. If he speaks it is
roughly, if he gives his advice it is severely, if he reprehends it is with
impatience and rage. It Is ever a bitter zeal and morose air, which is seldom
other then the effect of a dark and melancholy humor; scarce ever the spirit
of Charity: In which respect this Conduct is but a false Severity; for
Christian Severity is rigid only to its self, and indulgent to others. This too
was the fault of the Pharisee, who blamed all the rest of Mankind, because,
Fasting 'twice a week, he believed himself better then them all. Thus it is that
Men are severe to their Neighbor when they are so to themselves, that they
spare none because they favor not themselves, and that they speak ill of all
the World because they have a severer Morality then others. And thus Severity
becomes a mere Delusion, if founded on any other Principle then Charity. Let us
place our Glory then rather in Moderation and Charity, then in the austerity of
our Morals. For, Should we live only on Ashes, says S. Chrysostom, if we have
not indulgence, and love for our Neighbor, this austerity would avail us
nothing: And generally Pride, which is the ordinary effect of this Spirit of
Severity, is so great an obstacle to Charity, that men ought to stand so much
the more on their guard as they find themselves inclinable to Severity. Virtue
her self ought to redouble her Distrusts amidst the Applauses she receives; for
she becomes a snare as soon as she ceases to be pure. There is nothing so
dangerous as Disorder backed with a false Zeal, as an adhesion to Error hid
under the veil of an exemplar Life, and as strict Morality with a licentious
Belief. But if Severity be opposite to Charity when not founded on Mildness;
Mildness is no less contrary on several occasions, when not supported by
Severity: For it runs into a slackning of Order either by a soft Indulgence, or
by a timorous Conduct. In effect, Clemency is pernicious where there needs
Rigor, and Silence becomes a fault when one should Speak. He prevaricates that
holds his Tongue in those occasions where Counsels and Reproofs are absolutely
necessary. Judgment and Knowledge, which ought to be the two inseparable
companions of Charity, will find a middle path between these two Extremes, to
the edification of our Neighbor, the only Mark that Charity should aim at.

The Tenth is Hypocrisy. This is the Illusion of the Pharisees in the Gospel,
who affect being scrupulous about Trifles, and at the bottom have no principle
of Sincerity or Honesty. They humble their Souls before God by big-look'd
Pennances; and harden their Hearts to the complaints of the Afflicted and sighs
of the Poor: They cover their Violences and Injustice with the veil of Devotion
and Piety. This is the Disorder that reigns most in this Age, where Disguise
sits upon the very Altar: Virtue is scarce any longer practiced but to get
Reputation; Men only seek to impose: because they mean but to dazzle: They
renounce that Charity which is of obligation and commanded, to practice that
which is only counseled; They respect the mighty, to insult over the weak;
They have shameful Condescendencies for Greatones, and nothing but Rigor and
Imperiousness for the Mean; They propose to themselves imaginary Designs of
good Works impossible to be effected, and leave those that be very easy and
necessary. But this Hypocrisy may be discerned better if taken a pieces: This
person so exteriourly moderate, and who through an artificial carriage has the
repute of being so reasonable, is a Fury at home; In public he is Charitable,
and a Backbiter in private; In Company he speaks well of every one, but spares
none at his secret Cabals; He Is affable to those he esteems, but rude to those
he disreguards; His Devotions are as regular as can be, and he would pass for a
Saint, if he were not so revengeful and so dextrous to satisfy his Resentments
where he has any Contests; None ever offends him without smarting for it; for
he never forgives: So that by this his affected Moderation his Life is a
continual Imposture. There are a thousand other Disguises of Charity which may
be reduced to this, and which are so much the more odious in the sight of God,
as being done under the pretext of Piety. Vice is always criminal; but the most
criminal of all is that which is done under the Coulor and Veil of Virtue: for
Men less suffer themselves to be corrupted by a barefaced Vice, then a masqued
Virtue. After all, it is in vain to disguise on's self: nothing can be hid from
his sight that searches hearts and penetrates to the very bottom of them.

The Eleventh is a Spirit of Empire and Dominion. They are willing to be in at
all good Works, provided they may Rule, Direct and Manage: They make one in all
Designs and Enterprises of Charity, out of the sweetness they feel in Governing
things with some Authority; and the pleasure there is to exercise that petty
Empire which expresses its self in the knowledge of their Neighbors wants, and
the distribution of assistance given them. They meet punctually at Assemblies,
as so many favorable occasions of showing themselves; and give their wealth to
new Foundations to Reign in them. It Is out of this same Spirit that they thrust
themselves with such zeal into all manner of Affairs; that they are so earnest
to render themselves necessary in them; that they love Negotiating to find out
a Temperament in Accommodations and Arbitrations; that they charitably concern
themselves in every thing; that they have a Wit fertile enough in Expedients to
be of Council for all the World; and that they give so liberal advice upon the
Conduct of all Mankind. For this is the Character of the Devotion of these
Times; it will be Mistress and Govern all. It Is through this same Spirit that
Men have no value but for the good Works they do themselves; That they will not
abet any good unless themselves do it; and that there are some who cannot
endure either Religion should be defended or Virtue protected, but after their
way, their lights, and their methods: They condemn all else be it never so
good; They have not the least concern for it, because they have no share in it.
They set up for Directors without any Vocation or Character: for Direction now
adays, as it is ordered, is very comfortable to those that Direct; because they
speak with Authority, and find Submission every where. In short, this Spirit of
Command is become so much the Spirit of this Age, that it is crept in among
Persons consecrated to the Altars; who take on them in all the Functions of
their Ministry a certain air of Independence, whilst they hold the rest of the
World in Subjection. St. Paul, who had in his hands all the Authority of Jesus
Christ, is an excellent Pattern for Christian Pastors: for he never made use of
all his great Power to destroy, but only to edify. In effect this absolute
Authority is a Conduct too dismal and fierce for Christianity; serving only to
make the Yoke of Obedience more burthensom, unless tempered with Love and
Charity. True Pastors do themselves more honor in being the Fathers of Souls,
then their Lords and Masters; and in loving to Rule their Flocks with sweetness
and tenderness, rather then with haughtiness and Commands. You must, says S.
Bernard, Command with humility to Command like a Christian; And there is nothing
prepares the Hearts of Subjects to Submission like the Charity of those they
obey.

The Twelfth Illusion is Scandal and Ill-Example. It Is through this Illusion
Men live disorderly whilst they flatter themselves with fair appearances of a
kind of natural Equity, which they would have a horror to transgress: They have
at bottom a zeal for Justice, and have none for modesty: They are tender of a
Stranger's Interest, and sacrifice the Innocence of a Domestic, of whom they
serve themselves in the secret practices of their Passion: They are touched
with the Misfortunes of one unknown whom they see oppressed, and ruin the
Conscience of a Friend whom they cause to engage in their Revenge. You are not
Violent, you are not Unjust, you hate Oppression, Cruelty displeases you; in
brief you wrong no body: And you employ your Wives in shameful Concerns and
vicious Intrigues. You are nice even to scruple, in point of Detraction; and
have all the affectations of a Prostitute, to seduce Youth that puts it self
into your Hands. How many Disorders have you caused by your Scandals, you that
have so much aversion for Injustice? for your Example is a Poison that kills
him who sees it. But what is become of the Modesty of Christian Ladies in an
Age, where nothing is talked of but Reformation and Devotion? Was there ever
seen so great a licentiousness in Manners as now adays? Women, besides the
indecency and immodesty of their Dress, are even come to think it a greater
air of Quality to dress themselves publicly and before all the World: that is
to say, to expose themselves, by a scandalous Mode, to those adulterous Eyes
whereof the Apostle speaks; and to Present in the Golden Vessel, like the Whore
of Babylon, the mortal Draught to those that see them. Scandal is so dreadful a
spring of Corruption, and so pernicious a poison to Innocence; that one cannot
have Faith and read, without Trembling, the terrible Menaces of the Son of God
to those scandalous Persons who poison the Souls of those with whom they
converse. Our Lord seems to have forbidden in the Gospel nothing so strictly as
this: Cut, says he, cut off, pluck out even your very eyes, if your eyes
scandalize you. I say nothing of those fond foolish Mothers, who by their
Indulgency and Vanity ruin the Innocence of their young Daughters, in exposing
them to Assemblies and dangerous Companies, under pretense of showing and
teaching them the World: I speak not of those envenomed Tongues that tear in
pieces the Honor of their Neighbor, in most obliging and respectful Language,
and sow Dissension wherever they come. I only say that a Christian cannot
without trembling make reflection on those dreadful words of the Son of God, Woe
to him by whom scandal comes.

The Thirteenth is the Spirit of Emulation and Partiality, principally in
matters of Religion: and this is the most dangerous of all Illusions. It Is out
of this Spirit that Men make use of the holy Name of Christian Charity, to
heighten their Aversions, and render their Enmities irreconcilable. By this
they censure the Conduct of others to authorize their own; They destroy settled
Reputation to give themselves more Credit; They frame to themselves a Chimera
of Religion, to seek a more specious pretext for their Headstrongness, and they
give their Passion the name of Zeal and Charity. Such was the Illusion of that
Spanish Lady Lucilla, mentioned by S. Augustine; she was Rich, Devout, and of
Quality: and she it was who, suffering her self to be dazzled with Visions of
her own Zeal, kindled, by the profusion of her Alms and great Repute, the first
sparks of that fire, wherewith the Heresy of the Donatists laid waste the
Church of Africa, and afterward spread it self over Spain and Italy. Such
likewise was the Extravagancy of that rich Merchant of Lions called Valdo, who
upon a fancy of Reformation foolishly distributed all his Wealth to the Poor;
whence sprung that cursed Sect of the Valdenses, which since has been the
source of other Heresies that have infected France. Such in fine was the
Illusion of the Sacramentarians of the last Age, who taking upon them to be
Reformers, fancied a new Morality to draw peoples Eyes upon their Party, and
more signalize their Conduct. They spoke of nothing but Sweetness, Christian
Integrity, the New Testament and the Gospel. My Brethren and my Sisters was the
common Language of these Preachers when they spoke to the People. In fine, at
the beginning of this Reformation all places echoed with the fair and specious
Name of Charity and Union: whilst they cut the Throats of Priests, broke down
the Altars, writ most invective Libels against the Divines of the
Roman Catholic Church, and rendered all Morals ridiculous to establish that
which they vented. The Vices of those that declared themselves favorers of
that Party were Virtues; The Virtues of those that favored them not were
accounted Vices: the repute of Virtue and Honesty wholly depended on their
breath, and none had any Christianity, if you will believe them, but in as much as
they embraced their Judgments, and were their Friends. All this Conduct was
defective, because grounded on a false Principle; And these appearances of
Charity whereof they boasted, were but a pure piece of Policy, and a secret
Artifice to authorize their Party, and make their Error spread the better.

The Fourteenth is a hidden Vanity that finds its way into almost all Works of
Charity: It Is so natural to Man to seek himself in all things, even the most
holy, that he is so much the more subject to this weakness, as he is exempt
from all the rest. It pleases some to Teach, Instruct and Direct, because
thereby they get Credit. They love Charities that make a show, because they
would be particularly taken notice of. They find wants at their Doors, and
regard them not; and send their Alms to the end of the World, because that
makes a greater noise. They pardon an Offense with all the Ceremonies of
satisfaction in form, to raise a Trophy of their Moderation. They exercise, out
of a false generosity, Liberalities disproportionable to their Condition, and
fail their Brother in his necessity. It Is often nothing but Vanity that makes
those famous Wills wherein Friends are so well considered: they merit much by
it in the eyes of the World, but nothing in the sight of God: It conduces much
to the reputation of him that dies, and avails nothing to the Expiation of his
sins, and his Justification. At his death, he has given his Goods to his best
Friends; It looks very handsome, but it is very Pagan-like; herein he considers
Friendship, and regards not Charity. It is not for the love of God that this
Lady is Charitable, it is only for the love of her self; It Is out of this Spirit
that she is in at all good Works: Being vain, she is not displeased at being
thanked for the good she does; for she does it only for that end. Her Charity
being but a pretext to her Vanity, she endeavors much more to appear
Charitable, then to be so in effect; but woe to them who give Alms to be seen,
and so gain the applause of Men: For (says the Gospel) they have already
received their reward. And although an Alms given on this account is profitable
to the Receiver, yet is it wholly unprofitable to the Giver: This infectious
air of Vanity that mixes with it, is in it self alone sufficient to spoil the
fruit. Alms, to be Christian, ought to be humble; and done in private, to be
profitable to the Doer, That our heavenly Father, says S. Matthew, who sees in
secret, may give him his recompense. What in this place the Gospel speaks of
Alms, ought to be understood of all Works of Charity; which a Christian ought
to do with a pure and sincere intention, desiring God only for witness:
otherwise the worm of Vanity destroys his Works, and renders them unprofitable
in the sight of God.

The Fifteenth is a disorderly addictedness to Devotions; which gives to God
what is due to our Neighbor. Some neglect their Families to be more assiduous
at the foot of the Altar; They wave their Employments to be doing Kindnesses;
They love retiredness, when their Condition obliges them to appear in public;
They are silent out of a false modesty. when they should speak; They meditate
when they should act; They are in Office, and live like private Persons; They
would have peace with God without caring to have it with Men. This Pastor in
his Flock, This Superior in his House, are Mild, Peaceable, and Charitable; but
they suffer themselves to be governed by furious Spirits, whose Passions they
espouse: and allgo's topsie-turvie sometimes by their Authority, whilst they
are at the feet of their Crucifix to satisfy the gust of Devotion, which some
sentiment of Piety, or rather love of Ease gives them unseasonably. They
deceive themselves, if they believe they are innocent of the Violences done in
their Name; for it is only their Name that authorizes them. This is to be but
the vain Image of a Pastor, says the Prophet; or rather it is to be but
Charitable in Idea, to have the heart to abandon his Flock, to leave the
Conduct of it to Pastors foisted in, and to entrust with another the Salvation
of those, for whom himself in person is responsible to God. A watchful Superior
ought to be like a wise Pilot, who has always his Hand upon the Rudder: every
thing alarms him by reason of the concern he takes in the safety of those he
conducts. And as they are not in Office but to watch over those they Govern; so
all the Virtues, all the Graces, and all the most holy Actions of Superiors are
deceitful, when they seek more their satisfaction in Devotion then the peace of
those they Govern.

The Sixteenth is Self-love. This Love includes in it self the interest of all
other Passions, and almost the universal spring of all other Illusions. It Is
through this Principle of Self-love that Men sometimes are not in at Practices
of Charity, but to manage more dexterously their own Interests: They find hereby
their Affairs go much the better; and that sometimes serves to sustain their
Rights more boldly, and even more creditably. We see in effect Persons of
Quality Charitable, that thoroughly understand Christianity, that instruct others
to practice it, and distribute in their Manors well-ordered Alms to the Poor
of the County; but they will not quit any thing of their Interests: It Is they
advance them sometimes even beyond the bounds of Equity. Fain they would be
well at Court with every one: but the Chimera of their Birth and Quality is so
strong in their Head, that they become insupportable to all the Nobility of
their own County; and are so jealous of their Lordships and Rights, that they
forget all the care they ought to have of Charity and Edification. This Prelate
so set upon his Duty, is inflexible when the Functions of his Ministry are in
question: He talks of nothing now but his Power; his great zeal is to exercise
his Power in Ecclesiastical Judgments according to the rigor of the Canons, and
to hold up even unto the prejudice of Edification, the interest of his Dignity.
But after all, the matter well considered, ways there are more mild and
Christian-like to defend his Rights, then those of Haughtiness and Authority:
and ordinarily he makes use of his Authority too much, only to supply his want
of merit and conceal his weakness. This Lady has an admirable indifference for
all things, but is so wedded to her own Fancy, that she passionately defends
all her Sentiments. She is the most moderate Person in the World; but her
Moderation leaves her as soon as she finds her Interest in any Affair mixed with
those of others. She receives kindly every one except her Creditors: She is
humble and modest, but has ridiculous Niceties in point of Reputation. It Is
this Self-love which is so exact to observe Civility in Works of Charity:
'Twould shock her should she not pay her Devoirs to a sick Relation, though
little esteemed; or not to be one at a good Work with her best Friends, least
she should appear singular; nor to give to a Box-carrier she esteems and
values. In fine, these are but low and self-ended Regards: men act out of mere
humane and worldly Considerations; And Christian Charity is rarely practiced in
its purity.

There is an infinity of other Illusions I do not mention, which a little
attention to our selves will make us reflection: As to dissemble the Truth,
where Charity obliges to declare it, out of a too humane fear of scandal or
some other inconvenience; To forbear giving Alms, to avoid the vanity one is
subject to in giving them; To scandalize ones Neighbor out of too great desire
to edify him; To wound Charity under pretext to practice it; To give poisoned
praises to what one would discommend; To invent subtle Detractions introduced
with great Commendations, to destroy more methodically those one would ruin;
To mend with artificial Fetches what one would mar; To comfort a miserable
Person, and blast the Credit of one that is happy; To impose a Yoke on our
Neighbor which he cannot bear; To be ruling others, and to be ones self
irregular; To seek after Infidels to convert them, and not to love our
Brethren; To see evil and not to examine it; To condemn without being informed;
To use for ones peculiar Interest the Talents one has to be useful to his
Neighbor; To draw to ones self, by the Ministry of the Word of God, the Esteem
of those one ought to draw to God himself only; To dissipate ones self, by
instructing them; To impoverish ones self by enriching them with ones Lights;
To be too fond of the success, and pursue it with more inquietude then one
ought in the exercise of Charity; In fine, the very perfectest acts of Charity
are but mere Illusions, when they are contrary to the perfection of that State
whereunto God has called one. As for Example, If a Carthusian, who ought to
lead a solitary life, would become a Missioner; or if a Carmelite would from
his Grate convert the World by the Intrigues of his Direction: for both the one
and the other would act therein contrary to their Vocation. But it is observable
that if Charity be subject to all these Illusions, in respect of its Principle;
yet it is not subject to any in respect of its object: for when the motive of it
is pure, it is always Jesus Christ one assists in the Poor and the Afflicted,
although it be an Imposture that is assisted; because it is Jesus Christ alone one
has in view when he acts like a Christian. After all, examining thoroughly these
diverse sorts of Illusions, one will find they are all but the real disguises of
Self-love, which is the ordinariest enemy of Charity.

But it is to be feared lest, endeavoring to refine Charity overmuch by a too
strict observation of these Illusions, the greatest part whereof seldom happen,
the exercise of this Virtue be rendered so difficult that its practice be wholly
ruined: For it is easily said Man is exposed to so many occasions of Vanity, and
to so many Imperfections through the weakness of his Condition, that it is to
render the use of Charity impossible to pretend he must practice it so purely.
It seems even that God serves himself of the Imperfections of Man, that the
Poor may be relieved; yet he would not be so, if it depended on so pure a
practice of this Virtue. I affirm the Poor are frequently assisted, through the
Vanity and other Imperfections of those that succor them: for Man commonly
acts as Man, that is to say, very imperfectly: But is that a reason his Eyes
should not be open to oblige him to reflect on it? If God makes use of our
Passions as the most ordinary Instruments of his Designs; If the most secret
springs of his Providence for the accomplishment of great Events, are most
commonly set on work by the Intrigue of Interest or Ambition of Men; And if his
Wisdom is so wonderful as to draw from those corrupted and envenomed Sources
the purest Draughts of his Glory: It Is as much as to say, we must not dare to
speak against Passions, and advertise Man of his weakness, because God makes
use thereof to Govern the World; as he does of the Vanity of great Men to
supply the Wants of the mean. For the rest, I shall esteem my self abundantly
recompensed for the pains I have taken to clear so home by piecemeal these
Illusions, to which Charity is subject; if it may serve any one to reflect
thereon, and to practice sometimes this Virtue with more purity: And I hope God
will bless the intentions I have had, to endeavor rectifying the use of it, by
the simple and disinterested face thereof himself has shown me. But, when
Charity shall be fully cleared from these clouds that obscure it, and from all
those impure fogs that corrupt it: we must think of the means to acquire this
Virtue, in rooting out whatever is contrary to the purity of its Spirit.

CHAP. VI. The Means to acquire Christian Charity.
THere is no Rule methodically to acquire Christian Charity, which is a
supernatural Habit, and a Gift purely from God. But as a Christian, prevented
by Grace, may dispose his Mind to Faith, as supernatural as it is, by
destroying therein obstinacy, presumption, and adhesion to Error, and that
natural propensity that leads to Incredulity: So may he after the same manner
dispose himself to attain Charity, if he roots the obstacles of it out of his
heart. For this Virtue finds very great ones in the heart of Man: whereof I
will give a touch on the principal; without falling on the same Particulars I
mentioned in the Illusions, the most part whereof are also impediments to
Charity.

The greatest of all obstacles to Charity is that Worldly spirit, so opposite
to the Spirit of Jesus Christ; That Prudence of the Flesh, that Pride of the
Age, and all that vain Ostentation which reigns so much in the Courts of Great
men: wherein Worldly wisdom teaches these abominable Maxims, (viz.) To destroy
by subtle Artifices ones Neighbor's Reputation; To discredit him in the
opinion of such as esteem him; To violate the most holy Rights, turn all things
topsie-turvy to attain what one pretends to, and to aggrandize ones self. It Is
by this same Spirit young Gentlemen are taught that Revenge is a Gentleman's
Virtue; and that it is a piece of Cowardice to pardon. The Hatreds, Envies,
Jealousies, Intrigues of Licentiousness and Ambition, great Interests, violent
Passions, which are the common effects of this Spirit, reigns so powerfully in
the Great of this World, that they leave not room for the least spark of
Charity. Therefore the Apostle says, He that will become a friend of the world,
becomes an enemy of God.

There is another Spirit in the World still more opposite to this Virtue; the
Spirit of Disguise, Imposture, and Dissembling, whose only end is to mischief
our Neighbor. It Is this unhappy Policy of the Flesh, which only seeks to
establish it self by shameful and wicked Treacheries, and by all the depraved
Maxims of the World, I have been speaking of, and which render the Life of a
Christian a monstrous Life; that is, full of Passions, Animosities, Knavery and
Perfidiousness. These are the Machines Men make use of to perpetuate their
Enmities, by everlasting Wranglings, and to make all Tribunals ring with their
Injustices and Violences.

I Will say nothing of the Spirit of Obstinacy, Contradiction, diversity of
Judgments and Opinions in matters of Religion; nor of all those Factious
Sidings which at present afflict Christianity. The memory of the Disorders they
have caused in the last Age, is still fresh enough in this to make us
comprehend the importance of it: for there is nothing more capable of dividing
the hearts of the People, then different Judgments in Religion.

Being given to Pleasures, to Delights, to dangerous Divertisements, to Gaming,
to Riot, and Delicacy, is also a great obstacle to this Spirit of Charity we
are in quest of. These stately Houses, proud rich Furnitures, sumptuous Tables,
new Fashions in Clothes, which show nothing but wantonness; These Vanities of
worldly Ladies, this State that environs them, these profuse Expenses of
voluptuous sensual Persons intoxicated with the Delights of the Age, do so
forcibly dry up in the hearts of Worldlings this holy Unction of Charity, that
there remains not any sign of it in all those who are plunged in Vanity. For
how can a Woman that denies nothing to her Pleasure, and loves only her self,
be touched with any sentiments of Charity? She shuts her Eyes against the
poverty of the necessitous, she will not see it, nor so much as take notice of
it, that she may not squander the Fund she designs for her Vanity, by the
Assistance she should be obliged to give him that demands it in Gods name: And
hence it is Jesus Christ so often shakes with cold, in the Person of the Poor
at the Gate of the Rich, without being taken notice of; for he is only busied
about himself.

What shall I say of those perpetual Hatreds and inveterate Aversions, which
Men so scandalously retain? they can neither speak to, nor so much as look on
one that has affronted them; and believe their Resentment just, because they
have been injured. What is more contrary to the Spirit of Christianity, which
cannot so much as suffer coldness or indifferency? They flatter themselves too,
as they frame their Consciences in their Hatreds and Aversions; They believe
they wish no ill to him that has offended them: when any Misfortune befalls
him, they triumph for joy at it: And when they say, I wish him no ill, but
cannot endure to see him, nor have to do with him; this they call loving like a
Christian.

There is likewise I know not what air very repugnant to Charity, in the
natural advantages of Wit, of Conduct, of Sense, of Ability; and in the
excellency of other Qualities which, if one takes not great care, uses to
inspire a love and esteem of ones self: For it is natural for him that has
received more to undervalue him that has received less. But whilst he thinks to
distinguish himself from others by these Advantages, he corrupts his spirit,
and in the end becomes utterly insensible of the most tender motions of
Charity. For the rest, as every one has shared in the distribution of natural
or supernatural Gifts, according to the measure of Grace; There is no Christian
but may take notice of some particular Gift his Brother has received from God,
wherewith himself has not been favored. Thus S. Paul considers in S. Peter his
Primacy, and again S. Peter considers in S. Paul the high Wisdom he had
received from Heaven. S. Anthony only regards in his Brethren those Virtues
himself had not, to honor them the more. It Is in this manner that the Christian
who has wit, esteems one who has Virtue and Goodness. The Learned admires the
Dispatch of the Man of Business; The Man of Business praises the Capacity of
the Learned. In fine, thus it is that Charity makes the Superior not esteem his
own Dignity above others, but the Virtue and Merit of those he Commands: And
whilst he exteriourly Commands them, he humbles himself interiourly before
them; and they on their side respect in him his Power and Authority, and kindly
submit to his Conduct.

Lastly it may be said, that the greatest obstacle to Charity, is the
Immoderate love of Riches; for this love causes Impurity of Conscience,
Hardness of Heart, Independence, Pride, Insolence, Contempt of the Poor, and an
entire corruption of Spirit. And as this restless care of preserving his Goods
poisons the Soul of the Rich, so Covetousness is the most abominable of all
Vices, and most opposite to Charity: For the essential Character of Avarice is
a false Prudence of the Flesh, all whose Designs and Thoughts bound themselves
in the Person possessed by it; so that his Heart is locked up to all Sentiments
of pity for the Wants of the Poor. A Man darkens his spirit by the Vapors of so
carnal a Passion; he fixes his Heart to the Goods of the Earth, as to his
sovereign Good: If others possess them, he unjustly seizes them; he covets them
criminally, if he cannot get them, and violates what is most sacred in Society
to enrich himself maugre his Conscience, against which he shuts his Ears.

But it ought to be observed, that it is not so much the Riches inspire this
Spirit of Hardness and Injustice, as the fixing too great a love on them: For
Job was Charitable in his abundance; his Wealth was so far from being an
obstacle to his Charity, that it was a means for his better practicing it. He
was, as himself says, The father of the poor, and protector of the afflicted;
His door was always open to those in necessity, and with the wool of his sheep
he clad the naked; He was the support of the widow and fatherless, the
traveller was welcome to his house; And he refused nothing to any in want that
craved his help.

Besides this good use that ought to be made of Riches according to the example
of Job, whose life may serve as a pattern to a Christian, to dispose his heart
to Charity: He must likewise, to attain this Virtue, have frequent
communication with God by Prayer and Meditation. It Is chiefly from Prayer these
lights take birth in our hearts, which are the most pure springs of Christian
Charity and love of our Neighbors. For the same sighs that form in our Souls
the Spirit of Prayer, form there also the Spirit of Charity. The inward voice
of the heart; That Voice, says St. Augustine, which expresses it self by the
sighings of Prayer, is that which enkindles in us the fervor of this Virtue:
For Charity becomes cold when the Heart becomes silent, says this great Saint.
Thus one cannot be Charitable, without being Devout; because Devotion is the
most common nourishment of the love of God and our Neighbor. This love grows
cold by the distraction of Business, and is even extinguished by the disquiets
of a too busy Life. In effect, the true source of Charity, as Tertullian
assures us, is renouncing the love of the World, and indifference for temporal
Goods: for transitory Goods weaken the Heart, by the confidence they give it in
so frail a support as is that of Riches.

Likewise there is nothing more capable to inflame Charity in the Soul of a
Christian, then a fervent and lively Faith, animated with a perfect Confidence
in God: For the Fire of Charity kindles it self at the Ardors of Faith, which
makes a Christian act like a Child of God, and love the Poor as his Brother. In
fine, the sure and infallible way to acquire this Virtue, is by little and
little to accustom our selves to practice Works of it: For by visiting the
Prisoner, comforting the Afflicted, helping the Necessitous, instructing the
Ignorant, which are Actions may be done daily, and even ought to be performed
if one pretends to Christianity; he becomes insensibly Charitable, and attains
that heavenly Wisdom which is the portion of the Humble: and which without
Study or Reasoning pours into the Heart that interior Unction of the Spirit of
God, which teaches to love our Neighbor. But it is not sufficient to teach a
Christian the Means to become Charitable: he must also, to encourage him to
become so, be showed his obligation to it by the most pressing Motives.

CHAP. VII. Three very powerful Motives to excite a Christian to acquire the
Virtue of Charity.
THe first Motive is, That without being Charitable one cannot be a Christian;
for it is in Charity alone consists the true Spirit of Christianity. Nature
teaches Man to live with Man, but Grace obliges to love him. This is, says S.
Paul, the plenitude of the Law of the New Testament. All the Morality of Jesus
Christ, and all the depth of the Wisdom of the Gospel points only at the
practice of this Virtue, which alone is the sum and substance of Christian
Perfection. Without Charity, says the Apostle, neither Faith, nor Hope, nor the
gifts of Prophecy, nor the gifts of Tongues, nor Martyrdom, nor any other
Virtue, can be considerable in the sight of God. It is Charity perfects Man,
rectifies his Reason, and sanctifies all his Actions. This makes humble, and
unmakes proud: because it nourishes Humility, and choaks Pride. All Virtues
become unprofitable, and all good Works fruitless to him that is not
Charitable. It Is Charity that warms the Faithful, that animates his Hopes, and
that justifies a Sinner. One may enter into the Marriage-Chamber of the Lamb
without Virginity, but not without Charity. The ordinary life of a Christian in
the exercise of a faithful and perseverant Charity, may sometimes be as
meritorious in the sight of God, as the most heroic Conflicts of the Martyrs;
because every Action of Charity, by the nature of its Motive, is a secret
Sacrifice of his Interest or of his Pleasure, and even of his Honor: for one
cannot in effect love his Neighbor like a Christian, without depriving himself
of something either incommodiously, or against his Inclination; And all the
best we do is ordinarily good for nothing, but by the influence of this Virtue.
It is only through Charity that the Works of Piety are Christian: This enobles
the meanest Actions; and the weakest Reasonings become strong, when a little
sustained by it: and it is not the greatness of the things done for God that
renders them considerable, but the greatness of the Charity wherewith they are
done. In brief, this heavenly Virtue, which is the purest food of the Soul,
sanctifies even natural Defects and the grossest Imperfections; and covers that
multitude of Sins whereunto Man is subject through the weakness of his
Condition, as the Apostle says. Let us then seek after no other Practice of
Devotion, since this alone contains all other Practices, as St. John instructs
us; let us not strain our Wits, according to the Spirit of this Age, with vain
Reasonings, in quest of new ways to arrive at Perfection: Let us content our
selves with this the Savior of the World has marked out to us; let us set our
heart on this Virtue he most recommends to us; let us not stifle in our selves
this divine fire whereof Faith kindles the first flames in our hearts. Let us
love our Brethren sincerely, since we live on the same Bread, and have all the
same Hopes. If we cannot contribute our Goods toward succouring the Poor, at
least let us sigh to God for him; and thereby in some manner comfort him what
we can for the shame he undergoes to sigh so often to Men, imploring their
assistance. In fine, let us not by our hard-heartedness dishonor the holy Name
of Christian, a Name of sweetness and bounty; and since without being
Charitable one cannot be a Christian, let us be Charitable in effect, not to be
only Christians in idea. The reciprocal need Men have of one another, is the
foundation of their Society, and the natural principle of their Union; And
shall not Charity be a bond strong enough to unite Christians by the reciprocal
obligations they have to assist each other? for the Rich ought to help the Poor
before Men, as the Poor help the Rich before God; in that the misery of the
one, becomes the fountain of the others merit and happiness.

The Second Motive to acquire Charity, is the pain wherewith God so severely
punishes him that is not provided with this Virtue. In effect, as it is to
break the Alliance of the New Testament, and after a manner renounce the
Gospel, not to love ones Neighbor; there is nothing more terrible then these
Punishments wherewith the holy Scriptures threatens them that have not this
love. And is it not just, says S. Chrysostom, that he who does no kindness,
should receive none? But how dreadful a Judgment does the Savior of the World
pronounce against those Scribes whereof St. Mark speaks, who devour with such
injustice and violence the Goods of Widows? What Maledictions against those
cruel and merciless Pharisees whereof St. Matthew speaks? Virginity, how
pleasing soever to God, through the luster of its purity, is a Virtue reproved
in the Gospel, when severed from Charity. The foolish Virgins, far from being
received at the Nuptials of the Lamb, were treated as impudent Women; because
they took no care to make that provision of this Oil of the Gospel, which is
the figure of Charity. In vain they renounced Pleasure, to embrace Chastity;
all their Virtues avail them nothing to justify them to the Bridegroom, who
spoke to them these words full of contempt, I know you not. Oh! if true Virgins
are treated so severely by the Son of God: if the wisdom of their Conduct, if
the command over their Desires, if the purity of their Heart, if so many
victories obtained over so frail flesh and so weak a Sex; In fine, if even the
perseverance of their Virtue is fruitless to them: What will become of those
Virgins that lead such licentious and scandalous lives? But with what sharpness
does Jesus Christ condemn his own Disciples, because they advised him, through
want of Charity, to make fire fall from Heaven upon the Samaritans that would
not receive him? You know not, said he, of what spirit you are, and how far
it is contrary to mine. Is not the punishment of the wicked rich man in the
Gospel a most dreadful Example? and the Treatment he received, is it not
terrible? After all, what Crime had he committed? he had not been Charitable;
The hardness of his heart, says St. Chrysostom, was the cause of his loss. But
O my God, how severe and dreadful a Judge art thou! for this rich man had done
wrong to none: he made use of the Riches thou had bestowed upon him, without
doing any Violence or Injustice. It Is true, but the superfluities of his Table,
the sumptuousness of his House. his Oppulency, as innocent as it is, cry for
Vengeance before God; because he employed not his Goods to relieve the
Necessities of the Poor. Look then to your selves you Great ones of the Earth;
If prosperity be in your Houses, if you live at ease, if all things succeed to
your desires, Tremble amidst these temporal Blessings: All your good Fortune is
only a mark of your Reprobation, unless you are Charitable. Power, Riches,
Honors, you are but impediments to Salvation, if you be not employed in
assisting the Poor, and protecting him that is in oppression. For if the Rich
could love the Poor, he would be saved; and his Riches which are true evils,
would become true goods. But can one hear without terror those threatening words
of the Gospel, capable of themselves alone to make tremble the Great ones that
live in all abundance. Woe to you rich of the earth! And why? Because God, who
is just, abandons the Rich to their own Appetites, and strikes them with an
inward blindness, which makes them insensible of all the motions of Grace, and
all the lights of Heaven. This false Tranquillity, and dangerous Peace they
enjoy, is sometimes one of the most terrible torments wherewith God punishes
their hard-heartedness; and it is an assured sign he leaves them to impenitency.
But how great will be the confusion and astonishment of the Reprobate, when he
shall appear before the dreadful Tribunal of the last Judgment; to hear this
terrible Sentence, which an offended God shall pronounce in the fury of his
rage and indignation? Away from me you cursed into fire everlasting: for I was
hungry, and you gave me not to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me not to
drink; I was naked, and you clothed me not. O cruel torments, for a Soul to
see her self eternally deprived of God, and abandoned to her own despair;
because being Christian she was not Charitable. It is not of Impudicity, Envy,
Choler, Violence or Blasphemy, God speaks in his last Judgment to condemn these
Crimes; he only speaks of Insensibility toward the Poor; And Judgment without
mercy to him that shows not mercy, as the Apostle assures us. It is thus those
merciless Souls shall be treated that have not been moved with the miseries of
their Brethren. But can any one bear in mind the thoughts of this dreadful
Tribunal, and not be Charitable? And what hope can he have of the mercy of God,
when himself has pity on none? It Is a sign one has no Faith, when he is not
seized with horror at such terrible Menaces, and that would make one tremble
when seriously considered: for the Threats of a God are never in vain; and he
is as dreadful in his Judgments, as he is amiable in his Mercies.

If yet there be any found insensible of these Reasons, because their Effects
are at a distance; let him at least consider after what manner God exercises
his Judgments in this Life on such Christians as have not Charity: let him
tremble at reading in the Apocalypse the thundering Menaces wherewith that
dreadful Judge who carries a sharp Sword in his Mouth, and holds Death fettered
in Irons, strikes those first Pastors of the Churches of Asia, because their
Charity, the Seal as it were of their Character and Spirit of their Vocation,
was grown cold. Let him behold with trembling the terrible Punishment of that
unhappy Saprice mentioned by Metaphrastus: who after the Rigors of a severe
Prison, after the Conflicts he had resolutely sustained before his Judge in
defense of his Faith, lost his Crown at the very point of receiving it, and of
a Martyr became an Apostate and a Pagan; because he would not forgive his
Brother an Injury. What shall I say of those fearful pains wherewith God
punishes in this Life; the shameful attash the Rich have to the Goods of the
Earth; delivering them up a prey to their Appetites, and leaving them in an
utter forgetfulness of their Salvation? For a rich Man, says S. Basil, by
locking up the bowels of Charity against his Neighbor, at the same time shuts
those of Gods Mercy against himself; and by treating so coldly Jesus Christ in
the Person of the Poor, shows by his hard-heartedness that he fears not to have
him for his Judge, whom he would not acknowledge for his Brother. It is a Heart
perfectly hardened that, being no longer touched with any apprehension of fear,
rebels under the Rod, shuts his Ear against the checks of his Conscience, and
his Eyes against the light of his Reason; and becomes insensible of the motions
of Humanity. It Is the most rigorous pain wherewith God chastises the rich Man
that dies in abundance, and leaves vast Wealth to his often unknown Heirs,
without giving any share to the Poor: He thinks not on it, because God gives him
not the Grace. He might obtain mercy by giving in Alms, at least when he is
dying, what Death will soon snatch from him: But this is a Reflection a rich
Man is not worthy of; God abandons him to blindness and insensibility at his
Death, in punishment of his hard-heartedness during his Life; to make him feel
all the weight of his Justice, that regarded not his Mercy, which he slighted
in slighting the Poor.

It Is from this insolent contempt that there arise so many Disorders in
Families; hence comes the ruin of Houses, the Losses, the public Defamations,
and all the shameful Faults of particular Persons. The Providence of God
permits to fall into these Misfortunes, those who whilst they made profession
of Christianity, had not any sentiment of love or tenderness for their
Neighbor; and were Christians, but had not the Spirit or Character of a
Christian. But if the greatness of the Threats of the Son of God is able to
frighten us, the greatness of his Recompenses ought to have much more power
over our Hearts to touch them.

This is the Third Motive. In so short a Treatise as I proposed to my self, it
would be difficult to comprehend all the Rewards God has promi'sd to Charity;
the Scripture is full of them. It Is to this Virtue God has promised an
unconcern for temporal Goods, firmness of Faith, purity of Manners, the comfort
of a good Conscience, tenderness of Devotion, unshakable perseverance in
Virtue, and the infallible recompense of Salvation. God engages himself to
pardon every thing in consideration of Charity; for it is the ordinary
propitiation of Sin. One Alms, one action of Clemency, the pardon of one
Injury, one work of Mercy, is able to hide all the Faults that humane frailty
can make us commit: Nothing purifies so much the Conscience, nothing cleanses
more the Mind, then Alms-deeds. How many simple and humble Persons have
rendered themselves worthy to penetrate the Mysteries of the holy Scriptures,
and enter into the Secrets of God by the light of their Charity? It is a sure
protection against the frailty of Man, and against the occasions of offending
God: since it resists Sin, as the Scripture says. It is, says St. Ambrose, the
remedy against all Disorders Man is subject to. This is of all other the most
powerful Mediator to Jesus Christ; for it continually solicits this severe
Judge, who is inflexible to all but Alms. This poor Man whom you have Clothed,
this sick Man you have Visited, this innocent Creature to whom you have given
your protection, and this afflicted Soul whom you have comforted, is Jesus
Christ: For since Jesus Christ has told us that we do to him what we do to the
least of his Servants; There is no difference, says St. Chrysostom, between
giving to the Poor, and giving to Jesus Christ. If then the Poor are Advocates
to God, if their Intercession is the most assured assistance the Rich can
expect from their Riches in that dreadful Day of the universal Judgment; place
your hopes in this Treasure of Gods Mercies, where neither Thieves nor
Corruption can have access. Nay be assured that it is your Charity which will
draw upon you the assistance of Heaven in your temporal Occasions, and in the
afflicting Tribulations whereto the misery of our Condition is so subject. For
if you are Charitable, God will be faithful to the Promises he has made in his
Prophet, You shall no sooner open your mouth to call him to your aid, then he
will answer, Here I am.

But what blindness is it in a Christian to have it in his power to merit
Heaven by a Glass of Water, or a Morsel of Bread given to a poor Man out of the
motive of Christian Charity; and to refuse it him? With what face can he beg
pardon of God daily, if himself pardons not? Would you have others take pity on
you? take pity on others. Do you crave Favors? do them your self. Do not
judge, if you will not be judged; for as you treat your Neighbor, your self
shall also be treated. After all, what Recompense can move a Christians Heart,
if Heaven cannot, that comprehends in it self alone all Rewards; and is only
promised to the Charitable? For the Gospel teaches us that the Savior of the,
World in that terrible Day wherein he shall Judge the Universe, will show mercy
only to those that have been merciful: since in opening the Heavens to his
Elect he will say to them these words, You who have clothed and fed me in the
person of the Poor, come receive an eternal reward which I have prepared for
your mercies. Behold, what the price is of Christian Charity: it merits an
eternal recompense by a piece of Bread given to a poor Man for the love of
Jesus Christ; it gains heavenly Goods by earthly ones, and for perishable
Riches receives those will never perish. Behold what Virtue the Spirit of
Christianity has in it to produce the solid fruits of Eternity, by mean, weak,
and slight Works: For how many Christians are there that sanctify a Life, in
other respects but ordinary, nay sometimes imperfect, by the sole exercise of
Charity? How many Souls have been raised to a sublime perfection by the only
practice of this Virtue, which includes in it self all the perfection of
Christianity?

These are Motives capable to make impression on a Heart that is prevented by
the light of Faith, and is really touched with the hopes of what our Religion
proposes to us. But since we are in an Age wherein Christian Charity is much
cooled by the nicety of so many new Interests brought into the World, which
divide Men's minds: let us endeavor to reinforce the heat of this Virtue by
Considerations still more pressing, being its practice is so necessary.

CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion of this Discourse by way of Exhortation, to move
Christians to Charity.
IF the Spirit of Christianity be nothing else but the Spirit of Charity, as it
appears by this Discourse; let us see if we are Charitable, to judge whether we
are Christians. For the Law of Charity is the Law of the New Testament written
in the bottom of our hearts, by the Impression of the Holy Ghost: So that it
would be strange that Christians instructed in a School of Unity, modeled by
the same Maxims, redeemed with the same Blood, fed with the same Bread; that
have the same Faith, the same Hope, and are one day to be reunited in the same
Glory, should not have the same Spirit, and love one another. But after all how
go's it? have we Charity one for another? The Luxury, Self-interest, Ambition,
and general Irregularities of the Manners of this Age, have they not spread
every where the Spirit of Division? and what judgment ought one to make of the
Christianity of these later Times, wherein Animosities, Jealousies, Lawsuits,
Quarrels, Envies, Calumnies, Repinings, Injustices, and Revenge, reign with so
much heat? Were there ever seen so many Divisions in Families, so many
Separations in Marriages, such Coldness and Indifferency among Relations, so
little Union in Communities, and so many different Opinions in Religion? Men
have no Charity for those they know, how then can they have any for them they
know not? They love not their Kindred, how then can they love others? They are
rigid to their Domestics, and can they have any tenderness for Strangers?
Never did Luxury more reign in the World, and perhaps the Poor were never less
assisted. Are we Christians with such languishing Manners? Those later Times
when Men shall hate one another, and the Charity of the Faithful grow so cold:
Those Times I say foretold by our Lord, are they already come?

However, let us tremble, if we have not Charity: For without it all our hopes
are vain; and we are degenerated from the Spirit of the first Christians, who
generously renouncing all the Goods of the Earth, only raised their Minds to
Heaven, and made the purity of their Faith shine to the whole World by the
ardor of their Charity. Let us then not stray out of the sure way of Salvation
which they have marked out to us by the exercise of this Virtue, they have
practiced with so much perseverance and fidelity: Let us not stifle in our
selves the sentiments of that Spirit, which our Christianity gives birth to:
Let us examine our selves, and see if we have that Seal of our Predestination
so distinctly showed us in the Gospel: Let us be afraid of losing the features
of this divine Character, for fear we lose at the same time the marks and
surest pledge of our Salvation: Let us be touched with compassion for our
Brethren, that God may be touched with compassion for us: Let us assist them in
their wants, that God may assist us in ours: Let us be merciful to them, that
he may be so to us: Let us not judge them, for our Judgments must one day be
judged; or if we judge them, let it be without condemning them, that we be not
condemned; for we shall be judged in the same manner we judge: Let us not hope
God will stretch out to us his helping hand, if we refuse help to the Afflicted
that ask it. What pride would it be to behold with ungrateful Eyes Jesus Christ
pouring forth his precious Blood upon the Cross for us; and to deny him a bit
of Bread which he begs of us by the mouth of the Poor: And what unhappiness for
us, should these Riches that give us nothing but inquietude, and which we must
one day quit, become an obstacle to our Salvation; God having given them us
only by their means to save us? How happy is he who, to make a good use of
them, abandons the love of his Treasures, to reserve for himself none but those
of the Riches of Gods mercy at the day of his wrath.

But the Justice of this dreadful Judge has Secrets and Abysses impenetrable to
our understanding: His Grace is not for the Rich or Great ones of the Earth,
who, through monstrous hardness of heart, are become so insensible of the
motions of pity, that they see the miseries of the Afflicted without the least
compassion. Alas, if this poor wretch that carries sorrow in his Face; this
poor wretch that is your Brother; in fine, this poor wretch that represents
Jesus Christ in person cannot move you: what can? If you have been so cruel to
shut up your bowels against his wants: how can you have the confidence of the
truly faithful, who place all their hopes in the bowels of their Savior;
whence flow those springs of mercy which are the sanctuary of Sinners? With
what assurance will you appear before the Sovereign Tribunal of the last
Judgment, to render an account of your Life to that inflexible Judge, who will
give to every one according to his works; if you have been hard and pitiless to
all the world? But alas, how frightful will it be to hear those terrible words
of the Gospel, Go you accursed, and what follows; after having neglected to
clothe Jesus Christ when he was naked, to feed him when he was hungry in those
Members whereof he is Head? He must be very blind, to think himself secure
against the Sentence of so severe a Judge that sees all things, when one has so
contemned him in the person of his Brethren.

But it is a dreadful heedlesness, and dismal blindness to which God uses to
abandon those that permit themselves to be hardened by covetousness and pride of
the Grandeurs of this World; and that are so cruel to treat their own Brethren
more rigidly then they do the very Beasts they make use of for their Vanity. If
God will one day call a Christian to account for an idle word; what account
will he demand of the idle Expenses of the most part of the Great ones, and of
all the Abuses committed in the administration of the Estate he has given them?
For the Estate which God bestows is no longer his to whom he gives it, when he
has taken what is needful and seemly for his Quality: It is the Poors when the
Poor are in want. This is the reason why the Prophet calls Alms a piece of
Justice, not Mercy: He distributed, says he, what he had to the poor, the
memory of his justice remains for ever. You possess not your Goods as soon as
you are a Christian, but to distribute them. Give little if you have but
little; but give much if you have much. For what greater Inheritance can a
Father leave his Children, then the Protection of Jesus Christ; whom he has
succored in the Necessitous that had recourse to his assistance.

Happy he that comprehends this Mystery! it is a Secret unknown to earthly
Souls, that dream not what advantage it is to regard the wants of the
Necessitous out of the sincere Motive of Christian Charity. Happy he I say that
understands it! He starts not back at this ignominious outside, nor at the
miserable condition of the Poor; because he beholds Jesus Christ concealed
under that mean Aspect, and these Rags: He minds not the poorness of his
Clothes; he considers the price of his Soul. That ulcerous Body in tattered
Garments appears to him not unworthy his assistance; for he is favorably
looked on by Heaven from the Minute he is truly poor: so he receives him as an
Ambassador sent from God to treat of Peace with him, and mediate the Affair of
his Salvation: He hopes the Alms he gives him will be the cause of his
Predestination, and source of his Glory. Behold what a Christian ought to
comprehend, when he sees a poor Body: and once again, happy he that comprehends
it. If we then are truly Christians, as we glory to be; let us follow this
admirable counsel S. Paul gave to the Colossians, to raise them up to the
height of that Spirit he inspired into them, conformable to the Image he had
traced forth to them of the New Man he Preached to them: Put you on therefore
as the elect of God, (that is, as Christians) put you on, says he, the bowels
of mercy, benignity, modesty, patience, supporting one one another, and
pardoning one another, as also our Lord has pardoned you. Our Redeemer, wholly
clad as he is with our frailty, teaches us to pardon our Enemies, by his
pardoning us who are his. We are so nice, we cannot bear with those that do us
the least Offense; and yet we boast we are Disciples of a God who pardons his
Executioners, dies for those that crucified him, and who in spite of our
Ingratitude, continues to shower down upon us his Favors, and the continual
marks of his Bounty.

I do not bid you quit your Estates like the first Christians, who went and
laid them at the Apostles feet. I do not say to you, Go affront Tyrants, like
the Martyrs, to make an eminent Profession of your Faith. I say not, Retire
your self into the Wilderness, to lead a penitent Life like the Anchorites:
Sell your Liberties, as St. Paulinus did; Or cross the Seas like St. Xaverius;
though God deserves all this and more from you. I do not propose unto you the
Lives of the Primitive Christians, as the most holy Model, and true Rule of
Evangelical perfection. I only say to you, Do not tear in pieces your Brothers
Reputation; Pardon this Enemy, relieve this poor Man, this is sufficient for
you. I do not say to you, Save so many Souls that perish; I only say, Save your
self: your Soul is your next Neighbor, lose it not. Love those you are to live
with; but love them with a pure and sincere Charity, which neither your own
Interests nor the Artifice of Men may ever alter: that the Unity of spirit
which ought to be among the Faithful may not be prejudiced.

Let us leave Spiritual Fathers to invent new Methods of Devotion, to satisfy
the humor of the Age that pretends so much to Curiosity. Let us bluntly stop
at the practice of this Virtue, without seeking after any perfecter way to go
to God: since neither St. Paul, St. John, nor the Gospel it self have ever
owned a better.

In fine, let us be Charitable if we pretend to be Christians, since Charity is
the true Spirit of Christianity.

FINIS.

