A Confutation of Atheism FROM THE Origin and Frame of the WORLD. PART II. A
SERMON Preached at St. Martin's in the Fields, NOVEMBER the 7th. 1692. Being
the Seventh of the Lecture Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.

By RICHARD BENTLEY, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God,
EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1693.

Imprimatur. Ra. Barker, Rmo in Christo Patriac Dno Dno Johanni Archiep.
Cantuar. a Sacris Domest.

LAMBHITH, November. 10. 1692.

Acts XIV. 15, etc. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the living
God, who made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all things that are therein:
Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless,
he left not himself without witness, in that he did Good, and gave us Rain from
Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food and Gladness.


WHen we first entered upon this Topic, the demonstration of God's Existence
from the Origin and Frame of the World, we offered to prove four Propositions.

1. That this present System of Heaven and Earth cannot possibly have subsisted
from all Eternity.

2. That Matter considered generally, and abstractly from any particular Form
and Concretion, cannot possibly have been eternal: Or, if Matter could be so;
yet Motion cannot have coexisted with it eternally, as an inherent property and
essential attribute of Matter. These two we have already established in the
preceding Discourse; we shall now show in the third place,

3. That, though we should allow the Atheists, that Matter and Motion may have
been from everlasting; yet if (as they now suppose) there were once no Sun nor
Stars nor Earth nor Planets; but the Particles, that now constitute them, were
diffused in the mundane Space in manner of a Chaos without any concretion and
coalition; those dispersed Particles could never of themselves by any kind of
Natural motion, whether called Fortuitous or Mechanical, have convened into
this present or any other like Frame of Heaven and Earth.

I. And first as to that ordinary Cant of illiterate and puny Atheists, the
fortuitous or casual concourse of Atoms, that compendious and easy Dispatch of
the most important and difficult affair, the Formation of a World; (besides
that in our next undertaking it will be refuted all along) I shall now briefly
dispatch it, from what has been formerly said concerning the true notions of
Fortune and Chance. Sermon. V. p. 6, 7.
Whereby it is evident, that in the Atheistical Hypothesis of the World's
production, Fortuitous and Mechanical must be the self-same thing. Because
Fortune is no real entity nor physical essence, but a mere relative
signification, denoting only this; That such a thing said to fall out by
Fortune, was really effected by material and necessary Causes; but the Person,
with regard to whom it is called Fortuitous, was ignorant of those Causes or
their tendencies, and did not design nor foresee such an effect. This is the
only allowable and genuine notion of the word Fortune. But thus to affirm, that
the World was made fortuitously, is as much as to say, That before the World
was made, there was some Intelligent Agent or Spectator; who designing to do
something else, or expecting that something else would be done with the
Materials of the World, there were some occult and unknown motions and
tendencies in Matter, which mechanically formed the World beside his design or
expectation. Now the Atheists, we may presume, will be loath to assert a
fortuitous Formation in this proper sense and meaning; whereby they will make
Understanding to be older than Heaven and Earth. Or if they should so assert
it; yet, unless they will affirm that the Intelligent Agent did dispose and
direct the inanimate Matter, (which is what we would bring them to) they must
still leave their Atoms to their mechanical Affections; not able to make one
step toward the production of a World beyond the necessary Laws of Motion. It
is plain then, that Fortune, as to the matter before us, is but a synonymous
word with Nature and Necessity. It remains that we examine the adequate meaning
of Chance; Sermon. V. p. 12, 13.
which properly signifies, That all events called Casual, among inanimate
Bodies, are mechanically and naturally produced according to the determinate
figures and textures and motions of those Bodies; with this negation only, That
those inanimate Bodies are not conscious of their own operations, nor contrive
and cast about how to bring such events to pass. So that thus to say, that the
World was made casually by the concourse of Atoms, is no more than to affirm,
that the Atoms composed the World mechanically and fatally; only they were not
sensible of it, nor studied and considered about so noble an undertaking. For
if Atoms formed the World according to the essential properties of Bulk, Figure
and Motion, they formed it mechanically; and if they formed it mechanically
without perception and design, they formed it casually. So that this negation
of Consciousness being all that the notion of Chance can add to that of
Mechanism; We, that do not dispute this matter with the Atheists, nor believe
that Atoms ever acted by Counsel and Thought, may have leave to consider the
several names of Fortune and Chance and Nature and Mechanism, as one and the
same Hypothesis. Wherefore once for all to overthrow all possible Explications
which Atheists have or may assign for the formation of the World, we will
undertake to evince this following Proposition:

II. That the Atoms or Particles which now constitute Heaven and Earth, being
once separate and diffused in the Mundane Space, like the supposed Chaos, could
never without a God by their Mechanical affections have convened into this
present Frame of Things or any other like it.

Which that we may perform with the greater clearness and conviction; it will
be necessary, in a discourse about the Formation of the World, to give you a
brief account of some of the most principal and systematical Phenomenon, that
occurr in the World now that it is formed.

(1.) The most considerable Phenomenon belonging to Terrestrial Bodies is the
general action of Gravitation, whereby All known Bodies in the vicinity of the
Earth do tend and press toward its Center; not only such as are sensibly and
evidently Heavy, but even those that are comparatively the Lighted, and even in
their proper place, and natural Elements, (as they usually speak) as Air
gravitates even in Air and Water in Water. This has been demonstrated and
experimentally proved beyond contradiction, by several ingenious Persons of the
present Age, Mr. Boyle's Physicom. Exp. of Air. Hydrostat. Paradoxes.
but by none so perspicuously and copiously and accurately, as by the
Honorable Founder of this Lecture in his incomparable Treatises of the Air and
Hydrostaticks.

(2.) Now this is the constant Property of Gravitation; That the weight of all
Bodies around the Earth is ever proportional to the Quantity of their Matter:
As for instance, a Pound weight (examined Hydrostatically) of all kinds of
Bodies, though of the most different forms and textures, does always contain an
equal quantity of solid Mass or corporeal Substance. This is the ancient
Doctrine of the Epicurean Physiology, Lucret. lib. 1.
then and since very probably indeed, but yet precariously asserted: But it is
lately demonstrated and put beyond controversy by that very excellent and
divine Theorist Mr. Isaac Newton, Newton Philos. Nature. Princ. Math. lib. 3.
prop. 6.
to whose most admirable sagacity and industry we shall frequently be obliged
in this and the following Discourse.

I will not entertain this Auditory with an account of the Demonstration; but
referring the Curious to the Book it self for full satisfaction, I shall now
proceed and build upon it as a Truth solidly established, That all Bodies weigh
according to their Matter; provided only that the compared Bodies be at equal
distances from the Center toward which they weigh. Because the further they are
removed from the Center, the lighter they are: decreasing gradually and
uniformly in weight, in a duplicate proportion to the Increase of the Distance.

(3.) Now since Gravity is found proportional to the Quantity of Matter, there
is a manifest Necessity of admitting a Vacuum, another principal Doctrine of
the Atomical Philosophy. Because if there were everywhere an absolute
plenitude and density without any empty pores and interstices between the
Particles of Bodies, then all Bodies of equal dimensions would contain an equal
Quantity of Matter; and consequently, as we have showed before, would be
equally ponderous: so that Gold, Copper, Stone, Wood, etc. would have all the
same specific weight; which Experience assures us they have not: neither would
any of them descend in the Air, as we all see they do; because, if all Space
was Full, even the Air would be as dense and specifically as heavy as they. If
it be said, that, though the difference of specific Gravity may proceed from
variety of Texture, the lighter Bodies being of a more loose and porous
composition, and the heavier more dense and compact; yet an ethereal subtle
Matter, which is in a perpetual motion, may penetrate and pervade the minutest
and inmost Cavities of the closest Bodies, and adapting it self to the figure
of every Pore, may adequately fill them; and so prevent all Vacuity, without
increasing the weight: To this we answer; That that subtle Matter it self must
be of the same Substance and Nature with all other Matter, and therefore It
also must weigh proportionally to its Bulk; and as much of it as at any time is
comprehended within the Pores of a particular Body must gravitate jointly with
that Body: so that if the Presence of this ethereal Matter made an absolute
Fullness, all Bodies of equal dimensions would be equally heavy: which being
refuted by experience, it necessarily follows, that there is a Vacuity; and
that (notwithstanding some little objections full of cavil and sophistry) mere
and simple Extension or Space has a quite different nature and notion from
real Body and impenetrable Substance.

(4.) This therefore being established; in the next place it is of great
consequence to our present enquiry, if we can make a computation, How great is
the whole Sum of the Void spaces in our system, and what proportion it bears
to the corporeal substance. Mr. Boil of Air and Porosity of Bodies.
By many and accurate Trials it manifestly appears, that Refined Gold, the most
ponderous of known Bodies, (though even that must be allowed to be porous too,
being dissoluble in Mercury and Aqua Regis and other Chemical Liquors; and
being naturally a thing impossible, that the Figures and Sizes of its
constituent Particles should be so justly adapted, as to touch one another in
every Point,) I say, Gold is in specific weight to common Water as 19 to 1;
and Water to common Air as 850 to 1: so that Gold is to Air as 16150 to 1.
Whence it clearly appears, seeing Matter and Gravity are always commensurate,
that (though we should allow the texture of Gold to be entirely close without
any vacuity) the ordinary Air in which we live and respire is of so thin a
composition, that 16149 parts of its dimensions are mere emptiness and Nothing;
and the remaining One only material and real substance. But if Gold it self be
admitted, as it must be, for a porous Concrete, the proportion of Void to Body
in the texture of common Air will be so much the greater. And thus it is in the
lowest and densest region of the Air near the surface of the Earth, where the
whole Mass of Air is in a state of violent compression, the inferior being
pressed and constipated by the weight of all the incumbent. Mr. Boil ibid.
But, since the Air is now certainly known to consist of elastick or springy
Particles, that have a continual tendency and endeavor to expand and display
themselves; and the dimensions, to which they expand themselves, to be
reciprocally as the Compression; it follows, that the higher you ascend in it,
where it is less and less compressed by the superior Air, the more and more it
is rarefied. So that at the hight of a few miles from the surface of the Earth,
it is computed to have some million parts of empty space in its texture for one
of solid Matter. And at the hight of one Terrestrial Semid. Newton Philos. Not.
Principia. Math. p. 503.
(not above 4000 miles) the Ether is of that wonderful tenuity, that by an
exact calculation, if a small Sphere of common Air of one Inch Diameter
(already 16149 parts Nothing) should be further expanded to the thinness of
that Ether, it would more than take up the Vast Orb of Saturn, which is many
million million times bigger than the whole Globe of the Earth. And yet the
higher you ascend above that region, the Rarefaction still gradually increases
without stop or limit: so that, in a word, the whole Concave of the Firmament,
except the Sun and Planets and their Atmospheres, may be considered as a mere
Void. Let us allow then, that all the Matter of the System of our Sun may be
50000 times as much as the whole Mass of the Earth; and we appeal to Astronomy,
if we are not liberal enough and even prodigal in this concession. And let us
suppose further, that the whole Globe of the Earth is entirely solid and
compact without any void interstices; notwithstanding what has been showed
before, as to the texture of Gold it self. Now though we have made such ample
allowances; we shall find, notwithstanding, that the void Space of our System
is immensly bigger than all its corporeal Mass. For, to proceed upon our
supposition, that all the Matter within the Firmament is 50000 times bigger
than the solid Globe of the Earth; if we assume the Diameter of the Orbis
Magnus (wherein the Earth moves about the Sun) to be only 7000 times as big as
the Diameter of the Earth (though the latest and most accurate Observations
make it thrice 7000) and the Diameter of the Firmament to be only 100000 times
as long as the Diameter of the Orbis Magnus (though it cannot possibly be less
than that, but may be vastly and unspeakably bigger) we must pronounce, after
such large concessions on that side and such great abatements on ours, That the
Sum of Empty Spaces within the Concave of the Firmament is 6860 million
million million times bigger than All the Matter contained in it.

Now from hence we are enabled to form a right conception and imagination of
the supposed Chaos; and then we may proceed to determine the controversy with
more certainty and satisfaction; whether a World like the Present could
possibly without a Divine Influence be formed in it or no?

(1.) And first, because every Fixed Star is supposed by Astronomers to be of
the same Nature with our Sun; and each may very possibly have Planets about
them, though by reason of their vast distance they be invisible to Us: we will
assume this reasonable supposition, That the same proportion of Void Space to
Matter, which is found in our Sun's Region within the Sphere of the Fixed
Stars, may competently well hold in the whole Mundane Space. I am aware, that
in this computation we must not assign the whole Capacity of that Sphere for
the Region of our Sun; but allow half of its Diameter for the Radii of the
several Regions of the next Fixed Stars. So that diminishing our former number,
as this last consideration requires; we may safely affirm from certain and
demonstrated Principles, That the empty Space of our Solar Region
(comprehending half of the Diameter of the Firmament) is 8575 hundred thousand
million million times more ample than all the corporeal substance in it. And we
may fairly suppose, that the same proportion may hold through the whole Extent
of the Universe.

(2.) And secondly as to the state or condition of Matter before the World was
a-making, which is compendiously expressed by the word Chaos; they must suppose,
that either All the Matter of our System was evenly or well-nigh evenly
diffused through the Region of the Sun, this would represent a particular
Chaos: or All Matter universally so spread through the whole Mundane Space;
which would truly exhibit a General Chaos; no part of the Universe being rarer
or denser than another. Which is agreeable to the ancient Description of it,
That Diod. Sicul. lib. 1. (...). Apoll. Rhodius lib. 1. (...).
the Heavens and Earth had (...), one form, one texture and constitution: which
could not be, unless all the Mundane Matter were uniformly and evenly diffused.
It Is indifferent to our Dispute, whether they suppose it to have continued a
long time or very little in the state of Diffusion. For if there was but one
single Moment in all past Eternity, when Matter was so diffused: we shall
plainly and fully prove, that it could never have convened afterward into the
present Frame and Order of Things.

(3.) It is evident from what we have newly proved, that in the Supposition of
such a Chaos or such an even diffusion either of the whole Mundane Matter or
that of our System (for it matters not which they assume) every single Particle
would have a Sphere of Void Space around it 8575 hundred thousand million
million times bigger than the dimensions of that Particle. Nay further, though
the proportion already appear so immense; yet every single Particle would
really be surrounded with a Void sphere Eight times as capacious as that newly
mentioned; its Diameter being compounded of the Diameter of the Proper sphere,
and the Semi-diameters of the contiguous Spheres of the neighboring Particles.
From whence it appears, that every Particle (supposing them globular or not
very oblong) would be above Nine Million times their own length from any other
Particle. And moreover in the whole Surface of this Void sphere there can only
Twelve Particles be evenly placed (as the Hypothesis requires) that is, at
equal Distances from the Central one and each other. So that if the Matter of
our System or of the Universe was equally dispersed, like the supposed Chaos;
the result and issue would be, not only that every Atom would be many Million
times its own length distant from any other: but if any One should be moved
Mechanically (without direction or attraction) to the limit of that distance;
it is above a hundred million millions Odds to an unit, that it would not strike
upon any other Atom, but glide through an empty interval without any contact.

(4.) It Is true, that while I calculate these Measures, I suppose all the
Particles of Matter to be at absolute rest among themselves, and situated in an
exact and mathematical evenness; neither of which is likely to be allowed by
our Adversaries, who not admitting the former, but asserting the eternity of
Motion, will consequently deny the latter also: because in the very moment that
Motion is admitted in the Chaos, such an exact evenness cannot possibly be
preserved. But this I do, not to draw any argument against them from the
Universal Rest or accurately equal diffusion of Matter; but only that I may
better demonstrate the great Rarity and Tenuity of their imaginary Chaos, and
reduce it to computation. Which computation will hold with exactness enough,
though we allow the Particles of the Chaos to be variously moved, and to differ
something in size and figure and situation. For if some Particles should
approach nearer each other than in the former Proportion; with respect to some
other Particles they would be as much remoter. So that notwithstanding a small
diversity of their Positions and Distances, the whole Aggregate of Matter, as
long as it retained the name and nature of Chaos, would retain well-nigh an
uniform tenuity of Texture, and may be considered as an homogeneous Fluid. As
several Portions of the same sort of Water are reckoned to be of the same
specific gravity; though it be naturally impossible that every Particle and
Pore of it, considered Geometrically, should have equal sizes and dimensions.

We have now represented the true scheme and condition of the Chaos; how all
the Particles would be disunited; and what vast intervals of empty Space would
lie between each. To form a System therefore, it is necessary that these
squandered Atoms should convene and unite into great and compact Masses, like
the Bodies of the Earth and Planets. Without such a coalition the diffused
Chaos must have continued and reigned to all eternity. But how could Particles
so widely dispersed combine into that closeness of Texture? Our Adversaries can
have only these two ways of accounting for it. Either by the Common Motion of
Matter, proceeding from external Impulse and Conflict (without attraction) by
which every Body moves uniformly in a direct line according to the
determination of the impelling force. For, they may say, the Atoms of the Chaos
being variously moved according to this catholic Law, must needs knock and
interfere; by which means some that have convenient figures for mutual
coherence might chance to stick together, and others might join to those, and
so by degrees such huge Masses might be formed, as afterward became Suns and
Planets: or there might arise some vertiginous Motions or Whirlpools in the
Matter of the Chaos; whereby the Atoms might be thrust and crowded to the
middle of those Whirlpools, and there constipate one another into great solid
Globes, such as now appear in the World. Or secondly by mutual Gravitation or
Attraction. For they may assert, that Matter has inherently and essentially
such an intrinseck energy, whereby it incessantly tends to unite it self to all
other Matter: so that several Particles placed in a Void space at any distance
whatsoever would without any external impulse spontaneously convene and unite
together. And thus the Atoms of the Chaos, though never so widely diffused,
might by this innate property of Attraction soon assemble themselves into great
sphaerical Masses, and constitute Systems like the present Heaven and Earth.
This is all that can be proposed by Atheists, as an efficient cause of a World.
For as to the Epicurean Theory, of Atoms descending down an infinite space by
an inherent principle of Gravitation, which tends not toward other Matter, but
toward a Vacuum or Nothing; and verging from the Perpendicular Lucret. Nec
regione loci certa, nec tempore certo.
no body knows why nor when nor where; it is such miserable absurd stuff, so
repugnant to it self, and so contrary to the known Phenomenon of Nature (yet it
contented supine unthinking Atheists for a thousand years together) that we
will not now honor it with a special refutation. But what it has common with
the other Explications, we will fully confute together with Them in these three
Propositions.

(1.) That by Common Motion (without attraction) the dissever'd Particles of
the Chaos could never make the World; could never convene into such great
compact Masses, as the Planets now are; nor either acquire or continue such
Motions, as the Planets now have.

(2.) That such a mutual Gravitation or spontaneous Attraction can neither be
inherent and essential to Matter; nor ever supervene to it, unless impressed
and infused into it by a Divine Power.

(3.) That though we should allow such Attraction to be natural and essential
to all Matter; yet the Atoms of a Chaos could never so convene by it, as to
form the present System: or if they could form it, it could neither acquire
such Motions, nor continue permanent in this state, without the Power and
Providence of a Divine Being.

I. And first, that by Common Motion the Matter of Chaos could never convene
into such Masses, as the Planets now are. Any man, that considers the spacious
void Intervals of the Chaos, how immense they are in proportion to the bulk of
the Atoms, will hardly induce himself to believe, that Particles so widely
disseminated could ever throng and crowd one another into a close and compact
texture. He will rather conclude, that those few that should happen to clash,
might rebound after the collision; or if they cohered, yet by the next conflict
with other Atoms might be separated again, and so on in an eternal vicissitude
of Fast and Loose, without ever consociating into the huge condense Bodies of
Planets; some of whose Particles upon this supposition must have traveled many
millions of Leagues through the gloomy regions of Chaos, to place themselves
where they now are. But then how rarely would there be any clashing at all? how
very rarely in comparison to the number of Atoms? The whole multitude of them,
generally speaking, might freely move and rove for ever with very little
occurring or interfering. Let us conceive two of the nearest Particles
according to our former Calculation; or rather let us try the same proportions
in another Example, that will come easier to the Imagination. Let us suppose
two Ships, fitted with durable Timber and Rigging, but without Pilot or
Mariners, to be placed in the vast Atlantic or the Pacifique Ocean, as far
asunder as may be. How many thousand years might expire, before those solitary
Vessels should happen to strike one against the other? But let us imagine the
Space yet more ample, even the whole face of the Earth to be covered with Sea,
and the two Ships to be placed in the opposite Poles: might not they now move
long enough without any danger of clashing? And yet I find, that the two
nearest Atoms in our evenly diffused Chaos have ten thousand times less
proportion to the two Void circular Planes around them, than our two Ships
would have to the whole Surface of the Deluge. Let us assume then another
Deluge ten thousand times larger than Noah's. Is it not now utterly incredible,
that our two Vessels, placed there Antipodes to each other, should ever happen
to concur? And yet let me add, that the Ships would move in one and the same
Surface; and consequently must needs encounter, when they either advance
toward one another in direct lines, or meet in the intersection of cross ones;
but the Atoms may not only fly side-ways, but over likewise and under each
other: which makes it many million times more improbable, that they should
interfere than the Ships, even in the last and unlikeliest instance. But they
may say, Though the Odds indeed be unspeakable that the Atoms do not convene in
any set number of Trials, yet in an infinite Succession of them may not such a
Combination possibly happen? But let them consider, that the improbability of
Casual Hits is never diminished by repetition of Trials; they are as unlikely
to fall out at the Thousandth as at the First. So that in a matter of mere
Chance, Sermon. V. p. 32.
when there is so many Millions odds against any assignable Experiment; it is in
vain to expect it should ever succeed, even in endless Duration.

But though we should concede it to be simply possible, that the Matter of
Chaos might convene into great Masses, like Planets: yet it is absolutely
impossible, that those Masses should acquire such revolutions about the Sun.
Let us suppose any one of those Masses to be the Present Earth. Now the annual
Revolution of the Earth must proceed (in this Hypothesis) either from the Sum
and Result of the several motions of all the Particles that formed the Earth,
or from a new Impulse from some external Matter, after it was formed. The
former is apparently absurd, because the Particles that formed the round Earth
must needs convene from all points and quarters toward the middle, and would
generally tend toward its Center; which would make the whole Compound to rest
in a Poise: or at least that overplus of Motion, which the Particles of one
Hemisphere could have above the other, would be very small and inconsiderable;
too feeble and languid to propell so vast and ponderous a Body with that
prodigious velocity. And secondly, it is impossible, that any external Matter
should impell that compound Mass, after it was formed. It Is manifest, that
nothing else could impell it, unless the Ethereal Matter be supposed to be
carried about the Sun like a Vortex or Whirlpool, as a Vehicle to convey It and
the rest of the Planets. But this is refuted from what we have shown above,
that those Spaces of the Ether may be reckoned a mere Void, the whole Quantity
of their Matter scarce amounting to the weight of a Grain. It Is refuted also
from Matter of Fact in the Motion of Comets; which, as often as they are
visible to Us, Newton ibidem p. 480.
are in the Region of our Planets; and there are observed to move, some in
quite contrary courses to Theirs, and some in cross and oblique ones, in Planes
inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptic in all kinds of Angles: which firmly
evinces, that the Regions of the Ether are empty and free, and neither resist
nor assist the Revolutions of Planets. But moreover there could not possibly
arise in the Chaos any Vortices or Whirlpools at all; either to form the Globes
of the Planets, or to revolve them when formed. It Is acknowledged by all, that
inanimate unactive Matter moves always in a straight Line, nor ever reflects in
an Angle, nor bends in a Circle (which is a continual reflection) unless either
by some external Impulse, that may divert it from the direct motion, or by an
intrinsec Principle of Gravity or Attraction, that may make it describe a curve
line about the attracting Body. But this latter Cause is not now supposed: and
the former could never beget Whirlpools in a Chaos of so great a Laxity and
Thinness. For it is matter of certain experience and universally allowed, that
all Bodies moved circularly have a perpetual endeavor to recede from the
Center, and every moment would fly out in right Lines, if they were not
violently restrained and kept in by contiguous Matter. But there is no such
restraint in a Chaos, no want of empty room there; no possibility of effecting
one single Revolution in way of a Vortex, which necessarily requires either an
absolute Fullness of Matter, or a pretty close Constipation and mutual Contact
of its Particles.

And for the same reason it is evident, that the Planets could not continue
their Revolutions about the Sun; though they could possibly acquire them. For
to drive and carry the Planets in such Orbs as they now describe, that
Ethereal Matter must be compact and dense, as dense as the very Planets
themselves: otherwise they would certainly fly out in Spiral Lines to the very
circumference of the Vortex. But we have often inculcated, that the wide Tracts
of the Ether may be reputed as a mere extended Void. So that there is nothing
(in this Hypothesis) that can retain and bind the Planets in their Orbs for one
single moment; but they would immediately desert them and the neighborhood of
the Sun, and vanish away in Tangents to their several Circles into the Abyss of
Mundane Space.

II. Secondly we affirm, that mutual Gravitation or spontaneous Attraction
cannot possibly be innate and essential to Matter. By Attraction we do not here
understand what is improperly, though vulgarly, called so, in the operations of
drawing, sucking, pumping, etc. which is really Pulsion and Trusion; and
belongs to that Common Motion, which we have already shown to be insufficient
for the formation of a World. But we now mean (as we have explained it before)
such a power and quality, whereby all parcels of Matter would mutually attract
or mutually tend and press to all others; so that (for instance) two distant
Atoms in vacuo would spontaneously convene together without the impulse of
external Bodies. Now we say, if our Atheists suppose this power to be inherent
and essential to Matter; they overthrow their own Hypothesis: there could never
be a Chaos at all upon these terms, but the present form of our System must
have continued from all Eternity; against their own Supposition, and what we
have proved in our Last. Vide Sermon. VI. and Sermon. VIII.
For if they affirm, that there might be a Chaos notwithstanding innate
Gravity; then let them assign any Period though never so remote, when the
diffused Matter might convene. They must confess, that before that assigned
Period Matter had existed eternally, inseparably endued with this principle of
Attraction; and yet had never attracted nor convened before, during that
infinite duration: which is so monstrous an absurdity, as even They will blush
to be charged with. But some perhaps may imagine, that a former System might be
dissolved and reduced to a Chaos, from which the present System might have its
Original, as that Former had from another, and so on: new Systems having grown
out of old ones in infinite Vicissitudes from all past eternity. But we say,
that in the Supposition of innate Gravity no System at all could be dissolved.
For how is it possible, that the Matter of solid Masses like Earth and Planets
and Stars should fly up from their Centers against its inherent principle of
mutual Attraction, and diffuse it self in a Chaos? This is absurder than the
other: That only supposed innate Gravity not to be exerted; This makes it to be
defeated, and to act contrary to its own Nature. So that upon all accounts this
essential power of Gravitation or Attraction is irreconcilable with the
Atheist's own Doctrine of a Chaos. And secondly it is repugnant to Common Sense
and Reason. It Is utterly unconceivable, that inanimate brute Matter (without
the mediation of some Immaterial Being) should operate upon and affect other
Matter without mutual Contact; that distant Bodies should act upon each other
through a Vacuum without the intervention of something else by and through
which the action may be conveyed from one to the other. We will not obscure and
perplex with multitude of words, what is so clear and evident by its own light,
and must needs be allowed by all, that have any competent use of Thinking, and
are initiated into, I do not say the Mysteries, but the plainest Principles of
Philosophy. Now mutual Gravitation or Attraction (in our present acception of
the Words) is the same thing with This; it is an operation or virtue or
influence of distant Bodies upon each other through an empty Interval, without
any Effluvia or Exhalations or other corporeal Medium to convey and transmit
it. This Power therefore cannot be innate and essential to Matter. And if it be
not essential; it is consequently most manifest (seeing it does not depend upon
Motion or Rest or Figure or Position of Parts, which are all the ways that
Matter can diversify it self) that it could never supervene to it, unless
impressed and infused into it by an immaterial and divine Power.

We have proved, that a Power of mutual Gravitation, without contact or
impulse, can in no-wise be attributed to mere Matter: or if it could; we shall
presently show, that it would be wholly unable to form the World out of Chaos.
But by the way; what if it be made appear, that there is really such a Power of
Gravity perpetually acting in the constitution of the present System? This
would be a new and invincible Argument for the Being of God: being a direct and
positive proof, that an immaterial living Mind does inform and actuate the dead
Matter, and support the Frame of the World. I will lay before you some certain
Phenomenon of Nature; and leave it to your consideration from what Principle
they can proceed. It Is demonstrated, That the Sun, Moon and all the Planets do
reciprocally gravitate one toward another: that the Gravitating power of each
of These is exactly proportional to their Matter, and arises from the several
Gravitations or Attractions of every individual Particle that compose the whole
Mass: that all Matter near the Surface of the Earth, for example, does not only
gravitate downwards, but upwards also and side-ways and toward all imaginable
Points; though the Tendency downwards be praedominant and alone discernible,
because of the Greatness and Nearness of the attracting Body, the Earth: that
every Particle of the whole System does attract and is attracted by all the
rest, All operating upon All: that this Universal Attraction or Gravitation is
an incessant, regular and uniform Action by certain and established Laws
according to Quantity of Matter and Longitude of Distance: that it cannot be
destroyed nor impaired nor augmented by any thing, neither by Motion nor Rest,
nor Situation nor Posture, nor alteration of Form, nor diversity of Medium:
that it is not a Magnetical Power, nor the effect of a Vortical Motion; those
common attempts toward the Explication of Gravity: These things, I say, Newton
Philosophiae Naturalis Princ. Math. lib. III.
are fully demonstrated, as matters of Fact, by that very ingenious Author,
whom we cited before. Now how is it possible that these things should be
effected by any Material and Mechanical Agent? We have evinced, that mere
Matter cannot operate upon Matter without mutual Contact. It remains then, that
these Phenomenon are produced either by the intervention of Air or Ether or
other such medium, that communicates the Impulse from one Body to another; or
by Effluvia and Spirits that are emitted from the one, and pervene to the
other. We can conceive no other way of performing them Mechanically. But what
impulse or agitation can be propagated through the Ether from one Particle
entombed and wedged in the very Center of the Earth to another in the Center of
Saturn? Yet even those two Particles do reciprocally affect each other with the
same force and vigor, as they would do at the same distance in any other
Situation imaginable. And because the Impulse from this Particle is not
directed to That only; but to all the rest in the Universe, to all quatters and
regions, at once invariably and incessantly: to do this mechanically; the same
physical Point of Matter must move all manner of ways equally and constantly in
the same instant and moment; which is flatly impossible. But if this Particle
cannot propagate Motion; much less can it send out Effluvia to all points
without intermission or variation; such multitudes of Effluvia as to lay hold
on every Atom in the Universe without missing of one. Nay every single Particle
of the very Effluvia (seeing they also attract and gravitate) must in this
Supposition emit other secondary Effluvia all the World over; and those others
still emit more, and so in infinitum. Now if these things be repugnant to human
reason; we have great reason to affirm, That Universal Gravitation, a thing
certainly existent in Nature, is above all Mechanism and material Causes, and
proceeds from a higher principle, a Divine energy and impression.

III. Thirdly we affirm; That, though we should allow, that reciprocal
Attraction is essential to Matter; yet the Atoms of a Chaos could never so
convene by it, as to form the present System; or if they could form it, yet it
could neither acquire these Revolutions, nor subsist in the present condition,
without the Conservation and Providence of a Divine Being.

(1.) For first, if the Matter of the Universe, and consequently the Space
through which it is diffused, be supposed to be Finite (and I think it might be
demonstrated to be so; but that we have already exceeded the just measures of a
Sermon) then, since every single Particle has an innate Gravitation toward all
others, proportionated by Matter and Distance: it evidently appears, that the
outward Atoms of the Chaos would necessarily tend inwards and descend from all
quarters toward the Middle of the whole Space (for in respect to every Atom
there would lie through the Middle the greatest quantity of Matter and the most
vigorous Attraction) and would there form and constitute one huge sphaerical
Mass; which would be the only Body in the Universe. It is plain therefore, that
upon this Supposition the Matter of the Chaos could never compose such divided
and different Masses, as the Stars and Planets of the present World.

But allowing our Adversaries, that The Planets might be composed: yet however
they could not possibly acquire such Revolutions in Circular Orbs, or (which is
all one to our present purpose) in Ellipses very little Eccentric. For let them
assign any place where the Planets were formed. Was it nearer to the Sun, than
the present distances are? But that is notoriously absurd: for then they must
have ascended from the place of their Formation, against the essential property
of mutual Attraction. Or were each formed in the same Orbs, in which they now
move? But then they must have moved from the Point of Rest, in an horizontal
Line without any inclination or descent. Now there is no natural Cause, neither
Innate Gravity nor Impulse of external Matter, that could beget such a Motion.
For Gravity alone must have carried them downwards to the Vicinity of the Sun.
And that the ambient Ether is too liquid and empty, to impell them
horizontally with that prodigious celerity, we have sufficiently proved before.
Or were they made in some higher regions of the Heavens; and from thence
descended by their essential Gravity, till they all arrived at their respective
Orbs; each with its present degree of Velocity, acquired by the fall? But then
why did they not continue their descent, till they were contiguous to the Sun;
whither both Mutual Attraction and Impetus carried them? What natural Agent
could turn them aside, could impell them so strongly with a transverse
Side-blow against that tremendous Weight and Rapidity, when whole Worlds are a
falling? But though we should suppose, that by some cross attraction or other
they might acquire an obliquity of descent, so as to miss the body of the Sun,
and to fall on one side of it: then indeed the force of their Fall would carry
them quite beyond it; and so they might fetch a compass about it, and then
return and ascend by the same steps and degrees of Motion and Velocity, with
which they descended before. Such an eccentric Motion as this, much after the
manner that Comets revolve about the Sun, they might possibly acquire by their
innate principle of Gravity: but circular Revolutions in concentric Orbs about
the Sun or other central Body could in no-wise be attained without the power of
the Divine Arm. For the Case of the Planetary Motions is this. Let us conceive
all the Planets to be formed or constituted with their Centers in their several
Orbs; and at once to be impressed on them this Gravitating Energy toward all
other Matter, and a transverse Impulse of a just quantity in each, projecting
them directly in Tangents to those Orbs. The Compound Motion, which arises from
this Gravitation and Projection together, describes the present Revolutions of
the Primary Planets about the Sun, and of the Secondary about Those: the
Gravity prohibiting, that they cannot recede from the Centers of their Motions;
and the transverse Impulse withholding, that they cannot approach to them. Now
although Gravity could be innate (which we have proved that it cannot be) yet
certainly this projected, this transverse and violent Motion can only be
ascribed to the Right hand of the most high God, Creator of Heaven and Earth.

But finally, though we grant, that these Circular Revolutions could be
naturally attained; or, if they will, that this very individual World in its
present posture and motion was actually formed out of Chaos by Mechanical
Causes: yet it requires a Divine Power and Providence to have conserved it so
long in the present state and condition. We have showed, that there is a
Transverse Impulse impressed upon the Planets, which retains them in their
several Orbs, that they be not drawn down by their gravitating Powers toward
the Sun or other central Bodies. Gravity we understand to be a constant Energy
or Faculty (which God has infused into Matter) perpetually acting by certain
Measures and (naturally) inviolable Laws; I say, a Faculty and Power: for we
cannot conceive that the Act of Gravitation of this present Moment can
propagate it self or produce that of the next. But it is otherwise as to the
Transverse Motion; which (by reason of the Inactivity of Matter and its
inability to change its present State either of Moving or Resting) would from
one single Impulse continue for ever equal and uniform, unless changed by the
resistance of occurring Bodies or by a Gravitating Power; so that the Planets,
since they move Horizontally (whereby Gravity does not affect their swiftness)
and through the liquid and unresisting Spaces of the Heavens (where either no
Bodies at all or inconsiderable ones do occur) may preserve the same Velocity
which the first Impulse impressed upon them, not only for five or six thousand
years, but many Millions of Millions. It appears then, that if there was but
One Vast Sun in the Universe, and all the rest were Planets, revolving around
him in Concentric Orbs, at convenient Distances: such a System as that would
very long endure; could it but naturally have a Principle of Mutual Attraction,
and be once actually put into Circular Motions. But the Frame of the present
World has a quite different structure: here is an innumerable multitude of Fixed
Stars or Suns; all of which are demonstrated (and supposed also by our
Adversaries) to have Mutual Attraction: or if they have not; even Not to have
it is an equal Proof of a Divine Being, that has so arbitrarily endued Matter
with a Power of Gravity not essential to it, and has confined its action to
the Matter of its own Solar System: I say, all the Fixed Stars have a principle
of mutual Gravitation; and yet they are neither revolved about a common Center,
nor have any Transverse Impulse nor any thing else to restrain them from
approaching toward each other, as their Gravitating Powers incite them. Now
what Natural Cause can overcome Nature it self? What is it that holds and keeps
them in fixed Stations and Intervals against an incessant and inherent Tendency
to desert them? Nothing could hinder, but that the Outward Stars with their
Systems of Planets must necessarily have descended toward the middlemost System
of the Universe, whither all would be the most strongly attracted from all
parts of a Finite Space. It is evident therefore that the present Frame of Sun
and Fixed Stars could not possibly subsist without the Providence of that
almighty Deity, who spoke the word and they were made, Psalm. 148.
who commanded and they were created; who has made them Fast for ever and
ever, and has given them a Law, which shall not be broken.

(2.) And secondly in the Supposition of an infinite Chaos, it is hard indeed to
determine, what would follow in this imaginary Case from an innate Principle of
Gravity. But to hasten to a conclusion, we will grant for the present, that the
diffused Matter might convene into an infinite Number of great Masses at great
distances from one another, like the Stars and Planets of this visible part of
the World. But then it is impossible, that the Planets should naturally attain
these circular Revolutions, either by intrinsec Gravitation or the impulse of
ambient Bodies. It is plain, here is no difference as to this; whether the
World be Infinite or Finite: so that the same Arguments that we have used
before, may be equally urged in this Supposition. And though we should concede,
that these Revolutions might be acquired, and that all were settled and
constituted in the present State and Posture of Things; yet, we say, the
continuance of this Frame and Order for so long a duration as the known ages of
the World must necessarily infer the Existence of God. For though the Universe
was Infinite, the Fixed Stars could not be fixed, but would naturally convene
together, and confound System with System: for, all mutually attracting, every
one would move whither it was most powerfully drawn. This, they may say, is
indubitable in the case of a Finite World, where some Systems must needs be
Outmost, and therefore be drawn toward the Middle: but when Infinite Systems
succeed one another through an Infinite Space, and none is either inward or
outward; may not all the Systems be situated in an accurate Poise; and, because
equally attracted on all sides, remain fixed and unmoved? But to this we reply;
That unless the very mathematical Center of Gravity of every System be placed
and fixed in the very mathematical Center of the Attractive Power of all the
rest; they cannot be evenly attracted on all sides, but must preponderate some
way or other. Now he that considers, what a mathematical Center is, and that
Quantity is infinitely divisible; will never be persuaded, that such an
Universal Equilibrium arising from the coincidence of Infinite Centers can
naturally be acquired or maintained. If they say; that upon the Supposition of
Infinite Matter, every System would be infinitely, and therefore equally
attracted on all sides; and consequently would rest in an exact Equilibrium, be
the Center of its Gravity in what Position soever: This will overthrow their
very Hypothesis; at this rate in an infinite Chaos nothing at all could be
formed; no Particles could convene by mutual Attraction; for every one there
must have Infinite Matter around it, and therefore must rest for ever being
evenly balanced between Infinite Attractions. Even the Planets upon this
principle must gravitate no more toward the Sun, than any other way: so that
they would not revolve in curve Lines, but fly away in direct Tangents, till
they struck against other Planets or Stars in some remote regions of the
Infinite Space. An equal Attraction on all sides of all Matter is just equal to
no Attraction at all: and by this means all the Motion in the Universe must
proceed from external Impulse alone; which we have proved before to be an
incompetent Cause for the Formation of a World.

And now, O thou almighty and eternal Creator, having considered the Heavens
the work of thy fingers, Psalm. 8.
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained, with all the company of
Heaven we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee and
saying; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most High.

FINIS.

