THE Unfortunate Happy Lady.

A True HISTORY.

By Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Briscoe, in Charles-Street, Covent Garden, School.

TO EDWARD COOK, of Norfolk, Esquire.
Honored SIR,
IF so considerable a Name as Mrs. Behn's did not justify my Choice of your
Patronage, Sir, for the following Novel, I might perhaps be thought too
presumptuous, in sheltring the Unhappy Fortunate under your Name: But being
secured by her established Reputation from injuring yours, I gave way to that
Desire I had to show my self in the Number of your Admirers. For there being a
sort of Merit in admiring Merit, every one that has the least Ambition, would
desire to show himself Master of that Desert.

Your Virtues as well as Fortunes are too conspicuous not to be observed by
all; your Affability, Generosity, Goodness are what give Hope to your
Inferiors, and Comfort and Satisfaction to your Equals, and Admiration to all:
For it is seldom that Fortune alone can draw our Hearts though it draw our Eyes,
but when embellished with such Qualifications it makes the Possessour truly
Great and Happy, as well as Rich.

It Is well, Sir, I am no Panegerist, I should else, on so engaging a Theme, be
apt to forget the Violence I did your Modesty, in the Satisfaction I found in
the Contemplation of your Excellencies: But I leave that Task to happier Pens,
and content my self with the generous Ambition of what my Stars deny me, and
only heg leave to subscribe my self, Sir,

Your most obedient and devoted Servant, SAM. BRISCOE. ** Place this Epistle
Dedicatory next after the Title of the Unhappy Fortunate Lady.


THE Unfortunate Happy Lady. A True History.
I Cannot omit giving the world an account, of the uncommon villainy of a
Gentleman of a good Family in England practiced upon his Sister, which was
attested to me by one who lived in the Family, and from whom I had the whole
truth of the Story. I shall conceal the unhappy Gentleman's own, under the
borrowed names of Sir William Wilding, who succeeded his Father Sir Edward, in
an Estate of near 4000 l. a year, inheriting all that belonged to him, except
his Virtues. It Is true, he was obliged to pay his only Sister a Portion of 6000
l. which he might very easily have done out of his Patrimony in a little time,
the Estate being not in the least encumbered. But the death of his good Father
gave a loose to the extravagance of his Inclinations, which till then was
hardly observable, The first discovery he made of his Humor, was in the
extraordinary rich Equipage he prepared for his Journey to London, which was
much greater than his fair and plentiful Fortune could maintain, nor were his
expenses any way inferior to the figure he made here in Town; insomuch, that
in less than a twelve month, he was forced to return to his seat in the
Country, to Mortgage a part of his Estate of a thousand pounds a year, to
satisfy the debts he had already contracted in his profuse Treats, Gaming and
Women, which in a few weeks he effected, to the great affliction of his Sister
Philadelphia, a young Lady of excellent Beauty, Education, and Virtue; who,
foreseeing the utter ruin of the Estate, if not timely prevented, daily begged
of him, with Prayers and Tears, that might have moved a Scythian or wild Arab,
or indeed, any thing but him, to pay her her portion. To which however, he
seemingly consented, and promised to take her to Town with him, and there give
her all the satisfaction she could expect: And having dipped some paltry Acres
of Land, deeper than ever Heaven dipped 'em in Rain, he was as good as his
word, and brought her to Town with him, where he told her he would place her
with an ancient Lady with whom he had contracted a friendship at his first
coming to London; adding, that she was * Lady of incomparable Morals, and of a
matchless Life and Conversation. Philadelphia took him in the best sense, and
was very desirous to be planted in the same House with her, hoping she might
grow to as great a perfection in such excellent qualifications, as she imagined
'em. About four days therefore after they had been in Town, she sollicits her
Brother to wait on that Lady with her: He replied, that it is absolutely
necessary and convenient that I should first acquaint her with my design, and
beg that she will be pleased to take you into her care, and this shall be my
chief business to day: Accordingly, that very hour he went to the Lady Beldams,
his reverend and honorable Acquaintance, whom he prepared for the reception of
his Sister, who he told her was a cast Mistress of his, and desired her
assistance to prevent the trouble and charge, which she knew such Cattle would
bring upon young Gentlemen of plentiful Estates. To morrow morning about
eleven, I Will leave her with your Ladyship, who, I doubt not, will give her a
wholesome Lesson or two before night, and your reward is certain. My Son
(returned she) I know the greatness of your Spirit, the heat of your temper has
both warmed and inflamed me! I joy to see you in Town again -- Ah! That I could
but re-call one twenty years for your sake! -- Well -- no matter. -- I will not
forget your instructions, nor my duty to morrow: In the mean time, I Will drink
your health in a Bottle of Sherry or two. O! Cry your Mercy, good my Lady
Beldam, (said the young Debauchee) I had like to have forfeited my title to
your Care, in not remembering to leave your an obligation. There are three
Guinea's, which I hope will plead for me till to morrow. -- So -- Your
Ladyship's Servant humbly kisses your hand. Your Honors most Obedient Servant,
most gratefully acknowledges your favors. -- Your humble Servant, Good Sir
William, added she, seeing him leave her in haste.

Never were three persons better pleased for a time than this unnatural man,
his sweet innocent Sister, and the Lady Beldam; upon his return to
Philadelphia, who could not rest that night, for thinking on the happiness she
was going to enjoy in the conversation of so virtuous a Lady as her Brothers
Acquaintance, to whom she was in hopes that she might discover her dearest
thoughts and complain of Sir William's extravagance and unkindness, without
running the hazard of being betrayed; and at the same time, reasonably expect
from so pious a Lady all the assistance within her capacity. On the other side,
her Brother hugged himself in the prospect he had of getting rid of his own
Sister, and the payment of 6000 l. for the sum of forty or fifty Guineas, by
the help and discretion of this sage Matron; who, for her part, by this time,
had reckoned up, and promised to herself an advantage of at least three hundred
pounds, one way or other by this bargain.

About ten the next morning, Sir William took Coach with his Sister, for the
old Lady's Enchanted Castle, taking only one Trunk of hers with 'em for the
present, promising her to send her other things to her the next day. The young
Lady was very joyfully and respectfully received by her Brother's venerable
acquaintance, who was mightily charmed with her Youth and Beauty. A Bottle of
the best was then strait brought in, and not long after a very splendid
Entertainment for Breakfast: The Furniture was all very modish and rich, and
the Attendance was suitable. Nor was the Lady Beldam's Conversation less
oliging and modest, than Sir William's discourse had given Philadelphia
occasion to expect. After they had eaten and drank what they thought
convenient, the reverend old Lady led 'em out of the Parlour to show 'em the
House, every Room of which they found answerably furnished to that whence they
came. At last, she led 'em into a very pleasant Chamber, richly hung, and
curiously adorned with the Pictures of several beautiful young Ladies, wherein
there was a Bed which might have been worthy the reception of a Duchess: This,
Madam, (said she) is your Apartment, with the Anti chamber, and little
Withdrawing-room. Alas, Madam! (returned the dear innocent unthinking Lady) you
set too great a value on your servant; but I rather think your Ladyship designs
me this Honor for the sake of Sir William, who has had the happiness of your
acquaintance for some months: Something for Sir William, (returned the
venerable Lady Beldam) but much more for your Ladyships own, as you will have
occasion to find hereafter. I shall study to deserve your Favors and
Friendship, Madam, replied Philadelphia: I hope you will, Madam, said the
barbarous man. But my business now calls me hence; to morrow at Dinner I will
return to you, and order the rest of your things to be brought with me. In the
mean while (pursued the Traitor, kissing his Sister, as he thought and hoped,
the last time) be as cheerful as you can, my Dear! and expect all you can wish
from me. A thousand thanks, my dearest Brother, returned she, with tears in her
Eyes: and Madam, (said he to his old mischievous Confederate, giving her a very
rich Purse which held 50 Guineas) be pleased to accept this trifle, as an
humble acknowledgement of the great favor you do this Lady, and the care of
her, which you promise; and I Am sure she cannot want. -- So once more, (added
he) my Dear! And Madam! I am your humble servant, Jusqu' a Revoir, and went out
bowing. Heavens bless my dear Brother! (cried Philadelphia) your Honors most
Faithful and Obedient Servant, said the venerable Beldam.

No sooner was the treacherous Brother gone, than the old Lady taking
Philadelphia by the hand, led her into the Parlour; where she began to her to
this effect. If I mistake not, Madam, you were pleased to call Sir William
Brother once or twice of late in Conversation: Pray be pleased to satisfy my
Curiosity so far, as to inform me in the truth of this matter? Is it really so
or not? Philadelphia replied blushing, your Ladyship strangely surprises me
with this Question: For, I thought it had been past your doubt that it is so.
Did not he let you know so much himself? I humbly beg your pardon, Madam,
(returned the true Offspring of old Mother Eve) that I have so visibly
disturbed you by my Curiosity: But, indeed, Madam, Sir William did not say your
Ladyship was his Sister, when he gave me charge of you, as of the nearest and
dearest Friend he had in the world. Now our Father and Mother are dead, (said
the sweet Innocent) who never had more Children than us two, who can be a
nearer or dearer Friend unto me, than my Brother Sir William, or than I his
Sister to him? None? certainly, you will excuse me, Madam, (answered the other) a
Wife or Mistress may. A Wife indeed, (returned the beautiful Innocent) has the
pre-eminence, and perhaps, a Mistress too, if honorably loved and sought for
in Marriage: But (she continued) I can assure your Ladyship that he has not a
Wife; nor did I ever hear he had a Mistress yet. Love in youth (said old
Venerable) is very fearful of discovery. I have known, Madam, a great many fine
young Gentlemen and Ladies, who have concealed their violent passions and
greater affection, under the notion and appellation of Brother and Sister. And
your Ladyship imagins Sir William and I do so? replied Philadelphia, by way of
question. 'Twere no imprudence, if you did, Madam, returned old Lady Beldam,
with all the subtilty she had learned from the Serpent. Alas, Madam! (replied
she) there is nothing like secrecy in Love: It Is the very Life and Soul of it!
I have been young my self, and have known it by Experience. But all this,
Madam, (interrupted Philadelphia, something nettl'd at her discourse) all this
cannot convince me, that I am not the true and only Sister both by Father and
Mother of Sir William Wilding; however he would impose upon your Ladyship, for
what ends, indeed, I know not, unless (unhappily, which Heaven forbid!) He
designs to gain your Ladyships assistance in defeating me of the Portion left
me by my Father: But (she continued with tears) I have too great an assurance
of your virtue, to fear that you will consent to so wicked a Practice. You may
be confident, Madam, (said the other) I never will. And, supposing that he were
capable of perpetrating so base an act of himself, yet if your Ladyship will be
guided and directed by me, I will show you the means of living happy and great,
without your Portion, or your Brothers help; so much I am charmed with your
Beauty and Innocence.

But, pray Madam, (pursued she) what is your Portion? And what makes you doubt
your Brother's kindness? Philadelphia then told her how much her Brother was to
pay her, and gave her an account of his Extravagancies, as far as she knew 'em;
to which the other was no stranger; and (doubtless) could have put a period to
her sorrows with her life, had she given her as perfect a relation of his
Riotous and Vicious practices, as she was capable of: but she had farther
business with her Life, and, in short, bid her be of good comfort, and lay all
her care on her; and then she could not miss of continual happiness. The sweet
Lady took all her promises for sterling, and kissing her Impious hand, humbly
returned her thanks. Not long after they went to dinner; and in the afternoon
three or four young Ladys came to visit the Right Reverend the Lady Beldam; who
told her new Guest, that these were all her Relations, and no less than her own
Sister's Children. The Discourse among 'em was general and very modest, which
lasted for some hours: For, our sex seldom wants matter of tattle. But, whether
their Tongues were then miraculously wearied, or that they were tired with one
continued scene of place, I will not pretend to determine: But they left the
Parlour for the Garden, where after about half an hour's walk, there was a very
fine Disert of Sweetmeats and Fruits brought into one of the Arbours.
Cherbetts, Ros Solis, rich and small Wines, with Tea, Chocolace, etc.
completed the old Lady's Treat; the pleasure of which was much heightened by
the Voices of two of her Ladyships Sham-Neices, who sung very charmingly. The
dear, sweet Creature, thought she had happily got into the company of Angels:
But (alas!) they were Angels that had fallen more than once. She had heard talk
of Nunneries, and having never been out of her own Country till within four or
five days, she had certainly concluded she had been in one of those
Religious-houses now, had she but heard a Bell ring, and seen 'em kne^l to
Prayers, and make use of their Bead^ as she had been told those happy people
do. However it was, she was extremely (...)d with the place and company. So
nearly does Hell counterfeit Heaven sometimes. (...)t last, said one of the
white Devils, would my dear Tommy were here! O, Sister! (cried another) you
will not be long without your wish: For my Husband and he went out together, and
both promised to be here after the Play. Is my Brother Sir Francis with him
there? (asked the first) yes, (answered a third) Sir Thomas and Sir Francis
took Coach from St. James's, about two hours since: we shall be excellent
company when they come, said a fourth; I hope they will bring the Fiddlers with
'em, added the first: Don't you love Music, Madam? (asked the old Lady Beldam)
Sometimes, Madam (replied Philadelphia) but now I am out of tune my self. A
little harmless mirth will cheer your drooping Spirits, my dear, (returned
the other, taking her by the hand) Come! these are all my Relations, as I told
you Madam; and so consequently are their Husbands. Are these Ladys all Married,
Madam? Philadelphia asked. All, all, my dear Soul! (replied the insinuating
Mother of Iniquity;) and thou shall have a Husband too, e're long. Alas Madam!
(returned the fair Innocent) I have no Merit, nor Money: Besides, I never yet
could love so well as to make choice of one man before another.

How long have you lived then, Madam? (asked the Lady Beldam) too long by
almost sixteen years, (replied Philadelphia) had Heaven seen good. This
conversation lasted till word was brought that Sir Francis and Sir Thomas, with
two other Gentlemen were just lighted at the Gate: which so discomposed the
fair Innocent, that trembling, she begged leave to retire to her Chamber. To
which, after some persuasion to the contrary, the venerable Beldam waited on
her. For, these were none of the Sparks to whom Philadelphia was designed to be
sactifie'd. In her retirement, the beautiful dear Creature had the satisfaction
of venting her grief in Tears, and addressing her self to Heaven, on which only
she trusted, notwithstanding all the fair promises of her reverend Hostess; she
had not been retired above an hour, e're a she-attendant waited on her, to know
if she wanted any thing, and what she would please to have for her supper; if
she would not give her Lady the honor of her company below? To which she
returned, that she would not sup, and that she wanted nothing but rest, which
she would presently seek in bed. This answer brought up the officious old Lady
her self; who, by all means would needs see her undressed, for other reasons
more than a bare Compliment; which she performed with a great deal of Ceremony,
and a diligence that seemed more than double. For she had then the opportunity
of observing the delicacy of her Skin, the fine turn of her Limbs, and the
richness of her Night-dress, part of the furniture of her Trunk. Asscon as she
had covered her self, she kissed and wished her a good repose. The dear soul,
as innocent and white as her Linen, returned her thanks, and addressed her
self to sleep; out of which she was wakened by a loud Consort of Music, in
less than two hours time, which continued till long after midnight. This
occasioned strange and doubtful thoughts in her, though she was altogether so
unskilled in these mysteries, that she could not guess the right meaning. She
apprehended, that (possibly) her Brother (...)stress, from the Lady Beldam's
(...)e, and that this was their place of Assignation: suspecting too, that
either Sir Francis, or Sir Thomas, of whom she had heard not long before, was
Sir William, her Brother. The Music and all the noise in the house ceased
about four a clock in the morning; when she again fell into a sleep that took
away the sense of her sorrows, and doubts till nine; when she was again visited
from her Lady, by the same she-attendant, to know how she had rested, and if
she would please to command her any service. Philadelphia replied, That she had
rested very well most part of the morning, and that she wanted nothing, but to
know how her Lady had slept, and whether she were in health, unless it were the
sight of her Brother. The Servant returned with this answer to her Lady, while
Philadelphia made shift to rise, and begin to dress without an assistant; but
she had hardly put on any thing more than her Nightgown, e're the Lady Beldam
her self came in her Dishabille, to assure her of her Brother's company with
'em at Dinner, exactly at one a clock; and finding Philadelphia doing the
office of a Waiting Woman to her self, called up the same Servant, and in a
great heat (in which however she took care to make use of none of her familiar
devilish dialect) asked the reason that she durst leave the Lady when she was
rising. The wench trembling, replied, That indeed the Lady did not let her know
that she had any thoughts of rising. Well then (said her seeming offended Lady)
stir not from her now, I charge you, till she shall think fit to dismiss you,
and command your absence. Dear Madam, Good morrow to you, (said she to
Philadelphia) I Will make haste and dress too. Good morrow to your Ladyship
(returned the designed victim) when she was Habille, she desired the Servant to
withdraw* after which she betook her self to her Devotion; at the end of which
the Lady Beldam returned, attended by a Servant, who brought some Bread and
Wine for her Breakfast; which might then be seasonable enough to Philadelphia;
who could not forbear discovering the apprehensions she had of her Brother's
unkindness, still entertaining her Reverence, with the fear she had of his
disappointment that day at dinner; which the other opposed with all the seeming
reasons her Art could suggest, till the Clock had struck twelve; when a Servant
came to tell the Lady Beldam, that one Sir William Wilding would certainly wait
on her precisely at one, and desired that he might dine in the young Lady's
Apartment, to avoid being seen by any visitants that might come; and besides,
that he had invited a Gentleman, his particular friend, to dinner with him
there. This message being delivered aloud by the Servant, was no little
satisfaction to the poor desponding young Lady, who discoursed very cheerfully
of indifferent matters, till the Clock gave 'em notice that the hour was come;
within three minutes after which word was brought to the Lady Beldam, that a
Gentleman below inquired for Sir William Wilding, whom she immediately went
down to receive, and led up to Philadelphia. Madam, (cried the great mistress
of her Art) this is the Gentleman whom Sir William has invited to dinner with
us; and I am very happy to see him, for he is my worthy friend, and of a long
acquaintance. Trust me, Madam, he is a Man of Honor, and has a very large
Estate: I doubt not (added she) that you will find his merits in his
Conversation. Here Gracelove, for that was the Gentleman's name, saluted
Philadelphia, and acquitted himself like a person of good Sense and Education,
in his first Address to her; which she returned with all the modesty and
ingenuous simplicity that was still proper to her. At last, she asked him how
long he thought it would be e're Sir William came? To which he replied, that
Sir William told him, unless he were there exactly at half an hour after one,
they should not stay dinner for him; that he had not parted with him much above
a quarter of an hour, when he left him engaged with particular Company, about
some weighty business: But however, that, if he should be so unhappy as to lose
their Conversation at dinner, he would not fail to wait on 'em by four at
farthest. The young Lady seemed a little uneasy at this; but the Gentleman
appearing so very modest, and speaking it with such an assured gravity, took
away all thoughts of suspicion. To say truth, Gracelove was a very honest,
modest, worthy and handsome person; and had the command, at present, of many a
thousand pounds, he was by profession a Turkey Merchant: He had traveled much,
for his Age, not having then reached thirty, and had seen most of the Courts in
Christendom: He had was a man of a sweet temper, of just principles, and of
inviolable friendship, where he promised; which was no where, but where 'twas
merited. The minute came then at length, but without any Sir William; so dinner
was served up in the Room next to Philadelphia's Bedchamber. What they had was
nice and seasonable; and they were all three as pleasant as could be expected,
without Sir William; to whose health the Glass went round once or twice. Dinner
over, and the Table cleared, the old Lady Beldam entreated Mr. Gracelove to
entertain the young Lady with a discourse of his Travels, and of the most
remarkable passages and encounters of 'em, which he performed with a modesty
and gravity peculiar to himself; and in some part of his discourse moved the
innocent passions of the beauteous and compassionate Philadelphia; who was as
attentive as she used to be in Church at Divine Service. When the old Lady
perceived that he had made an end, or at least, that he desired to proceed no
farther, she took occasion to leave 'em together, in haste; pretending, that
she had forgotten to give orders to one of her Servants, about a business of
moment, and that she would return to 'em in a very little time. The Gentleman,
you may believe, was very well pleased with her retreat, since he had a
discourse to make to Philadelphia of a quite contrary nature to the preceding,
which required privacy: But how grateful her absence was to Philadelphia, we
may judge by the sequel. Madam, (said Gracelove) how do you like the Town? Have
you yet seen any man here whom you could love? Alas Sir! (she replied) I have
not seen the Town, only in a Coach, as I past along, nor ever was in any House,
except this and another, where my Brother lodged: And to your other question I
must answer, that I love all men. That Is Generous, indeed, Madam! (cried he)
there is then some hope that I am one of the number. No doubt, Sir (she
returned) that I love you as well as any, except Sir William. Is he the happy
man then, Madam? (said Gracelove.) If to be loved best by me may make any man
happy, doubtless it must be he, for he is my own Brother. I fancy, Madam,
(returned he) that you may make me as dear a Relation to you, as Sir William.
How is that possible, Sir? she asked. Thus, Madam (replied he, drawing closer
to her) by our nearer approaches to one another. O, Heaven defend me! (cried
she aloud) what do you mean? Take away your hand; you uncivil Man! Help! Madam!
my Lady! O, (said Gracelove) she is gone purposely out of hearing. Am I betrayed
then? she cried. Betrayed! as if your pretty Innocent Ladyship did not know
where you were lodged. Ah, Lady, (said he) this faint will will never do. Come,
Child, (pursued he) here are an hundred Guineas for you; and I promise you
yearly as much, and two hundred with every Child that I shall get on thy sweet
Body: 'Faith I love thee, thou pretty Creature. Come! let us be better
acquainted! you know my meaning. Hell does, no doubt of (she returned:) O
Monster a man! I hate the sight of you. With that she flung from him, and ran
into the Bedchamber, where she thought to have locked her self in; but the Key
was conveyed into his Pocket. Thither therefore he pursued her, crying, Ah,
Madam, this is the proper field for our dispute. Perceiving her error, and
animated by despair, she rushed between him and the door, into the outward Room
again, he still following, and dodging her from Chair to Chair; she still
shrieking. At last (cried he) a Parley, Madam, with you. Let me ask you one
question; and will you answer me directly and truly to it? Indeed I will, (said
she) if it be civil. Don't you know then, that you are in a naughty-house, and
that old Beldam is a rank Procuress, to whom I am to give two hundred Guinea's
for your Maidenhead? O Heaven (cried she, kneeling with tears gushing out from
her dear eyes) thou asserter and guardian of Innocence! protect me from the
impious practices intended against me! Then looking steadfastly on him, Sir,
(pursued she) I can but difficultly guess what you mean: But I find* that
unless you prove what at first you seemed to me, I would say, an honest, worthy
Gentleman, I shall be in danger of eternal Ruin. You, Sir, are the only person
that may yet preserve me. Therefore I beseech you, Sir, hear my story --, with
the injuries and afflictions that so dreadfully torment me; of which, I am
sure, none of those Barbarians, of which you had occasion to speak but now,
would have been guilty! O, hear and help me! for Heaven's sake, hear and help
me! I will, poor Creature! (returned be;) methinks I now begin to see my crime
and thy innocence, in thy words and looks. Here she recounted to him all the
accidents of her Life, since her Father's decease, to that very day, e're
Gracelove came to Dinner. And now (cried she, sobbing and weeping) how dare I
trust this naughty Brother again? can I be safe with him, think you, Sir! O,
no; thou dear sweet Creature! by no means. O Infernal monsters! Brother and
Bawd! If you distrust that I am yet his Sister, here, Sir, take this Key (said
she) and open that Trunk within, where you will find Letters from him to me in
his own hand; and from my own dear dead Father too, Sir Edward, that gracious,
that good Man! He showed us both the paths of Virtue; which I have not yet
forsaken. Pray satisfy me, Sir, and see the truth! For your satisfaction I
will, Madam, (said he) but I am now fully convinced that you have greater
Beauties within, than those I admire without. Saying this, he opened the Trunk,
where he read a line or two from her Father, and as many from her Brother,
which having again laid down, returned to her, with this advice: I see, Madam,
(said he) that you have Money there, and several things of value; which I
desire you to secure about you this moment; for I mean to deliver you out of
this cursed place; if you dare put any confidence in a stranger, after your own
Brother has acted the part of so great a Villain; if you dare trust a stranger
too, Madam, who had himself a design upon you; heaven forgive me for it! but by
all things sacred, I find my error: I pity you, and I fear I shall love you. Do
you fear that, Sir, (said she) why I love you dearly now, because I see you are
going to be good again: that is, you are going to be your self again. I hope,
nay, I resolve I will; though it cost me my Life (said he.) Can you submit,
Madam, to attend on a young Lady of my acquaintance here in Town, till I can
provide better for you? O I can be any thing, a Chambermaid, a Cook maid, a
Scullion, what you shall think sit, though never so mean, that is not naughty.
Well, Madam, (said he) compose your self then, and seem a little pleasant when
I bring up that old Factoress of Hell. I will endeavor it, Sir, she returned;
and he went down to the Devil's chief agent, to whom he said, that the poor
thing was at first very uneasy, but that now she had consented to go along
with him for an hour or two to some other place, doubting your secrecy; for she
would not have her Brother know it, as she calls him, for a thousand worlds,
and more Money. Well, my Son! (replied old Beldam) you may take her with you:
But you remember your bargain. O fie Mother! (cry^d he) Did you ever know me
false to you? No, no, you smock-fac'd wag (said she) but be sure you bring her
again to night, for fear Sir William should come. Never doubt it! Come up with
me, (cried he) you will see a strange alteration, I believe. To Philadelphia they
came then, whom they found walking about the Room, and looking something more
pleasantly than she had ever done since she came thither. After she had taken
her Money and other things of value, so, Madam, (said Beldam) how does your
Ladyship now? I find, the sight of a young, handsome Gentleman has worked
wonders with you in a little time: I understand you are going to take a walk
with my worthy friend here, and it is well done: I dare trust you with him, but
with no other man living, except Sir William. Madam, (returned the fair
afflicted Lady) I am strangely obliged to you for your care of me; and am sure
I shall never be able to return your obligations as I ought, and as I could
wish. You will not stay late, Mr. Gracelove? (said the Mother of mischief.) No,
no, (replied he) I will only show the Lady a Play, and return to Supper. What
is played to Night? (asked the old one) The Cheats, Mother, the Cheats
(answered Gracelove.) Ha (said Beldam laughing) a very pretty Comedy, indeed!
Ay, if well played, returned he. At these words they went down, where a Coach
was called; which carried 'em to Counselor Fairlaw's House, in Great
Lincolns-Inn-Fields; whom they found accidently at home; but his Lady and
Daughter were just gone to Chapel, being then turned of five. Gracelove began
his Apology to the good old Counselor, who was his Relation, for bringing a
strange Lady thither with a design to place her in his Family: But Sir,
continued he, if you knew her sorrowful story, you would be as ambitious of
entertaining her, as I am earnest to entreat it of you. A very beautiful Lady
it is, (returned the Counselor) and very modest, I believe. That I can witness
(replied the other.) Alas Sir! (said the Fair, unfortunate) I have nothing but my
modesty and honest education to recommend me to your regard. I am wronged and
forsaken by my nearest Relation; then she wept extravagantly: That Gentleman
can give you an account of my misfortunes, if he please, with greater ease, and
less trouble than my self. Not with less trouble, believe me, Madam, (returned
Gracelove) and then began to inform Fairlaw in every point of her unhappy
circumstances. The good old Gentleman heard 'em with amazement and horror; but
told her however, that she need not despond, for he would take care to right
her against her Brother: And, that in the mean time she should be as welcome to
him, as any of his nearest Kindred, except his Wife and Daughter. Philadelphia
would have knelt to thank him; but he told her, that humble posture was due to
none but Heaven, and the King sometimes. In a little while after, the Lady
Fairlaw and her Daughter came home, who were surpised at the sight of a
stranger, but more at her Beauty; and most of all at her story, which the good
old Gentleman himself could not forbear relating to 'em: which ended, the
Mother and Daughter both kindly and tenderly embraced her, promising her all
the assistance within their power, and bid her a thousand welcomes. Gracelove
stayed there till after Supper, and left her extremely satisfied with her new
station. 'Twas here she fixed then; and her deportment was so obliging, that
they would not part with her for any consideration. About three days after her
coming from that lewd woman's House, Gracelove took a Constable and some other
assistants, and went to Beldam's to demand the Trunk, and what was in it, which
at first her reverence denied to return, till Mr Constable produced the emblem
of his Authority; upon which it was delivered, without so much as re-minding
Gracelove of his bargain; who then pretended he would search the House for Sir
William Wilding, but her graceless reverence swore most devoutly that he had
never been there, and that she had neither seen nor heard from him, since the
day he left Philadelphia with her. With these things, and this account he
returned to Counselor Fairlaw's, who desired Gracelove, if possible, to find
out Sir William, and employed several others on the same account. In less than
a months time Gracelove had the good fortune to find him at his Lodgings in
Soho Square, where he discoursed him about his Sisters Portion, and desired Sir
William to take some speedy care for the payment of it; otherwise she had
friends that would oblige him to it, tho never so contrary to his intentions.
Wilding asked where she was? the other inquired where he left her? Sir William
replied, that he had placed her with an old grave Gentlewoman of his
acquaintance, and that he thought she was there still. No, Sir, (returned
Gracelove) I have delivered her out of the jaws of Perdition and Hell. Come,
Sir William, (answered he) 'twas impiously done, to leave your beautiful,
young, and virtuous Sister, to the management of that pernicious woman. I found
her at old Beldam's, who would have prostituted her to me for two hundred
Guinea's; but her heavenly virtues might have secured and guarded her from more
violent attempts than mine. Blusn if you can, Sir! And repent of this! It will
become you. If not, Sir, you will hear farther from your Servant, added he, and
left him, staring after him. This discourse was a great mortification to the
Knight, whose Conscience, hardened as it was, felt yet some pain by it. He found
he was not like to continue safe or at ease there, wherefore he immediately
retreated into a place of Sanctuary, called the Savoy, whither his whole
Equipage was removed as soon as possible, he having left order with his
Servants, to report that he went out of Town that very afternoon for his own
Country. Gracelove in the mean time returned to the Councillors, with a great
deal of joy, for having discovered Sir William at his Lodgings, which was
likewise no little satisfaction to Fairlaw, his Lady and Daughter; Philadelphia
only was disturbed when she heard the good old Gentleman threaten to lay her
Brother fast enough: but alas! he was too cunning for 'em; for in a whole
twelvemonth after, all which time they made enquiry and narrowly searched for
him, they could not see him, nor any one that could give an account of him, for
he had changed his true name and title, for that of Squire Sportman. The
farther pursuit of him then seemed fruitless to 'em, and they were forced to be
contented with their wishes to find him.

Gracelove by this time had entertained the sincerest affections and noblest
passion that man can be capable of, for Philadelphia; of which he had made her
sensible, who had at that time complied with his honorable demands, had she
not entreated him to expect a kind turn of providence, which might (happily)
e're long put her in possession of her right; without which, she told him, she
could not consent to marry him, who had so plentiful a fortune, and she nothing
but her person and innocence. How, Madam! (cried he) have you no love in store
for me! Yes, Sir, (returned she) as much as you can wish, I have in store for
you, and so I beg it may be kept till a better opportunity. Well, Madam, (said
he) I must leave you for some months, perhaps for a whole year; I have received
Letters of Advice that urge the necessity of my going to Turkey; I have not a
weeks time to endeavor so dreaded a separation as I must suffer; therefore,
thou beautiful, thou dear, thou virtuous creature; let me begin now! Here, thou
tenderest part of my Soul! (cohtinu'd he, giving her a rich Diamond Ring) wear
this till my return! I hope the sight of it may sometimes re-call the dying
memory of Gracelove, to your better busi'd thoughts. Ah Gracelove! (said she)
nothing can so well, nothing I Am sure can better employ my thoughts, than thy
dear self: Heaven only excepted. They enlarged a great deal more on this
subject at that time; but the night before this departure was entirely spent in
sighs, vows, and tears on both sides. In the morning, after he had again
entreated his Cousin's, and the Lady's and her Daughter's care and kindness to
Philadelphia, the remaining and best part of his Soul, with one hearty Kiss,
accompanied with tears, he took a long farewell of his dear Mistress, who
pursued him with her Eyes, till they could give her no farther intelligence of
him; and they helped her kindness to him, and eased her grief for his absence in
weeping for above a week together, when in private. He never omitted writing to
her and his Cousin by every opportunity for near nine months, as he touched at
any Port; but, afterward they could not hear from him for above half a year;
when, by accident, the Counselor met a Gentleman of Gracelove's acquaintance
at a Coffeehouse, who gave him an account, that the Ship and he were both cast
away, near five months since; that most, if not all of the Ship's company
perished; of which, 'twas feared, Gracelove was one; having never since been
heard of. That his loss in that Ship amounted to above 12 thousand pounds: with
this dreadful and amazing news, the good old Gentleman returns home, afflicts
his poor sorrowful Lady and Daughter, and almost kills unhappy Philadelphia;
who the next day, by mere chance, and from a stranger, who came on business to
the Counselor, heard, that one Sir William Wilding, an extravagant, mad,
young Spark of such a County, who lately went by the borrowed name and title of
Esquire Sportman, had mortgaged all his Estate, which was near four thousand a
year; and carried the Money over with him into France on Saturday last. This,
added to the former news, put so great a check on her spirits that she
immediately dropped down in a swoon; whence she only recovered, to fall into what
was of a much more dangerous consequence, a violent Fever, which held her for
near six weeks, e're she could get strength enough to go down stairs: In all
which time, Madam Fairlaw and Eugenia her Daughter attended her as carefully
and constantly, as if they had been her own Mother and Sister: The good old
Counselor still commending and encouraging their care. The Roses and Lillys
at last took their places again; but the clouds of her sorrow were still but
too visible. Two years more past without one word of advice from Gracelove, or
any account of him from any one else; insomuch, that they all concluded, he was
certainly dead: And, 'twas true, indeed, that his Ship and he were cast away,
much about that time that the Gentleman gave Fairlaw a relation: That 'twas
certain he had lost above 12000 l. and had like to have lost his Life, but
being very expert in swimming, he got to shore upon the coast of Barbary, the
wrack happening not to be above three leagues thence; he was in almost as bad a
condition as if he had been drowned, for here he was made a Prisoner to one of
the Natives; in which miserable circumstance he languish'd for above six years,
for want of a Ransom; which he had often endeavored to raise by Letters, that
he sent hither to his friends (in England); amongst which Counselor Fairlaw
was one of his most particular and assured. But however, Providence or
Accident, if you please, ordered it, not a line came to the hands of any of his
friends: so that, had not Heaven had ye^ a future blessing in store for him, he
had certainly have better perished in the Sea, than to have fallen into the
power of a people less merciful, than Seas, Winds, or hungry wild Beasts in
pursuit of their Prey. But this could not be learned (it seems) from any man
but himself, upon his return, after his Redemption.

Two years more past on, toward the latter of which the old Lady Fairlaw took
her bed, desperately sick, insomuch that she was given over by all her
Physicians; she continued in great misery for near two months, in all which
time Philadelphia was constantly with her all the day, or all the night; much
about that time she died, and dying, told her Husband, that she had observed he
had a particular esteem or kindness Philadelphia, which was now a great
satisfaction to her; since, she was assured, that if he married her, she would
prove an excellent Nurse to him, and prolong his life by some years. As for
Eugenia (added she) you need not be concerned; I Am sure, she will consent to
any thing that you shall propose, having already so plentifully provided for
her. The good old Gentleman answered, that he would fulfill her Will, as far as
lay in his power: and not long after, she departed this life. Her burial was
very handsome and honorable. Half a year was now expired since her Interrment,
when the old Counselor began to plead his own Cause to young Philadelphia,
reminding her that now the death of Gracelove was out of question, and that
therefore she was as much at her liberty to make her own choice of an Husband
as he was of a Wife; not forgetting at the same time, to let her know, that his
Widow, who ever had the good fortune to be so, would be worth above thirty
thousand pounds, in ready Money: Besides a thousand a year. But above all, he
urged his dying Ladys last advice to him, that he would marry her; and hoped
she would see the Will of the Dead satisfied. The young Lady, being broken in
sorrows, and having mortified all her Appetites to the enjoyments of this
World, and not knowing where to meet with so fair an overture, though at first,
in modesty she seemed to refuse it as too great an honor, yet yielded to less
than a quarter of an hour's Courtship: And the next Sunday married they were,
with the consent, and to the perfect satisfaction of his Daughter, Madam
Eugenia; who loved Philadelphia sincerely. They kept their wedding very nobly
for a month at their own house, in Great Lincoln's Inn Fields; but the memory of
the old Lady was still so fresh with the young Lady Fairlaw, that she prevailed
with him to remove to another, more convenient as she fancied, in Covent
Garden. They had dwelt there not much more than four months e're the good old
Gentleman fell sick and died. Whether it were the change of an old House for a
new, or an old Wife for a young, is yet uncertain, though his Physicians said,
and are still of opinion, that (doubtless) it was the last. It Is past all
doubt, that she did really mourn for, and lament his Death; for she loved him
perfectly, and paid him all the dutiful respect of a Virtuous Wife, while she
lived within that state with him; which he rewarded, as I have said before. His
Funeral was very sumptuous and honorable indeed! and as soon as it was over,
Eugenia desired her young, beautiful Mother-in-Law, to retreat a little with
her into the Country, to a pleasant house she had not twenty Miles distant from
Town: urging, that she could by no means enjoy her self under that Roof, where
her dear Father died. The obliging Stepmother, who might more properly have
been called her Sister, being exactly of the same Age with her, readily
complied, and she passed away all that Summer with Eugenia, at their
Country-seat, and most part of the Winter too: For Eugenia could by no means be
prevailed on to lie one night in her Mother's house; 'twas with some Reluctance
that she consented to dine there sometimes. At length the whole year of
Philadelphia's Widow-hood was expired; during which you cannot but imagine that
she was solicited and addressed to by as many Lovers, or pretended Lovers, as
our dear King Charles, whom God grant long to Reign, was lately by the
Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, and all those canting Whiggish
Brethren! But she had never liked any man so well as to make him her Husband by
Inclination, unless it was Gracelove, devoured by the greedy inhabitants of the
Sea.

Whilst her Fortune began to mend thus, her Brother's grew worse; but that was
indeed the effect of his extravagancy: in less than two years time, he had
spent eight thousand pounds in France: whence he returned to England, and
pursuing his old profuse manner of living, contracted above 100 l. debts here,
in less than four months time; which not being able to satisfy, he was
Arrested and thrown into a Goal, whence he removed himself into the
King's Bench, on that very day that old Fairlaw died. There, at first, for about
a month he was entertained like a Gentleman; but finding no Money coming, nor
having a prospect of any, the Marshall and his instruments turned him to the
Common-side; where he learnt the Art of Peg-making; a mystery to which he had
been a stranger all his life long, till then. 'Twas then he wished he might see
his Sister, hoping that she was in a Condition to relieve him; which he was apt
to believe, from the discourse he had with Gracelove some years past. Often he
wished to see her, but in vain: However, the next Easter after the old
Councellour's death, Philadelphia, according to his custom, sent her Steward to
relieve all the poor Prisoners about Town: Among the rest he visited those in
the Common side of the King`s-Bench; where he heard 'em call Sir William
Wilding, to partake of his Lady's Charity. The poor Prodigal was then feeding
on the Relief of the Basket, not being yet able to get his Bread at his new
Trade: To him the Steward gave a Crown, whereas the other had but half a Crown
apiece. Then he inquired of some of the unhappy Gentlemen, Sir William's
Fellow-Collegians, of what Country Sir William was? how long he had been there?
and how much his debts were? all of which he received a satisfactory account.
Upon his return to his Lady, he repeated the dismal news of her Brother's
misfortunes to her; who immediately dispatched him back again to the Prison,
with orders to give him twenty Shillings more at present, and to get him
removed to the Master's side, into a convenient Chamber, for the Rent of which
the Steward engaged to pay, and promised him, as she had commanded, twenty
Shillings a week, as long as he stayed there, on condition, that he would give
the names of all his Creditors, and of all those to whom he had engaged any
part of his Estate; which the poor Gentleman did most readily and faithfully:
After which, the Steward inquired for a Tailor, who came and took measure of
Philadelphia's unkind Brother, and was ordered to provide him Linen, a Hat,
Shoes, Stockings, and all such necessaries, not so much as omitting a Sword:
with all which he acquainted his Lady at his return; who was very much grieved
at her Brother*s unhappy Circumstances, and at the same time extremely well
pleased to find her self in a condition to relieve him. The Steward went
constantly once a week pay him his Money, and Sir William was continually very
curious to know to whom he was obliged for so many and great favors: But he
was answered, That they came from a Lady who desired to have her name
concealed. In less than a year Philadelphia had paid 25000 l. and taken off
the Mortgages on 2500 l. per Ann. of her Brother's Estate; and coming to Town
from Eugenia's Country House one day, to make the last payment of two thousand
pounds, looking out of her Coach on the Road, near Dartford, she saw a
Traveller on foot, who seemed to be tired with his Journey, whose face, she
thought, she had formerly known: This thought invited her to look on him so
long, that she, at last, persuaded her self it was Gracelove or his Ghost: For
to say truth, he was very pale and thin, his Complexion swarthy, and his
Clothes (perhaps) as rotten as if he had been buried in 'em. However,
unpleasant as it was, she could not forbear gazing after this miserable
spectacle; and the more she beheld it, the more she was confirmed it was
Gracelove, or something that had usurped his figure. In short, she could not
rest till she called to one of her Servants, who rode by the Coach, whom she
strictly charged to go to that poor Traveller, and mount him on his Horse, till
they came to Dartford; where she ordered him, to take him to the same Inn,
where she baited, and refresh him, with any thing that he would eat or drink;
and after that, to hire a Horse for him, to come to Town with them: That then
he should be brought home to her own House, and be carefully looked after, till
further orders from her. All which was most duly and punctually performed.

The next morning early she sent for the Steward, whom she ordered to take the
Stranger to a Sale-shop, and fit him with a Suit of good Clothes, to buy him
Shirts and other Linen, and all necessaries as he had provided for her
Brother; and gave him charge to use him as her particular friend during his
stay there; bidding him withal learn his name and circumstances, if possible,
and to supply him with Money for his pocket expenses: All which he most
faithfully and discreetly performed, and brought his Lady an account of his
sufferings by Sea, and Slavery among the Turks, as I have before related;
adding, that his name was Gracelove. This was the greatest happiness,
certainly, that ever yet the dear Beautiful Creature was sensible of. On,
the other side Gracelove could not but admire and praise his good Fortune, that
had so miraculously and bountifully relieved him; and one day having some
private discourse with the Steward, he could not forbear expressing the sense
he had of it, declaring that he could not have expected such kind treatment
from any body breathing, but from his Cousin, Counselor Fairlaw, his Lady, or
another young Lady whom he placed and left with his Cousins. Counselor
Fairlaw* (cried the Steward) why, Sir, my Lady is the old Councellour's Widow;
she is very beautiful and young too. What was her name, Sir, before she married
the Counselor? (asked Gracelove.) That I know not (replied the other,) for the
old Steward died presently after the old Lady, which is not a year and a half
since; in whose place I succeed; and I have never been so curious or
inquisitive, as to pry into former passages of the Family. Do you know, Sir,
(said Gracelove) whereabouts in Town they lived before? Yes, Sir, (returned the
Steward, who was taught how to answer) in Great Lincolns-Inn-Fields, I think.
Alas! (cried Gracelove) 'twas the same Gentleman to whom I designed to apply my
self, when I came to England. You need not despair, now, Sir, (said the other) I
dare say, my Lady will supply your wants. O wonderful goodness of a stranger!
(cried Gracelove) uncommon and rare amongst Relations and Friends! How have I,
or how can I ever merit this! upon the end of their conference, the Steward
went to Philadelphia, and repeated it, almost verbatim to her. Who ordered
Gracelove should be taken measure of by the best Tailor in Covent Garden; that
he should have three of the most modish rich suits made that might become a
private Gentleman of a thousand pounds a year, and Hats, Perukes; Linen,
Swords, and all things suitable to 'em, all to be got ready in less than a
month, in which time, she took all the opportunity she could either find or
make to see him, and not to be seen by him: she obliged her Steward to invite
him to a Play; whither she followed 'em, and sat next to Gracelove, and talked
with him; but all the while masqu'd. In this month's time she was daily
pestered with the visits of her Addressors; several there were of 'em; but the
chief were only a Lord of a very small Estate, though of a pretty great Age; a
young blustering Knight; who had a place of 500 l. a year at Court, and a
Country Gentleman of a very plentiful Estate, a Widower, and of a middle Age.
These three only of her Lovers she invited to dinner, on the first day of the
next month: In the mean while she sent a rich suit, and equipage proportionable
to her Brother; with an Invitation to dine with her on the same day. Then she
writ to Eugenia to come and stay in Town, if not in the same house with her,
for two or three days before: which her affectionate Daughter obeyed; to whom
Philadelphia related all her Brothers past extravagancies, and what she had
done for him, in redeeming most part of his Estate; begging of her, that if she
could fancy his Person, she would take him into her mercy and marry him. Being
assured that such a virtuous Wife, as she would prove, must necessarily reclaim
him, if yet he were not perfectly convinced of his Follies; which, she doubted
not, his late long sufferings had done. Engenia returned, that she would wholly
be directed and advised by her in all things; and that, certainly, she could
not but like the Brother, since she loved the Sister so perfectly and truly.

The day came, and just at twelve Gracelove meeting the Steward on the Stairs,
coming from his Lady, Gracelove then told him, that he believed he might take
the opportunity of that afternoon, to go over to Putney, and take a game or two
at Bowls. The Steward returned, Very well, Sir, I shall let my Lady know it, if
she enquires for you. Philadelphia, who overheard what they said, called the
Steward in haste, and bid him call Gracelove back, and tell him, she expected
his Company at her Table to day; and that she desired, he would appear like
himself. The Steward soon overtook him at the door, just going out as Eugenia
came in; who looked back on Gracelove: The poor Gentleman was strangely
surpised at the sight of her, as she was at his: but the Steward's message did
more amaze and confound him. He went directly to his Chamber to dress himself
in one of those rich suits lately made for him; but the distraction he was in
made him mistake his Coat for his Wastecoat, and put the Coat on first; but,
recalling his straggling thoughts, he made shift to get ready time enough to
make his appearance without a second summons. Philadelphia was as pleasant at
dinner, as ever she had been all her Life: she looked very obligingly on all
the Sparks, and drank to every one of 'em particularly, beginning to the Lord
-- and ending to the stranger; who durst hardly lift up his eyes a second time
to here is, to confirm him that he knew her. Her Brother was so confounded, that
he bowed and continued his head down till she had done drinking; not daring to
encounter her Eyes, that would then have reproached him with his Villainy to her.

After dinner the Cloth was taken away; she began thus to her Lovers, My Lord!
Sir Thomas! and Mr. Fat-acres! I doubt not, that it will be of some
satisfaction to you to know whom I have made choice for my next Husband; which
now I am resolved no longer to defer.

The person to whom I shall next drink must be the Man who shall ever command
me and my Fortune; were it ten times greater than it is: which I wish only for
his sake; since he deserves much more. -- Here (said she to one that waited)
put Wine into two Glasses? Then she took the Diamond-Ring from her Finger, and
put it into one of 'em, My dear Gracelove, (cried she) I drink to thee; and
send thee back thy own Ring with Philadelphia's heart. He startled, blushed and
looked wildly; whilst all the company star'd on him. Nay, pledge me (pursued
she) and return me the Ring; for it shall make us both one the next morning. He
bowed, kis'd and returned it, after he had taken off his Wine. The defeated
Lovers knew not how to resent it; The Lord and Knight were for going; but the
Country Gentleman opposed it: and told 'em, 'twas the greatest argument of
Folly to be disturbed at the Caprice of a Woman's humor. They sat down again
therefore; and she invited 'em to her Wedding on the morrow.

And now Brother (said she) I have not quite forgotten you, though you have not
been pleased to take notice of me: I have a dish in reserve for you, which will
be more grateful to your fancy, than all you have tasted to day. Here! (cried
she to the Steward) Mr. Rightman, do you serve up that Dish your self! Rightman
then set a covered Dish on the Table. What! more tricks yet, (cried my Lord and
Sir Thomas,) Come, Sir William! (said his Sister) uncover it! He did so; and
cried out, O matchless goodness of a Virtuous Sister! Here are the Mortgages of
the best part of my Estate! O, what a Villain! what a monster have I been! No
more, dear Brother (said she, with tears in her eyes) I have yet a greater
happiness in store for you: This Lady, this beautiful, virtuous Lady, with
twenty thousand pounds will make you happy in her Love. Saying this, she joined
their hands; Sir William eagerly kissed Eugenia's, who blushed and said, Thus
Madam, I hope to show how much I love and honor you. My Cousin Eugenia! (cried
Gracelove!) The fame, my dear lost dead Cousin Gracelove! (replied she) O!
(said he in a transport) my present joys, are greater than all my past
miseries! my Mistress and my Friend are found; and still are mine. Nay, (faith,
said my Lord) this is pleasant enough to me, tho I have been defeated of the
enjoyment of the Lady. The whole company in general went away very well that
night; who returned the next morning, and saw the two happy pair firmly united.

FINIS.

