From Aboard the Van-herring. ANOTHER LETTER FROM LEGORN, To an Eminent
Merchant in Land. Sept. 23. 1680.
SIR,
MY last informed you what ill Circumstances our Ship and Ships-company were
in; this comes to tell you how matters now stand with us. And to speak the
truth, they are but little mended. The Mahometans aboard, and abroad, are still
plotting our destruction. Though at present they are pretty silent, yet they
are not asleep; we may expect a storm after the calm. You wonder why this Ship
is so much the object of their spite! for this you must understand, she was
once in their possession, and 'twas the best Ship they had; they made great
Merchandise of her; till anon a noble Captain that commanded her, was so
affronted with their insolence, and offended with their superstition, that he
turned the most of them ashore, and put Christian Officers and Sailers in their
room. And ever since the Mahometans have been restless in their attempts to
ruin or recover her into their hands again. It Is within the memory of some yet
alive, that they had a most devilish design upon her, and it had like to have
taken effect. Some of them on board had very cunningly put Gunpowder under the
place where the Captain and his Council of Officers were to meet, intending to
have put fire to it, and to have blown them all up into the air: this
treacherous Conspiracy was discovered by the sagacity of the Captain himself;
and the ringleaders being deservedly executed, their heads were fixed for the
terror of others upon the top of the Mainmast. Not long before that, they
rig'd out a Fleet, that they thought and called Invincible, and coming up to
this Ship, they attackt her as she lay at an anchor; but the heavens helping,
she worsted that great Armado, and some of the Ships being fired, others
stranded, and the rest scattered, scarce any returned home to give an account
of their ill success. It was but the other day that they employed some to fire
the great Cabin of the Ship, which was effectually accomplished. One Algerine
confessed he had an hand in it, and was accordingly condemned and executed.
Others were accused; but the Lieutenant got them out of the way. And after the
then Council of Officers had a little looked into the business, it was hushed up
I know not how, and never enquired after since. However the Mahometans mist of
their aim, for in a little time the Cabin was repaired again, and is now much
more splendid than it was before. Since these disappointments they have played
at several small games, being resolved never to stand out; and now they think
they have such good Cards in their hands, if they can but get rid of the
Captain, they make no question of sweeping the stakes. Therefore they have
indented with several of late to take him off; but yet he has escaped their
malicious hands, and some of these (which is very strange) have escaped the
hands of Justice. My last told you of one, a little Doctor, or
Chirurgeons-mate, and this will tell you of another, an old Cinkator, born in
88, or thereabout, he was tried also for this bold attempt, and though the
Sailors would have laid an hundred to one, when they heard the Evidence against
him, he would be condemned, yet he was cleared. Some others also have been
unexpectedly acquitted upon their Trial; particularly two female Passengers,
one a Tempestuous Lady, the other an Impudent Strumpet: This latter was so
hardy, that the afterward put forth a lying Libel in Vindication of the
Mahometans, alleging that the Confession upon record against them, was
extorted by racks and tortures; a thing never practiced aboard this Ship; for
this she was sentenced to stand two or three times at the Capstorm; and the
boys fingers did itch to anoint her with Pitch and Tar; but the Clemency of the
Officers would not suffer it. These proceedings you may imagine don't a little
animate the Conspirators. And there is one little accident fallen out greatly
to their content, after they had barbarously murdered (as you heard before) an
honest Boat-swain, the Captain put another in his room; a little sprunt fellow,
that did ferret them about; there could not be two or three of them together,
but he was presently at their heels; this sawciness of his they deemed
insufferable, therefore an hole was quickly picked in his coat, and he sent
ashore; so that now they can club and cabal together without control; and if
any shall molest them, they must look to themselves. An honest Quartermaster a
little while ago, did but a little disgust them, and presently they appointed
some desperate Ruffians to dispatch him; these taking their opportunity when he
was all alone, fell upon him and cut his Throat; but being scared, they did
their work to halves; for the Quartermaster by good looking after recovered,
and is like to do well.

The Captain, though he does not say much, yet doubtless he cannot but resent
these doings; and I believe also that he is something concerned about the
growing Greatness and power of Algier; for he has sent to some other Ships to
league with him for mutual security and defense: and upon this hangs a pretty
story, in the Arsenal of the Commonwealth of Genoa, (which is not far from us)
there rides a Ship called the Van-Trump, a lusty stout Ship she is, and sailed
altogether by Christians and Anti Mahometans; this Ship alone has born up
against all the power of Algier. To this Ship the Captain sent that there might
be a nearer Alliance betwixt them; and when the Messenger came aboard, who
should he find there but an Envoy from Algier, who was negotiating the very
same thing for his Master? And we are informed that he had cunningly insinuated
himself into some great Officers aboard the Ship, and had suggested to them the
great glory and prowess of his Master, as also the nakedness and great
unfaithfulness of the Van-herring; and had them remember how unhandsomely she
had lately served them in a Voyage from Smyrna, However the Captain and the
Generality of the Officers Were too wise to be wheedled into an Alliance with
Algier; they were sensible 'twas against their interest that the Van-herring
should fall into the hands of the Algerines; for if so, all the favor they
could expect, would be that which Ulysses obtained of Poliphemus to be last
devoured. And yet there is not so good an understanding and so firm an Union
and Alliance betwixt these two Ships as most desire; for certainly would they
keep together, and resolutely stand one by another, the Algerines would quickly
pull in their horns; yea, these two Ships in conjunction are easily able to
destroy the nest of Pirates; they may keep them in, that they shall not peep
out at Sea, yea, they may fall upon them ashore. There is a multitude of
Christian slaves there, whose bondage is so grievous to them, that they would
be glad of any opportunity to revolt. For my part I am not out of hope to see
such a design carried on for the good of all Christendom. I know some of the
principal Officers, and the generality of Sailors of both Ships desire it
should be so. However it gives some satisfaction, that the Captain has now at
last declared, That his Council of Officers shall sit; and consult about
common-safety. If you ask the reason why their coming together has been so
long deferred, I know none but the Captain himself that can give you a positive
answer; though others may stumble on this or the other probable conjecture.
Some think the Lieutenant and others of the Mohammedan faction are the cause.
It Is manifestly their interest to hinder the Councils sitting. It Is likely
they will begin where the former Council left, they will fall a raveling into this
Hellish and Damnable Plot; and then the five great Criminals of which my last
told you (who are still kept in the Hold of the Ship) with many others will
probably go to pot; yea, it is an even lay but they will fall foul upon the
Lieutenant himself, so did the Council that last met, who Voted that the
Plotters took too great encouragement from the Lieutenants being a Mohammedan,
thereupon the Succession might be thought disputable.

I observe that a great many of the Sailors have a wonderful kindness for the
Captain's Eldest Son: He is now aboard, and when ever he appears upon the Deck,
they flock about him, and show him all imaginable respect. A day or two ago he
went upon the foreship, and I warrant you there were Scores following him with
such loud Acclamations, as made the Ship to ring again; the Lieutenant heard
it, and bit his lip; and though he says nothing, I believe he thinks the more.
It appears he is a little jealous of him; however the Captain has been pleased
to declare publicly, that he was never married to his Mother; but yet he did
not say he was not his Father; he owns him still for his Son; and the Sailors
for his own and his Fathers honor are loath to think him Illegitimate.

Well, let the Father say what he will of his Son, upon my word he is a brisk
young Gentleman, and by profession a Christian, and one that is renowned for a
person of admirable valor amongst the Mahometans themselves. Whether the
Council will interpose and concern themselves about this matter is uncertain;
but some of the less wary Sailors have thought one reason why the Council have
not sit, to be a suspicion lest they should intermeddle with the Business of
Succession.

Again, others think that some who are no Mahometans (at least they are not
such professedly) may be faulted; it is too well known, and it cannot be
concealed, how the Christians themselves that are in the Ship (the more is the
pity) are not all of a mind. There are many that don't very well like the mode
of Worship we have aboard; they say that several of our Religious usages are
borrowed from the Mahometans, this is the sentiment of some of our Officers,
and of a great, if not the greater number of the Sailors; this dissent of
theirs does greatly enrage the other party, for this they stigmatize them, and
sometimes severely handle them, which they may do by the Orders of the Ship.
One would think our common danger should induce us to use more moderation. And
standers-by that are not so deeply concerned and engaged in a party, do think
the petty differences amongst us are capable of an accommodation, and the
rather because both sides agree in the main. Only there are a few half-witted
and hare-brain'd bigots that blow up the coals. Nay, there are some that are
not ashamed to declare, they would rather be Mahometans than Christian
dissenters; which it may be is truly enough spoken, for that they are
Semi-Mahometans already; they are these mungril-Christians that do us the
greatest mischief; if we ever be destroyed, 'twill be by the wildfire of these
men. These be they that dissuade the Captain from calling his Council together;
fearing possibly lest they should make some alteration in the present Orders of
the Ship in favor of the dissenting party; which they may be the more inclined
to do, for as much as they find them to be very faithful to the interest of
Christianity, and most forward (upon all occasions) for the Ships welfare and
safety. They see also that the severities they have for sometime been under,
have not had their intended effect, in as much as they are increased and not
diminisht thereby. Some of these Phreneticks (for so they may be called) are
often buzzing the Captain in the ear with the rude carriage of a Council of
Officers in his Fathers days. It happened, as you have probably heard, that his
Father had a contest with his Council, and from words they fell to blows, and
in the scuffle the good old Captain was killed and thrown overboard; this
unhappy and unheard of Tragedy, is ever now and then ripped up to alienate the
present Captain from his Council; though we all know the now Council has not
the same power, nor does it consist of the same persons. I believe they are a
company of as honest men as ever used the Sea; and on my conscience they have
that respect and honor for the Captain, that they would hazard their All for
his safety and preservation. And if he would but be advised by them, he might
be as happy a man as ever commanded a Ship. If in his Conduct he should have
been any ways tardy or deficient, they would take no notice of it. For it is a
Maxim amongst them, That though his Officers may, yet the Captain himself cannot
do amiss.

SIR, Yours to serve You, etc.

Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1680.


