THE CASE OF THE EARL of ARGYLE.

OR An exact and full Account of his Trial, Escape, and Sentence: Wherein are
insert the Act of Parliament injoining the Test, the Confession of Faith, the
old Act of the King's Oath to be given at His Coronation: With several other
old Acts, made for establishing the Protestant Religion.

As also several Explications made of the Test by the Conformed Clergy: With
the Secret Councils Explanation thereof.

Together with several Papers of Objections against the Test; all framed and
emitted by Conformists: With the Bishop of Edinburgh's Vindication of the Test
in answer thereto.

As likewise a Relation of several Matters of fact, for better clearing of the
said Case.

Whereunto is added An APPENDIX, in answer to a late Pamphlet called, A
Vindication of His Majesty's Government, and Judicatories, in Scotland, --
Especially with Relation to the Earl of Argyle's Process. In so far as concerns
the Earl's Trial,

Printed in the Year M. D. C. LXXXIII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
HAving received the ensuing Narrative of the Case and Trial of the Earl of
Argyle, under the Caution you may find in the close of it, not to hasten the
publication, but rather to vvait for a more convenient season, It Is like I had
continued to comply (as I have done hitherto) with the Earl's inclination, if
not excited to the contrary by a Paper called, A Vindication of His Majesty's
Government, and Judicatories, in Scotland -- Especially with relation to the
late Earl of Argyle's Process, printed at Edinburgh, and reprinted at London,
with the appearance of a public allowance: For, albeit all wise and sober
men, not only in Scotland, but also in the world, who have heard this affair,
do, at this day, sufficiently understand its rise, procedure, issue, and
tendency, with all the just consideration, that either oppressed innocence,
abused justice, or impotent and ill contrived malice, do deserve; Yet seeing
these concerned have had the confidence to subject their Res Judicata to an
unexpected review; and vvithall, the equity to leave their advantages, and
sist themselves on even ground, with an open defiance to all contradictors,
and fair submission to the common sense and reason of mankind: I thought, I
could not be vvanting to such an happy opportunity, without disappointing so
generous an offer, deserting my good Friend the Author of the Mist, and failing
of the second, and principal part of my Trust: And therefore resolved, without
further delay, to give the follovving sheets their long desired license:
Purposing to subjoyn, as an Appendix, any further animadversions that the
abovementioned Pamphlet may seem to deserve.

ERRATA.
Page 2. L. 48. Acts, r. Oaths. p. 6. l. 39. Tursday, r. Thursday. p. 8. I. 9.
peased, r. pleased. l. 20. And, r. But. p. 40. l. 24. prositive, r. positive.
p. 41. l. 38. 1667. r. 1567. p. 44. l. 61. there, r, the. p. 64. l. 6. King, r.
Kingdom. p. 66. l. 48* the Earl's hand, r. the Earl of Glencairn (first
Chancellor after His Majesty's Return) his hand. p. 76. l. 2. is not, r. as
not. p. 82. l. 34. yet, r. et. p. 86. l. 3. Governor, r. Deputy Governor. p.
94. l. 3. I have considered, r. I have not considered.

Edinburgh; 30. May, 1682.
SIR
The case of the late Earl of Argyl, which, even before the Process led against
him, you was earnest to know, was at first. I thought, so plain, that I needed
not, and grew afterward so exceedingly mysterious, that I could not, for some
time, give you so perfect ane account of it, as I wished: But this time being
still no less proper, the exactness of mynarrative will, I hope, excuse all
delays.

The design against him being now so clear, and the grounds founded on so
slender, that to satisfy all unbyassed Persons of his integrity, there needs
no more, but barely to represent matter of fact; I should think shame to spend
so many words, either on arguments, or relation, were it not lest to strangers
some mystery might still be suspected to remain concealed: And therefore to
make plain what they can hardly believe, though we clearly see it.

At His Royal Highness arrival in Scotland, the Earl was one of the first to
wait upon him, and until the meeting of our last Parliament, the world
believed, the Earl was as much in His Highness favor, as any entrusted in His
Majesty's affairs, in this Kingdom.

When it was resolved, and His Majesty moved to call the Parliament, the Earl
was in the country, and at the opening of it, he appeared as forward as any in
His Majesty's, and His Highness service, but it had not fat many days when a
change was noticed in His Highness, and the Earl observed to decline in His
Highness favor.

In the beginning of the Parliament, the Earl was appointed one of the Lords of
the Articles, to prepare matters for the Parliament, and named by His Highness
to be one of a Committee of the Articles for Religion, which, by the custom of
all Scots Parliaments, and His Majesty's instructions to his Commissioner, at
this time, was the first thing treated of: In this Committee there was ane Act
prepared for securing the Protestant Religion; which Act did ratify the Act
approving the Confession of Faith, and also the Act containing the Coronation
Oath, appointed, by several standing Acts of Parliament, to be taken by all our
Kings, and Regents, before their entry to the exercise of the Government.

This Act was drawn somewhat less binding upon the Successor, as to his own
profession; But full as strictly tying him to maintain the Protestant Religion,
in the public profession thereof, and to put the Laws concerning it in
execution, and also appointing a further Test, beside the former, to exclude
Papists from places of public trust: and because the fines of such as should
act, without taking the Test, appeared no better then discharged, if falling in
the hands of a Popish Successor, and some accounting any limitation worse then
ane exclusion, and all being con^ent to put no limitation on the Crown, so it
might consist with the safety and security of the Protestant Religion, it was
ordained, that all such fines, and forfaultures should appertain the one half
to the informers, and the other half should be bestowed on pious uses,
according to certain Rules expressed in the Act.

But this Act, being no wise pleasing to some, it was laid aside, and the
Committee discharged any more to meet, and instead of this Act, there was
brought in to the Parliament, at the same time, with the Act of succession, a
short Act, ratifying all former Acts made for the security of the Protestant
Religion, which is the first of the printed Acts of this Parliament.

At the passing of this Act the Earl proposed that these words, And all Acts
against Popery, might be added, which was opposed by the Advocat, and some of
the Clergy, as unnecessary, But the motion being seconded by Sir George
Lockhart, and the then President of the Session, now turned out, it was yielded
to, and added without a vote, and this Act being still not thought sufficient;
and several Members desiring other additions, and other Acts, a promise was
made by His Royal Highness, in open Parliament, that time, and opportunity
should be given, to bring in any other Act, which should be thought necessary
for further securing the Protestant Religion: But though several persons, both
before and after passing the Act for the Test (here subjoyned) did give in
memorials, and overtures, yet they were never suffered to be read, either in
Articles, or Parliament, but in place of all, this Act for the Test was still
obtruded, and nothing of that nature suffered to be heard, after once that Act
past, though even at passing it the promise was renewed.

As for the Test, it was first brought into the Parliament without mentioning
the Confession of Faith, and, after several hours debate, for adding the
Confession of Faith, and many other additions, and alterations, it was past at
the first presenting, albeit it was earnestly pressed, by near half the
Parliament, that it might be delayed till nixt morning, the draught being so
much changed and interlined, that many, even of the most engaged in the debate,
did not sufficiently understand it, and though they took notes knew not
precisely how it stood. And this was indeed the Earls case in particular, and
the cause why, in voting, he did forbear either to approve or disapprove.

His part in the debate was, that, in the entry of it, he said, that he
thought, as few Oaths should be required, as could be, and these as short and
clear as possible: That it was his humble opi^ion, that a very small alteration
in these Acts, which had been used, these twenty years, might serve, for it
was manifest, and he attested the whole Parliament upon it, That the Oath of
allegiance, and Declaration had effectually debarred all Fanatics from getting
into places of trust, all that time: It was true some Papists had swallowed the
Oath of allegiance, and therefore a word or two only of addition, to guard
against them, was all he judged necessary.

And there after where in the close of the Act, The Kings Sons, and Brothers,
were intended to be dispensed with from taking the Test, He opposed the
exception, and said, it was our happiness that King, and people were of one
Religion, and that they were so by Law: That he hoped the Parliament would do
nothing to loose what was fast, nor open a gap for the Royal Family, to differ
in Religion, their example was of great consequence, one of them was as a
thousand, and would draw the more followers, if once it appeared to the people,
that it were honorable, and a privilege to be of an other Religion: And
therefore he wished, if any exception were, it might be particular for his
Royal Hs; but His Hs himself opposing this, the Earl concluded with his fear,
that if this exception did pass it would do more hurt to the Protestant
Religion then all the rest of that Act, and many other Acts could do good.

Whilst these Acts, about Religion, were in agitation, his Hs told the Earl one
day in private, to beware of himself, for the Earl of Erroll* and others were
to give in a bill to the Parliament, to get him made liable to some debts they
pretended to be cautioners in for his Father, and that those that were most
forward in His Majesty's service must be had a care of: The Earl said He knew
there was no ground for any such bill, and he hoped neither the Earl of Errol,
nor any other should have any advantage of him, upon any head relating to His
Majesty's service. His Highness told others likewise, he had given the Earl
good advice.

But shortly after the above mentioned debates, there were two bills given in
to the meeting of the Articles, against the Earl, one by the Earl of Errol, the
other by His Majesty's advocat, who alleged he did it by command, for
otherwise he acknowledged it was without his line. The Earl of Erroll's clame
was, that the Earl of Argyl might be declared liable to releeve him, and
others, of a debt, wherein, they alleged, they stood bound as cautioners, for
the late Marquis of Argyll, the Earl's Father, To which the Earl answered, that
he had not got his Fathers whole estate, but only a part of it, and that
expressly burdened with all the debts, he was liable to pay, whereof this
pretended debt was none, and that the Marquess of Huntlie, who at that time was
owing to the Marquess of Argyl 35000. l. s^erl. had got 4000 l. sterling. of
yearly rent, out of the Marquis of Argyll's forsaulture, without the burden of
any debt; so that both by Law, and equity, the Earl could not be liable, the
Marquess of Huntlie, and not he, having got that which should bear this
relief, and which should indeed have paid the far greatest part of the
Marquis of Argyll's debt, the same having been undertaken for Huntlie by
Argyll, either as cautioner for Huntlie, or to raise money to pay his debt;
Besides that the Earl of Erroll can never make it appear, that he, or his
predecessors were bound, for the Marquis of Argyll in the third part of the
sums he acclaimes: Yet some were much inclined to believe Erroll on his bare
assertion.

His Majesty's Advocat's clame was, to take from the Earl his heritable
offices of Sheriff etc. especially that of justice General of Argyll-Shire,
the ^sles, and other places, which last is nevertheless only a part of the
general Justitiarie of all Scotland, granted to his Predecessors, some hundred
of years ago, for honorable, and onerous causes, and constantly enjoyed by
them until expressly surrendered, in his late Majesty's hands, for a new grant
of the above mentioned Justitiary of Argyl etc: And this new grant was also
confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, and particularly by his Majesty's Royal
Father, of blissed memory, in the Parliament holden by him Anno 1633. as
likewise by his Majesty that now is (whom God long preserve) his new Gift and
Chartour, after several Debates before him in Anno 1663. and 1672. which new
Gifts and Chartours were again ratified by a special instruction from His
Majesty in the Parliament 1672. So that albeit several late Gifts of Regalitie
granted to the Marqueis of Athol, Marqueis of Queensberrie, and others, may be
questioned, because granted since the Acts of Parliament discharging all such
Gifts in time coming, yet the Earl of Argyl's rights are good, as being both of
a far different nature, and granted long before the said Acts of Parliament,
and in effect the Earl his rights are rather confirmed by these prohibitive
Acts, because both anterior to, and excepted from them, as appears by the Act
Salvo Iure 1633. wherein the Earls rights are particularly and fully excepted
in the body of the printed Act.

When these things appeared so plain as not to be answered. It was alleged
that upon the fo^faulture of the late Marqueis of Argyl, his Estate was annexed
to the Croun, and so could not be gifted to the Earl by His Majesty, (wherein
they soon discovered a design to forfault him, if any pretense could be found)
But the Act of Forfaulture being read, and containing no such thing, but on the
contrary a clear power left to His Majesty to dispose of the whole, and the
Earl telling them plainly, that these that were most active to have his Father
forfaulted, were very far from desiring his Estate to be annexed to the Croun,
seeing it was in expectation of Gifts out of it they were so diligent, that
pretense of the annexation was past from, but yet the design was nowise given
over, for there was a proposition made, and a vote carried in the Articles, that
a Committee should be appointed, with Parliamentary power, to meet in the
intervals of Parliament, to determine all controversies could be moved against
any of the Earls rights; Which was a very extraordinary device, and plainly
carried by extraordinary influences.

Upon this the Earl applied to the Parliament, where this vote was to be
brought, and having informed the members of his right, and the consequences of
such a new Judicature, he had good hope to get the vote ranversed, when his
Royal Hs on second thoughts judged it fit to put a stop to it, and excused
himself, saying, it was his not being acquaint, and but lately in affairs, had
made him go along with it, for he found it did plainly impugn His Majesty's
prerogative, and might be of ill consequence, and indeed it is plain enough. It
would have exposed the Marqueis of Huntli'es gift, which proceeded on the same
forfaulture, as well as the Earl of Argyls, to the same, and far greater
hazard, as some came to be sensible, when they heard all. You see here at what
rate the Earl was pursued, and on what grounds, before his taking of the Test
came in hand.

After the Parliament was adjurned, there was a new design to apply to His
Majesty for a Commission, of the same nature, for reviewing all the Earls
rights, and to deprive him of his heritable offices, and, if possible, to
burden him with more debts then his Estate was worth.

Upon which, the Earl waited on his Highness, and informed him more
particularly, offering to make it appear, by unquestionable rights and
evidences, That his Estate was not subject to any such review, as was intended,
And that it might breed the Earl great trouble, but could have no effect in
Law. To which his Highness answered, That a review could do no hurt: The Earl
said, If a commission for a review were granted, some thing must be intended,
and some thing must be done, and it was very like that some of these put into
such a commission would be his enemies, at least small friends, and therefore
entreated that if any intended to quarrel his rights, they and he and all their
debates might be remitted to the Ordinary Iudicatories: And indeed he had
reason, to desire, it might be so, the Ordinary Iudicatories being established
by the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, not in order, or with respect to particular
causes, and persons, but for the general, equal and impartial administration of
Justice to all, Whereas the granting particular Commissions, for trying and
judging such and such cases, and persons, cannot but expose to the just
contrary inconveniences, there being certainly a vast difference betwixt a man's
finding a judge indifferently constitut, and his having one expressly and
particularly appointed, for his single affair, who might possibly think himself
commissionat, rather to serve a turn, in ane arbitrary way, then to administer
fair Justice: but all this prevailed not, Only his Highness said, The
commission should not be expede until the Earl knew the names of the Persons
insert in it: Whereunto the Earl answered, That their might be many Persons,
against whom he could make no legal exception, whom yet he might have very good
reason to decline to be his particular judges, and to have his rights taken
from the ordinary Judges, and committed to their examination, and all he might
possibly gain by excepting would be to irritat: Adding that as to his heritable
offices, he had undoubtedly right to them, and they were rather honorable,
then of advantage, that his family had them for faithful services to the Crown;
and because they had served more faithfully then their Neighbors, and been
more useful then others, in keeping the Country in peace, from Thieves and
Robbers, therefore all the broken men and their patrons, were enemies to him,
and his family, and desirous to have these offices out of his hands, but he
resolved to do as he had alwise done, to put himself in His Majest* will, and
if His Majest. were resolved to have back all heritable offices, and should
think fit after hearing him to have back his, His Majesty should have them,
either freely, or for a just value: For though, they rendered the Earl no free
yearly rent, as the Earl used them, yet he might be a sufferer in the want of
them, if the Country were left open to Thieves and Robbers, which he hoped His
Majesty would repair. His rights (as he had said in Parliament) were
unquestionable, and oftentimes confirmed; Yet he was willing to surrender them
all on his knee to His Majesty, but was not willing to have them ^orn from him
with ane affront by any other.

Upon this his Highness was pleased, to allow the Earl a time, to go to the
Country, to bring his Papers, and he was put in hopes no Commission should
pass till his return, which was indeed observed.

In the mean time, the Earl did write to the Earl of Murray, His Majest.
Secretary, that he might have leave, to wait upon His Majesty, which His
Majesty did graciously and readily grant; The Earl purposing, at his return to
Edinburgh, to beg the same favor of His Highness: But he found this motion
more fatal to him then he could have at first expected so innocent a design
could prove: For it was at first told him, he could not have access to kiss His
Majesty's hand without taking the Test; then it dropped out that it was ill
taken, His Majesty was at all addressed to, for leeve to kiss his hand: And at
length it became plain that taking the Test would not clear the way.

As the Earl was on his return to Edinburgh, to wait upon His Highness, and
come the length of Glasgow, he got the news, that the late President of the
Session, and He, were both turned out of it, and at his arrival at Edinburgh,
several meetings of Council were appointed only to occasion his taking of the
Test: But the Earl having gone some miles out of town, was not present. At last
a meeting of the Council was appointed expressly, and one of the clerks ordered
to warn the Earl particularly to be present; whereof the Earl being advertised
before the clerk came to him, he waited on His Highness, and had the honor of
ane opportunity after supper to speak to His Royal Highness, in his bed
chamber: The Earl told His Highness, he was now returned, to make good his
word, and to show those writts and rights he had promised: But Sir (said the
Earl) I haveheard by the way of alterations, and that I am turned out of the
Session: His Highness said, it was so: The Earl asked what nixt? His Highness
said, he knew no more. The Earl said he had never sought that, nor any place,
and he knew that place was at His Maj. dispose, and it might soon be better
filled: But said the Earl, if it be to express a frown, it is the first I have
had from His Majesty, their thirty years; I know I have enemies, but they shall
never make me alter my duty, and resolution to serve His Majesty; I have
served His Majesty in arms, and in his judicatures, when I knew I had enemies
on my right hand, and on my left, and I will do so still, But if any have
power, to render His Majesty or your highness jealous of me, it will make my
service the more useless to both, and the less comfortable to my self: His
Highness said he knew no more then what he had said; the Earl then said, it was
late, and he would wait on His Highness, some other time, about these matters:
But the thing that at present presses (Says the Earl) is, That I hear one of
the Clerks of Council is appointed to tell me to be at the Council, to morrow,
I conceave, to take the Test; Pray, what is the haste? may not I, with Your
Highnesses favor, have the time allowed by the Act of Parliament? His
Highness said, No. The Earl urged it again, but in vain: And all the delay, he
could obtain, was till tursday the third of November, the nixt Council day in
course. The Earl said he was the less fond of the Test, that he found, that
some that refused it were still in favor, and others that had taken it turned
out, as the Register, At which His Highness only laughed: But Sir, [said the
Earl,] how comes your Highness to press the Test so hastily? Sure there are
some things in it Your Highness does not over much like: Then said His
Highness, angrily, and in a passion most true, that Test was brought into the
Parliament, without the Confession of Faith: But the late President caused put
in the Confession, which makes it such as no honest man can take it: The Earl
said he had the more reason to advise: Whereby you may see, whether His
Highness then thought, the Confession was to be sworn to in the Test, ^or not.

After this the Earl waited several times on His Highness, and made new
attempts for the favor of a delay, but with no success: What passed in
Private, shall not be repeated, except so far as is absolutely necessary to
evince the Earl his innocence, and to show that in what he did he had no ill
design, nor did, in the least prevaricat, or give any offense willingly, but
was ready to comply, as far as he could, with a good conscience: It was in this
interval, that the Earl spoke with the Bishop of Edinburgh, and saw his
Vindication of the Test, and all the Explanations I here send you, only the
Councils explanation was not yet thought on: And that all the Bishop did then
urge the Earl with, beyond what is in his Vindication, was to have a care of a
noble Family, and to tell him, that the opposing the exception of the Kings
Sons, and Brothers, from taking the Test, had fired the kiln.

At the last upon Wednesday, the second of November, late, the Earl waited on
his Highness, and did in the most humble, and easy expressions he could
devise, decline the present taking of the Test; But if h(...) H^ would needs
have a present answer, he begged his favor, that he would accept of his
refusing it in private, which was denied again: Then, he said, if his Highness
would allow him time, to go home, and consider, he would, either give
satisfaction, or the time prescribed by the Act of Parliament would elapse, and
so he would go off in Course, and without noise: But this also His Highness
absolutely refused: Upon which the Earl asked what good his appearing in
Council, to refuse there, would do? His Highness was pleased to answer, that
he needed not appear, but to employ some friend, to speak for him; And His
Highness himself named one; this the Earl yielded to, as the best of a bad
choice, and said, he should either use the person named by His Highness, or
some other relation that were a Councellor, and in town: And, in compliance
with his Highness pleasure* the nixt morning, the Earl drew a letter, for a
warrant to the same Person his H^ had named, for declaring his mind in Council;
wherein he expressed his constant resolution to continue a true Protestant, and
Loyal Subject, which were the true ends of the Test; But the letter concluding
on a delay of taking the Oath, and his Highness having given some indication,
how little pleasing that office was to him, neither that friend, nor any other
would, by any means, accept of it.

Upon this the Earl drew a second, and shorter letter, to any that should that
day Preside in Council; but after much discourse, it being suggested, that an
explanation would be allowed, and the shorter the better, the Earl first drew
one, suitable to his own thoughts; and it being thought too long, did instantly
shorten it, and put it into his pocket, but withal said he would not offer it,
till he knew His Highness pleasure, lest his Highness might take it ill that
any had prevailed more with him, then himself; and therefore the Earl did
refuse to go to the Council, or out of his chamber, till he had his
approbation. A little after a coatch was sent for the Earl, and it was told him,
in the room without the Council chamber, that the Bishop of Edinburgh had spoke
to His Highness, and signified to him, that the Earl was willing to take the
Test, with an Explanation, and that the Bishop said, it would be very kindly
accepted: These were the express words, and then (and not till then) the Earl
went in to the Council, and delivered (that is pronounced) his Explanation
closs by His Highness, and directly toward him; so loud, and audible, that
some in the furthest corner of the room acknowledged they heard it: Whereupon
the Oath was administered, and the Earl took it; and His Highness with a well
satisfied Countenance, and the honor of a smile, Commanded him to take his
place: And while he sat by His Highness (which was his honor to do that day)
His Highness spoke several times privately to him, and alwise very pleasantly.

And the Earl has since protested to his friends, that he thinks his Highness
was, at the time, well peased, though some others, that wished the Earl out of
the Council, appeared surprised, and in some confusion.

The first thing came to be treated of in Council, after the Earl had taken his
seat, was the Concils Explanation, at that time intended, and resolved to be
allowed to the Clergy only, and no other, and withal not to be printed: To
which the Earl refused to vote, which was afterward made a ground of
challenge: A little after, it being the post night, The Earl slept out, and
went to his lodging, and though he acknowledges, he did not decline to give
some friends ane account of what had past, vet he was so far from spreading
copies of his Explanation, at taking the Oath; That he flatly refused to give
a kind, and discreet friend, then in his chamber, a copy of it, lest it might
go abroad: And the words being few, and publictly spoke, it is not strange they
might be, almost perfectly, repeated, as, its known, the Clerks pretended to
do, but the Kings Advocat having past from the accusation of Spreading, this is
only mentioned to evidence howsingly studious the Earl was to satisfy his own
conscience, and how tender of giving offense, for I can say truly for him, he
was never heard to dissuade any to take the Test, nor to disparage it, after it
past in an Act; Only he refused to take it himself, without ane Explanation,
which to stretch to a crime is beyond all example: I confess, he never cried it
up as superexcellent, or divine, as some have done that can alter their toon,
and decry it as much, when ever there shall be occasion.

Nixt morning the Earl waited on His Highness, expecting yesternights
countenance, and indeed nothing less then what he met with; for beginning to
speak with His Highness in private, his Highness interrupted him, and said he
was not pleased with his explanation: The Earl said, he did not presume to give
it till his Highness allowed him: His Highness acknowledged, that the Bishop of
Edinburgh had told him, that the Earl intended ane explanation: But (says His
Highness) I thought it had been some short one, like Earl Queesburries: The
Earl answered that his Highness heard what he said: His Highness said, he did,
but he was surprised: Then the Earl said, he had said the same thing, in
private, to his Highness, wherewith he, at that time, appeared satisfied: And
the Earl being about to say more, in his own vindication, his Highness
interrupting him said, well it is past with you, but it shall pass so with no
other, which words, the Earl thought, did both confirm the Councils acceptance,
and his explanation, and sufficiently clear him of all offense, if he had
incurred any.

And whatever has been his Highness resolution, or the Earl's misfortune
since, the Earl is persuaded, that his Highness was resolved, then, to press
the affair no further: For though some had still the same animosities, and
prejudices, against the Earl, yet hitherto, they had not adventured, to
undertake, to extract, and forge such crimes, out of his words as afterward
they did: And it was not, till private suggestions were made, that Advocats were
asked (as they were) if these words could be stretched to treason; and that
(when the ablest denied) the Kings Advocat complied, and was ordered to draw
the indictment, and some judges were engaged, and secured about it, as will
appear, when ever his Majesty thinks it his interest, to take ane exact trial
of that whole affair.

The Earl did think (as I just now said,) his Highness saying, it was past as
to him, was enough; and he was resolved to say no more for justifying himself;
but seeing he is so hardly pressed, and his life, and honor at the stake, it is
hoped his Highness will not disown what the Earl has hitherto so respectfully
concealed; and is now no less necessary to be spoke out, for his vindication.
And that is, that besides that his Highness did allow the Earl to explain, and
did hear his explanation, in Council, and approve it: The Earl did twice in
private, once before, and once after his Oath in Council, repeat, to his
Highness, the same words, that the treason is now founded on: (viz.) That the
Earl meant not to bind up himself, to wish, and endeavor, in a Lawfulway, and
in his station any alteration, he thought to the advantage of Church, and
state, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and his Loyalty: and that His
Highness was so far from charging them with treason, that he said, plainly,
both times, the Earl's scruples were unnecessary, and that the Test did not
bind him up, as he imagined: adding further, the last time, that the Earl had
cheated himself, for notwithstanding the explanation, he had taken the Test. To
which the Earl only answered, that then His Highness should be satisfied. Now,
after all this, that treason should be so earnestly searched for, and so
groundlesly found, in those words, Is it not strange beyond all example? could
it be treason, for the Earl to say, he will not bind up himself where His
Highness says so often, and so plainly, it was not intended, that he, or any
man, should be bound up?

What past, the nixt day, after the Earl had taken the Test, and was received
by the Council, is also proper for you to know. The Earl, being to take it as
one of the Commissioners of the Treasury, it was commonly thought, that he, and
the other Commissioners were to take it in the Exchequer: but after ten of the
clock, about two hours after the Earl had parted from His Highness, one told
him, there was a design upon him, to make him swear once more before the
Council: and accordingly, at twelve, there was an extraordinary Council called
in the Abbay, and there it was found, That the Commissioners of Treasury, as
officers of the Croun, were to take the Test, before the Council; and it was
told the Earl, that the Exchequer could not, that day, sit without him; And, to
make the matter more solemn, It was resolved, that the Council should meet that
after noon, and that His Highness should be present: So as soon as they were
met, the Oath was tendered, and the Earl offering to take it, and saying only
these words, as before, The Earl of Roxburgh, never heard to speak in Council
till then, stood up behind His Highness chair, and with Clamor, asked what was
said: To whom His Highness was pleased to turn, and inform him: Upon which
Roxburgh, prepared for the purpose, desired, that what the Earl of Argyll had
said, the day before, might be repeated: Which the Earl, seeing a design upon
him, did at first decline; till he was peremptorily put to it by His Highness,
and he being ingenuous, and thinking no course more proper to prevent mistakes
of words. He said, he had a note of what he had said, in his pocket, which His
Highness called for, very earnestly, and Commanded him to produce, which being
done, and the paper read, so secure was the Earl of his innocence, that he was
willing, upon the first motion, to sign it: But the, then, new President of the
Session, now Chancellor, and the new Register, could not agree, whither it was
fit, or not, the treason not yet appearing, when read in Council, as when they
had talked of it, in private: So the Earl was removed, and then called in, and
after these two had wheted, and adjusted their inventions, he was desired
positivly to sign the paper, he had given in. To which he answered, he meant
well, and truly did see no ill in the paper, why he might not, and if the
words did please them then, as they did when they were first pronounced, he
would do it: But, if they found the least matter of displeasure in them he
would forbear: Whereupon being again removed, and called in, he was told. he
had not given the satisfaction required by the Act of Parliament, in taking the
Test: And so could not sit in the Council, and somewhat more was added, as if
the matter drew deeper, but the particular words I do not know: To which the
Earl said, that he judged, All the Parliament meant was to exclud refusers of
the Test from places of trust: And if he were judged a refuser, he submitted,
but could conceave no greater danger in the matter, for he had served his
Majesty faithfully within doors, and was resolved to do so without doors, and
so he made his obeisance, and went out. Nixt morning, being Saturday November
5. The Earl waited on his Royal Highness, and, amongst other things, told his
Highness, he was strangely surprised, that the saying He could not bind up
himself in his station, and in a lawful way etc. as was contained in that
paper, was looked on as a crime, ^eing he had said the same words to his
Highness formerly, in private, without any offense, to which His Highness gave
no answer, but held his peace, which made the Earl make bold, to put him to
remember his own words, and to ask him, what he had said, when the Earl
formerly spoke to him: Then His Highness was pleased to say, he had forgot what
he had said: To which the Earl answered, the worse indeed for me; But Sir, here
are the same words, I formerly said, without offense, what says your Highness
now? What ill is in them? Let me know and I will vindicat my self. And all his
Highness at this second time said, was, what has been above remarked, That
they were unnecessary words, that the Earl scrupled needlessly, that he was not
tied up, by that Oath, as he imagined; And after a pause added, As I have
already told you; Well, you have cheated your self, you have taken the Test: To
which the Earl replied, he hoped then his Highness was satisfied, (as above)
His Highness then began to complain, that the Earl, the little while he sat in
Council, after he had taken the Oath, had not gone along, to approve the
Councils explanation: The Earl said he had not heard the debate: And therefore,
it was reasonable, to excuse him from voting. His Highness returned, a little
warmly, that the Earl knew the case will enough (which indeed was not unlike,
and yet not at all strange, that the Earl could not vote, for that explanation,
Seeing he could not but know, the Parliament did intend the Confession should be
sworn: And that he himself had taken it in that sense, as all others had done,
before that explanation past in Council) but the Earl replying nothing, His
Highness continued, That the Earl, and others, had designed to bring trouble
upon an handful of poor Catholics, that would live peaceably, however they
were used, but it should light upon others.

A little after, His Highness commanded the Earl not to go out of Town, till he
waited on him, which the Earl said he should obey: But notwithstanding thereof,
one of the Clerks of the Council was sent to the Earl, that same night, late,
to intimat to him, not to go out of Town, till the Council should sit, upon the
Tuesday thereafter.

Upon Moonday, the seventh of November, the Earl waited on His Highness again,
and told him, he was surprised to get such a message from the Council, after
his Highness had laid his own commands upon him, and asked what the Councils
meaning could be: his Highness was pleased to say, he knew nothing, but
referred all to themselves, at their meeting.

Upon Tuesday, the 8. of November, when the Council met, without ever calling
the Earl, ane order was sent to him, by one of their Clerks, to enter himself
prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, before twelve of the Clock, the nixt day,
with a warrant to the Deputy Governor, to keep him prisoner, wherein the word
Sure - firmance was struk out, which appeared to have been fairly writ: This
order the Earl received, and obeyed it, with great submission, entering all
alone in ane haikny Coatch: And when some of his relations, and persons of
quality, offered to go along with him, he refused, saying, that if he were
pursued at the instance of any other, he would accept of their civility, but
seeing he was pursued, at the instance of his Majesty's Advocat, he would go, in
the most humble way that he could think on, and have no body concerned but
himself.

But all this did not hinder the Council, to write to his Majesty the Letter
hereafter insert, giving judgment, before trial, without any hearing, and
s^eking leeve to proceed to a process, which they likewise proceeded in, before
any return came; as likewise, about the very date of this Letter, they emitted
their explanation of the Test: Albeit in their Letter, they assert, That they
had been very careful not to suffer any to take the Test with glosses and
explanations.

The Earl, some days after his entering prisoner into the Castle of Edinburgh,
did write a Letter to his Royal Highness, telling him, that he had obeyed his
Highness, and the Councils order, in entering prisoner in that place; that he
had not written sooner, lest he might be thought too impatient of his
punishment, which appeared to be the effects of an high displeasure, which, he
hoped, he nowise deserved; that he was resolved to continue in all duty, and
obedience to his Majesty, and his R. Highness, and never to fail in any
profession thereof, he had made; and begged to know, what satisfaction was
expected, and where, and how, he might live with his Highness favor.

This Letter, at first, seemed to please, and, the Earl heard, it did, But the
only answer, directly returned, was Summonds charging the Earl, with leasing
making, and depraving of Laws, before any return from His Majesty: And after a
return came, an other Sumonds, with sound of trumpet, containing perjury, and
treason, added to the former crimes: Notwithstanding all which, fair weather
was made, and it was given out, and likewise intimat to the Earl, by a
particular message, from one of the Club, that no more was designed, but to
humble the Earl, and to take his heritable, and other offices from him, and his
family: and when his Highness was told it was hard measure, by such a process,
and on such pretensions, to thereaten life, and fortune, his Highness said,
life, and fortune? God forbid.

What happened after these things, and how the process was carried on,
follows now in order: and for your more clear, and distinct information, I
have sent you, several, very necessary and useful papers, with indexes on the
margin, pointing at such passages, as more remarkably concern this affair: And
the papers are.

I. Act Char. 2. P. 3. C. 6, Aug. 31. 1681. Anent Religion, and the Test. II.
Act I. 6. P. 1. C. 3. Anno 1567. Anent the annulling of the Acts of Parliament
made against God's Word, and for maintenance of Idolatry, in any times by
past. III. Act I. 6. P. 1. C. 4. Anno 1567. The Confession of the Faith, and
Doctrine, etc. IV. Act I. 6. P. 1 C. 8. Anno 1567. Anent the Kings Oath to be
given at his Coronation. V. Act I 6. P. 1. C. 9. No Person may be judge,
Procurator, Notar, nor member of Court who professes not the Religion, etc.
VI. Part of the Act I. 6. P. 2. C. 5. Anno 1609. entitled, Act against
Jesuits, seminary Priests, sayers, or hearers of Mess, Papists, and receptors
of them. VII. Act I: 6. P: 3. C. 47. Anno 1572. Adversaries of the true
Religion are not Subjects to the King. Of Apostats. VIII. Act Char. 2. P. 2. C
1. 16 Nov. 1669. Act asserting his Majesty's Supremacy, over all persons, and
in all causes ecclesiastical. IX. The Bishop of Aberdeens explication of the
Test. X. The explication of the Test by the Synod, and Clergy of Perth. XI.
Paraphrase on the Test: XII. Grounds whereupon some of the conform Ministers
scruple to take the Test. XIII. Sederunt of the Council 22. September 1681.
XIV: The Earl of Queensberries explanation. XV. Sederunt 21: October 1681. XVI.
The Bishop of Edinburgh's paper, and vindication of the Test. XVII. Sederunt 3
November 1681. XVIII. Privy Councils explanation. XIX. Sederunt 4. Nov. 1681.
XX. The Earl of Argyl's explication of the Test. XXI. The explanation of his
explication. XXII, The Councils Letter to the King. XXIII. The Kings Answer.
XXIV, The indictment. XXV. Abstract of the Acts of Parliament, whereupon the
inditment is founded. XXVI. The Earl of Argyl's first Petition for Advocats.
XXVII. The Councils Answer. XXVIII. The Earl of Argyl's second Petition. XXIX.
The Councils Answer. XXX. The Earl of Argyl's Letter of Attorney. XXXI.
Instrument thereon. XXXII. Opinion of Lawyers of the Earl's Case.
Which Papers may give you much light in this whole matter.

An^ ACT For securing the Protestant Religion, and enjoining a Test.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with his Estates of Parliament considering, That albeit by
many good, and wholesome Laws, made by his Royal Grandfather, and Father, of
glorious Memory, and by himself, in this, and the other Parliaments, since his
happy restoration, The Protestant Religion is carefully asserted, established,
and secured against Popery, and Fanaticisme; yet the restless Adversaries of
our Religion, do not cease to propagate their errors, and to seduce His
Majesty's Subjects from their duty to God, and loyalty to his Vicegerent; and
to overturn the established Religion, by introducing their superstitions, and
delusions into this Church and Kingdom. And knowing, that nothing can more
increase the numbers, and confidence of Papists, and Schismatical Dissenters
from the established Church, then the supine neglect of putting in execution
the good Laws provided against them, together with their hopes to insinuate
themselves into Offices, and places of trust; and public employment: Therefore
His Majesty, from his Princely, and pious Zeal, to maintain, and preserve the
true Protestant Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the
first Parliament of King James the VI. which is founded on, and agreeable to
the written word of God. Does with advice, and consent of his Estates of
Parliament, require and command all his Officers, Judges, and Magistrates, to
put the Laws made against Popery, and Papists, Priests, Jesuits, and all
persons of any other Order, in the Popish Church; especially against all
sayers, and hearers of Mess, venters, and dispensers of forbidden books, and
resetters of popish Priests, and excommunicat Papists; as also against all
fanitical Separatists from this National Church, against Preachers at house, or
field Conventicles, and the resetters, and harbourers of preachers who are
intercommuned; against disorderly Baptisms, and Marriages, and irregular
Ordinations, and all other schismatical disorders, to full* and vigorous
execution, according to the tenor of the respective Acts of Parliament
thereanent provided. And that His Majesty's Princely Care, to have these Laws
put in execution, against these enemies of the Protestant Religion, may the
more clearly appear, He does with advice and consent foresaid, statute and
ordain, that the Ministers of each Parish give up in October yearly, to their
respective Ordinaries, true and complete Lists of all Papists, and schismatical
with-drawers from the public worship, in their respective Parishes, which
Lists are to be subscribed by them: and that the Bishops give in a double of
the said Lists, subscribed by them, to the respective Sheriffs, Steuards,
Bailiffs of Royalty and Regality, and Magistrates of Burghs, to the effect, the
said Judges may proceed against them, according to Law: As also the Sheriffs,
and other Magistrates foresaid, are hereby ordained to give an account to His
Majesty's Privy - Council, in December, yearly, of their prooceedings against
those Papists and fanatical separatists, as they will be answerable at their
highest peril. And that the diligence done by the Sheriffs, Baylies of
Regalities, and other Magistrates foresaid, may be the better enquired into by
the Council, the Bishops of the respective Diocesses, are to send exact doubles
of the Lists of the Papists, and Fanatiks, to the Clerk of the Privy - Council,
whereby the diligence of the Sheriffs, and other Judges of Courts may be
comptrolled, and examined. And to cut off all hopes from Papists, and Fanatiks,
of their being employed in Offices, and Places of public trust, It is hereby
statute, and ordained, That the following Oath shall be taken by all persons in
Offices, and Places of public trust, Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military;
especially by all Members of Parliament, and all Electors of Members of
Parliament; all Privy-Councellors, Lords of Session, Members of the Exchequer,
Lords of Justitiary, and all other Members of these Courts, all Officers of the
Crown and State, all Archbishops, and Bishops, and all Preachers, and Ministers
of the Gospel whatsoever, all persons of this Kingdom, named or to be named,
Commissioners of the Borders, all Members of the Commission for Church
affairs, all Sheriffs, Steuards, Baylies of of Royalties and Regalities,
Justices of Peace, Officers of the Mint, Commisaries and their Deputies, their
Clerks, and Fiscals, all Advocats, and Procurators before any of these Courts,
all Writers to the Signet, all public Notars, and other persons employed in
writing, and agenting, The Lion King at arms, Heralds, Pursevants, Messengers
at Arms, all Collectors, Sub* Collectors, and Fermers of His Majesty's
Customs, and Excise, all Magistrates, Deans of Gild, Counselors and Clerks of
Boroughs Royal and Regality, all Deacons of trades and De^con-conveeners in the
said Burghs, all Masters and Doctors in Universities, Colleges or Schools, all
Chaplans in families, Pedagogues to children, and all Officers, and Soldiers in
Armies, Forts or Militia, And all other persons in any public Trust or office
within this Kingdom, who shall publicly swear, and subscribe the said Oath, as
follows: viz. Archbishops, Chief Commanders of the Forces, and Officers of the
Crown and State, and Counselors, before the Secret Council: all the Lords of
Session, and all members of the College of Justice, and others depending upon
them, before the Lords of Session: the Lords of lustitiary, and all these
depending upon that Court, in the Iustice-Court: the Lords, and other Members
of the Exchequer, before the exchequer; all Bishops before the Archibishops,
all the Inferior Clergy, Commisaries, Masters, and Doctors of Universities and
Schools, Chaiplans, and Pedagogues, before the Bishops of the respective
Diocesses; Sheriffs, Stewards, Baylies of Royalty and Regality, and these
depending on these Jurisdictions, before their respective Courts; all Provosts,
Baylies, and others of the Boroughs, before the Town-Council; all Collectors
and Fermers of the Kings Customs and Excise, before the Exchequer, the
Commissioners of the Borders before the Privy Council: all Justices of the
Peace before the Conveeners, and the Officers of the Mint before the General of
the Mint; and the Officers of the Forces before the Commander in chief, and
common Soldiers before their respective Officers: The Lion before the Privy
Council, and Heralds, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, before the Lion. And
His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Statutes and ordains, that all these who
presently possess and enjoy any of the foresaid offices, public Trusts, and
Employments, shall take and subscribe the following Oath in one of the foresaid
Offices in manner before prescribed betwixt -- and the first of January next,
which is to be recorded in the Registers of the respective Courts, and extracts
thereof under the Clerks hand, to be reported to His Majesty's Privy Council
betwixt -- and the first of March 1682. and hereafter in any other Courts
whereof they are Judges or Members, the first time they shall sit or exercise
in any of these respective Courts; and ordains, That all who shall hereafter be
promoted to, or employed in any of the foresaid Offices, Trusts or Employments,
shall at their entry into, and before their exercising thereof, take and
subscribe the said Oath in manner foresaid, to be recorded in the Registers of
their respective Courts, and reported to His Majesty's Privy Council, within
the space of forty days, after their taking of the same. And if any shall
presume to exercise any of the faid offices or Employments, or any public
Office or Trust within this Kingdom (the Kings Brothers and Sons only excepted)
until they take the Oath foresaid, and subscribe the same to be recorded in the
Registers of the respective Courts, they shall be declared incapable of all
public trust thereafter, and be further punished with the loss of their
movables and liferent-escheats the one half whereof is to be given to the
Informer, and the other half to belong to his Majesty; and his Majesty with
advice foresaid recommends to his Privy Council to see this Act put to due and
vigorous execution.

The TEST. Containing the Oath to be taken by all Persons in public Trust.
I Solemnly swear, in the presence of the eternal God, whom I invoke as Judge,
and witness of the sincere intention of this my Oath, That I own and sincerely
profess the true Protestant Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith /
recorded in the first Parliament of King James the VI, and that I believe the
same to be founded on, and agreeable to the written Word of God. And I promise
and swear, That I shall adhere thereunto, during all the days of my lifetime;
and shall endeavor to educate my Children therein; And shall never consent to
any change
or alteration contrary thereto, and that I disoun and renounce all such
Principles, Doctrines, or practices, whether Popish, or Fanatical which are
contrare unto, and inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and
Confession of Faith. And for testification of my obedience ^o my most gracious
Sovereign, Charles the II. I do affirm, and swear by this my solemn Oath, that
the Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all
persons, and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil: And that no
foreign Prince, Person, Pope, Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to
have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminency, or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, within this Realm. And therefore I do utterly
renounce, and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and
Authorities: And do promise, that from henceforth I shall bear Faith, and true
Allegiance to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my
power shall assist and defend all Rights, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives,
Privileges, Preferments, and Authorities belonging to the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and lawful Successors. And I further affirm and swear by this my solemn
Oath, That I judge it unlawful for Subjects, upon pretense of Reformation, or
any other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to
convocar, conveen, or assemble in any Councils, Conventions or Assemblies, to
treat, consult or determine in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastic,
without his Majesty's special command, or express license had thereto; or to
take up arms against the King, or these Commissionate by him. And that I shall
never so rise in arms, or enter into such Covenants or Assemblies: And that
there lies no obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the Solemn League
and Covenant (commonly so called) or any other manner of way whatsoever, to
endeavor any change or alteration in the Government, either in Church or
State, as it is now established by the Laws of this Kingdom. And I promise and
swear, That I shall, with my utmost power, defend, assist and maintain his
Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid against all deadly. And I shall never decline
his Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God. And finally, I
affirm and swear, That this my solemn Oath is given in the plain genuine sense,
and meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental reservation, or any
manner of evasion whatsoever; and that I shall not accept or use any
dispensation from any creature whatsoever; So help me God.

Act J. 6. P. 1. C. 3. Anno 1567. Anent the annulling of the Acts of
Parliament, made against God His Word, and for maintenance of Idolatry, in
any times bypast.
ITem, our Sovereign Lord, with advice of his dearest Regent, and three
Estates of this present Parliament, ratifies and approves the Act
underwritten, made in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the 24. day of
August, the year of God an^ thousand five hundred threescore years. And of new
in this present Parliament, statutes and ordains the said Act, to be as a
perpetual Law to all our Sovereign Lords leiges in all times coming. Of the
quhilk the tenor follows. The quhilk day, for same^^le as there has been
diverse and sundry Acts of Parliament, made in King James the I. II. III. IV.
and V's times, Kings of Scotland for the time, and also in our sovereign
Ladies time, not agreeing with Gods holy Word, and by them diverse persons take
occasion to maintain Idolatry, and Superstition, within the Kirk of God, and
rep^esse such persons as were professors of the said Word, wherethrow diverse
innocents did suffer. And for escheving such inconveniences in time coming, the
three Estates of Parliament has annulled, and declared all such Acts made in
times bypast, not agreeing with God His Word, and now contrary to the
Confession of Faith, according to the said Word, published in this Parliament,
to be of none avail, force nor effect. And decerns the said Acts and every ane
of them, to have no effect nor strength; in time to come: But the same to be
abolished and extinguished for ever in so far as any of the foresaid Acts are
repugnant, and contrary to the Confession of Faith, and Word of God foresaid,
ratified and approved by the Estates in this present Parliament. And therefore
decerns and ordains, the Contraveeners of the famine Act in any time hereafter
to be punished, according to the Laws. Of the Quhilk Confession of the Faith
the ^^nour follows.

THE Confession of the Faith, and Doctrine, Believed, and professed by the
Protestants of Scotland, exhibited to the Estates of the same in Parliament,
and by their public Vots authorized, as a Doctrine grounded upon the
infallible Word of God. As the same Confession stands recorded. Ja. 6. p. 1. c:
4. Anno 1567.
I. Of God.
WE confess, and acknowledge ane only God, to whom only we must cleave, whom
only we must serve, whom only we must worship, and in whom only we must put
our trust, who is Eternal, Infinite, Unmeasurable, Incomprehensible, Omnipotent,
Invisible, ane in substance, and yet distinct in three Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. By whom we confess and believe all things in
heaven and earth, as well Visible as Invisible; to have been created, to be
retained in their being, and to be ruled, and guided by his inscrutable
Providence, to sik end, as his Eternal Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice has
appointed them, to the manifestation of his own glory.

II. Of the Creation of Man.
WE confess and acknowledge, this our God to have created man, to wit, our
first father Adam, in his own Image and similitude, to whom he gave Wisdom,
Lordship, Justice, Free will, and clear knowledge of himself, so that in the
hail nature of man there could be noted no imperfection. Fra quhilk honor and
perfection, Man and Woman did both fall, the Woman being deceived be the
Serpent, and Man obeying the voice of the Woman, both conspiring against the
Sovereign Majesty of God, who in express words had before threatened death, if
they presumed to eat of the forbidden Tree.

III. Of Original Sin.
BE quhilk transgression, commonly called Original Sin, was the image of God
utterlie defaced in Man, and he and his posterity of nature became enemies to
God, slaves to Satan, and servants unto sin, in samiekle that death
everlasting has had; and shall have power and dominion, over all that have not
been, are not, or shall not be regenerated from above, quhilk regeneration is
wrought by the power of the holy Ghost working in the hearts of the elect of
God ane assured faith in the promise of God, revealed to us in his word, be
quilk Faith we apprehend Christ Jesus with the graces, and benefits promised in
him.

IV. Of the Revelation of the Promise.
FOR this we constantly believe, that God after the fearful and horrible
defection of man fra his obedience, did seek Adam again, call upon him, rebuke
his sin, convict him of the same, and in the end made unto him ane most joyful
promise, to wit, that the seed of the woman should break down the serpents
head, that is, he should destroy the works of the Devil; quhilk promise, as it
was repeated, and made mair clear from time to time; so was it embraced with
joy, and may constantly received of all the faithful from Adam to Noah, from
Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to David, and so forth to the incarnation of
Christ Jesus, all (we mean the faithful fathers under the law) did see the
joyful day of Christ Jesus, and did rejoice.

V. Of The continuance, increase, and preservation of the Kirk.
WE may constantly believe that God preserved, instructed, multiplied,
honored, decored, and from death called to life, his Ki^k, in all ages, fra
Adam till the coming of Christ Jesus in the flesh: For Abraham he called from
his fathers country, him he instructed, his seedhe multiplied, the same he
marvelously preserved, and mair marvelously delivered from the bondage and
tyranny of Pharaoh; to them he gave his Laws, constitutions and ceremonies,
them he possessed in the Land of Canaan, to them after Judges, and after Saul,
he gave David to be King, to whom he made promise, that of the fruit of his
Ioynes should ane sit for ever upon his regnall seat: To this same people, from
time to time, he sent Prophets to reduce them to the right way of their God,
from the quhilk oftentimes they declined, by Idolatry: and albeit that for
their stubborn contempt of justice, he was compelled to give them into the
hands of their enemies, as before was threatened by the mouth of Moses, in
sameikle that the hally City was destroyed, the temple burnt with fire, and the
hail land left desolate, the space of lxx years, yet of mercy did he reduce
them again to Jerusalem, where the City, and Temple were reedified, and they,
against all temptations and assaults of Satan, did abide till the Messiah
came, according to the promise.

VI. Of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus.
WHEN the fullness of time came, God sent his Son, his eternal wisdom, the
substance of his own glory, into this World, who took the nature of man-head of
the substance of woman, to wit of a virgin, and that by operation of the Holy
Ghost, and so was born the just seed of ^avid, the Angel of the great counsel
of God, the very Messiah promised, whom we confess and acknowledge Emmanuel,
very God and very man, two perfect natures united, and joined in one person. By
quhilk our Confession we condemn the damnable, and pestilent herefies of
Arrius, Marchion, Eutiches, Nest^rius, and sik others, as either did deny the
eternity of his Godhead, or the verity of his human nature, or confounded
them, or yet divided them.

VII. Why it behoved the Mediator to be very God, and very man.
WE acknowledge, and confess, that this may wondrous conjunction betwixt the
Godhead, and the man-head in Christ Jesus, did proceed from the eternal and
immutable decree of God, from quhilk all our salvation springs, and depends.

VIII. Of Election.
FOR that same eternal God and Father, who of mere grace elected us in Christ
Jesus his son, before the foundation of the World was laid, appointed him to be
our head, our brother, our pastor, and great Bishop of our souls: But because
that the enmity betwixt the justice of God and our sins was sik, that no flesh
by it self could, or might have attained unto God, it behoved that the Son of
God should descend unto us, and take to himself a body of our body, flesh of
our flesh, and bone of our bones, and so become the Mediator betwixt God and
man, giving power to so many as believe in him to be the sons of God, as
himself does witness. I pass up to my Father, and to your Father, to my God,
and to your God: Be quhilk may haly fraternity whatsoever we have tynt in
Adam is restored unto us again: And for this cause we are not afraid to call
God our Father, not sameikle because he has created us quhilk we have common
with the reprobate) as for that, that he has given to us his only Son, to be
our brother, and given unto us grace to acknowledge and embrace him for our
only Mediator as before is said; it behoved farther the Messiah and Redeemer to
be very God and very man, because he was to underly the punishment due for our
transgressions, and to prefent himself in the presence of his Fathers
Judgment, as in our person, to suffer for our transgression, and inobedience,
by death to overcome him that was author of death. But because the only
Godhead could not fuffer death, neither yet could the only man-head overcome
the samine, he joined both together in one person, that the imbecility of the
ane should suffer, and be subject to death (quilk we had deserved) And the
infinite and invincible power of the other, to wit, of the goodhead should
triumph, and purchase to us life, liberty, and perpetual victory: And so we
confess, and may undoubtedly believe.

IX. Of Christ's Death, Passion, and Burial.
THAT our Lord Jesus offered himself a voluntary Sacrifice unto his Father for
us, that he suffered contradiction of sinners, that he was wounded, and plagued
for our transgressions, that he being the clean innocent Lamb of God, was
damned in the presence of ane earthly Judge, that we should be absolved before
the tribunal seat of our God, that he suffered not only the cruel death of the
Cross [quhilk was accursed by the sentence of God,] but also that he suffered
for a season the wrath of his Father, quhilk sinners had deserved. But yet we
avow, that he remained the only well-beloved and blessed Son of his Father,
even in the midst of his anguish, and torment, quhilk he suffered in body and
soul, to make the full satisfaction for the sins of his people. After the
quhilk, we confess, and avow that there remains no other Sacrifice for sin,
quhilk if any affirm, we nothing doubt to avow, that they are blasphemous
against Christ's death, and the everlasting purgation, and satisfaction
purchased to us by the same.

X. Of his Resurrection.
WE undoubtedly believe, that in samiekle as it was impossible that the dolours
of death should retain in bondage the Author of life, that our LORD JESUS
crucified, dead, and buried, who descended into hell, did rise again, for our
justification, and destroying him who was the Author of death, brought life
again to us that were subject to death, and to the bondage of the same. We
know, that his Resurrection was confirmed by the testimony of his very enemies,
by the Resurrection of the dead, whose Sepulchers did open, and they did rise,
and appeared to many, within the City Jerusalem. It was also confirmed by the
testimony of his Angels, and by the senses, and judgments of his Apostles, and
of others, who had conversation, and did eat and drink with him, after his
Resurrection.

XI. Of his Ascension,
WE nothing doubt, but the self-same body, quhilk was born of the Virgin, was
crucified, dead, and buried, and quhilk did rise again, did ascend into the
heavens, for the accomplishment of all things, where, in our names, and for our
comfort, he has received all power in heaven, and earth, where he sits at the
right hand of the Father, inaugurate in his Kingdom, Advocate and only
Mediator for us. Quhilk Glory, Honor and Prerogative, he alone among the
brethren sall possess, till that all his Enemies be made his fotostool, as that
we undoubtedly believe they sall be in the final judgment: To the execution
whereof we certainly
believe, that the same our Lord Jesus sall as visibly return, as that he was
seen to ascend. And then we firmly believe, that the time of refreshing and
restitution of all things sall come, in samiekle that they that fra the
beginning have suffered violence, injury and wrong, for righteousness sake,
sall inherit that blessed immortality promised fra the beginning. But
contrariwise, the stubborn, inobedient, cruel oppressors, filthy persons,
idolaters, and all such sorts of unfaithful, sall be cast into the dungeon of
utter darkness, where the worm sall not die, neither yet their fire sall be
extinguished. The remembrance of quhilk day, and of the judgment to be
executed in the same, is not only to us a bridle, whereby our carnal lusts are
refrained, but also such inesteemabe comfort, that neither may the threatening
of Worldly Princes, neither yet the fear of temporal death, and present danger,
move us to renounce and forsake that blessed society which we the members have
with our Head and only Mediator, Christ Jesus, whom we confess and avow to be
the Messiah promised, the only head of his Kirk, our just Lawgiver, our only
high Priest, Advocate and Mediator: In which Honors and Offices, if Manor
Angel presume to intrude themselves, we utterly detest and abhor them, as
blasphemous to our Sovereign and Supreme Governor, Christ Jesus.


XII. Of Faith in the Holy Ghost.
THis our Faith, and the assurance of the same, proceeds not from flesh and
blood; that is to say, from no natural powers within us, but is the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost: Whom we confess God equal with the Father, and with the Son,
who sanctifies us, and brings us in all verity, by his own operation, without
whom we should remain for ever enemies to God, and ignorant of his Son Christ
Jesus: For of nature we are so dead, so blind, and so perverse, that neither
can we feel when we are pricked, see the light when it shines, nor assent to
the will of God when it is revealed, unless the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
quicken that which is dead, remove the darkness from our minds, and bow our
stubborn hearts to the obedience of his blessed will. And so as we confess,
that God the Father created us, when we were not: As his Son, our Lord Jesus,
redeemed us, when we were enemies to him; so also do we confess, that the Holy
Ghost does sanctify, and regenerate us, without all respect of any merit
proceeding from us; be it before, or be it after our Regeneration. To speak
this one thing yet in more plain words: As we willingly spoil our selves of all
honor, and glory of our own Creation, and Redemption; so do we also of our
Regeneration, and Sanctification: For of our selves we are not sufficient to
think one good thought, but he who has begun the work in us is only he that
continues us in the same, to the praise and glory of his undeserved Grace.

XIII. Of The cause of good works.
SO that the cause of good works, we confess to be not our free will, but the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, who dwelling in our hearts by true faith, brings
forth such works as God has prepared for us to walk in. For this we most boldly
affirm, that blasphemy it is to say, that Christ abides in the hearts of such
as in whom there is no Spirit of Sanctification. And therefore we fear not to
affirm, that Murderers, Oppressors, cruel Persecutors, Adulterers;
Whoremongers, filthy Persons, Idolaters, Drunkards, Thieves, and all workers of
Iniquity, have neither true Faith, neither any portion of the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus, so long as obstinately they continue in their wickedness. For how
soon that ever the Spirit of the Lord Jesus [which Gods elect children receive
by true Faith] takes possession in the heart of any man, so soon does he
regenerate, and renew the same man. So that he begins to hate that which before
he loved, and begins to love that which before he hated, and from thence comes
that continual battle which is betwixt the Flesh, and the Spirit in Gods
Children; still the flesh and natural man, according to its own corruption,
lusts for things pleasant and delectable unto it self, and grudges in
adversity, is lifted up in prosperity, and at every moment is prone and ready
to offend the Majesty of God. But the Spirit of God, which gives witnessing to
our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God, makes us to resist filthy pleasures,
and to groan in Gods presence, for deliverance from this bondage of corruption.
And finally, to triumph over sin, that it reign not in our mortal bodies. This
battle has not the carnal man, being destitute of Gods Spirit, but does
follow, and obey sin with greediness, and without repentance, even as the
Devil, and their corrupt Lusts do prick them. But the Sons of God, as before
was said, do fight against sin, do sob and mourn, when they perceive themselves
tempted in iniquity: and if they fall, they rise again with earnest and
unfeigned repentance, and these things they do not by their own power, but by
the power of the Lord Jesus, without whom they were able to do nothing.

XIV. What works are reputed good before God.
WE confess and acknowledge, that God has given to man his holy Law, in which
not only are forbidden all such work as displease, and offend his godly
Majesty, but also are commanded all such as please him, and as he has promised
to reward. And these works be of two sorts. The one is done to the honor of
God, the other to the profit of our Neighbors: and both have the revealed will
of God for their assurance. To have one God, to worship, and honor him, to
call upon him in all our troubles, to reverence his holy Name, to hear his
word, to believe the same, to communicate with his holy Sacraments, are the
works of the first Table. To honor Father, Mother, Princes, Rulers, and
Superior Powers: to love them, to support them, yea to obey their charges (not
repugning to the commandment of God) to save the lives of Innocents,
to repress Tyranny, to defend the oppressed, to keep our bodies clean and
holy, to live in soberness,
and temperance, to deal justly with all men both in word and deed: And
finally, to repress all appetite of our Neighbors hurt, are the good works of
the second Table, which are most pleasing and acceptable unto God, as those
works that are commanded by himself: The contrary whereof is sin most odious,
which always displeases him, and provokes him to anger; As not to call upon him
alone, when we have need, nor to hear his word with reverence, to contemn and
despise it, to have or to worship Idols, to maintain, and defend Idolatry,
lightly to esteem the reverend name of God, to profane, abuse, or contemn the
Sacraments of Christ Jesus, to disobey or resist any that God has placed in
Authority [while they pass not over the bounds of their
Office] to murder; or to consent thereto, to bear hatred, or to let Innocent
blood be shed, if we may withstand it. And finally, the trangression of any
other commandment in the first or second Table, we confess and affirm to be
sin, by the which Gods anger and displeasure is kindled against the proud
unthankful world. So that good works we affirm to be those only, that are done
in Faith, and at Gods commandment, who in his Law has expressed what the things
be that please him. And evil works we affirm to be not only those that expressly
are done against Gods commandment; but those also that in matters of Religion,
and worshipping of God, has no other
assurance but the invention and opinion of man: which God from the beginning
has ever rejected, as by the Prophet Esaias, and by our Master Christ Jesus, we
are taught in these words, Invain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the precepts of men.

XV. Of The perfection of the Law, and the imperfection of Man.
THe Law of God we confess, and acknowledge most just, most equal, most holy,
and most perfect, commanding those things which being wrought in perfection,
were able to give life, and able to bring man to eternal felicity. But our
nature is so corrupt, so weak, and so imperfect, that we are never able to
fulfill the works of the Law in perfection. Yea, if we say we have no sin, even
after we are regenerated, we deceive our selves, and the verity of God is not
in us. And therefore it behooves us to apprehend Christ Jesus, with his Justice,
and Satisfaction, who is the end, and accomplishment of the Law, by whom we are
set at this liberty, that the Curse, and Malediction of God fall not upon us,
albeit we fulfill not the same in all points. For God the Father beholding us in
the body of his Son Christ Jesus, accepts our imperfect obedience, as it were
perfect, and covers our works, which are defiled with many spots, with the
Justice of his Son. We do not mean, that we are so let at liberty, that we owe
no obedience to the Law (for that before we have plainly confessed,) but this
we affirm, that no man in earth (Christ Jesus only except) has given, gives, or
shall give in work, that obedience to the Law, which the Law requires. But when
we have done all things, we must fall down, and unfeignedly confess, that we
are unprofitable Servants. And therefore whosoever boasts themselves of the
merits of their own works, or put their trust in the works of Supererogation,
boast themselves in that which is naught, and put their trust in damnable
Idolatry.

XVI. Of the Kirk.
AS we believe in one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; so do we most
constantly believe, that from the beginning there has been, and now is, and to
the end of the World shall be, one Kirk; that is to say, one company and
multitude of men chosen of God, who rightly worship, and embrace him by true
Faith in Christ Jesus, who is the only Head of the same Kirk, which also
is the Body, and Spouse of Christ Jesus, which Kirk is Catholic, that is,
Universal, because it contains the Elect of all ages, of all Realms, Nations,
and Tongues, be they of the Jews, or be they of the Gentiles, who have
Communion, and Society with God the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus,
through the Sanctification of his Holy Spirit; and therefore it is called the
Communion, not of profane persons, but of Saints, who as Citizens of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, have the fruition of the most inestimable benefits, to wit,
of one God, one Lord Jesus, one Faith, and one Baptism: Out of the which Kirk
there is no other life, nor eternal felicity. And therefore we utterly abhor
the blasphemy of them that affirm, that men which live according to Equity, and
Justice shall be saved, what Religion that ever they have professed: For as
without Christ Jesus there is no other Life nor Salvation; so shall there none
be participant thereof, but such as the Father has given unto his Son Christ
Jesus, and they that in time come unto him, avow his Doctrine, and believe into
him (we comprehend the Children with the faithful Parents.) This Kirk is
invisible, known only to God, who alone knows whom he has chosen, and
comprehends as well (as said is) the Elect that be departed* commonly called
the Kirk triumphant, as those that yet live, and fight against sin, and Satan,
and shall live hereafter.

XVII. Of The Immortality of the Soul.
THe Elect departed are in peace, and rest from their labors: not that they
sleep, and come to a certain oblivion, as some Phantasticks do affirm: but that
they are delivered from all fear, and torment, and all temptation, to which we,
and all God's Elect are subject in this life; and therefere do bear the name of
the Kirk-Militant: As contrary wise, the reprobate, and unfaithful departed,
have anguish, torment, and pain, that cannot be expressed: So that neither are
the one nor the other in such sleep, that they feel not their happiness nor
torment, as the Parable of Christ Jesus in the 16. of Luke, his words to the
Thief, and these words of the Souls crying under the Altar: O Lord, thou that
art righteous, and just, How long shall thou not revenge our blood upon these
that dwell in the earth? does declare.

XVIII. Of the Notes by the which the true Kirk is discerned from the false,
and who shall be Judge of the Doctrine.
BEcause that Satan from the beginning has labored to deck his pestilent
Synagogue with the title of the Kirk of God, and has inflammed the hearts of
cruel murderers, to persecute, trouble, and molest the true Kirk, and Members
thereof, as Cain did Ab^l, Ishmael Isaac, Esau Jacob, and the whole Priesthood
of the Jews, Christ Jesus himself, and his Apostles after him. It is one thing
most requisite, that the true Kirk be discerned from the filthy Synagogues, by
clear, and perfect Notes, lest we being deceived, receive and embrace to our
own condemnation, the one for the other. The notes, signs, and assured tokens,
whereby the immaculate Spouse of Christ Jesus is known from the horrible
Harlot, the Kirk Malignant, we affirm, are neither Antiquity, Title usurped,
Lineal descent, Place appointed, nor Multitude of men approving ane error: Cain
in Age and Title was preferred to Abel and Seth: Jerusalem had prerogative
above all places of the earth, where also were the Priests lineally descended
from Aaron. And greater numbers followed the Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests,
than unfeignedly believed and approved Christ Jesus, and his Doctrine: And yet
as we suppose, no man of sound judgment will grant, that any of the forenamed
were the Kirk of God. The notes therefore of the true Kirk of God, we believe,
confess, and avow to be, first, the true preaching of the Word of God, in the
which God has revealed himself unto us, as the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles do declare. Secondly, the right Administration of the Sacraments of
Christ Jesus, which must be annexed unto the word, and promise of God, to seal,
and confirm the same in our hearts. Lastly, Ecclesiastical Discipline uprightly
ministered, as God's Word prescribes, whereby Vice is repressed, and Virtue
nourished. Wheresoever then these former notes are seen, and of any time
continue (be
the number never so few, about two or three) there without all doubt is the
true Kirk of Christ, who according unto his promise, is in the midst of them:
Not that universal, of which we have before spoken, but particular, such as was
in Corintbus, Galatia, Ephesus, and other places, in which the Ministry was
planted by Paul, and were of himself named the Kirks of God: and such Kirks we
the Inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, Professors of Christ Jesus, profess
our selves to have in our Cities, Towns, and places reformed: For the Doctrine
taught in our Kirks is contained in the written Word of Godto wit, in the Books
of the Old and New Testament, in those Books, we mean, which of the Ancients
have been reputed Canonical. In the which we affirm, that all things necessary
to be believed, for the salvation of Mankind, is sufficiently expressed. The
interpretation whereof, we confess, neither appertains to private nor public
persons, neither yet to any Kirk* for any pre-eminence, or prerogative,
personally and locally, which one has above another, but appertains to the
Spirit of God, by the which also the Scripture was written. When controversy
then happens, for the right understanding of any place, or sentence of
Scripture, or for the reformation of any abuse within the Kirk of God, we ought
not so much to look what men before us have said or done, as unto that which
the H. Ghost uniformly speaks, within the body of the Scriptures, and unto that
which Christ Jesus himself did, and commanded to be done. For this is one thing
universally granted, that the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of Unity, is
in nothing contrarious unto himself. If then the Interpretation, Determination,
or Sentence of any Doctor, Kirk or Council, repugne to the plain word of God,
written in any other place of the Scripture, it is a thing most certain, that
there is not the true understanding and meaning of the Holy Ghost, although that
Coun cils, Realms and Nations have approved, and received the same: For we dare
not receive nor admit any interpretation, which repugnes to any principal point
of our faith, or to any other plain text of Scripture, or yet unto the rule of
charity.

XIX. Of The Authority of the Scriptures.
AS we believe, and confess the Scriptures of God sufficient to instruct, and
make the man of God perfect; so do we affirm, and avow the Authority of the
same, to be of God, and neither to depend on Men, nor Angels. We affirm
therefore, that such as alledg the Scripture, to have no other Authority, but
that which it has received from the Kirk, to be blasphemous against God, and
^njurious to the true Kirk, which always hears, and obeys the voice of her own
Spouse, and Pastor, but takes not upon her to be Mistres over the same.

XX. Of General Councils, of their Power, Authority, and cause of their
Convention.
AS we do not rashly damn that which godly men assembled together in General
Council, lawfully gathered, have proponed unto us; so without just examination,
dare we not receive whatsoever is obtruded unto men under the name of General
Councils: For plain it is, as they were men, so have some of them manifestly
erred, and that in matters of great weight and importance. So far then as the
Council proves the determination, and commandment that it gives, by the plain
word of God, so soon do we reverence and embrace the same. But if men under the
name of a Council, pretend to forge unto us new Articles of our Faith, or to
make Constitutions repugning to the Word of God, then utterly we must refuse
the same, as the Doctrine of Devils, which draws our souls from the voice of
our only God, to follow the Doctrines and Constitutions of men. The cause then
why that General Councils conveened, was neither to make any perpetual Law,
which God before had not made, neither yet to forge new Articles of our
Belief, nor to give the Word of God Authority, much less to make that to be
his Word, or yet the true Interpretation of the same, which was not before, by
his holy will, expressed in his word: But the cause of Councils (we mean of
such as merit the name of Councils) was partly for confutation of Heresies, and
for giving public confession of their Faith to Posterity following, which both
they did by the authority of Gods written Word, and not by any Opinion or
Prerogative, that they could not err, by reason of their general Assembly-And
this we judge to have been the chief cause of General Councils. The other was
for good Policy, and Order to be constitute, and observed in the Kirk, in which
(as in the house of God) it becomes, all things to be done decently, and in
order. Not that we think, that any policy, and order in Ceremonies, can be
appointed for all ages, times, and places: For as Ceremonies, such as men have
devised, are but temporal, so may, and ought they to be changed, when they
rather foster Superstition, than that they edify the Kirk, using the same.

XXI. Of the Sacraments.
AS the Fathers under the Law, besides the verity of the Sacrifices, had two
chief Sacraments, to wit, Circumcision and the Passover, the despisers and
contemners whereof were not reputed of Gods People; so do we acknowledge and
confess, that we now in the time of the Evangel, have two chief Sacraments only
instituted by the Lord Jesus, and commanded to be used of all these that will
be re^uted Members of his Body; to wit, Baptism, and the Supper or Table of the
Lord Jesus, called the Communion of his Body and Blood. And these Sacraments as
well of Old, as New Testament, were instituted of God, not only to make a
visible difference betwixt his People, and these that were without his League;
but also to exercise the faith of his Children, and by participation of the
same Sacraments to seal in their hearts the assurance of his promise, and of
that most blessed conjunction, union and society, which the Elect have with
their, Head Christ Jesus. And thus we utterly damn the vanity of them, that
affirm Sacraments to be nothing else but naked and bare signs. No, we assuredly
believe, that by Baptism we are ingrafted in Christ Jesus, to be made pertakers
of his Justice, by which our sins are covered and remitted. And also that in
the Supper rightly used, Christ Jesus is so joined with us, that he becomes
very nourishment, and food of our souls. Not that we imagine any
Transubstantiation of Bread into Christ's natural Body, and of Wine into his
natural Blood, as the Papists have perniciously taught, and damnably believed;
but this Union and Conjunction which we have with the Body and Blood of Christ
Jesus, in the right use of the Sacraments, is wrought by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, who by true faith carries us above all things that are visible,
carnal, and earthly, and makes us to feed upon the Body and Blood of Christ
Jesus, which was once broken and shed for us; who now is in Heaven, and appears
in the presence of his Father for us: And yet notwithstanding the far distance
of place which is betwixt his body now glorified in Heaven, and us now mortal
in this earth; yet we most assuredly believe, that the bread which we break, is
the Communion of Christ's Body, and the Cup which we bless, is the Communion of
his Blood. So that we confess, and undoubtedly believe that the faithful in the
right use of the Lords Table, do so eat the Body and drink the Blood of the
Lord Jesus, that he remains in them, and they in him. Yea, they are so made
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, that as the eternal Godhead has
given to the flesh of Christ Jesus (which of its own condition and nature, was
mortal and corruptible) life and immortality; so does Christ Jesus his flesh
and blood eaten and drunken by us, give unto us the same Prerogatives. Which
albeit we confess are neither given unto us at that time only, neither yet by
the proper power and virtue of the Sacrament only; yet we affirm that the
faithful in the right use of the Lords Table has such Conjunction with Christ
Jesus, as the natural man cannot apprehend. Yea, and further we affirm, That
albeit the faithful oppressed by negligence, and manly infirmity, does not
profit, so much as they would, in the very instant Action of the Supper; yet
shall it after bring fruit forth, as lively seed sown in good ground. For the
Holy Spirit which can never be divided from the right Institution of the Lord
Jesus, will not frustrate the faithful of the fruit of that mystical Action;
but all this, we say, comes of true faith, which apprehends Christ Jesus, who
only makes this Sacrament effectual unto us. And therefore whosoever slanders
us, as that we affirm or believe Sacraments to be naked and bare signs, do
injury unto us, and speak against the manifest truth. But this liberally and
frankly we consess, that we make a distinction betwixt Christ Jesus in his
Eternal substance, and betwixt the Elements in the sacramental signs; so that
we will neither worship the signs in the place of that which is signified by
them; neither yet do we despise and interpret them as junprofitable and vain,
but do use them with all reverence, examining our selves diligently, before
that so we do; because we are assured by the mouth of the Apostle, that such as
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup unworthily, are guilty of the Body,
and Blood of Christ Jesus.

XXII. Of the right Administration of the Sacraments.
THAT Sacraments be rightly ministered, we judge two things requisite: the one,
that they be ministered by lawful Ministers, whom we affirm to be only these
that are appointed to the preaching of the word, into whose mouths God has put
some sermon of Exhortation, they being men lawfully chosen thereto by some
Kirk. The other, that they be ministered in such Elements, and in such sort as
God has appointed, else we affirm that they cease to be the right Sacraments
of Christ Jesus. And therefore it is, that we fly the Doctrine of the
Papistical Kirk in participation of their Sacraments. First, because their
Ministers are no Ministers of Christ Jesus; yea (which is more horrible) they
suffer Women, whom the Holy Ghost will not suffer to teach in the Congregation,
to Baptize. And secondly, because they have so adulterated both the one
Sacrament, and the other, with their own inventions, that no part of Christ's
Action
abides in the original purity: For Oil, Salt, Spitle, and such like in
Baptism, are but men's inventions; Adoration, Veneration, bearing throw Streets
and Towns, and keeping of bread in boxes, are Profanation of Christ's
Sacraments, and no use of the same. For Christ Jesus said, Take, eat, etc. do
ye this in rememberance of me: By which words and charge he sanctified Bread
and Wine to the Sacrament of his Holy Body and Blood, to the end that the one
should be eaten, and that all should drink of the other, and not that they
should be kept to be worshipped, and honored as God, as the Papists have
done heretofore, who also committed Sacriledg, stealing from the people the one
part of the Sacrament, to wit, the blessed Cup. Moreover, that the Sacraments
be rightly used, it is required, that the end, and cause why the Sacraments
were institute, be understood and observed, as well of the Ministers as the
Receivers: For if the opinion be changed in the Receiver, the right use ceases,
which is most evident by the rejection of the Sacrifice; as also if the Teacher
plainly teach false Doctrines, which were odious and abominable before God
(albeit they were his own Ordinance) because that wicked men use them to
another end than God has ordained: The same affirm we of the Sacraments in the
Papistical Kirk; in which we affirm the whole action of the Lord Jesus to be
adulterated, as well in the external form, as in the end and opinion. What
Christ Jesus did, and commanded to be done, is evident by the Evangelists, and
by Saint Paul: What the Priest does at his Altar we need not to rehearse. The
end and cause of Christ's institution, and why the selfsame should be used, is
expressed in these words, Do ye this in rememberance of me; as often as ye shall
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show forth, that is, extol,
preach, magnify and praise the Lords death, till he come. But to what end, and
in what opinion, the Priests say their Mass, let the words of the same, their
own Doctors; and Writings witness: to wit, that they, as Mediators betwixt
Christ and his Kirk, do offer unto God the Father, a Sacrifice propitiatory for
the sins of the quick and the dead; Which Doctrine as blasphemous to Christ
Jesus, and making derogation to the sufficiency of his only sacrifice, once
oftered for Purgation of all these that shall be sanctified, we utterly abhor,
detest, and renounce.

XXIII. To whom Sacraments appertain
WE confess and acknowledge, that Baptism appertains as well to the Infants of
the faithful, as unto them that be of age, and discretion; and so we damn the
error of the Anabaptists, who deny Baptism to appertain to children, before
that they have Faith, and Understanding: but the Supper of the Lord, we confess
to appertain to such only as be of the household of Faith, and can try and
examine themselves, as well in their Faith, as in their duty toward their
Neighbors. Such as eat, and drink at that holy Table, without Faith, or being
at dissension, and division with their brethren, do eat unworthily. And
therefore it is, that in our Kirk, our Ministers take public, and particular
examination of the knowledge, and conversation of such as are to be admitted to
the Table of the Lord Jesus.

XXIV. Of the Civil Magistrate.
WE confess and acknowledge, Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions and Cities, to be
distincted, and ordained by God: the powers and authority in the same, be it of
Emperors in their Empires, of Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in their
Dominions, and of other Magistrates in the Cities, to be Gods holy Ordinance,
ordained for manifestation of his own Glory, and for the singular profit, and
commodity of Mankind: So that whosoever goes about to take away, or to
confound the whole state of Civil Policies, now long established, we affirm the
same men, not only to be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against
God's express will. We farther confess and acknowledge, that such persons as are
placed in Authority are to be loved, honored, feared, and holden in most
reverent estimation; because that they are the Lieutenants of God, in whose
Sessions God himself does sit and judge: yea, even the Judges and Princes
themselves, to whom by God is given the sword, to the praise and defense of
good men, and to revenge and punish all open malefactors. Moreover to Kings,
Princes, Rulers and Magistrates, we affirm, that chiefly and most principally
the conservation and purgation of the Religion appertains; so that not only
they are appointed for Civil Policy, but also for maintenance of the true
Religion, and for suppressing of Idolatry and Superstition whatsoever, as in
David, Iehosaphat Ezechias, I^sias, and others highly commended for their zeal,
in that case, may be espied. And therefore we confess and avow, that such as
resist the supreme Power, doing that thing which appertains to his charge do
resist Gods Ordinance: and
therefore cannot be guiltless. And farther we affirm, that whosoever denies
unto them their aid, counsel and comfort, whist the Princes and Rulers
vigilantly travel in execution of their Office, that
the same men deny their help, support, and counsel to God, who by the presence
of his Lieutenant does crave it of them.

XXV. Of the gifts, freely given to the Kirk.
ALbeit the word of God truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly ministered,
and Discipline executed, according to the word of God, be the certain and
infallible signs of the true Kirk; we mean not, that every particular person
joined with such company, be an elect member of Christ jesus: For we acknowledge
and confess, that dornel, cockle and chaff, may be sown, grow, and in great
abundancely in the midst of the wheat; that is, the Reprobate may be joined in
the society of the Elect, and may externally use with them the benefits of the
word and Sacraments: But such being but temporal professors, in mouth, but not
in heart, do fall back, and continue not to the end: And therefore have they no
fruit of Christ's Death, Resurrection, nor Ascension: but such as with heart
unfeignedly believe, and with mouth boldly confess the Lord Jesus, as before we
have said, shall most assuredly receive these gifts. First, In this life,
remission of sins, and that by only Faith in Christ's blood, in so much, that
albeit sin remains, and continually abides in these our mortal bodies, yet it
is not imputed unto us, but is remitted, and covered with Christ's Justice.
Secondly, in the general Judgment there shall be given, to everyman, and woman,
resurrection of the flesh: for the Sea shall give her dead; the Earth these
that therein be enclosed: yea, the Eternal God shall stretch out his hand on
the dust, and the dead shall arise uncorruptible, and that in the substance of
the self-same flesh that every man now bears, to receive according to their
works, glory, or punishment: For such as now delight in vanity, cruelty,
filthiness, superstition or idolatry, shall be adjudged to the fire
unquenchable, in which they shall be tormented for ever, as well in their
bodies as in their souls, which now they give to serve the Devil in all
abomination. But such as continue in well-doing to the end, boldly professing
the Lord Jesus, we constantly believe, that they shall receive glory, honor
and immortality, to reign for ever in life everlasting with Christ Jesus, to
whose glorified body all his Elect shall be made like, when he shall appear
again in Judgment, and shall render up the Kingdom to God his Father, who then
shall be, and ever shall remain, in all things, God blessed for ever: To whom,
with the Son, and with the Holy Ghost, se all honor and glory now and ever. So
be it. Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be confounded, let them flee from
thy presence that hate thy godly Name. Give thy Servants strength to speak thy
Word in boldness^; and let all Nations cleave to thy true Knowledge Amen.



Their Acts, and Articles, were read in the face of Parliament, and ratified by
the three Estates, at Edinburgh, the 17. day of August, the year of God 1560.
years.

Act I. 6. P. 1. C. 8. Anno 1567. Anent the Kings Aith to be given at His
Coronation.
ITem, Because that the increase of virtue, and suppressing of Idolatry,
craves, that the Prince, and the People be of ane perfect Religion, quhilk of
Gods mercy is now presently professed, within this Realm: Therefore it is
statute, and ordained, be our Sovereign Lord, my Lord Regent, and the three
Estates of this present Parliament, that all Kings, and Princes, or Magistrates
whatsoever, holding their place, quhilk hereafter in any time sall happen to
reign, and bear rule over this realm, at the time of their Coronation, and
receipt of their Princely Authority, make their faithful promise be aith, in
presence of the eternal God, that during the haill course of their lives, they
sall serve the samin eternal God, to the uttermost of their power, according
as he hes required in his may haly Word* revieled and contained in the new,
and auld Testaments: And, according to the samin word, sall maintain the true
Religion of Christ Jesus, the preaching of his halie word, and due and right
ministration of the Sacraments, now received, and preached within this realm.
And sall abolish, and gainstand all false Religion, contrare to the samin: And
sall rule the people committed to their charge, according to the will, and
command of God, revealed in his foresaid Word, and according to the laudable
Laws, and Constitutions, received in this realm, nawise repugnant to the said
Word of the eternal God: And sall procure to the uttermaist of their power, to
the Kirk of God, and haill Christian people, true and perfect peace, in all
time cumming: The Rights, and rents, with all just Privileges of the Croun of
Scotland, to preserve, and keep inviolated nouther sall they transfer, nor
alienate the samin: They sall forbid, and repress, in all estates, and degrees
reife, oppression, and all kind of wrang. In all judgments, they sall
command, and procure that justice, and equity de kept to all creatures,
without exception, as the Lord and father of all mercies be mereyful to them.
And out of their Lands, and Empire, they sall be careful to root out all
heretics, and enemies to the true worship of God, that shall be convict be the
true Kirk of God, of the foresaid crimes; And that they fall faithfully
affirm the things above written be their solemn aith.

Act. J. 6. P. 1. C. 9. Anno 1567. No person may be judge, Procurator, Notar,
nor Member of Court, quha professis not the Religion.
ITem, The Kings grace, with advice of my Lord Regent, and the three Estates of
this present Parliament, statutes and ordains, That no manner of person, nor
persons, be received, in any times hereafter, to bear public office removabill
of judgment, within this Realm, but sik as profess the purity of Religion and
Doctrine, now presently established. And that nane be permitted to procure, nor
admitted Notar, or created a M^mber of Court, in any time coming, without he in
likewise profess the Evangel, and Religion foresaid. Providing always, that
this Act be on no - wise extended to any manner of person, or persons, havand
their offices heritable or in life-rent, but that they may use the samin,
conform to their infeftments, and dispositions granted to them thereof:

Which Act was thereafter Anno 1609. explained and extended in this manner.

Part of the Act I. 6. P. 2. C. 5. Anno 1609. entitled etc.
AND that the Act made in His Highness first Parliament, bearing that nane that
profess not the true Religion, presently professed, within this Realm, may be
judge, Procurator or Member of Court, be extended to all and whatsomever
offices, without any exception, or restriction, in all time coming.

Act. J. 6. P. 3. C. 47. Anno 1572. Adversaries of the true Religion are not
Subjects of the King. Of Apostats.
ITem, Forsameikle as there hes been great rebellion, and disobedience against
our Sovereign Lords authority, in time bypast, and seeing the cause of Gods
true Religion, and His Highness authority foresaid, are so joined, as the hurt
of the ane is common to both. It is therefore declared, statute, and ordained,
by our Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of his Regents grace, with the
three Estates, and hail body of this present Parliament: That nane shall be
repute as loyal, and faithful Subjects to our said Sovereign Lord, or his
Authority, but be punishable, as Rebellars, and Gainstanders of the samine,
quhilk shall not give their confession, and make their profession of the said
true Religion: And that all sik as makes profession thereof, and yet hes made
defection fra their dew obedience ought to our Sovereign Lord, shall be
admonished be the Pastors, and Ministers of the Kirk, to acknowledge their
offense, and turn to their dutieful obedience: And, if they failzie therein, to
be excommunicat, and secluded from the Society of the Kirk, as rebellious, and
corrupt Members, betwixt and the first of Jun: nixt to come; and that always
before sik persons as hes made defection be received to our Sovereign Lords
mercy, and favor, they shall give the Confession of their Faith, of new, and
promise to continue in the Confession of the true Religion, in time coming, and
maintain our Sovereign Lords Authority, and that they shall at the utmost of
their power, fortify, assist and maintain, the true Preachers, and Professors
of Christ's Religion, against whatsomever enemies, and gainstanders of the same;
and namely, against all sik of whatsomever Nation, Estate, or degree they be
of, that hes joined, and bound themselves, or hes assisted, or assist to set
forward, and execut the cruel decreits of the Council of Trent, (quhilk most
injuriously is called by the adversaries of Gods Truth, the halie league)
contrary the Preachers, and true Professors of the Word of God.

Many other Acts, and these most peremptory, and strict, against the Popish
Religion, as Idolatry, and very pernicious to the Kingdom, might here be
added; But these are set down as most apposite to the purpose, and the rest may
be seen at length in the printed Acts of Parliament.

Act Chapter 2. P. 2. C. 1. Anno 1669. Act asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over
all Persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastik.
THE Estates of Parliament having seriously considered, how necessary it is,
for the good, and peace of Church and State, that His Majesty's Power, and
Authority, in relation to matters, and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
asserted, by ane Act of Parliament: Have therefore thought fit it be enacted,
asserted, and declared: Likeas, His Majesty, with advice, and consent of his
Estates of Parliament, does hereby enact; assert, and declare, that His Majesty
has the supreme Authority, and Supremacy over all Persons, and in all causes
Ecclesiastical within this his Kingdom: And that by virtue thereof, the
ordering, and disposal of the external Government, and Policy of the Church,
does properly belong to His Majesty, and his Successors, as ane inherent right
of the Crown, and that His Majesty, and his Successors, may setle, enact, and
emit such Constitutions, Acts, and Orders, concerning the administration of the
external Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and
concerning all Ecclesiastical meetings, and matters, to be proposed, and
determined therein, as they, in their Royal Wisdom shall think fit. Which Acts,
Orders, and Constitutions, being recorded in the Books of Council, and duly
published, are to be observed, and obeyed by all His Majesty's Subjects, any
Law, Act, or Custom, to the contrary, notwithstanding: likeas, His Majesty,
with advice, and consent foresaid, does rescind, and annull all Laws. Acts,
and Clauses thereof, and all Customs, and Constitions, Civil, or Ecclesiastic,
which are contrary to, or inconsistent with His Majesty's Supremacy, as it is
hereby asserted, and declares the same void, and null, in all time coming.

The Bishop of Aberdeen, and the Synods Explanation of the Test.
I. WE do not hereby swear to all the particular Assertions and Expressions of
the Confession of Faith; mentioned in the Test, but only to the uniform
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches contained therein.

II. We do not hereby prejudg the Church's Right to, and Power of making any
alteration in the said Confession, as to the ambiguity and obscure expressions
thereof, or of
making a more unexceptionable frame.

III. When we swear, That the King is Supreme Governor over all Persons, and
in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastic as Civil: and when we swear to assert and
defend all His Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives; this is reserving always the
intrinsic unalterable
power of the Church, immediately derived from Jesus Christ, to wit the power
of the Keys, consisting in the preaching of the Word, administration of the
Sacraments, ordaining of Pastors, exercise of Discipline, and the holding of
such Assemblies as are necessary for preservation of Peace and Unity, Truth and
Purity in the Church: and withal we do not hereby think, that the King has a
power to alter the Government of the Church at his pleasure.

IV. When we swear, That it is unlawful for subjects to meet or conveen, to
treat or consult, etc. about matters of State, Civil, and Ecclesiastic; this
is excepting meetings for Ordination, public Worship and Discipline, and such
meetings as are necessary for the conservation of the Church and true
Protestant Religion.

V. When we swear, there lies no obligation on us, etc. to endeavor any change
or alteration in Government, either in Church or State, we mean by Arms, or any
seditious
way.

VI. When we swear, That we take the Test in the plain and genuine sense of the
words, etc. we understand it only in so far as it does not contradict these
Exceptions.


The Explanation of the Test, by the Synod and Clergy of Perth.
BEcause our Consciences require the publishing and declaring of that express
meaning we have in taking the Test, that we be not mis-interpreted to swear it
in these glosses which men uncharitable to it, and enemies to us, are apt to
put upon it: and because some men, ill affected to the Government, who are
daily broachers of odious and calumnious slanders against our Persons and
Ministry, are apt to deduce inferences and conclusions from the alleged
ambiguity of some Propositions of the
Test, that we charitably and firmly do believe were never intended by the
Imposers, nor received by the Takers: Therefore to satisfy our Consciences,
and to save our Credit from these unjust imputations, we expressly declare, That
we swear the Test in this following meaning.

I. By taking the Test, we do not swear to every Proposition and Clause
contained in the Confession of Faith, but only to the true Protestant Religion,
founded upon the Word of God, contained in that Confession, as it is opposed to
Popery and Fanaticism.

II. By swearing the Ecclesiastic Supremacy, we swear it as we have done
formerly, without any reference to the assertory Act: we also reserve entire
unto the Church its own intrinsic and unalterable power of the Keys, as it was
exercised by the Apostles, and the pure primitive Church, for the first three
Centuries.

III. By swearing, That it is unlawful to convocate, conveen or assemble in any
Councils, Conventions or Assemblies, to treat, consult, etc. in any matter of
State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, as we do not evacuate our natural liberty,
whereby we are in freedom, innocently without reflection upon, or derogation to
Authority, or persons entrusted with it, to discourse in any occasional meeting
of these things; so we exclude not those other meetings which are necessary for
the well-being and Discipline of the Church.

IV. By our swearing it unlawful to endeavor any change or alteration in the
Government, either of Church or State, we mean, that it is unlawfal for us to
endeavor
the alteration of the specific Government of Monarchy in the true and lineal
Descent, and Episcopacy.

V. When we swear in the genuine and literal sense, etc. we understand it so
far as
it is not opposite or contradictory to the foresaid exceptions.

They were allowed to insert after the Oath, before their Subscriptions, these
words, or to this purpose.

We Underwritten do take this Oath according to the Explanation made by the
Council, approved by His Majesty's Letter: and we declare, we are no further
bound by this Oath.

A Paraphrase on the Test emitted by one of the conformed Clergy.
I A. B. solemnly swear, in presence of the Eternal God, whom I invocate as
judge, and witness of my sincere intention of this my Oath. That I A. B. being
fully assured, without the least doubt or hesitation of the truth of all that I
am now to assert, and of the lawfulness of all that I am now to promise; Do in
the most solemn manner, swear in the sight, and presence of the Eternal God,
whom I here call upon to witness against me in the Great Day, and to pass
Sentence of Condemnation upon me, if I affirm any thing, by this my Oath, of
the certainty whereof I am not fully assured, or promise any thing of the
lawfulness whereof I have any scruples, and which I am not sincerely resolved
to perform, viz.

That I own, and sincerely profess the true Protestant Religion, contained in
the Confession of Faith recorded in the first Parliament of James the VI etc.
That I cordially own, and without any dissimulation, profess the true
Protestant Religion: And because there are many doctrines, and opinions that
pass under that name, that it may be known what I do mean by the true
Protestant Religion, I declare, That I own that Confession of Faith, which is
recorded in the first Parliament of King James the VI. as the true test, and
standard thereof: And that I believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable
to the written Word of God. And because it would not be a just standard, if
some part of it were taken, and others left, unless these parts, that are to be
sworn to, were expressly condescended on by the same Authority whereby it is
imposed: For if it were left arbitrary, for every one to pitch on these parts
of it he pleases, as the measure of his Faith, it would be useless for the end
for which it is adduced: Therefore I embrace the whole Confession, and do swear
by the same solemn Oath, That I believe every Article, and every Proposition
therein to be true, as being evidently founded on, and agreeable to the Word of
God. As for instance, Art. 3. I swear by this my solemn Oath, That Adam's
Transgression is commonly called Original Sin. And Art. 12. That men have as
little hand in their Regeneration and Sanctification, as they have in their
Creation and Redemption. And Art. 14. That to suppress Tyranny, is one of the
good works of the Second Table, most pleasing, and acceptable to God, and
commanded by himself; the contrary whereof is (...) sin most odious, which
always displeases, and provokes him to anger: that is, When the Civil Mastrate
comes to act arbitrarily, and against Law, when he invades the established
Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, or the Liberties, and Properties of
Subjects, he is to be opposed and resisted. Or when our Ecclesiastical
Superiors usurp a Dominion over the Inferior Clergy, or behave themselves as
Lords over Gods Heritage, or require absolute obedience to their Dictates, and
Determinations, they are to be withstood, and born down. And as it is in the
same Article, I swear, That I believe, our resistance of these whom God has
placed in Authority over us, is a sin, when they do not pass over the bounds of
their Office, but if they pass over these bounds, it is a duty to resist them;
which is evident being compared with the former Proposition, and the practices
of them who composed the Confession. And in the same Article I swear, and
believe all these to be evil works in matters of Religion, and the worship of
God, which have no other assurance but the invention, and opinion of men. So
that whatsoever our Superiors determine in this matter, tho only for Decency,
if they cannot show it to be clearly founded on the Word of God, it is to be
looked on as an evil work; And I swear, I shall so reckon it. Art. 16. I swear,
That I think it blasphemy to affirm, that men who live acording to natural
light, and moral equity, shall be saved; unless they profess the Christian
Religion: And that out of the true Church there is neither life, nor eternal
felicity. So that I not only condemn all Pagans and Papists to Hell fire, but I
declare upon Oath, That I think it Blasphemy to affirm the contrary. And Art.
18. I believe, That Ecclesiastical Discipline, rightly administered, as Gods
Word prescribes, is as essential a note of the true Church, as the right
administration of the Word, and Sacraments; So that the Church of England, or
any other Church, that has not Discipline rightly administered, tho they have
the Word, and Sacraments pure, and uncorrupted, wants an essential Note of a
true a Church. And Art. 21. I declare, That I perfectly understand this
Proposition, and do solemnly swear, that it is true, that the faithful, in the
right use of the Lords Table, are so made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone, that as the eternal Godhead has given to the flesh of Jesus Christ (which
of its own condition and nature, was mortal, and corruptible) Life, and
Immortality, so does Christ Jesus his flesh, and blood, eaten* and drunken by
us, give unto us the same Prerogatives. And Art. 22. I declare, and swear by
this my solemn Oath, That the Ministers of the Church of Rome are not Ministers
of Jesus Christ, and that they have no true Sacraments; So that our first
Reformers having both their Baptism, and Ordination from them, we have neither
among us truly baptized persons, nor rightly ordained Ministers And Art 24 I
believe, That the resisting the Supreme Power doing that which appertains to
his charge is to resist the Ordinance of God. So that to resist, when he goes
beyond his charge, is not to resist the Ordinance of God, but to repress
Tyranny, according to Art. 14

And I promise and swear, That I shall adhere thereto, during all the days of
my life, and shall endeavor to educate my children therein, and shall never
consent to any change contrary thereto: And that I disown all such Doctrines,
whether Popish or Fanatical, which are contrary to and inconsistent with the
true Protestant Religion, and this Confession of Faith All these Propositions,
and every thing contained therein, I firmly believe, and embrace, and I
promise, and swear, that I shall adhere to them, so long as I live, without
ever changing my opinion about them, and that I shall carefully educate my
children according to them; i. e. I shall teach them to repress Tyranny, and if
the Authority should make any alteration in the said Confession, or any of the
Propositions therein, I swear, that I shall never consent thereto: And I swear
also, That I shall renounce all Principles, Doctrines and Practices, whether
Popish or Fanatical which are contrary to any Article, or proposition of the
foresaid Confession of Faith.

And for testification of my obedience to my most Gracious Sovereign, Charles
the Second, I do affirm, and swear, by this my solemn Oath, That the Kings
Majesty is the only Supreme Governor over this Realm, over all Persons, and
Causes, as well Ecclesiastic, as Civil; and that no Foreign Prince, etc. As I
have declared my Faith toward God, so now to testify, that I am a good Subject
to the King, I affirm, and swear by this my solemn Oath, That the Kings Majesty
is the only Supreme Governor over all Persons, not only Civil, but also
Ecclesiastical: By which I understand that Ecclesiastical Supremacy which the
Parliament by Act, Nov. 1669. has declared to belong to him, as an inherent
Right of the Crown: By virtue whereof, His Majesty, and Successors, may dispose
of the external Government, and Policy of the Church, as they please; i. e. of
all Church Government, there being no other Government exercised in the Church
by men, but that which is external: And that they may settle, enact, and emit
any Constitutions, Acts or Orders, concerning the Government, or persons
employed therein, and concerning all Ecclesiastical meetings, and matters to be
proposed, and determined therein, as they shall think fit: So that I affirm,
that His Majesty, and Successors, may alter, change, or abolish the form of
Church Government, now established by Law: that he may commit it into the hands
of persons of a different Religion, from what is presently professed in this
Realm: that he may discharge all meetings of Synods, Presbyteries, and Sessions
for ever: Or if he shall please to continue them, that he may choose one
delegated, or deputed by himself, to propose, and determine all-matters
therein, as he thinks ^it: That he may by virtue of his Supreme Power, iuhibit
Church Officers to meet, or meddle in any matter, eisher Doctrine, or
Discipline, without his special Order: to pursue, or process any Delinquent, or
to consider of means to prevent any change, or alteration in Religion, tho it
should be in never so great hazard, except only as he shall determine, and
appoint therein: All which he may do by himself, and his Council without any
new Law, or Act of Parliament: And I affirm, and swear, that tho any of His
Majesty's Successors shall happen to be of another Religion (as God forbid,)
yet all this Ecclesiastical Power does belong to him, it being declared to be
an inherent Right in the Crown, and so not to belong to him as a Christian, or
Protestant Magistrate, but as a Magistrate precisely. And to my power I shall
defend all Rights. Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Privileges, Preheminencies
belonging to His Majesty, and lawful Successors. And also I swear by this my
solemn Oath, that so far as I am able, I shall assist, and defend His Majesty's
Rights, and Prerogatives, which because I do not know, therefore whatsoever the
King, and Parliament, or King, and Council, shall declare to belong to him, as
a Right, Jurisdiction, and Prerogative, either in Civil or Ecclesiastical
Affairs, either concerning Religion, Liberty, or Property, by Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, I swear, I shall own, and approve, assist, and defend the same, as
far as possibly I can.

And further I affirm, and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I judge it
unlawful for Subjects, upon pretext of Reformation, or any other pretense
whatsoever, to enter into Covenants, or Leagues, or to convocate, conveene, or
assemble in any Council, Convocation, or Assembly, to treat, consult or
determine in any matter of State, Civil, or Ecclesiastic, without His
Majesty's special License, or express Warrant had thereto; or to take up Arms
against the King, or those commissionated by him: And that I shall never so
rise in Arms, nor enter into such Covenants or Assemblies, etc And I further
swear, That I think it utterly unlawful for any Subject, of whatsoever quality,
or condition, many or few, for whatsoever Cause, not only to make any
Covenants, but not so much as to meet together in any kind of Meeting, to hear,
see, or consult about any matter belonging to the Civil, or Ecclesiastical
Estate, without His Majesty's special Command, and express License: So that
whatsoever corruption, or abuse may be in the Civil Government, through the
fault of the King. or Council; or whatsoever hazard or danger the true
Religion, and Church of God, within this land, may be in, I judge it unlawful
for any Subject, whether Pastors, or others, to meet together, that they may
consider what way to remedy, or prevent the same; tho it were only by humble
Addresses, and Petitions: And I s^ear. That there can never fall out a Case
wherein Subjects may rise in Arms against their King, or any Commissionated by
him, even though it were merely to defend themselves, tho never so cruelly
persecuted, and invaded by any who pretend his Name, and Authority: And I
promise and swear; That if any shall rise in Arms or meet together, in a
peaceable way, for the ends foresaid, that I shall never join with them. And
that there lies no Obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the Solemn
League and Covenant, so commonly called, or any manner of way whatsoever, to
endeavor any change, or alteration in the Government, either in Church, or
State, as it is now established by the Laws of this Kingdom, etc. And I also
affirm, and swear by this Oath, That there lies no Obligation on me, either by
the National, or Solemn League and Covenant, or any other way imaginable
whatsoever, to endeavor the least change, or alteration in the Government,
either in Church, or State, as they are now established: So that I am never to
endeavor any alteration, not only in the Civil Government, but also in the
Govern. of the Church, as it is now established among us, though it should be
found never so prejudicial to Religion, to His Majesty's Service, or to the
good of the Country. Yea, whatever corruptions may come to be in either of the
Govern. I swear, That I am obliged never to endeavor the least alteration of
them. And particularly, 1. As to the Ecclesiastical Govern. it being
established by the Civil Magistrate, I am never to endeavor that it may be
settled by the consent of the Church. 2. The Bishops, by the Act of Restitution,
Art. 1. Ses. 2. Par. 1. Char* 2. being allowed to inflict Censures, and to
exercise all other Discipline, only with advice, and consent of such of the
Clergy, as shall be found to be of known loyalty and prudence: yet tho they
should utterly neglect Synods, and Presbyteries, and call only such Ministers
as they please, tho it were but Two, or Three; and let them make Canons
concerning Doctrine, and Worship, suspend, and depose Ministers, inflict the
highest Censures, either upon Churchmen, or Laics, I am not to endeavor an
alteration of these things. 3. There being no Obligation on them by that Law
which gives them their Legal Establishment, either to reside in their
Diocesses, or to visit their Churches, or to hold but one Benefice, I am to use
no endeavor that this may be helped. 4. They being by the same Act only
accountable to His Majesty, I am not to endeavor that they may be accountable
to the Church, tho they be convicted in a National Synod, for any of their
Administrations. 5. Whereas by the Act establishing a National Synod, Act 4.
Ses. 2. Par. 1. Char. 2. the Moderators of every Presbytery, who are nominated
to that Office by the Bishop, are appointed to be of the Commissioners, for the
National Synod, and the Moderators, declared to have a Negative Voice for the
choosing of the other Commissioners: And so the whole Asse^bly is nominated by
the Bishops. And it being further enacted, That nothing is to be debated and
considered in the said Assembly, but as it is proposed by His Majesty, and
Successors: And that the Archbishop of St. Andrews, as President of the
Assembly, is declared to have a Negative Voice, not only in the whole Synod,
but even on His Majesty himself: So that whatever should be agreed on by all
the rest of the Bishops, and Clergy, His Majesty consenting thereto, yet it
cannot be concluded, and emitted, without consent of the President: Yet I am to
affirm, and swear, That I am not to endeavor the alteration of any of these
things: And that there lies no Obligation on me, either from respect to
Religion, or duty to my Prince, and Native Country, or any regard to
Episcopacy, or any other manner of way whatsoever, to endeavor the least
change of any of these forementioned.

And I promise and swear, That I shall from henceforth, with my utmost power,
defend, assist, and maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid, against all
deadly, etc. And I shall never decline His Majesty's Jurisdiction, as I shall
answer to God, etc. And finally, I affirm and swear by this, etc. That I shall
not only submit unto, but that I shall own, and approve His Majesty's
Jurisdiction; i e. all ^is Rig^ts, and Prerogatives, especially his
Ecclesiastical Supremacy: Yea, that I shall with my utmost power, both of body,
and mind, defend, and maintain the same, against all creatures whatsoever: And
tho His Majesty should by himself, or any Laick deputed by him, inflict a
Church-censure, or an Excommunication it self, yet I shall never decline this
his Power and Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God, at the great day.

And finally, I affirm and swear, That this my solemn Oath is given in the
plain genuine meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental
reservation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever, and that I shall not accept,
or use any dispensation from any creature whatsoever. So help me God, etc. And
lastly, I affirm and swear, That I have sworn all these things, in the pla^^
sense and meaning of the words, not only without equivocation, or mental
reservation, bu^ without any manner of evasion whatsoever, So that I renounce
all senses, and glosses and explications whatsoever, which seem any way
disagreeable to the plain sense of the words of this Oath, as they are commonly
understood by me^. And that as I shall not accept, or use any dispensation from
any creature whatsoever* so I shall never make use, orrely upon such glosses,
as explications to help me out* or set me free from Perj^ry. Wherefore being
fully persuaded of the truth* and lawfulness of all that I have now sworn, and
as sincerely resolved to perform it, in every Ar^icle thereof, I do confidently
pray to God to help me to this Grace to do so: and I wish he may make me so
speed, here and hereafter, as I am persuaded and resolved.

1. An Oath being considered b^ all men who have any sense of a Deity, as a
most Sacred Bond, and of the straitest Obligation; It Is to be presumed, that no
man who truly fears God, will rashly adventure on it: For if I affirm any
thing upon Oath, of the truth whereof I am not certain; or if I promise any
thing, of the justice, or lawfulness whereof I have any doubt, or which I am
not fully resolved to perform, I make my self guilty of Perjury; which even the
most barbarous Nations have ever looked on as the foulest of Crimes; For it is
both the greatest affront that can be put on God, in calling him to be Judge,
and Witness to a Lie; and one of the greatest injuries that can be done to men,
in overthrowing the best security, and chiefest ground of trust that they have:
It were therefore to be wished, that Oaths were never imposed, except in cases
of absolute necessity: For it is certain, that the most part of ^en being acted
^ore by interest then by conscience, will be too easily persuaded to swallow
them*, that they may shun a present inconveniency, whatever danger or damage it
may import to them in the Life to come: And it has been always observed, that
these w^o have been most forward to take Oaths, are most forward to break them,

2. But all who truly fear the Lord, who prefer the peace of their Conscience
to their worldly interest* and who look more to the things* that are not seen,
then to the things that are seen, will think themselves obliged to advise well
before they adventure on an Oath, that if they swear at all* they may do it as
the Lord himself requires* Jer. 4, 2. in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness; i e. that they know what they affirm to be true, and what they
promise to be just, and righteous; and that in neither of these they be rash or
inconsiderate, but have their judgments truly informed, and sufficiently
instructed in both: If a man be uncertain or doubtful in any of these, he is by
no means to adventure on an Oath, but rather to suffer the loss of all things
than to take it.

3. Now if an Oath containing one single Proposition* and contrived in the
plainest, and easiest terms, ought to be diligently weighed, and pondered
before it can be taken, how much more such an Oath as this, which consists of
so many different, and various matters: Some of which are not only doubtful,
and uncertain in themselves (to say no worse) but in the judgment of wise, and
sober men* inconsistent one with another.

4. It Is granted by all, that this Oath cannot be taken, without several
glosses, and explications. And these which are commonly offered, cannot be
admitted for diverse Reasons. 1. Because they seem to overthrow the genuine
sense, and meaning of the Oath. 2. Because in the Oath, we swear, That we take
it in the plain genuine sense, and meaning of the words, without any
equivocation, mental reservation, or evasion whatsoever: So that although these
glosses should be conceived in the plainest terms, and we suffered to write
them down under our hands; and so cannot come under the notion of equivocation
or mental reservation; yet that cannot but be considered as evasions, it being
only by the help of them that we pretend to escape the fearful crime of
perjury. 3 There is no Authority that can give us Explications, but the same
who has imposed the Oath, that is the King, and Parliament. For tho the King,
and Lords of Council, and Session, be considered as Interpreters and Explainers
of the Laws, yet that is only in matters of Right, or Wrong, to which men ought
to submit: But it is another thing in matter of an Oath: For that is always to
be taken only in the sense of the Imposers: And we being required not to submit
to it but to swear to it, no Explication given by any other, but by him, or
them who gives us the Oath, can secure or quiet our Consciences. 4. These
Explications, tho given by the same Authority who imposed the Oath, seem both
useless, and unsafe, unless published, and recorded as the Oath it self;
otherways the Explication will soon be forgotten, whereas the Oath stands still
as it was.

5. It must be also considered, that tho men take this Test, it seems it will
not secure them in their places: For why may not the same alterations be made
in the Church which are made in the State, the Supreme Power, and Prerogative
being alike over both? And tho this Argument will be of small force unto some,
yet it may have its own weight unto others

6. If it be said, That diverse Articles, and Parts of the Test, are asserted,
and enacted by former Laws, as partly, that against meeting, conveening, or
Assembling to treat, consult, etc. which is in the very same terms discharged
and forbidden, not only by Act. 4. Sess 1. Par. 1, Char. 2. but also by an old
Law, Act. 31. Par. 8. James 6. It is answered, That there is this considerable
difference therein in those Acts, viz. that the ordinary judgments are
excepted: And it is not without reason, that this clause is left out here, and
it is one thing to submit to a Law, another to swear it.

7. But some may say, that we have already sworn the Oath of Supremacy; to
which they who took it before the year 1669. had little, or no ground of
scruple, but by the Act assertory, the Supremacy being declared to be quite
another thing than ever it was understood before, there are many conscientious
men, and the best friends to Episcopacy, who cannot take that Oath now, though
that alone should be made the Test: As for others of the Clergy who have ta^en
it since that Act of Parliament, they were told by the Bishop that administered
it to them, that the Assertory Act had no relation to the Oath; and therefore
they gave it them only in the old sense, whereby they were persuaded to take
it: But now the matter is put beyond all doubt: For the Kings Ecclesiastical
Supremacy* as it is explained in the Act, being declared to be an inherent
Right of the Crown; and we swearing in the Test, to maintain, and defend all
His Majesty's Rights and Prer^gatives, we do clearly swear to own and maintain
the Supremacy, as itis there asserted and declared.

8. But we are told, we should not oppose our sentiments to the wisdom of the
Nation: And if the meaning of this be, that we ought to reverence our
Superiors, submit to their Laws, and live peaceably under their Government, it
is willingly granted: But if the meaning of the Test be, that we are to believe
whatsoever they say, blindly swear whatever they bid us, this is to erect an
infallible chair in the State, in the stead of the Church, which is a new
unheard of piece of Popery.

But if we stand out, and refuse the Test, how shall the Credit and Honor of
Authority be saved? It were to be wished it did consult its own Credit more,
before the making of any Laws, and Edicts; for there cannot be too great
deliberation used, in enacting such things as are to oblige the whole Nation at
present, and their Posterity for the time to come: And much more heed ought to
be had in appointing an Oath to be sworn by the most considerable part thereof.
If our Ecclesiastik Superiors had been so kind, and just to themselves, and
their Clergy, as to have consulted the wisest of their Presbyters within the
Kingdom, it is like it might have prevented much of this inconveniency: But now
that it is done, all who can take this Oath with a clear Conscience let them
take it, and much good may it do them: But as for these who cannot take it, let
them suffer patiently the penaltly inflicted by the Law; and let them behave
themselves orderly, and peaceably, without making any rent in the State, or
Schism in the Church, and without reflecting on their Governors: Ye^, that it
may be seen by all men they are acted by Principles of Conscience: And this
seems to be the best way that is now left for salving the Credit of Authority:
And yet many wise men think, that it would be no reflection on Authority, if
His Majesty, out of his Goodness, finding how great a Grievance the urging of
the Test is like to prove to his best and most loyal Subjects, which could not
be so well known till it was tried, should suspend the Execution of the Law
till further advice.

It obliges us to swear, That we believe the Confession recorded in the 1.
Par. James 6. is founded on, and agreeable to the written Word of God: Now if
there be but one single proposition in that Confession, either false, or
dubious, not expressed in, or clearly deduced from the Scriptures, can we swea^
it with a good Conscience? Surely whoever reads it with understanding, will
find many things doubtful, and uncertain at least. But it deserves to be
particularly remarked, that it contains Doctrines which manifestly cross the
many ends of the Test: This was certainly designed to guard and engage men
against Fanatical principles, and yet for all that, it obliges all that swear
it to own the most capital, and fundamental principles of those who are called
Fanatiks. They maintain, that our obedience to the supreme Magistrate is to be
limited; and that if he be an enemy to the Truth, and Cause of God, Subjects
may take up Arms against him. 2. They maintain, That nothing is to be allowed
in the worship of God, but what is prescribed in his Word: Were not these the
Principles that embroiled these Kingdoms, that raised a Combustion, and that
turned all things upside down, both in Church and State? And are not these
Principles plainly taught in this Confession? It is reckoned, Art. 15* a duty
to repress Tyranny; and to disobey, and resist Kings, is a sin, with this
caution and limitation (while they pass not over the bounds of their Office, or
do that thing which appertains to their charge.) And in like manner, the
assistance we ow them is cautioned, and limited, [while they vigilantly travel
in the execution of their Office]. Is not this the very Doctrine of the Solemn
League and Covenant by which they bind themselves to defend the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority, in the preservation, and defense of the true Religion,
and Liberties of the Kingdom? Let any but read Spotswood's History of the
Resormation, Anno 1558, 1559, 1560. among others; how Subjects did bind
themselves by Oaths, and Subscriptions, to assist one another for advancing the
Cause of Religion; how by the advice of the Ministers, they deprived the Queen
Regent of her Government, and this very year this Confession was compiled, and
ratified in Parliament. And I am sure there can remain no doubt about the sense
of the Confession in this point. But to render the matter beyond exception, It
is declared rebellious, and treasonable by Act of Parliament, for Subjects to
put limitations on their due obedience, and allegiance. And for the other
Principles about Divine Worship, the Confession affirms these to be evil works,
that in matters of Religion, and Worship of God, have no other assurance, but
the invention, and opinion men. In this principle they condemn very Ancient and
laudable Customs of Churches, as singing the Doxology, and the most innocent,
and indifferent Ceremonies for decency, and helps for Devotion, calling them by
the odious titles of Superstition, and Will Worship. But be these Principles
true or false in themselves certainly they are utterly inconsistent with these
other clauses in the Test, that assert it unlawful, on any pretense whatsoever,
to take Arms against the King, and invest him with such a Supremacy as impowers
him to erect such Constitutions, and orders about Ecclesiastical matters, as
His Majesty thinks fit. And in this also there is a palpable Contradiction,
that the Test binds us not to consent to any change contrary to the Confession,
and by and by enjoins to swear what is flatly contradictory to it: We cannot
take this Test, unless with the same breath we swear, and forswear, under Oath
protest onething, and forthwith under Oath protest the quite contrary.

It obliges us to swear, we shall with our utmost power, defend, assist, and
maintain all the Kings Rights. And is not this to swear we know not what? or is
it not to swear, we shall maintain, and defend, with the greatest zeal and
concernedness, whatsoever the King challenges, or the Parliament votes to
belong to him? And may not a Prince come to claim a Right to act Arbitrarily?
and may not iniquity happen to be established by Law? Nay* does not the King,
de facto, challenge, and has not the Parliament declared Supremacy to be an
inherent Right of the Crown; by which His Majesty may settle and emit such Acts
and Orders as he pleases, about Ecclesiastical matters? And are not Articles of
Faith Ecclesiastical matters? And what is this, but to avow, we hold our selves
obliged to believe as the King believes? And so ere long the Rights,
Jurisdictions, Prerogatives* Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities that may
be v ted to belong to our Prince; may come to swallow up Religion, Liberty,
Property, and all our Privileges. We do not see how any man of Sense, and
Conscience, can swear this clause, in so great a Latitude, and so illimited
Terms.

It obliges us to swear* That we acknowledge it unlawful, without the Kings
special Command, to convocate, conveen or assemble in any Council, Convention,
or Assembly, to treat, consult, or determine, in any matter of State, Civil, or
Ecclesiastik. The clause (excepting ordinary judgments) which was added in all
such convocating, conveening, and assembling, which were declared unlawful,
Anno 1661. 1. Par. Char. 2. Act 21. being left out here, we have reason to
think, that all such Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods are discharged, there
being no special Command, or Express for them that we know of: And these
meetings being of great use, for curbing of Vice, and Profaneness, and for
settling, and entertaining Peace, and good Order in the Church, we cannot swear
to forbear holding of them, tho we have not an express License from the King.
We acknowledge Princes have Power, and Authority, to inhibit their Subjects to
meet as they see cause, but we cannot bind our selves to obey them, against
such liberty which Christ has conferred on his Church: This is a Privilege the
Church ever enjoyed, since it was founded, and erected by our Savior, and, in
all Ages, used as the state of affairs required; So we cannot devoid our selves
of it, without proving betrayers of our Trust, and condemning the conduct of
the Primitive Christians, who without special command, nay, contrary to the
express Edict of Princes, did convocate, conveen or assemble in Councils, and
Conventions, to treat, consult, and determine about Ecclesiastical matters; and
yet for all that, have been no less commended, and admired for loyalty, and
peaceableness, than for piety, and zeal. And seeing that in the present
juncture its notour that there are Cabals, and Engines formed, and carried on,
to undermine the Protestant Religion, and to bereave us of the Truth which our
Lord has committed to us as so many Depositaries, Can we, without the most
horrid guilt, and the blackest infamy, swear, That we shall not so much as meet
Two or Three of us together, till we have the Kings Warrant, (perhaps never) to
consult about the Welfare of the Church, and the Salvation of our own, and
other Men's Souls?

It obliges us to swear* there is no obligation on us, any manner of way
whatsoever, to endeavor any change, or alteration in the Government, either in
Church, or State. Is not this to swear what no man living can assuredly know?
And are there not indeed many ties on us as Men, as Christians, as Pastors, to
procure, as far as in us lies, the happiness of the Church, and State? Now if
we discern, and it be acknowledged by wise; and good men, that the Government
may be bettered by enacting wholesome new Laws, and abrogating corrupt old ones,
might we not, ought we not, in our stations endeavor such an alteration? The
Constitution of a National Synod, e. g. gives the Archbishop of St. Andrew's a
Negative, when the whole Clergy is contrary, so that were all our Bishops, and
other Members of the Synod, men of Apostolic sanctity, and zeal, yet nothing
could be done for reforming the Church, if one man, who may happen to be an
enemy both to Truth, and Virtue, shall dissent. And how can honest
conscientious Churchmen swear, they shall never endeavor to have this helped?
By the same Act* no matter is to be debated, consulted, or concluded, but what
shall be allowed by His Majesty: What now if the Prince come to be Popish, or
altogether unconcerned about Religion, shall we, can we, in Conscience, bind
our selves to propose, treat, and conclude nothing but what he pleases?

By the explicatory Act, itis put in the Kings power to cut, and carve in the
external Government of the Church, at his pleasure: And so he may without
consent of Parliament, or Clergy, restore Presbytery; he may turn out all the
Bishops, and Pastors, and plant in their room men of his own persuasion,
whatever it be, he may casheer all our spiritual Fathers, and substitute
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Lawyers, or any other kind of Laiks, to be
Superintendents of the Church, or his Commissioners in Ecclesiastical affairs:
And shall we oblige our selves by an Oath, to endeavor no rectification of so
unreasonable a Statute? If we see, and it cannot be denied, that Episcopal
Government might contribute more to maintain Truth, and advance Piety, and
Peace, than hitherto it has done, might we not, ought we not to use our utmost
endeavors, to procure such Laws, and Canons to be enacted as should oblige
Bishops to manage their Power, and Authority to such noble, and excellent ends,
and not put off the respect to the souls committed to their charge? We are to
endeavor such a change, which might conduce mightily for changing, and
reforming them: Out of the veneration we bear to Episcopacy, we cannot but
pray, and with for such a change, and do our best to effectuate it, because
otherways Episcopal Government would come to be despised; and derided, not only
as useless, but pernicious: Unless then we would entirely abandon Episcopacy,
unless we would express no regard for* or concern our selves with the
flourishing of piety, unless we would sit down contented, and satisfied,
without ever complaining of, and opposing the corruptions of the Church, we can
by no means swear this Clause of the Test: But we would with a very good
Conscience testify by our Solemn Oath, if we were put to it, that we judge our
selves obliged to endeavor a change, both of the Government, and Governors of
the Church.

There are several other things that beget in our minds an utter dislike of the
Act anent Religion: We shall touch Two or Three things more. It commands us to
become a kind of Sycophants, Delators and Informers against Dissenters: Hardly
could our mortal enemies fall upon a course more likely to blast our Ministry,
and expose us to hatred and obloquy. Had it been designed we should give an
account of Schismatical Withdrawers, that our spiritual Fathers might bear with
them in the spirit of meekness, and charity, for clearing their prejudices, we
would have most readily, and joyfully served them in so worthy an enterprise:
But to delate them, that they may be fined, and imprisoned, or banished, or
sustain any bodily, or temporal damages, is a thing we abhor: We judge it more
eligible to be no Pastors than to be on such terms.

2. It weakens the Protestant Interest, by dividing Protestants, and treating
sober Dissenters with as great severity as Papists, or wildest Fanatiks.

3. It leaves a wide postern for Popery, for it exempts from the Test such as
should have been first of all put to it, and so provides most effectually for
perpetuating Popery in the Royal Family: And what could have been contrived
more grateful, and advantageous to the Church of Rome, and what more grievous
and fatal to the Reformed?

Grounds whereupon some of the Conformed Ministers scruple to take the Test.
FIrst, passing by the danger of Oaths, when pressed so generally, (men of the
least tenderness ordinarily swallow them easily and make small Conscience of
observing them, while they that fear Oaths are hardly induced to take them, and
by their strict observance make themselves a Prey) we think it strange that
this Oath should be enjoined to us, who cannot be suspected rationally to
incline either to Fanaticism or Popery, since by our Subscriptions to the Oath
of Supremacy, and canonical obedience, we have sufficiently purged our selves
of the first, and by our refuting Popish errors daily in our Pulpits, do show
an utter abhorrence of the other, and further, since merely our owning of
Episcopal Government has begot, and still increases in the minds of our People,
such an Aversion from and dislike of us, we would have expected that our
spiritual Fathers would not have exposed us to greater loathing, and contempt,
by such engagements; which although it should be granted to be causeless and
unjust, yet we think our selves bound to shun it, that our Ministry may be the
more taking with them, since the thing pressed upon us, is neither absolutely
necessary, nor yet so evident in what is asserted for truth as may encourage
us for to underlie their prejudice conceived thereupon: And finally, since it
is known that abjuring the Covenant did hinder many Ministers to conform, and
People to join in Ordinances dispensed by Conformists, and our Parliaments had
hitherto showed such civil Moderation as to free us from the Declaration, we
cannot look at it but as bad and fatal that our Church should be dashed on this
Rock, which may occasion its splitting, and instead of quenching this former
evil create new Flames.

Secondly, as we wish for the suppressing of the growth of Popery a more
particular way had been made use of, even for the discovering of such as are of
no public Trust, so we cannot but regret that this Test has been so framed as
to divide the sound sober Presbyterians amongst themselves, whereby our Common
Enemies are gratified, and the true Faith endangered, we being persuaded that
there are many Presbyterians in the Kingdom, Gentlemen, Ministers, and others,
who cannot in conscience take this Test, who yet do daily come, and are ready
to join with us in Ordinances. We think it had been fitter to have
condescended something for gaining of such, then to have put such a brand upon
them, which may more alienate them, and weaken us.

Thirdly, that Confession of Faith Recorded in the first Parliament of King
James the 6th, has some things in it which may scarre the Swearing to it
without Limitation, as 1. Section 15th. it Asserts those to be evil works which
are done not only contra, but praeter verbum Dei. 2dly, Section 25th. It
Asserts, such as resist the Supreme Power, doing that which pertains to his
charge, and while he vigilantly travels in his office, do resist the Ordinance
of God, which clauses may bear an exclusive sense, especially when in the 5th
Section, it is reckoned among good works to suppress Tyranny, 3dly Section
15th; Jesus Christ is asserted to be the only Head, and Lawgiver of his Kirk,
and it is counted Blasphemy for Angels, or Men to intrude themselves into the
said Honor, and Office; 4th Section the 23th on the Sacraments. Popish Baptism
is denied as to its validity, and Popish Priests denied to be true Ministers,
which expressions if narrowly scanned, will be found of dangerous consequence,
and contradictory to other positions in the Confession it self.

Fourthly, we fear that our People may look on us rather as Countenancers and
Incouragers, then Suppressors of Popery, seeing by the Act we are obliged to
delate yearly in October such as withdraw from our Ministry, that they may be
punished by the civil Magistrates, and yet by the same Act, the Kings lawful
Brother, and Sons in perpetuum are exempt from taking the Test, and
consequently left at liberty to be Papists, or Protestants, and what bad
influence their example may have on inferior People may easily be apprehended,
and our taking the Test will be reputed an approving of that exemption, which
will be more stumbling. That all former Acts against Papists were made without
any exemption, and they all declared to be disloyal who embraced not the
Reformed Religion, particularly in the 47th Act of the third Parliament of
James the V I. and the 8th Act of the I. Parliament of Charles the II.

Fifthly, We are to swear that there lies no obligation on us by virtue of the
late Covenants, or any other manner of way to endeavor the change of the
Government, either in Church, or State, as it is established by Law, where we
suppose we are sworn not only to maintain Monarchy, but also, as our Law ties
us, in the present line, and in the nearest in kin to our present King, although
they should be Papists, although we judge the Coronation Oath in the eight Act of
the first Parliament of James the VI. to be contradictory, which yet is a
standing unrepealed Law, since this current Parliament has ratified, and
confirmed all Acts made in savor of the Protestant Religion, whereof this is
one, so that we swear Contradictions.

Sixthly, as for the Church Government, as it is now established by Law, there
has not been, nor are yet wanting sound Protestants who assert the Jus divinum
of Episcopacy, such could not in conscience take this Oath, seeing the King by
virtue of his Prerogative, and Supremacy is empowered by Law to dispose of the
External Government, and Policy of the Church, as he pleases, as for such as
look upon Episcopal Government as indifferent in it self, notwithstanding the
submission that we give to it, or have engaged for, they can as little swear on
these terms: for why should they swear never to endeavor to alter that which in
it self they look upon as alterable, there being no indifferent thing which in
tract of time, through the corruption of Men, may not prove hurtful? and why
might not men in their Station endeavor the redressing (by fair means) of any
such evil, and advise his Majesty, if he be willing, to exert the power settled
on him by the law, for freeing the Church from any inconveniency? and although we
have engaged to obey Bishops, yet we ever did wish that they may be settled
a^ongst us in a way more suitable to the primitive times viz. That their number
might be more increased, that they might by called by the Church allenarly to
that office, and that they might be made liable to the censure of the Church
for their doctrine, life, and diligence, that they might not be such
pragmatical Medlers in Civil affairs, and that Synods, and Presbyteries might
have more power then is assigned them by the Act of Restitution; from the
seeking a Remedy in any of which things this Oath does tie us up.

Seventhly, the power given to the King by the present laws, if he should be
popish, should be very prejudicial to the Protestant Interest, for by the first
Act of the 2d Parliament of Charles the 2d he may not only dispose of the
external Policy of the Church, but may emit such Acts* concerning the Persons
employed therein; and all Ecclesiastical Meetings, and Matters to be treated
upon therein, as he shall think fit, and this Act only published is to oblige
all his Subjects, and by the Act for a National Synod no Doctrinal Matter may
be proposed, debated, or concluded without his express allowance; in the
foresaid case it is easy to divine, what advantage the Enemies of our Religion
will have for the overturning of all.

Hoc ^thacusvelit, and magno mercentur Atrid^

EDINBURGH, The sederunt of the Council. Sederunt vigesimo secundo Die
Septembris, 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc.
Montrose, Errall, Marshall, Mar, Glencarne, Winton, Linlithgow, Perth,
Strathmore, Roxburgh, Queensberry, Airley, Kintore, Breadalbane, Lorne,
Levingston, Bishop of Edinburgh, Elphinston, Rosse, Dalziel, Treasurer Deputy
Praeses, Advocate Justice Clerk, Collintoun, Tarbet, Haddo, Lundie.
This day the Test was subscribed by the above-written Privy Counselors, and
by the Earl of Queensberry, who coming in after the rest had taken it declared
that he took it with the Explication following,

The Earl of Queensberrie's Explanation of the Test when he took it.
HIS Lordship declared that by that part of the Test, That there lies no
obligation -- to endeavor any change, or alteration in the Government, etc. He
did not understand himself to be oblidged against Alterations, In case it
should please His Majesty to make alterations of of the Government of Church
or State.

HALYRUDEHOUSE Sederunt vigesimo primo Die Octobris 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc.
Winton, Perth, Strathmore, Queensberry, Ancram, Airley, Lorne, Levingston,
Bishop of Edinburgh, Treasurer Deputy Praeses, Register, Advocate, Collintoun.
This day, the Bishop of Edinburgh having drawn up a long Explication of the
Test, to satisfy the many Objections, and Scruples moved against it,
especially by the conformed Clergy, presented it to the Council for their Lp's
Approbation, which was ordered to be read: But the paper proving prolixe, and
tedious, His Highness, after reading of a few leaves, interrupted, saying very
wittyly, and pertinently, that the first Chapter of John with a stone will
chase away a dog, and so brake it off. Yet the Bishop was afterward allowed to
print it, if he pleased, and here you have it.

The Bishop of Edenburgh's Explanatory Vindication of the Test.
THE last Session of this current Parliament considering the interest of the
true Protestant Religion to be the most sacred and important of all others;
does by the first Act, revive, ratify, and confirm all Acts and Statutes, made
in our former Parliaments, establishing the same in this Kingdom: which Acts
being made by our wise Ancestors when the Protestant Religion was in greatest
danger, not only from the great number of Popish Subjects in this Kingdom, many
whereof were persons of greatest interest, power, and influence therein, but
from the Power of France, as well as of the Pope, both which were zealously
bent to re-establish, and confirm the setlement of Popery in its Jurisdictions,
and Superstitions amongst us, were judged by all, both in Articles and
Parliament, and that after long and strenuous application and endeavor in
contriving ane new Act for these ends, not only sufficient, but the best
security for our Religion, against all hazards and contingencies, in which the
best and wisest part of the Parliament acquiesced, till the importunity and
repeated clamours of some, who needs would appear more warmly concerned in this
matter than others, they offering new overtures to the Articles, for the
securing of the Protestant Religion, of which they often received an account in
open Parliament, did awaken a more narrow inspection into this more concerning
Affair: And therefore for the farther security of Religion, from the danger of
Popery on the one hand, and of Principles and Practices of Rebellion, and
fanatical Schism on the other, did judge it necessary, that ane Act should be
past, disabling Papists, and Fanatics from any power, or capacity, to subvert
or overthrow it; which in their deep wisdom they found could never be so
effectually done as by keeping all such out of places of publik Trust and
Employment, Civil, Ecclesiastik, or Military: And in regard that the good and
wholesome Laws, and the steady, and vigorus execution thereof, are the best and
most firm human security of Religion: Therefore such wise provisions were
piously made by that Act, as might bar all disaffected to the Protestant
Religion, from electing, or being elected Members of Parliament, wherein the
Law - making power is lodged, or from creeping into any Office or Trust,
whereby the execution of the Law is managed: So that our established Religion
might never be endangered, or subverted by evil or corrupt Laws, or by the
remiss and negligent execution of good ones.

Notwithstanding such is the fate of the best of human Constitutions that
nothing can be so piously intended, or prudently contrived, but either through
ignorance or malice, misprision or mistake, it may be misrepresented,
misconstrued, and many groundless, and unaccountable jealousies, by scruples
and prejudices entertained against it, as is but too clearly instanced in the
matter of the present Oath, and Test, which the wisdom of our Governors has
enacted, and appointed to be taken by all persons employed in Offices of publik
Trust, as the best fence of the Church, and security of the Protestant Religion
against the invasion and encroachments they stand in danger of from the
restless adversaries.

Some of the Regular and Orthodox Clergy, and other well-meaning Subjects,
having entertained
some jealousies which far exceed their causes, and vented some scruples and
objections against it, which are most part founded on mistakes, and
unnecessary, not to say uncharitable stretching and extending the meaning
thereof far beyond either the genuine sense of the words, or design and
intention of the Parliament, in framing and enjoining that Test, tenderness and
compassion toward these conform and loyal persons, who may either be imposed
upon by the malice and craft of the Church's Adversaries, to stumble at, or by
their own fears, and misapprehensions, may be led into mistakes of the meaning,
and design of this excellent mean for securing our Church and Religion, has
prevailed with us to endeavor a short Essay, for vindicating this Oath and
Test from all mistakes and scruples, by answering, and satisfying the
Objections which are commonly moved against it; and that thereby the plain and
genuine sense, in which this Oath is required by Authority to be taken by all
persons in Trust, may be clear and apparent.

Pursuant to this, it will be fit to read and consider the Oath or Test it
self, as it is contained in the sixth Act of the last Session of this Current
Parliament.

In the next place, it will not be amiss to rank up the doubts and objections
moved against it, in their several Heads and Classes, and to resolve and answer
them accordingly, in their respective place and order.

Of these Scruples and Objections some are founded upon the Consession of
Faith, contained in the foresaid Oath: others arise from the Oath of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and the asserting therein of the Kings Prerogative: some are
taken from that part of the Test, wherein the unlawfulness of assembling in any
Councils or Conventions, to treat, consult or determine in any matter of State,
Civil or Ecclesiastik, without the Kings special command and license had
thereto, is asserted and sworn: and finally others arise from the Clause,
asserting, that no obligation lies from the late Covenants, or any other manner
of way whatsoever, to endeavor any change or alteration in the Government,
either in Church or State, as the same is now established by the Laws of this
Kingdom.

It is beyond all peradventure that as Conscience is the most tender thing in
the Soul of man, so Oaths are of the strictest force and obligation, and are to
be taken in Truth Righteousness and Judgment: which is the Doctrine of all
sound Casuists, Juramenti obligatio est stricti juris; yet this strictum jus is
not so to be understood, as if it did exclude all sensing and interpreting of
it,
the interpretation thereof amounting to no more than merely to make clear and
plain any word or sentence therein, which may seem to be dark, doubtful and
ambiguous. It is excellently said by that judicious Casuist, Doctor Sandersone,
Prel. 2. De juramenti obligatione, p. 8. De lege Charitatis aliena dicta, and
facta, praesertim Principum, Parentum, aliorumque Rectorum sunt benignae
interpretationis. Juxta id quod dici solet, dubia esse interpretanda in
meliorem partem. That is, by the Law of Charity the words and deeds of others,
especially of our Princes, Parents, and other Governors,
are to be moderated by a favorable interpretation, according to the usual
maxim, That things doubtful are to be interpreted to the best sense.

This being premised, the Objections of the first Classis arising upon the
Confession of Faith are to be first considered; and in order to this it must be
remembered, that this Confession is not to be looked upon as fully comprehensive
of all the Protestant Doctrine in opposition to all the Errors, and
Superstition of the Romish Church, and other Heresies; nor is there any one
amongst the Harmony of the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, which can
challenge this perfection to it self: nor is it to be thought strange, that in
many things it should be defective, if we consider, that it was hastily
compiled in the short space of four days, by a select number of Barons, and
Ministers, in the very Infancy of our Reformation as the History of the
Reformation of the Church of Scotland, commonly ascribed to John Knox, Printed
at London, in the Year 1644 in Fol. p. 252. does inform: Nor are the Authors of
the foresaid Confession so prositive, as to look upon all therein contained as
infallible, or to be received as Articles of Faith, as appears from the Preface
prefixed thereto, as it is set down in the History of the Reformation foresaid,
p. 253. wherein they promise upon their Honors and Fidelity, Reformation of
any Article or Sentence therein, which shall be proved to be amisle, or
Erroneous, so that it is not to be considered as the complete Standard of the
Protestant Faith and Doctrine, in which nothing is wanting, but is inserted in
the body of this Oath as being the only Protestant Confession in this Church,
which is stamped with the impress of Lawful Authority, it being ratified by the
first Parliament, James the VI Anno 1567. and is the most Ancient, being
received for six score years, without any contradiction in this Kingdom; and is
only used in this Oath, designotive, to express that, as a particular systeme,
wherein the main Substantials of the Protestant Religion, sworn unto, are
contained. If it be asked, What, or where is the Protestant Religion? The
answer is plain, that it is the true Christian Religion, as it is reformed from
the Errors and Superstitions of the Popish Church, and is contained in the
harmony of the Protestant Church's Confessions, which agree in the chief and
principal Substantials, tho they may differ in lesser matters, and opinions
disputable; among which this our Confession is recorded. But tho we are under
no obligation to justify every Sentence or Article thereof, yet it deserves so
much reverence from us, as to justify it, so far as we may, from any charge of
Error or, Heterodoxy; and the rather that, upon due trial and examination,
there seems nothing to be contained in it which is not agreeable to the
charitable Analogy of Faith, and may not admit of a very fair, true and
orthodox sense and interpretation, as the following Answers to the Scruples and
Objections arising upon it, will sufficiently evince.

It is objected by some then, 1. That in the third Ar^. of Original Sin it is
said, That by it the Image of God was utterly defaced in man; which seems to
run cross to the stream of the Protestant Doctrine, which aslerts, That the
Remains of the Divine Image still abide in the Soul, notwithstanding of man's
fall. The answer is easy, if we shall carefully distinguish betwixt defacing
of the Image of God, which imports no more than a darkning or maiming thereof,
and utter destroying of that Image, which implies the total subversion or
abolition of it; and that the former is allowed by all sound Protestants.

It is objected, 2. That Art. 17. it is said, That it is blasphemy to affirm,
that men who live according to equity and justice, shall be saved, whatsoever
Religion they profess, since without Christ Jesus there is neither life nor
salvation; which some think a very uncharitable doctrine, barring all the
Ancient Philosophers, and Moralists, such as Plato, Seneca, Socrates, Plutarch,
etc. from eternal life and salvation. Answer 1. That Clause is but a
consequence drawn from the 16th Article, rather than any essential part of its
doctrine, as will appear upon the perusal. 2. It is most infallibly true, that
there is no Name under Heaven by which salvation can be obtained, but the Name
of Jesus; which imports at least a sense of sin, and of the necessity of
expiating the same, and of propitiating God toward the sinner in every one that
shall be saved; which by some is termed an implicit knowledge of Christ Jesus,
who alone is the grand Propitiation, and such a knowledge as the moral Gentiles,
and even the Jews had before the Revelation and Exhibition of the Person of the
Messiah, in the fullness of time; and how far an implicit knowledge of Jesus
Christ in his Doctrine and Offices, before his exhibition in time, is necessary
to salvation, is not of easy determination. And therefore, 3. This Clause must
be supposed to respect the Gospel Economy, and Evangelical dispensation, and
to extend to such as are blessed with the manifestation of the Gospel, and
clear revelation of Jesus Christ thereby; And in this sense it is beyond all
doubt, that none come to age, and the clear exercise of Reason, in an ordinary
way, shall be saved, but such only as believe in him, own his Doctrine, and
sincerely obey his holy Precepts.

It is objected, 3. That from the 19th Article, the interpretation of the
sacred Scripture appertains to the Spirit of God, by which the Scripture was
dictate and written, and no^ to any person, or Church, for any Pre-eminence or
Prerogative; personal or local; which seems to cut off all power of
interpreting Scriptures from the Ancient Fathers, or General Councils. Answ.
The harmonious Doctrine of the Protestant Church is, That the Spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures is as the best Judge, so the only best and infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, whereby, tho the primary and authoritative
Interpretation of the Scripture is ascribed to that blessed Spirit yet thereby
is not denied to the Fathers and Councils a ministerial and declaratory power,
in expounding the sacred Word, which is of great weight and authority with all
Christians; who needs must believe these holy persons and Assemblies to be
ordinarily assisted by the light and conduct of his holy Spirit, who promised
to be with his Church to the end of the world.

It is objected, 4. That Article 19. the right administration of the Sacraments
is one of the Notes of the true Church of God. And Art. 23. requires to the
right administration of the Sacraments, that they be ministered in such
Elements, and in such sort as God has appointed; whence some would infer, That
all such Churches as use circumstances in the administration thereof which are
not appointed by God, as the mixing of Water with Wine in the holy Eucharist,
or of Oil with Water in Baptism, must be by this Doctrine unchurched. Ans. When
the 23d. Article requires to a true Church, that the Sacraments be administered
in such sort as God has appointed, it mainly relates to the words of
Consecration, and to the institution, which indeed are essentially requisite to
the very being of the Sacraments, these being null which are celebrated without
them, and not according to the institution. As for the Elements, tho these be
necessary, at least in ordinary cases, yet the mixtures and superadditions to
these appointed Elements do not absolutely nullify, tho they do corrupt the
Sacraments. And that this is the meaning of the 23d Article appears clear from
the words immediately following, viz. else we affirm; that they cease to be the
right Sacraments of Christ Jesus, where they are not denied simply to be
Sacraments, but are charged as Sacraments not rightly and duly administered, as
these are which are not vitiated and adulterated by superstitious mixtures.

It is objected 5. from that same Article 23. That to the being of lawful
Ministers it is required, that they be men lawfully chosen thereto by some
Kirk; which seems to import the necessity of popular Elections, and to cancel
the Rights of Patronages, and to unminister such as are presented by them.
Answ. All Ministers presented by Patrons are elected by the Churh, in as much
as Edicts are served, whereby the peoples consent is legally obtained before
the person presented be collated or inducted to the particular Flock or
Congregation; And that by this Article Laik Patronages are not annulled appears
evident by the seventh Act of the Parliament, 1667. wherein the same Confession
of Faith, and all its Articles are authorized, and therefore cannot be supposed,
by any Article of the foresaid Confession, to have been intended to be cast and
overturned.

It is objected, 6. That in the 15. Article amongst works which are reputed to
be good before God to repress Tyranny is enumerate for one, which seems to
encourage resistance and rebellion against the Supreme Civil Powers. Answ.
Besides what may be said concerning Tyranny in inferior Judges, Magistrates,
and other subordinate Superiors, the repression whereof is certainly a good
work; If we consider Tyranny in the Supreme Magistrate, it can only be said
repressable by fair, just and lawful means: For i^ possumus quod jure possumus:
To suppress Tyranny by resistance or rebellion were to do evil that good may
come of it, contrary to the Apostolical Rule and injunction; but to suppress
Tyranny by a regular assisting to make good Laws, by devout prayers, and pious
Instructions and exhortations, may well be reckoned among good works.

It is objected, 7. That in the 23. Article the Popish Ministers are no
Ministers of Jesus Christ, which is contrary both to the doctrine, and practice
of all sound Protestant Churches. Answ. 1. That Assertion is not contained in
the doctrinal part of that Article 23. but is a Corollary illogically deduced
from the first part thereof; and we are not concerned in the ill Consequences
and Paralogisms, which may be found in any of these Articles. 2. All Protestant
Churches do acknowledge the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Romish Church
to be real and ordained Ministers of the Catholic Church, owning the
Ordination of their Ministers to be derived in its succession from them: So
that without unchurching themselves they must needs believe these to be really
Ministers; and the practice of Protestants does universally demonstrate this:
Inso much that when a Romish Priest comes over from them, and reconciles
himself to the Protestant Church, he is allowed to exercise all the parts, and
functions of the holy Ministry, without any new ordination: So that the meaning
must be, either 1. That many are reputed Ministers in the Romish Church which
indeed ^^o no Ministers of Jesus Christ, viz Deacons, Acolyths, and Exorcists,
etc. and as follows in the Article, even women among them are allowed to
baptize, who sure are none of Christ's Ministers. Or 2. That they are no pious
and faithful Ministers, nor such as Christ will own to be his, as is insinuate
in the foresaid History of Reformation of the Church of Scotland, p. 251. where
it calls all Popish Ministers then in this Kingdom, Thieves, Murderers, Rebels,
Traitors, etc Or 3. That they were not duly elected Ministers, as is asserted
ibid. Or in fine, That they are not sound or incorrupted Ministers. For
according to the harmony of the Protestant Confessions, among which this
Confession of ours is inserted, the Ministers of the Popish Church are owned to
be true and real Ministers, in the same sense wherein that Church is
acknowledged to be a true, and real Church, tho not a sound and pure one; even
as we say, that a Leprous or Paralitik man is a true and real man, tho not a
healthful and sound man: as this same Confession, Article 17. calls the Church
at Jerusalem, consisting of Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, etc. no Church of God,
by reason of the corruptions thereof, wherein must be meaned no sound or
incorrupt Church of God, as appears from the Title, viz. Of the Notes by which,
etc.

Many other Particulars may perhaps be excepted against, which are contained in
that Confession, besides these which are here considered, and which we are not
concerned much to notice, or to dip upon the Authority enacting, or authorizing
that Confession at the first forming thereof, since it is inserted in the Test
only designative, as pointing to that Ancient system, wherein the substantials
of the Protestant Religion are to be found, (as was declared openly in
Parliament, when some more zealous than considerate, would needs press the
mentioning of it in this Oath) which must be presumed to be the alone use of
that Confession in this Test, since upon this account the Articles thereof were
refused so much as to be read in Parliament, as being no part of our Oath, and
formerly ratified by Law, at the passing of the Act, enjoy^ing the same: For if
the words of the Oath be seriously weighed, we shall find, that by this Test we
swear to own, prosess, and believe not every Article, or every Proposition, or
every Consequence in that Confession; but only the true Protestant Religion
contained therein, and which Religion we believe to be founded on, and
agreeable to he written word of God; to the which Religion we bind our selves
to adhere all the days of our life, and to educate our children therein etc So
that if there be any Article, or proposition, or consequence contained in that
Consession, which is contrary, or repugnant to the true Protestant ^eligion to
be found in the
harmony of Confessions; We do not swear to own o^ believe it. If it be
replied, that by that Oath and Test, we swear to disown and renounce all
Principles, Doctrines, and Practices, which are contrary to, and inconsistent
with the said Protestant Religion, and Confession of Faith, and that therefore
we are bound to own and believe all Principles and Doctrines which are
contained in the Confession foresaid. Ans 1. The Confession of Faith repeated
in this clause cannot be supposed to be understood otherways than as it is
taken in the former, which is only designative, and denoting the system where
the Protestant Doctrine is to be found, ut supra. 2: The words of the Oath do
sufficiently clear up this seeming difficulty, which are, That I disown and
renounce all such Doctrines, Principles and Practices, Popish or Fanatical,
which are contrary to, etc. So that unless there be errors, or Heterodox
Doctrines, which are neither Popish nor Fanatical, discovered to be contained
in the Confession foresaid, no shadow of scruple can be rationally entertained
upon this account; and tho there were, yet it is apparent, that the intention
of the Parliament, in inserting that Confession into this Oath, was only so far
as it stands in opposition to Popery and Fanticism, and no further: So that if
there be any Doctrines which oppose any part or Article of that Confession,
which are neither Popish nor Fanatical, we are not bound by this part of the
Oath to renounce them: and no sound loyal Protestant will scruple to renounce
all such Doctrines and Principles which are either Popish or Fanatical, which
are repugnant to this Confession foresaid To close up this Head of Objections
drawn from the Confession foresaid, it is to be considered, that the famous and
^earned Doctors of Aberdeen, Anno 1638. in their Demands and Duplys, do in
Demand 11. declare and take God to witness, that they, and other people, were
willing to subscribe this very Confession of Faith. And 11: Duply, They assert,
that they are ready, not only to subscribe, but to swear this National
Confession of Faith, (so they call it) ratified, and registered in Parliament.
To which Declaration they add the Oath sworn by them, when they received the
degree of Doctorat in Theology, which Oath they solemnly again renew in the 7.
Duply. And this they judged necessary for them to do, to satisfy the world,
that they were no favorers of Popery, which, as then, so now, is the Engine
whereby to calumniate loyal Subjects, and soundest Protestants, as Papists in
masquerade. By which we understand, that these learned loyal Divines, and
Orthodox, (the glory of the Reformed Church in their Age) who well understood
the Protestant Doctrine, the unlawfulness of resisting the supreme Magistrate
upon any pretense whatsoever, the intrinsik power of the Church, together with
the Interests and Rights of Episcopal Government, did not scruple to subscribe
and swear this Confession of Faith, and that as a Test against Popish Errors
and Supersition. So that they who shall now refuse to swear to own and believe
the true Protestant Religion, reformed from Popery, contained in this
Confession, do occasion too much umbrage of suspicion and jealousy that they
are not sound nor solid Protestants.

As to the second Head or Classis of Objections, drawn from the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, which, together with the maintenance of the Kings
Prerogative, is asserted and sworn in the Test, the great stress of the
Objections founded thereupon lies in these two Particulars: That the Kings
Supremacy, as it is asserted by the Act of Parliament, viz 16 Anno 1669. seems
to deprive and divest the Church of all its intrinsic Power; as if all
Ecclesiastical Authority were derived not from Jesus Christ, the alone Prince,
and Vital Head of his Church, but from secular Princes and Magistrates. And 2.
That by the foresaid Act there seems to be a Power lodged in the King, to alter
and change the established Episcopal Government of the Church, at his Royal
pleasure, which they can never swear to maintain as a Prerogative of the Crown
who believe Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, and Apostolical Institution, and
by consequence, an oecumenick and unalterable Government by any power on earth.

For the more clear satisfaction of these Objections, it will be convenient to
read and consider that Act of Parliament, November the 16th. 1669: (in which,
upon due perusal and examination, nothing new or dangerous to the setlement of
our National Church, will be found comprehended. Our Savior was very
unconcerned to regulate the bounds of Sovereign Powers: he does not examine
Pilate's Power to judge of Blasphemy or Treason, but acknowledges and submits
unto it: And so his Apostles neither enquire into the Rights of the Roman
Emperors, nor limit the exercise of their Power, but seriously recommend to all
good Subjects, as their duty, submission and obedience to the higher Powers:
and they leave the secular Powers of the world in possession of whatever
Authority, either over persons or matters, they found them invested with. The
Magistrate does not entitle himself to the Spiritual Function, in preaching the
Word, administering the Sacraments, exercising the Power of Ordination, or the
Keys, etc. Our gracious King never challenged these spiritual Powers, which
indeed belong to the Bishops and other Ministers of the Church. The holiest and
best Kings of Israel and Judah, are famous for abolishing false Worship,
asserting and settling of the Truth: Many excellent Ordinances concerning
Religion were made by Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa, Iosiab, etc. which
are recorded and applauded by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures. These
ordered and regulated divine worship, Sacraments, and Covenants with God; they
erected Altars, Temples, and Tabernacles, and dedicated them to God: They
destroyed Idolatry, reformed abuses in Gods House and service, and both settled
the standing worship, and ordained Thanksgivings, and Humiliations; so that the
ordering of matters of Religion was not exempted from the supreme secular Power
under the Law; nor did the Emperors and Sovereign Princes of the earth by
embracing Christianity lose their Power enjoyed by all their Predecessors,
which if they had, they should have been thereby inevitably exposed to the
disturbances of their Government by Seditions and Rebellions upon every
frantic eruption of religious Melancholy. If Constantine had not interposed
his Authority for suppressing the Arrian Heresy, what had become either of
Government or Religion? The drawing up of Canons for regulating Religion our
Lord committed to the Apostles and their Successors the Bishops with other
Ecclesiastical persons: but that these Canons should be enforced as Laws by
temporal sanctions and penalties, this flowed from the authority of the Civil
Power: And accordingly in the second ecumenical Council, the Bishops and
Fathers assembled at Constantinople beseech Theodosius the elder to ratify the
Decrees of that Synod. Justinian established the main Canon or Cod^x of the
Universal Church, consisting of the Canons of the first general and five
Ancient provincial Councils, commanding them to be keept as Laws.

As matters of Religion have not been exempted from the cognizance and
regulation of the Supreme Civil Powers, much less can the exemption of
Ecclesiastical persons be pretended. Under the Law, we find Solomon judging an
High Priest offending, viz. Abiathar, whom he turned out, and placed Zadock in
his Room and Office, 1 King. 2. 27, 35. and as single persons, so if we
consider Church Officers in their Ecclesiastical Meetings and Assemblies, we
find the Calling thereof lodged in the supreme Magistrate; for Moses, not
Aaron, David, not Abiathar, Solomon, not Zadock, summoned the Priests and
Levites to the Meetings, so under the Gospel, in the pure and primitive times,
we find no Councils, nor Synods called by the Bishop of Rome, nor by any other
Bishop, or by any other Ministers forming themselves into Classical and
Synodical Meetings, against, or without the Consent of the Christan Prince or
Magistrate. To any who will be at the pains to consult Antiquty or
Ecclesiastical History, it will evidently appear, that the indiction of times
and places, the convocating of persons, the precedence, the ordering of
debates, the dismission of Assemblies, the confirmation of Canons so as to
enforce them as Laws in the General or Provincial Councils, were all performed
by the supreme Magistrate. St. Paul himself appealed to Caesar, when arraigned
and called in question for his Religion; and Athanasius appealed from the Synod
at Tire to Constantine, to whom were two appeals made in the case of Cassianus
and Donatus, besides many other instances of the like nature. And it were
heartily to be wished, that all Churchmen and Ministers whatsoever were
thoroughly convinced of the doctrine and duty of their obedience to the Supreme
Powers, otherways as they grow popular they become dangerous: Sacerdoces eo
quidem sunt ingenio, ut ni pareant territent St. Chrysostom comments
excellently on Romans 13, v. 1. 2. Let every soul be subject, saying, whether he
be an Apostle or Evangelist, a Prophet, etc. let him be subject to the higher
Powers. Our blessed Savior and the Apostles were the most eminent
Ecclesiastical persons, yet did not think themselves exempted from the
Authority and Jurisdiction of the Civil Powers; and if the 24th. Article of the
Confession of Faith, mentioned in the Test, be considered, it will be found to
grant as much to the Civil Magistrate as here is asserted and yielded.

Yet all this power belonging to the supreme Magistrate over religious persons
and matters does not interfer with, nor suppress the intrinsik and essential
Power, and Authority of the Church; for the Church's power is internal and
spiritual, and the power of the supreme Magistrate is external, coercive and
temporal; which, when duly weighed in a just balance, will be found not only
to be poised of just different kinds and natures, but so far from interfering
with or destroying one another, that if duly and rightly managed, they do
mutually assist and support each other. Beside, the sense of the Oath of
Supremacy asserted in a Speech delivered by B. James Usher then Bishop of
Mead, and afterward Primate of Ireland, at Dublin, November. 22. 1622. for
which he received the thinks of King James the sixth, the Solomon of his Age,
by a Letter from His Majesty, dated the 11. day of January 1623. is so clear
and plain, that it leaves no place for any manner of scruple concerning the
intrinsic power of the Church, as if it were invaded and incroached upon by
the foresaid Oath; where it is said, That the Kings Supremacy reaches the
outward man only, but the spiritual and intrinsic power of the Church reaches
to the inward; this binding or loosing the soul, that laying hold only on the
body, and things belonging thereto: Yea, there is an Act of the Parliament of
England, 13. Eliz. declaring, That by the supreme Government given to the
Prince is understood that kind of Government only which is exercised with the
Civil Sword.

So that there is nothing can be more evident than that by the Kings Supremacy,
as asserted by the Act November 16. 1669. no incroachment or invasion is made
upon the spiritual intrinsic power of the Church. Besides, by the very express
words of that assertory Act, No more is declared to belong to the King, save
the ordering and disposal of the external Government and Policy of the Church.
And again, The administration of the external Government of the Church; where
not a syllable can be found touching upon the internal, spiritual, and
essential power and jurisdiction thereof And as to the word, matters, contained
in that Act, and the Kings emitting Orders concerning religious matters as well
as persons, it needs stumble no thinking person, as if our Religion were
thereby exposed to dangers at the pleasure of the Prince, if we consider the
following words, viz. Matters to be proposed and determined in Ecclesiastical
Meetings or Assemblies, which reserves the power of determining matters of
Religion still in the hands of that Meeting or Assembly: So that tho the King,
may, by virtue of his RoyalSupremacy, propose any matter of Religion to a
National As^. Yet it is not to pass unto an act, till first it be determined by
the deliberate and free consent, vote and suffrage of the major part of that
Ecclesiastical Meeting. And now let the Impartial Judge, if any so great
security for the true Protestant Religion can be devised as to have all
Bishops, Ministers, and Members of a National Synod (to whom the determining of
matters of Religion by Law belongs), solemnly sworn and bound by this Oath and
Test, to adhere to the same Protestant Religion all the days of their lives,
and never to consent to any alteration or change thereof.

As for the other Objection of these who think that by this assertory Act,
1669. there is a power declared to be vested in the King, to alter, and change
the Established Episcopal Government of this National Church, which these who
believe Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, and Apostolical Institution, and by
consequence, unalterable by any humane Authority, can never swear to belong to
the Crown, as an Inherent Right and Prerogative thereof.

For answer: Tho this point of the Divine Right of Episcopacy is tenderly to be
touched, the Phrase of Jus Divinum being in terms subject to misconstruction;
yet it must be acknowledged, that no form of Church - Government was ever yet
modelled, or set up, which has not claimed to a Jus Divinum, as well as
Episcopacy, tho every one of them, with far more noise, but with far less
reason than this has done, For the Papists ground the Popes Ecumenical
Supremacy upon Christ's Commands, to St. Peter, to execute it, and to all the
Flock of Christ, Sovereign Princes as well as others, to submit to him, as to
their Universal Pastor. The Presbyterians cry up their model of Government, tho
of a very late Edition, as the very Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, to which all
Kings are bound to submit theirs, making it also unalterable, and as inevitably
necessary to the being of a Church, as the Word and Sacraments. The
Independents assert, that any single Confederate Congregation is, Jure Divino,
free and absolute within it self, to govern it self by such Rules as shall be
consented to by its Members; without dependence from any, except Jesus Christ
alone, or subjection to any Prince, Bishop, or any other Person, or Consistory
whatsoever: So that all these other flatly deny the Kings Supremacy, and claim
a Power and Jurisdiction over him, The Presbyterians agreeing with the Papists
in this branch of Antichristianism, and claiming to their Consistories as full
and absolute Jurisdiction over Princes, even to the highest censure by
Excommunication, as the Romanists challenge to belong to the Pope; or pleading,
at least, a privilege of exemption from the Kings Authority and Jurisdiction,
The Independents exempting their Congregations from all Ecclesiastical
subjection to Christian Kings, in asample manner as there Papists do their
Clergy: whereas the Protestant Bishop, and regular Ministers, as becomes good
Christians, and dutiful Subjects, do neither pretend to any Jurisdiction over
the King, nor withdraw their Subjection from him, but humbly acknowledge His
Majesty to have Sovereign Power over them, as well as over his other Subjects,
and that in all matters, Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal.

But for a more closse Answer to this Objection, They who believe the
Indifferency of the forms and models of Church-Goverment cannot have any
scruple on this Head, in regard of the present Church Government. For should it
be changed by Authority, then are they not obliged by this
Oath any longer to own it: Cessante enim materia juramenti, cessat ejusdem
obligatio: radice obligationis sublata, tollitur ^^a pullulans inde obligatio.
according to all Casuists. Juramentum sequitur naturam and conditionem actus
cui adjungitur, id est, materiae circa quam versatur, sicut accessorium
sequitur naturam sui principalis, accessorium extinguitur cum principale cadit,
D. Sandersone. These who believe Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, have no
cause to fear that ever the King will alter this specific form of
Church Government, neither inclination, nor interest moving him to it: The
Aphorism so usual with His Majesty's Royal Grandfather, No Bishop no King,
cannot but make deep impression on His Majesty, and must be considered not only
as a sentence full of present truth when it was uttered, but a sad prophecy of
the Tragical events which after ensued: And as the greatest and most politic
Underminers of the Monarchy did of late, so their successors continue still to
make their oblique and first assaults upon it, by raising their batteries
against the settled Episcopacy. 3: If the words of that assertory Act be
sedately weighed, they will not be found to bear the weight of this Objection,
for the odds are vast betwixt them, a power to order, and dispose the external
Government, and Policy of the Church, together with the ordering of the
administration of the external Government of the Church, which are the words of
that Act, and the power of altering and changing the specific and essential
Government of the Church; the former relating to the Ecclesiastical ordering of
Ecclesiastical Persons, Matters and Meetings as the Act it self expressly bears.
The King may, and ought to have the ordering, and disposing, and administration
of the external Government of the Church, without claiming a power to alter or
change the very
Species, Body, and essence of it. Nor may we in charity presume, that our
Gracious King challenges any such power to himself, by virtue of that Act
assertory; nor does it hinder any to believe Episcopal Government to be
institute of God, that, in the exercise and external administration thereof, it
is subject to the Orders and Authority of the Prince: for the same power may be
said to be from Heaven, and to be of men under different notions, and respects;
to be from Heaven, and of God, in respect of the substance of the thing in
general, and to be of men, in respect of the determination of sundry
particulars requisite to the lawful and laudable exercise thereof: Tho the
Ministerial Power be of God, yet are the Ministers, in executing the Acts
proper to their Ministerial Functions, regulated and ordered by Ecclesiastical
Laws, Canons of the Church, or Acts of General Assemblies: Nor does the
derivation of any power from God necessarily infer the Non-subjection of the
persons in whom that power is vested to any others, as to the managing and
exercise thereof: For the power which Fathers have over their Children,
Husbands over their Wives, Masters over their Servants, is from Heaven, of God,
and not of Men; yet are Parents, Husbands, Masters, in the exercise of their
several respective powers, subject to the powers, Jurisdictions, and Laws of
the lawful Sovereigns. It will prove a very difficult task for any man to find
out a clear and satisfying reason of difference, in this present case, betwixt
the Ecclesiastical power and Oeconomical, why the one, because it claims to
be of Divine Right, should be therefore exempted from the Regulation of it, in
its exercise, by humane Laws, and not the other, which flows from Heaven, and
is equally of Divine Right with the former. 5. In fine, All such who have sworn
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, since the assertory Act was made, Anno
1669* can have no pretense to scruple the taking of this Test, upon account of
any thing contained in the Act of Supremacy, already sworn by them, in as much
as they must be understood to have taken that Oath in the sense of the
Lawgivers who framed that Act.

Before we come to the Third Classis of Objections, it will be necessary to say
something for satisfaction of the Doubts of some who apprehend contradictions
betwixt some expressions in the Consession of Faith, and others in the same
Consession; and betwixt some assertions therein, and others in the Test: So
that they think by taking this Oath they shall he ensnared to swear to
contradictory Propositions. Two are instanced, that in the Article concerning
the Immortality of Souls, it is said, That the Elect departed this life are
delivered from all torment; And yet in the same Article it is asserted, That
neither the Elect nor Reprobate are in such sleep after death that they feel no
torment. To this seeming contradiction it is answered, 1. That this flows from
the mistake and error of the Printer alone, and not from any fault in the
Confession: For in that History of the Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland, of
the foresaid Edition, the later part of the Article runs thus: So that neither
the one nor the other are in such sleep that they feel nothing; Which clearly
takes off all shadow of Contradiction, as well as the error of those against
whom that Article seemsto be levelled. But finally, the Latin Paraphrase of it,
in the Harmony of Confessions, takes off all difficultly: For there the words
run thus, Adeo ut neque hi neque illi ita dormiant ut non sentiant in qua
condition versentur. Another seeming contradiction, is betwixt the Confession
and the Test, viz. Art. 25. it is said, That they who resist the supreme Powers
(doing that which belongs to their charge) resist Gods Ordinance, and they who
deny to them their aid, counsel, comfort, etc (while the Prince^ and Rulers
vigilantly travel in the execution of their Office,) these deny their help and
support to God: which words seem to disallow the resisting of the supreme
Magistrate, only conditionally, and in a limited and restricted sense. Again
the Oath and Test assert, That it is unlawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up arms against the King, or these commissionate by him; which does
declare the resisting of the Sovereign power to be simply and absolutely
unlawful, without any restriction or limitation.

Ans. Here is no Contradiction, if the Logical Rules be observed: For, to
resist the Supreme Powers doing that which pertains to their charge is to
resist Gods Ordinance, and not to resist the Supreme Powers, doing that which
pertains to their charge, is to resist Gods Ordinance, were indeed a
contradiction: but to resist the Supreme Powers doing that which appertains to
their charge, is to resist Gods Ordinance: and to resist the Supreme Powers,
upon whatsoever pretense, is to resist Gods Ordinance, imports no manner of
contradiction. And so of the other proposition, To deny aid, counsel, etc.
while Princes and Rulers vigilantly travel, etc. in the execution of their
Office, and not to deny aid, counsel, etc. while, etc are contradictions: but
to deny aid, counsel, etc. while Princes and Rulers vigilantly travel: and to
deny aid, counsel etc. to Princes and Rulers, upon no pretense whatsoever,
implies nothing of a contradiction. 3. When it is told. That at the very time
of the framing and enacting of the Test, this Confession was represented to be
wanting and defective in the Doctrine of the absolute unlawfulness of resisting
the Sovereign Magistrate: and that therefore it was necessary, that agreeably
to the peaceable and loyal protestant Doctrine, something might be inserted in
the Test to make that point more clear, full, and perspicuous, which
accordingly was done: And whatever bad use might be made of the clause in the
25th Article, the scruple it self not being exempted from the wresting of
unlearned and perverse men, for serving ill designs and purposes, by some
bus^ie and seditious Spirits, to introduce the Doctrine of Conditional
Allegiance, which was openly advanced by the late Covenant, and solemn League;
Yet the Assertion contained in the words of that Article is undoubtedly true
and certain. vi^ That the lawful Magistrate is not to be resisted, while he
does what pertains to his charge, and travels vigilantly in the execution of
his Office: tho it be not full enough, or sufficiently extensive, but is more
clearly and fully supplied and asserted in the Oath or Test it self: So that
the Doctrine of the unlawfulness of resistance, asserted in the Test, is more
comprehensive and full, but no way contrary, or contradictory thereto. And
indeed it were most impious uncharitableness for any to suppose that the same
Persons and Authority which asserteth and determines the absolute unlawfulness
of resisting in one branch of an Oath, should in another branch of the same
Oath, allow of conditional resistance, especially while they proceed gravely
and deliberately, after a plain representation of the defects of the
Confession, in this very point of Doctrine. So that the Oath being to be taken
according to the sense and meaning of the framers and imposers thereof. It is
clear as light, that the late Session of Parliament, which injoins this Oath,
understood the Doctrine concerning the unlawfulness of resistance, in the
simple and absolute sense supplied and expressed in the later part of the ^est,
that thereby the Protestant Doctrine might be vindicated from all imputations
of disloyalty, in seeming to countenance any pretense of resisting and
rebelling against the Lawful Power which God in his providence had set over
them.

The 3d. head or classis of Objections is drawn from that of asserting the
unlawfulness of convocating or assembling in any Councils, Conventions, etc. to
consult or determine, in any matter of State, etc. whence some Object and say,
That this cuts off intrinsic power from the Church of holding Religious
Assemblies, and Church Courts, for giving ordination, and for spiritual
censures, etc. To which it is sufficiently replied already by showing that the
spiritual and intrinsic power of the Church, as to this matter, is no ways
hurt and damnified, by making Church meetings, as to their external and
coercive power, depend upon the Supreme Magistrate his allowance and regulation.

The words of the Oath and Test do sufficiently clear up this mistake, which do
not bar Christian Subjects from Godly communications or quiet and peaceable
meetings for Religious Worship, in preaching the word, Administration of the
Sacraments, and the internal exercises of the power of the keys by ordination
and spiritual jurisdiction, censuring Offenders, and absolving penitents as the
Apostles and the Primitive Christians used in Ancient times of Infidelity and
persecution, but only obliges not to hold meetings or assemblies for treating,
consulting and determining in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastical,
etc. which in the plain sense and meaning relates to the external policy of the
Church, and Peace, Order, and Government of the World, viz. That they shall not
meet nor form themselves in Judicatories to make Laws, or to invade or overturn
the settled Estate and Government of the Church, or Kingdom, without the Kings
express Warrant or consent, which every sound and Loyal Protestant must needs
acknowledge he is bound not to endeavor, unless he should conclude that the
Sons of Peace are by the most peaceful institutions of the Word obliged to turn
Sons of Thunder, to disturb, and inflame the tranquillity of mankind.

3. When we assert the unlawfulness of meetings and conventions, it is
understood (except in ordinary Judgments.) Which clause is expressly inserted in
the 4th Act, 1 Sess. 1. Par. Char. 2d, whereby His Majesty's Royal Prerogative
is recognized, and which Prerogative is Sworn in the Test to be maintained and
defended. The holding of Green Tables and Church assemblies in the beginning of
the late fatal Rebellion against our late blessed King, and Martyr, without and
against His Majesty's Warrant and License, does sufficiently discover the
dangers, as well as the sinfulness of Church Convocations and Illegal Meetings,
so that unless a man discover himself too forward to commence new Tumults and
Insurrections, he will beware to entertain such Principles which tend so openly
to advance and promote them

The 4. and last classis of Objections, which militate against the Oath and
Test, is drawn from that clause, which asserts. That there lies no obligation
from the Covenants, or Solemn League or Covenant, or any other manner of way
whatsoever, to endeavor any Change or Alteration in the Government, either in
Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws of this Kingdom: Whence
some object and say, That no Policy or Government in the world is so perfect as
not in something to need correction and amendment, which every one that is
entrusted with the management thereof, ought to endeavor, and in his proper
station, to reform and better it, and therefore it seems unlawful to swear
never to endeavor any alteration in the Government, Civil or Ecclesiastik. And
seeing endeavor here may refer to the forementioned means of Leagues,
Covenants, Councils, Conventions and Assemblies, relating to State Affairs
Ecelesiastik or Civil, or of taking up of Arms, [which no pious or loyal
Subject will decline to renounce] without the Kings express license: It is
obvious, that by change or alteration in the Government, nothing else can be
reasonably understood, but the subversion of the specifik established
Government, or of the fundamental Constitution thereof; and not of every
circumstance,
or unnecessary part thereof, as is cleared beyond doubt, by the same
Parliament which formed and enjoined this Oath and Test. Wherein many excellent
Acts are made for bettering and securing the Government, both in Church and
State: So that it cannot be supposed, that by this clause, any regular
endeavor to rectify or better the established Government of both, is
renounced; but only such impious and
irregular endeavors and attempts as intend to shake or subvert the substance,
species, and body of the Monarchy and Episcopacy or the fundamental Laws and
Constitutions thereof. Hence it appears a mere quible, to cavil upon the
Particle, (as) it is established; which some think had been better expressed
by, (which) is established by Law, since by what is said, the Particle (as) is
not to be taken reduplicative, but specificative, relating to the species, and
substance of the Government. And it is a cavil, no less f^ivoious, which is
made upon the Particle (in) ^he Government; which they say had been been better
expressed, of the Government, since that Particle (in,) must neither relate to
the substance, species, and fundamentals of these Governments, to endeavor the
alteration or change whereof is entirely unlawful by this Oath; or it must be
interpreted by the Parricle (of), by which the sinfulness of any Subjects
endeavoring the change or subversion of the settled Monarchy, and Episcopacy,
is sworn and asserted. The last clause in the Test ^^e^^ing it to be taken in
the plain and genuine sense and meaning of the words, without any equivocation
or men
tal reservation. etc does not exclude the sensing and interpreting the same by
the common Rules of Speech, as well as of Justice and equity.

This Interpretation imports no more than singly to make clear and plain any
word or sentence therein, which may seem to any to be dark or dubious, which
serves only to disco ver the genuine sense of the
Oath, and the true design and meaning of the imposers thereof; which is all
that by this essay is undertaken and endeavored. And if a man may swear to
believe the Articles of the Apostolik Creed, or the several petitions of the
Lords Prayer, or the Doctrine contained in the Ten Commands of the Moral Law,
without any equivocation, mental reservation, or evasion, etc. which yet he
cannot do, without an interpretation put upon some Articles of the Creed, viz.
of the descent into Hell, and upon some Petitions in the Lords Prayer; as Give
us this day our daily bread, and on some of the Ten Commandments, as the Fifth,
and the words of the Fourth Commandment: then may we also swear this Oath, the
some words, or phrases in it need a sense or illustration
to be put on them. Must a Christian abstain therefore from saying the Lords
Prayer? No. Neither for this need we to admit any ambiguity or equivocation:
The word certainly has but one true sense and signification; but diverse
persons understand them according to the different measures of their light.

These are the most ordinary and popular scruples of greatest seeming force,
which are commonly offered against this Oath and Test, and upon the issue they
appear to be founded upon mistakes of the true sense and meaning of some words
and clauses therein; and misconstructing of the design Authority had in framing
and imposing the same. And now we having been in duty so tender and
compassionate toward the Loyaland Regular Protestant Subjects, (this
Vindication being intended for the satisfaction neither of Papists nor
Fanatiks), as to endeavor by this short essay to clear these doubts and
scruples which might arise in their minds upon the Oath, that thereby they may
perceive the genuine sense of the same, whereby it clearly appears, that we are
not Sworn by it to maintain or believe every Article, assertion, or clause in
the Confession of Faith
therein mentioned, but only the true Christian Protestant Religion, as it is
reformed from the errors and superstitions of the Romish Church and other
Heresies; and that by it no power is asserted to belong to the Prince which is
inconsistent with, or destructive of the Specifik Established Government of the
Church, or the intrinsik or Spiritual Jurisdiction thereof; it may be fairly
hoped that all good and Peaceable Subjects with their Ministers and others will
meekly receive the Satisfaction here offered unto them, and compose their minds
to a cheerful acquiescence in the Wisdom of their Governors, who have judged
this Oath so necessary for defeating the pretended Obligations of many former
unlawful and Treasonable Oaths, and the best mean and expedient for securing
the Church and Protestant Religion, together with the Monarchy, from all danger
of Subversion from the Papists on the one hand, and the Fanatiks on the other.

It cannot but be looked on as a fatal thing, if any Conformist Ministers or
truly Loyal Protestants, for whose interest, Peace and Security, this Oath was
chiefly formed and enjoined, should not only, after what is said, continue to
entertain peevish scruples themselves, but undutifully to fill the minds of the
Populacie with prejudices as unjust as uncharitable against it, contrary to the
Rules of our most peaceable Religion, and therein following the steps of these
incendiaries who fatally fired the Kingdom in the late Age, by instilling
prejudices into the unwary Mobile from the Pulpits, or other ways, branding the
Actions of the K. and Par. as imposing things sinful and unlawful. This sure
will prove the greatest advantage the promoters of the Romish Interest will
propose to themselves against our Church and Religion, in as much as every
Schism and Breach amongst us, and concussion in the Ancient Government of our
Church, does visibly hazard the dissolution of the whole fabric of our
Religion.

And if things still go on at this rate, the explanation that some in our late
Distractions and Rebellion made of that passage, St. John 11. v. 45. Venient
Romani and capient gentem nostram, will prove too true a Prophecy, and Popery
will overturn all at last.

It is a wonder indeed to see how the Fanatical adversaries of this poor Church
have in so short a time been so strangely multiplied in their number, and
divided and subdivided into so many special opinions and Principles, crumbled
into factions and fractions, biting and ready to devour one another: And if
loyal Protestants also fall in pieces and by the ears among themselves, upon
most unseasonable and uncharitable scruples, may it not be feared, that the
vigilant adversary, who is intent upon all manner of advantages, will, when he
spieth his time, over-master all with the more ease and less resistance.

It cannot in charity be doubted, but the love of the Church's Peace and Unity,
Loyalty to the best of Monarchs, pious care for preserving and securing our
excellent Religion from Popery, Disloyalty, and Enthusiasm, with the zeal of
loyal and regular Ministers for the benefit and education of Christian Schools,
under their spiritual conduct, and the dutiful regard and deference men owe to
their spiritual and temporal Governors will prevail with humble, meek and
teachable minds, by interpreting all the actions of Authority in the best and
most favorable sense, to resolve and overcome all scruples, that stand in the
way of their duty, and frankly and readily to embrace what the most
transcendent Authority of this Nation has, from sincere and pious intentions,
enjoined and imposed, for so pious and excellent ends.

If this small Apology be read without gall or prejudice, the Reader will not
catch at Particles or Syllables, but studying the peace of this Church and
Kingdom, will receive without peevishness, prejudice or partiality, the
satisfaction which herein is with so much affection and charity endeavored and
tendered, then the pains herein taken shall be thought well placed and
employed.

EDINBURGH, Sederunt tertio Die Novembris 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc.
Athol Praeses, Montrose, Argyle, Winton, Linlithgow, Perth, Strathmore,
Roxburgh, Ancram, Airley, Balcarres, Lorn, Levingston, Bishop of Edinburgh,
Elphinston, Rosse, Dalziel, President of Session; Treasurer Deputy, Register,
Advocate, Justice Clerk, Collintoun, Lundie.
This day the Earl of Argyll having first openly declared his sense* as you
have it hereafter set down in his explication, took the Test, as a Privy
Councellor, and after he was called to, and had taken his place, the Councils
explication, which I have already mentioned, having been formerly read and
debated, was put to the vote, and passed, the Earl not voting thereto, as has
been remarked.

Edinburgh, the 3d day of November, 1681. The Privy Councils Explanation of the
Test.
FOrasmuch as some have entertained jealousies, and prejudices aganst the Oath
and Test appointed to be taken by all persons in publik Trust. Civil,
Ecclesiastical, or Military, in this Kingdom, by the Sixth Act of His
Maje(...)ies Third Parliament; as if thereby they were to swear to every
Proposition or Clause of the Confession of Faith therein mentioned, or that
invasion were made by it upon the intrinsik spiritual Power of the Church, or
Power of the Keys, or as if the present Episcopal Government of this National
Church, by Law established were thereby exposed to the hazard of alteration, or
subversion: All which are far from the intention, or design of the Parliament's
imposing this Oath, and from the genuine sense and meaning thereof: Therefore
His Royal Highness* His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of
Privy Council, do allow, authorize, and empower the Archbishops and Bishops to
administer this Oath and Test to the Ministers, in their respective Diocesses,
in this express sense: (1.) That tho the Confession of Faith, ratified in
Parliament 1567. was framed in the Infancy of Reformation, and deserves its due
praise yet by the Test we do not swear to every Proposition, or clause therein
contained, but only to the true Protestant Religion, founded on the word of
God, contained in that Confession as it as opposed to Popery and Fanaticism.
(2.) That by the Test, or any clause therein contained, no invasion or
encroatchment is made or intended upon the intrinsik spiritual power of the
Church, or power of the Keys, as it was exercised by the Apostles; and the most
pure and primitive Church, in the first three Centuries after Christ, and which
is still reserved entirely to the Church. (3.) That the Oath and Test is
without any prejudice to the Episcopal Government of this National Church,
which is declared by the first Act of the second Session of His Majesty's first
Parliament, to be most agreeable to the word of God, and most suitable to
Monarchy, and which upon all occasions His Majesty has declared he will
inviolably and unalterably preserve. And appoint the Archbishops, and Bishops
to require the Ministers in their respective Diocesses, with their first
convenience, to obey the Law in swearing and subscribing the foresaid Oath and
Test with certification, that the refusers shall be esteemed persons
disaffected to the Protestant Religion, and to his Majesty's Government; and
that the punishment appointed by the foresaid sixth Act of His Majesty's third
Parliament shall be impartially, and without delay inflicted upon them. By me.

Pet. Menzeis.

Sederunt quarto Die Novembris, 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc.
Montrose Praeses, Perth, Ancram, Levingston, President of Session, Advocate,
Winton, Strathmore, Airley, Bishop of Edinburgh, Treasurer Deputy, Lundie.
Linlithgow, Roxburgh, Balcaras, Elphynstoun, Register,
This day the Earl of Argyle being about to take the Test, as a Commissioner of
the Treasury, and having uponcommand produced a paper bearing the sense in
which he took the Test, the preceding day, and in which he would take the
same, as a Commissioner of the Treasury; Upon consideration thereof, it was
resolved, that he cannot sit in Council, not having taken the Test, in thesense
and meaning of the Act of Parliament, and therefore was removed.

The Earl of Argyle's Explication of the Test when he took it
I Have considered the Test, and I am very desirous to give obedience as far as
I can. I Am confident the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory
Oaths: Therefore I think no man can explain it but for himself. Accordingly I
take it, as far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion.
And I do declare That I mean not to bind up my self in my station, and in a
lawful way, to wish and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of
Church or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion and my Loyalty. And
this I understand as a part of my Oath.

But the Earl finding, as has been narrated, this his Explication, though
accepted, and approven by His Highness and Council, the day before, to be this
day carped and offended at, and advantages thereupon sought and designed
against him, did immediately draw up the following Explanation of his
Explication, and for his own vindication did first communicate it to some
privatlie, and thereafter intended to have offered it at his trial for clearing
of his defenses.

The Explanation of his Explication.
I Have delayed hitherto to take the Oath, appointed by the Pa(...)ent to be
taken, betwixt and the first of January nixt: but now being required, (...) two
months sooner to take it, this day peremptourly or to refuse. I have
considered the Test, and have seen several Objections moved against it,
especially by many of the Orthodox Clergy, notwithstanding whereof, I have
endeavored to satisfy my self with a just explanation which I here offer,
that I may both satisfy my conscience, and obey Your Highness, and Your
Lordships commands in taking the Test; though the Act of Parliament do not
simply command the thing, but only under a certification, which I could easily
submit to, if it were with Your Highness favor, and might be without offense,
but I love not to be singular, and I am very desirous to give obedience in this
and everything as far as I can, and that which clears me is that I am confident
whatever any man may think, or say to the prejudice of this Oath, the
Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; and because their
sense, (they being the framers and imposers) is the true sense, and that this
Test enjoined is of no private interpretation, nor are the Kings Statuts to be
interpreted but as they ^ear, and to the intent they are made, Therefore I
(...)nk no man, that is, no private person, can explain it for another, to amuse
or trouble ^im with (it may be) mistaken glosses. But every man as he is to
take it, so is to ex(...)ain it for himself and to endeavor to understand it,
(notwithstanding all these exce(...)ons) in the Parliaments, which is its true,
and genuine sense. I take it therefore notwithstanding any scruple made by any
as far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion which is
wholly in the Parliaments sense, and their true meaning; which [being present]
I am sure, was owned by all to be the securing of the Protestant Religion,
founded on the word of God, and contained in the Confession of Faith recorded
I. 6 p. 1. c. 4. And not out of scruple as if any thing in the Test did import
the contrary, but to clear my self from all cavils; as if thereby I were bound
up further then the true meaning of the Oath. I do declare that by that part
of the Test, that there lies no obligation on me etc. I mean not to bind up my
self, in my station, and in a lawful way, still disclaming all unlawful
endeavors, to wish, and endeavor any alteration I think, according to my
conscience, to the advantage of Church, or State, not repugnant to the
Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty and by my Loyalty, I understand no other
thing then the words plainly bear, to wit the duty and allegiance of all Loyal
Subjects and this explanation I understand as a part not of the Test or Act of
Parliament, but as a qualifying part of my Oath that I am to swear, and with it
I am willing to take the Test, if Your Royal Highness, and Your Lordships allow
me, or otherwise, in submission to Your Highness, and the Councils pleasure, I
am content to be held as a refuser at present.

The Councils Letter to His Majesty, concerning their having committed the Earl
of Argyle.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
THE last Parliament having made so many and so advantageous Acts, for securing
the Protestant Religion, the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, and your Majesty's
Sacred Person (whom God Almighty long preserve) and having, for the last, and
as the best way for securing all these, appointed a Test to be taken by all who
should be entrusted with the Government; which bears expressly, That the same
should be taken in the plain and genuine sense and meaning of the words; We
were
very careful, not to suffer any to take the said Oath or Test, with their own
Glosses or Explications: but the Earl of Argyle having, after some delays, come
to Council, to take the said Oath, as a Privy-Councellor, spoke some things
which were not then heard, nor adverted to, and when his Lordship at his next
offering to take it in Co^ncil, as one of the Commissioners of your Majesty's
Tresury, was commanded to take it simply, he refused to do so; but gave in a
Paper, showing the only sense in which he would take it, which Paper we all
considered, as that which had in it gross and scandalous Reflections upon that
excellent Act of Parliament, making it to contain things contradictory
and inconsistent; and thereby depraving your Majesty's Laws, misrepresenting
your Parliament, and teaching your Subjects to evacuate and disappoint all Laws
and Securities that can be enacted for the preservation of the Government;
suitable to which his Lordship declares in that Paper, That he means not to
bind up himself from making any alterations he shall think fit, for the
advantage of Church or State; and which Paper he desires may be looked upon as
a part of his Oath, as if he were the Legislator, and able to add a part to the
Act of Parliament. Upon serious perusal of which Paper we found our selves
obliged to send the said Earl to the Castle of Edinburgh, and to to transmit
the Paper to your Majesty, being expressly obliged to both these by your
Majesty's express Laws. And we have commanded your Majesty's Advocate to raise
a pursuit against the said Earl, forbeing Author, and having given in the said
Paper: And for the further prosecution of all relating to this Affair, we
expect your Majesty's Commands, which shall be most humbly and faithfully
obeyed by

Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and
Servants
Edinburgh, Nov. 8. 1681. Sic Subscribitur, Glencairne, Winton, Linlithgow,
Perth, Roxburgh, Ancram, Airlie, Levingstoun, Io. Edinburgen: Ross, Geo.
Gordoun, Chapter Maitland, G. Mckenzie, Ja. Foulis, I. Drumond.


The Kings Answer to the Councils Letter.
C. R.
November. 15. 1681.
MOst dear, etc. having in one of your Letters directed unto us, of the 8.
Instant, received a particular account of the Earl of Argyle's refusing to take
the Test simply, and of your proceedings against him, upon the occasion of his
giving in a Paper, showing the only sense in which he will take it, which had
in it gross and scandalous Reflections upon that excellent late Act of our
Parliament there, by which the said Test was enjoined to be taken; we have now
thought fit to let you know, that as we do hereby approve these your
Proceedings, particularly your sending the said Earl to our Castle of
Edinburgh; and your commanding our Advocate to raise a Pursuit against him, for
being Author of, and having given in the said Paper; so we do also authorize
you to do all things that may concern the further prosecution of all relating
to this Affair. Nevertheless, it is our express will and pleasure. That before
any Sentence shall be pronounced against him, at the Conclusion of the Process,
you send us a particular account of what he shall be found guilty of, to the
end that, after our being fully informed thereof, we may signify our further
pleasure in this matter. For doing whereof, etc.

But as notwithstanding the Councils demanding by their letter His Majesty's
allowance for prosecuting the Earl, they before any return caused His
Majesty's Advocat exhibit ane indictment against him, upon the points of
slandering and depraving, as has been already remarked so after having
received His Majesty's answer, the design grows, and they thought fit to
order a new indictment containing beside the former Points the crimes of
treason and perjury, which accordingly was exhibit, and is here subjoyned, the
difference betwixt the two indictments being only in the particulars above
noted.

The Copy of the Indictment against the Earl of Argyle.
Archibald Earl of Argyle,
YOU are indicted and accused, That albeit by the Common Law of all
wellgovern'd Nations, and by the Municipal Law and Acts of Parliament of this
Kingdom; and particularly, by the 21, and by the 43d Act, Par. 2 James 1. and
by the 83d Act, Par. 6. James 5. and by the 34th Act Par. 8. James 6. and the
134th Act, Par 8 James 6. and the 205th Act, Par. 14. James 6. All
leasing-makers, and tellers of them, are punishable with tinsel of Life and
Goods; like as by the 107th Act. Par. 7. James 1* it is statuted, That no man
interpret the Kings Statutes otherwise than the Statute bears, and to the
intent and effect that they were made for, and as the makers of them
understood; and whosoever does in the contrary to be punished at the Kings will:
And by the 10th Act, Par. 10. James 6. it is statuted That none of His
Majesty's Subjects presume or take upon him publikly to declare, or privately
to speak or write any purpose of reproach or slander of His Majesty's Person,
Estate or Government, or to deprave his Laws, or Acts of Parliament, or
mistconstrue his Proceedings, whereby any mistaking may be moved betwixt his
Highness, his Nobility, and loving Subjects, in time coming, under pain of
death; certifying them that does in the contrary, they shall be reputed as
seditious and wicked instruments, enemies to his Highness, and to the
Commonwealth of this Realm: and the said pain of death shall be executed
against them with all rigor, to the example of others: And by the second Act,
Ses. 2. Par. 1 Char. 2. it is statuted, That whosoever shall by writing,
libelling, remonstrating, express, publish, or declare any words or sentences,
to stir up the people to the dislike of His Majesty's Prerogative and
Supremacy, in causes Ecclesiastik, or of the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops, as it is now settled by Law, is under the pain of being
declared incapable to exercise any Office Civil, Ecclesiastik, or Military,
within this Kingdom, in any time coming. Like as by the fundamental Laws of
this Nation, By the 130th Act, Par 8. James 6. it is declared, That none of His
Majesty's Subjects presume to impugn the Dignity or Authority of the Three
Estates, or to procure innovation or diminution of their Power and Authority,
under the pain of Treason. And that it is much more Treason in any of His
Majesty's Subjects, to presume to alter Laws already made, or to make new Laws,
or to add any part to any Law by their own Authority, that being to assume the
Legislative Power to themselves, with his Majesty's highest, and most
incommunicable Prerogative. Yet true it is, That albeit His Sacred Majesty did
not only bestow on you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle those vast Lands,
Jurisdictons and Superiorities justly for faulted to His Majesty by the Crimes
of your deceased Father; preferring your Family to those who had served His
Majesty against it, in the late Rebellion, but also pardoned and remitted to
you the Crimes of leasing making and misconstruing His Majesty's and his
Parliaments proceedings against the very Laws above written, whereof you were
found guilty, and condemned to die therefore, by the High Court of Parliament,
the 25. of August, 1662. And raised you to the Title and Dignity of an Earl,
and being a member of all His Majesty's Judicatures. Notwithstanding of all
these, and many other Favors, you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle, Being put
by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to take the Test, appointed by the
Act of the last Parliament to be taken by all persons in publik Trust, you,
instead of taking the said Test, and swearing the same in the plain genuine
sense and meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental reservation,
or evasion whatsoever, you did declare against, and defame the said Act; and
having, to the end you might corrupt others by your pernicious sense, drawn the
same in a Libel, of which Libel you dispersed and gave abroad Copies, whereby
ill impressions were given of the King and Parliaments Proceedings at a time
especially when his Majesty's Subjects were expecting what submission should be
given to the said Test; and being desired the next day to take the same, as one
of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, you did give in to the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council and owned twice, in plain judgment before them, the
said defamatory Libel against the said Test and Act of Parliament; declaring,
That you had considered the said ^est, and was desirous to give obedience as
far as you could: whereby you clearly insinuated, that you was not able to give
full obedience: In the second Article of which Libel you declare, That you were
confident the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; thereby
to abuse the people with a belief, that the Parliament had been so impious as
really and actually to have imposed contradictory Oaths; and so ridiculous, as
to have made an act of Parliament (which should be most deliberate of all
humane Actions) quite contrary to their own intentions: after which you
subsumed contrary to the nature of all Oaths, and to the Acts of Parliament
above cited that every man must explain it for himself, and take it in his own
sense; by which not only that excellent Law, and the Oath therein specified,
which is intended to be a Fence to the Government both of Church and State, but
all other Oaths and Laws shall be rendered altogether useless to the
Government. If every man take the Oaths imposed by Law in his own sense, then
the Oath imposed is to no purpose: for the Legislator cannot be sure that the
Oath imposed by him will bind the takers according to the design and intent for
which he appointed it: and the Legislative Power is taken from the Imposers:
and settled in the taker of the Oath: And so he is allowed to be the Legislator,
which is not only an open and violent depraving of His Majesty's Laws and Acts
of Parliament, but is likewise a settling of the Legistative Power on private
Subjects, who are to take such Oaths. In the third Article of that Paper you
declare, That you take the Test in so far only as it is consistent with it
self, and the Protestant Religion; by which you maliciously intimate to the
people; That the said Oath is inconsistent with it self and with the Protestant
Religion, which is not only a downright depraving of the said Act of
Parliament, but is likewise a misconstruing of His Majesty's and the
Parliaments Proceedings, and misrepresenting them to the people in the highest
degree, and in the tenderest points they can be concerned; and implying, that
the King and the Parliament have done things inconsistent with the Protestant
Religion, for securing of which that Test was particularly intended. In the
Fourth Article you do expressly declare, that you mean not by taking the said
Test, to bind up your self from wishing and endeavoring any alteration in a
lawful way that you shall think fit, for advancing of Church and State; whereby
also it was designed by the said Act of Parliament and Oath, That no man should
make any alteration in the Government of Church and State, as it is now
established; and that it is the duty of all good Subjects, in humble and quiet
manner, to obey the present Government: Yet you not only declare your self, but
by your example you invite others to think themselves ^oosed from that
Obligation; and that it is free for them to make any alteration in either, as
they shall think fit, concluding your whole Paper with these words (And this I
understand as a part of my Oath); which is a treasonable invasion upon the
Royal Legislative Power as if it were lawful for you to make to your self an
Act of Parliament; since he who can make any part of an Act may make the whole,
the Power and Authority in both being the same. Of the which Crimes
abovementioned you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle are Actor, Art and Part;
which being found by the Assize, you ought to be punished with the pains of
Death, for faulture and escheat of Lands and Goods, to the terror of others to
commit the like hereafter.

An Abstract of the several Acts of Parliament upon which the Indictment
against the Earl of Argyle was grounded.
Concerning Raisers of Rumors betwixt the King and his People, Chap 20. 1.
Statutes of King Robert 1.
IT is defended and forbidden, That no man be a Conspirator or Inventer of
Narrations or Rumors, by the which occasion of discord may arise betwixt the
King and his People. And if any such man shall be found, and attainted thereof,
incontinent he shall be taken and put in Prison, and there shall be surely
kept up, ay and while the King declare his will anent him.

Act 43. of Par. 2. King James 1. March 11. 1424. Leasingmakers for fault Life
and Goods.
Item, it is ordained by the King and whole Parliament, that all Leasing
makers, and tellers of them, which may engender discord betwixt the King and
his People, wherever they may be gotten, shall be challenged by them that power
has, and tyne Life and Goods to the King.

Act 83. Par, 6. James 5. Dec. 10. 1540. Of Leasing-makers.
ITem, Touching the Article of Leasing-makers to the Kings Grace, of his
Barons, Great-men and Leidges, and for punishment to be put to them therefore,
the Kings Grace, with advice of his three Estates, ratifies and approves the
Acts and Statutes made thereupon before, and ordains the same to be put in
execution in all Points; and also Statutes and ordains, That if any manner of
person makes any evil Information of his Highness to his Barons and Leidges,
that they shall be punished in such manner, and by the same punishment as they
that make Leasings to his Grace of his Lords, Barons, and Leidges.

Act 134. Par. 8: James 6. May 22. 1584. Anent Slandereres of the King, his
Progenitors, Estate and Realm.
FOrasmuch as it is understood to our Sovereign Lord, and his Three Estates
assembled in this present Parliament, what great harm and inconveniency has
fallen in this Realm, chiefly since the beginning of the Civil Troubles
occurred in the time of His Highness minority, through the wicked and
licentious, publik and private speeches, and untrue Calumnies of diverse of his
Subjects, to the disdain, contempt and reproach of His Majesty, his Council and
Proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of His Highness, his Parents,
Progenitors and Estate, stirring up His Highness's Subjects thereby to
misliking, sedition, unquietness, and to cast off their due obedience to His
Majesty, to their evident peril, tinsil and destruction; His Highness
continuing always in love and clemency toward all his good Subjects, and most
willing to seek the safety and preservation of them all, which wilfully,
needlessly, and upon plain malice, after His Highness's mercy and pardon
oft-times before granted, has procured themselves, by their treasonable deeds,
to be cut off, as corrupt Members of this Commonwealth. Therefore it is statut
and ordained by our Sovereign Lord, and his Three Estates in this present
Parliament, that none of his Subjects of whatsoever Function, Degree or
Quality, in time coming shall presume, or take upon hand, privately or
publikly, in Sermons, Declamations, and familiar Conferences, to utter any
false, slanderous, or untrue speeches, to the disdain, reproach and contempt of
His Majesty, his Council and Proceedings, or to the dishonor, hurt or
prejudice of His Highness, his Parents and Progenitors, or to meddle in the
Affairs of His Highness, and his Estate present, bygone, and in time coming,
under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament anent makers and tellers of
Leesings, certifying them that shall be tried contraveeners thereof, or that
hear such slanderous speeches, and reports not the same with diligence, the
said pain shall be executed against them with all rigor, in example of others.

Act 205. Par. 14 King James 6. June 8. 1594. Anent Leasing-makers, and Authors
of Slanders.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice of his Estates in this present Parliament,
ratifies, approves, and for His Highness and Successors, perpetually confirms
the Act made by his Noble Progenitors, King James the First, of Worthy Memory,
against Leasing-makers, the Act made by King James the Second, entitled
Against Leasing-makers, and tellers of them; the Act made by King* James the
Fifth, entitled, Of Leasing-makers; and the Act made by his Highness's self,
with advice of his Estates in Parliament; upon the 22 day of May, 1584.
entitled, For the punishment of the Authors of Slanders and untrue Calumnies
against the Kings Majesty, his Council and Proceedings, to the dishonor and
prejudice of His Highness, his Parents, Progenitors, Crown and Estate; as also
the Act made in His Highness's Parliament holden at Linlithgow, upon the 10 of
December, 1585. entitled* Against the Authors of slanderous speeches or Writs;
and statutes and ordains all the said Acts to be published of new, and to be
put in execution in time coming, with this addition, That whoever hears the
said Leasings, Calumnies or slanderous Speeches or Writs to be made, and
apprehends not the Authors thereof, if it lies in his power, and reveals not
the same to His Highness, or one of his Privy Council or to the Sheriff,
Steward or Bailiff of the Shire Stewards in Regality or Royalty, or to the
Provost, or any of the Bailiffs within Burgh, by whom the same may come to the
knowledge of his Highness, or his said Privy Council, wherethrough the said
Leasing-makers, and Authors of slanderous Speeches may be called, tried and
punished according to the said Acts: The hearer, and not apprehender, [if it
lie in his power] and concealer, and not revealer of the said Leasing-makers,
and Authors of the said slanderous Speeches or Writs, shall incur the like pain
and punishment as the Principal Offender.

Act 107. Par. 7. King James 1. March 1. 1427. That none interpret the Kings
Statutes wrongously.
ITem, The King by deliverance of Council, by manner of Statute, forbids, That
no man interpret his Statutes otherwise than the Statutes bear, and to the
intent and effect that they were made for and as the maker of them understood:
and whosoever does in the contrary, shall be punished at the Kings will.

Act 10. Par 10. King James 6. Dec. 10. 1585. Authors of slanderous Speeches or
Writs should be punished to the death.
IT is statuted and ordained by our Sovereign Lord and Three Estates, That all
his Highness's Subjects content themselves in quietness and dutiful obedience
to his Highness and his Authority; and that none of them presume, or take upon
hand publikly to declaim, or privately to speak or write any purpose of
reproach or slander of His Majesty's Person, Estate or Government, or to
deprave his Laws and Acts of Parliament, or misconstrue his Proceedings,
whereby any misliking may be moved betwixt his Highness and his Nobility, and
loving Subjects in time coming, under the pain of death; certifying them that
do in the contrary they shall be reputed as seditious and wicked instruments,
enemies to his Highness and the Commonwealth of this Realm: and the said pain
of death shall be executed upon them with all rigor, in example of others.

Act for preservation of His Majesty's Person, Authority, and Government, May
16^2.
-- And further it is by His Majesty and Estates of Parliament declared,
statuted and enacted That if any person or persons shall by writing, printing,
praying, preaching, libelling, remonstrating, or by any malicious or advised
speaking, express, publish or declare any words or sentences, to stir up the
people to the hatred or dislike of His Majesty's Royal Prerogative and
Supremacy, in Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops, as it is now settled by Law -- That every such person
or persons so offending, and being Legally Convicted thereof are hereby
declared incapable to enjoy or exercise any place or employment, Civil,
Ecclesiastik, or Military, within this Church and Kingdom, and shall be liable
to such further pains as are due by the Law in such Cases.

Act 130. Par. 8. James 6. May 22. 1584 Anent the Authority of the Three
Estates of Parliament.
THe Kings Majesty considering the Honor and the Authority of his Supreme
Court of Parliament, continued past all memory of man unto their days, as
constitut upon the free Votes of the Three Estates of this ancient Kingdom, by
whom the same, under God, has ever been upholden, rebellious and traitorous
Subjects punished, the good and faithful preserved and maintained, and the Laws
and Acts of Parliament (by which all men are governed) made and established.
And finding the Power, Dignity and Authority, of the said Court of Parliament,
of late years, called in some doubt, at least, some curiously traveling to
have introduced some Innovation thereanent; His Majesty's firm will and mind
always being as it is yet, That the Honor, Authority, and Dignity of his said
Three Estates shall stand and continue in their own Integrity, according to the
ancient and laudable custom bygone, without any alteration or diminution:
Therefore it is statuted and ordained by our said Sovereign Lord, and his said
Three Estates in this present Parliament, That none of his Leidges or Subjects
presume, or take upon hand to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the said
Three Estates, or to seek or procure the innovation or diminution of the power
and Authority of the same Three Estates, or any of them, in time coming, under
the pain of Treason.

The Earl of Argyle's first Petition for Advocats, or Council to be allowed
him.
To his Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and to the Right
Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.

The Humble Petition of Archibald Earl of Argyle.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner being Criminally Indicted before the Lords Commissioners
of ustitiary, at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high
Nature. And whereas in this Case no Advocate will readily plead for the
Petitioner, unless they have your Royal Hig^ness's, and ^ordships Special
License and Warrant to that Effect, which is usual in the like Cases

It is therefore humbly desired, that Your Royal Highness, and Lordships, would
give special Order and Warrant to Sir George Lockhart* his ordinary Advocate*
to cons^lt and plead for him in the foresaid Criminal Process, without
incurring any hazard upon that account and your Petitioner shall ever pray.


Edinburgh, November. 22. 1681. The Councils Answer to the Earl of Argyl's first
Petition, about his having Advocates allowed him.
HIS Royal Highness, his Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of
Privy Council, do refuse the desire of the above-written Bill, but allows any
Lawyers the Petitioners shall employ, to consult and plead for him in the
Processof Treason, and other Crimes, to be pursued against him at the instance
of His Majesty's Advocate. Extr. By me,

Will. Paterson.

The Earl of Argyl's second Petition for Council to be allowed him.
To His Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and to the Right
Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council:

The humble Petition of Archibald Earl of Argyle.
SHOWS.
THat your Petitioner having given in a former Petition, humbly representing,
That he being Criminally Indicted before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary,
at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high Nature: And
therefore desiring that your Royal Highness, and Lordships, would give special
Warrant to Sir George Lockhart, to consult and plead for him: Whereupon your
Royal Highness, and Lordships, did allow the Petitioner to make use of such
Advocates as he should think fit to call. Accordingly your Petitioner having
desired Sir George Lockhart to consult and plead for him, he has as yet
refused your Petitioner. And by the 11. Parliament of King James the VI. Cap.
38. As it is the undeniable privilege of all Subjects, accused for any Crimes,
to have liberty to provide themselves of Advocates, to defend their Lives,
Honor, and Lands, against whatsoever accusation; so the same Privilege is not
only by Parliament 11. King James the VI. Cap. 90. farther asserted and
confirmed, but also it is declared, That in case the Advocates refuse the
Judges are to compel them, lest the party accused should be prejudged: And this
being an affair of great importance to your Petitioner, and Sir George Lockhart
having been not only still his ordinary Advocate, but also by his constant
converse with him is best known to your Petitioners Principles; and of whose
eminent abilities and fidelity your Petitioner (as many others have) has had
special proof all along in his Concerns, and has such singular confidence in
him that he is most necessary to your Petitioner at this occasion.

May it therefore please Your Royal Highness and Lordships to interpose your
Authority, by giving a special Order and Warrant to the said Sir George
Lockhart, to consult and plead for him in the said Criminal Process, conform to
the tenor of the said Acts of Parliament, and constant known practice in the
like Cases, which was never refused to any Subject of the meanest quality, even
to the greatest Criminals. And Your Royal Highness's, and Lordships Answer is
humbly craved.


Edinburgh, November. 24. 1681. The Councils Answer to the Earl of Argyle's
second Petition.
HIS Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of Privy
Council, having considered the foresaid Petition, do adhere to their former
Order, allowing Advocates to appear for the Petitioner in the Process foresaid.
Extr. By me,

Will. Paterson.

The Earl of Argyle's Letter of Attorney, constituting Alexander Dunbar his
Procurator, for requiring Sir George Lockhart to plead for him.
WE Archibald Earl of Argyle do hereby substitute, constitute and ordain
Alexander Dunbar, our Servitor, to be our Procurator, to pass and require Sir
George Lockhart Advocate to consult, and plead for us in the Criminal Process
intended against us, at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate; and to compear
with us, before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary, upon the 12th of
December next, conform to an Act of Council, dated the 22d of November. instant,
allowing any Lawyers that we should employ, to consult and plead for us in the
said Process, and to another Act of Council of the 24th of November. instant,
relative to the former, and conform to the Acts of Parliament. In witness
whereof, we have Subscribed these Presents, at Edenburgh-Castle, Nov 26. 1681.
before these Witnesses, Duncan Campbell Servitor to James Glen Stationer in
Edinburgh, and John Thom, Merchant in the said Burgh.

ARGYLE.
Duncan Campbell, John Thom,
Witnesses.


An Instrument whereby the Earl of Argyle required Sir George Lockhart to
appear and plead for him.
Apud Edenburgum vigesimo sexto die Mensis Novembris, Anno Domini millesimo
sexcentesimo octuagesimo primo, and Anno Regni Car. 2. Regis trigesimo tertio.
THe which day, in presence of Me Notar publik, and Witnesses under-subscribed,
compeared personally Alexander Dunbar, Servitor to a Noble Earl, Archibald Earl
of Argyle, as Procurator, and in name of the said Earl, conform to a
Procuration subscribed by the said Earl at the Castle of Edinburgh, upon the
twenty first day of November, 1681. making and constituting the said Alexander
Dunbar his Procurator, to the effect underwritten; and past to the personal
presence of Sir George Lockhart Advocate, in his own lodging in Edinburgh,
having and holding in his hands an Act of his Majesty's Privy Council, of the
date the 22 of November, 1681. instant, proceeding upon a Petition given in by
the said Earl of Argyle, to the said Lords, showing, That he being Criminally
indicted before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary, at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high Nature, and whereas in that case no
Advocates would readily plead for the said Earl, unless they had his Royal
Highness's, and their Lordships special License and Warrant to that effect,
which is usual in the like Cases: And by the said Petition humbly supplicated,
That his Highness, and the Council would give special Order and Command to the
said Sir George Lockhart, the said Earl's ordinary Advocate, to consult and
plead for him in the foresaid Criminal Process, without incurring any hazard
upon that account. His Royal Highness, and Lords of the said Privy Council, did
refuse the desire of the said Petition but allowed any Lawyers the Petitioner
should employ, to consult and plead for him in the Process of Treason, and
other Crimes to be pursued against him, at the instance of His Majesty's
Advocate. And also the said Alexander Dunbar having and holding in his hands
another Act of the said Lords of Privy Council, of the date the 24th of the
said month, relative to, and nar rating the foresaid first Act, and Proceeding
upon another supplication given in by the said Earl, to the said-Lords,
craving, That his Royal Highness, and the said Lords, would inter^ose their
Authority, by giving a positive and special Order and Warrant to the said Sir
George Lockhart, to consult and plead with him in the foresaid Criminal
Process, conform to the tenor of the Acts of Parliament mentioned and
particularized in the said Petition, and frequent and known practice in the
like cases, which was never refused to any Subjects of the meanest quality. His
Royal Highness, and Lords of Privy Council, having considered the foresaid
Petition, did by the said Act adhere to their former Order, allowing Advocates
to appear for the said Earl in the Process foresaid, as the said Acts bear; and
produced the said Acts and Procuratory foresaid to the said Sir George
Lockhart, who took the same in his hands, and read them over successive; and
after reading thereof, the said Alexander Dunbar Procurator, and in name and
behalf foresaid, solemnly required the said Sir George Lockhart, as the said
Noble Earl's ordinary Advocate, and as a Lawyer and Advocate, upon the said
Earl's reasonable expense, to consult and advise the said Earl's said Process
at any time and place the said Sir George should appoint to meet thereupon,
conform to the foresaid Two Acts of Council, and Acts of Parliament therein
mentioned, appointing Advocates to consult in such matters: Which the said Sir
George Lockhart altogether refused: Whereupon the said Alexander Dunbar, as
Procurator, and in Name foresaid, asked and took Instruments, one or more, in
the hands of me Notary publik undersubscribed. And these things were done
within the said Sir George Lockhart's Lodging, on the South side of the Street
of Edinburgh, in the Lane-Mercat, within the Dining Room of the said Lodging,
betwixt Four and Five hours in the Afternoon, Day, Month, Year, Place, and of
His Majesty's Reign, respective foresaid, before Robert Dicksone, and John
Lesly, Servitors to John Campbell, Writer to His Majesty's Signet, and Do^gall
Man. Alester, Messenger in Edinburgh, with diverse others, called and required
to the Premises

Ita esse Ego Johannes Broun, Notarius publicui, in Praemissis requisitus,
Attestor Testantibus his meis sign and subscriptione manualibus solitis and
consuetis.

Broun.
Witnesses. Robert Dicksone, Dowgall, Mac. Alester, John Lesly,



December. 5. 1682. The Opinion of diverse Lawyers concerning the Case of the Earl
of Argyle.
WE have considered the Criminal Letters, raised at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocate, against the Earl of Argyle, with the Acts of Parliament
contained and narrated in the same Criminal Letters, and have compared the same
with a Paper, or Explication, which is libelled to have been given in by the
Earl to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and owned by him, as the
sense and explication in which he did take the Oath imposed by the late Act of
Parliament. Which Paper is of this tenor: I have considered the Test; and am
very desirous to give obedience as far as I can, etc. And having likewise
considered that the Earl after he had taken the Oath with the explication and
sense then put upon it, it was acquiesced to by the Lords of Privy Council, and
he allowed to take his Place, and to sit and vote. And that, before the Earl's
taking of the Oath, there were several Papers spread abroad, containing
Objections, and alleging inconsistencies and contradictions in the Oath, and
some thereof were presented by Synods and Presbyteries of the Orthodox Clergy,
to some of the Bishops of the Church. It is our humble Opinion, that seeing the
Earls design and meaning in offering the said Explication was allenarly for the
clearing of his own Conscience, and upon no factious or seditious design; and
that the matter and import of the said Paper is no contradiction of the Laws
and Acts of Parliament, It does not at all import any of the Crimes libelled
against him, viz. Treason, Leasing-making depraving of His Majesty's Laws, or
the Crime of Perjury; but that the Glosses and Inferences put by the Libel upon
the said Paper are altogether strained and unwarrantable, and inconsistent with
the Earl true design, and the sincerity of his meaning and intention, in
making of the said Explication.

Wednesday the 12. of December, the day of compearance assigned to the Earl,
being now come, he was brought by a guard of Soldiers from the Castle to the
place appointed for the trial, and the justice Court being met and fenced, the
Earl, now Marquis, of Queensberry, then Justice General, the Lords Nairn,
Collingtoun, Forret, Newtoun and Hirkhouse, the Lords of Justitiary sitting in
judgment, and the other formalities also performed, the indictment above set
down Number 24. was read, and the Earl spoke as follows.

The Earl of Argyle's Speech to the Lord Justice General, and the Lords of the
Justitiary, after he had been arraigned, and his Indictment read.
My Lord Justice General, etc.
I Look upon it as the undeniable privilege of the meanest Subject to explain
his own words in the most benign sense: and even when persons are under an ill
Character, the misconstruction of words in themselves not ill can only reach a
presumption or aggravation but not any more.

But it is strange to alledg, as well as, I hope, impossible, to make any that
know me believe, that I could intend any thing but what was honest and
honorable, suitable to the Principles of my Religion and Loyalty, tho I did
not explain my self at all.

My Lord, I pray you be not offended that I take up a little of your time, to
tell you, I have from my Youth made it my business to serve His Majesty
faithfully, and have constantly, to my power, appeared in his Service;
especially in all times of difficulty, and have never joined, nor complied with
any Interest or Party, contrary to His Majesty's Authority, and have all along
served him in his own way, without a frown from His Majesty these Thirty years.

As soon as I passed the Schools and Colleges, I went to travel to France and
Italy, and was abroad 1647, 1648, and till the end of 1649.

My first appearance in the world was to serve His Majesty as Colonel of his
Foot-Guards. And tho at that time all the Commissions were given by the then
Parliament, yet I would not serve without a Commission from His Majesty, which
I have still the Honor to have by me.

After the misfortune of Worcester, I continued in Arms for His Majesty's
Service, when Scotland was overrun with the Usurpers, and was alone with some
of my Friends in Arms in the Year 1652. and did then keep up some appearance of
opposition to them: And General Major Dean coming to Argyleshire, and planting
several Garrisons he no sooner went away but we fell upon the Garrisons he had
left, and in one day took two of them, and cut off a considerable part of a
third, and carried away in all about Three hundred Prisoners: And in the end of
that year, I sent Captain Shaw to His Majesty, with my humble Opinion, how the
War might be carried on; who returned to me with Instructions and Orders which
I have yet lying by me.

After which, I joined with those His Majesty did Commissionate, and stood out
till the last, that the Earl of Middleton, His Majesty's Lieutenant General,
gave me Orders to capitulate, which I did without any other Engagements to
the Rebels but allowing persons to give bale for my living peaceably: and did
a^ my capitulating relieve several Prisoners by exchange, whereof my Lord
Granard, out of the Castle of Edinburgh, was one.

It is notarly known, that I was forefaulted by the Usurpers, who were so
jealous of me that, contrary to their Faith, within Eight Months after my
Capitulation, upon pretense I keep'd Horses above the value, they seized on me,
and kept me in one Prison after another, till His Majesty's happy
Restoration, and this only because I would not engage not to serve His
Majesty, tho there was no Oath required.

I do with all gratitude acknowledge His Majesty's Goodness, Bounty and Royal
Favors to me, when I was pursued before the Parliament in the Year 1662. His
Majesty was graciously pleased not to send me here in any opprobrious way, but
upon a bare verbal Paroll. Upon which I came down post, and presented my self
a Fourthnight before the day. Notwithstanding whereof I was immediately clapped
up in the Castle, but having satisfied His Majesty, at that time, of my entire
Loyalty, I did not offer to plead by Advocates. And His Majesty was not only
pleased to pardon my Life, and to restore me to a Title and Fortune, but to put
me in trust in his Service, in the most eminent Judicatories of this Kingdom,
and to heap Favors upon me, far beyond what ever I did or can deserve: tho I
hope His Majesty has always found me faithful and thankful, and ready to
bestow all I have, or can have, for his Service. And I hope never has had nor
ever shall have ground to repent any Favor he has done me. And if I were now
really guilty of the Crimes libelled, I should think my self a great Villain.

The next occasion I had to show my particular zeal to His Majesty's Service
was in Anno 1666. when the insurrection was made that was represt at
Pentland-Hills. At the very first, the intercourse betwixt this place and me
was stopped, so that I had neither Intelligence nor Orders from the Council, nor
from the General; but upon a Letter from the now Archbishop of St. Andrews,
telling me there was a Rebellion like to be in the three Kingdoms, and bidding
me beware of Ireland and Kintyre, I brought together about Two thousand men: I
seized all the Gentlemen in Kintyre that had not taken the Declaration, tho I
found them peaceable. And I sent a Gentleman to General Dalziel, to receive his
Orders, who came to him just as they were going to the Action at Pentland, and
was with him in it; and I keept my Men together till his return. And when I
met with considerable trouble from my Neighbors, rebelliously in Arms, and had
Commissions both on publik, and private Accounts, have I not carried dutifully
to His Majesty, and done what was commanded with a just moderation, which I can
prove under the hands of my enemies, and by many infallible demonstrations?

Pardon me a few words: Did I not in this present Parliament show my readiness
to serve His Majesty and the Royal Family, in asserting vigorously ^^e lineal
legal Succession of the Crown, and had a care to have it expressed in the
Commissions of the Shires and Burghs I had interest in? Was I not for offering
proper Supplies to His Majesty and his Successor? And did I not concur to bind
the Landlords for their Tenants, although I was mainly concerned? And have I not
always keept my Tenants in obedience to His Majesty?

I say all this, not to arrogate any thing for doing what was my Honor and
Duty to His Majesty; but if after all this, upon no other ground but words that
were spoken in absolute innocence, and without the least design, except for
clearing my own Conscience, and that are not capable of the ill sense wrested
from them by the Libel, I should be further troubled, what assurance can any of
the greatest Quality, Trust, or Innocence, have that they are secure?
especially considering, that so many Scruples have been started, as all know,
not only by many of the Orthodox Clergy, but by whole Presbyteries, Synods, and
some Bishops, which were thought so considerable, that an eminent Bishop took
the pains to write a Treatise, that was read over in Council, and allowed to
be Printed, and a Copy given to me, which contains all the expressions I am
charged for, and many more that may be stretched to a worse sense.

Have I not showed my zeal to all the ends of the Test? How then can it be
imagined that I have any sinister design in any thing that I have said? If I
had done any thing contrary to it all the course of my life, which I hope shall
not be found, yet one act might pretend to be excused by a habit. But nothing
being questioned but the sense of words misconstrued to the greatest height,
and stretched to imaginary insinuations, quite contrary to my scope and design,
and so far contrary, not only to my sense, but my principles, Interest, and
duty, That I hope my Lord Advocate will think he has gone too far on in this
Process, and say plainly what he knows to be truth by his acquaintance with me,
both in publik and private; viz. That I am neither Papist nor Fanatik, but
truly loyal in my principles and practices.

The hearing of this Libel would trouble me beyond most of the sufferings of my
Life if my innocence did not support me, and the hopes of being vindicated of
this and other Calumnies before this publik and Noble Auditory.

I leave my Defenses to these Gentlemen that plead for me, they know my
innocence, and how groundless that Libel is.

I shall only say, As my Life has most of it been spent in serving and
suffering for his Majesty, so whatever be the event of this Process, I resolve,
while I breath, to be loyal and faithful to His Majesty. And whether I live
publikly or in obscurity, my head, my heart nor my hand, shall never be wanting
where I can be useful to His Majesty's Service. And while I live, and when I
die, I shall pray, That God Almighty would bless His Majesty with a long,
happy, and prosperous Reign; and that the lineal legal successors of the Crown
may continue Monarchs of all His Majesty's Dominions, and be Defenders of the
True Primitive, Christian, Apostolik, Catholic, Protestant Religion, while Sun
and Moon endure.

God save the King.
The Kings own Letter to this Nobleman when he was Lord Lorn.
Collogne, December 20. 1654. My Lord Lorn,
I Am very glad to hear from Middleton, what affection and zeal you show to my
Service, how constantly you adhere to him in all his distresses, and what good
Service you have performed upon the Rebels. I assure you, you shall find me
very just, and kind to you, in rewarding what you have done and suffered for
me; and I hope you will have more Credit and Power with those of your Kindred,
and Dependants upon your Family, to engage them with you for me, than any body
else can have to seduce them against me; and I shall look upon all those who
shall refuse to follow you as unworthy of any protection hereafter from me,
which you will let them know. This honest Bearer, M -- will form you of my
Condition and Purposes, to whom you will give Credit; and he will tell you,
That I am very much.

Your very affectionate Friend, C. R.

General Middleton's Order to the Earl of Argyle, who was then Lord Lorn, for
capitulating with the English, wherein he largely expresses his Worth and
Loyalty.
John Middleton, Lieutenant General, next and immediate under His Majesty, and
Commander in chief of all the Forces raised, and to be raised, within the King
of Scotland.
SEeing the Lord Lorn has given so singular proofs of clear and perfect Loalty
to the Kings Majesty, and of pure and constant affection to the good of His
Majesty's Affairs, as never hitherto to have any ways complied with the Enemy,
and to have been principally instrumental in the enlivening of this late War,
and one of the chief and first movers in it, and has readily, cheerfully, and
gallantly engaged, and resolutly and constantly continued active in it,
notwithstanding the many powerful disswasions, discouragements, and oppositions
he has met withal from diverse hands, and has in the carrying on of the
Service shown such signal Fidelity, Integrity, Generosity, Prudence, Courage,
and Conduct, and such high Virtue, Industry, and Ability, as are suitable to
the Dignity of his Noble Family, and the Trust His Majesty reposed in him; and
has not only stood out against all temptations and enticements, but has most
nobly crossed and repressed designs and attempts of deserting the Service, and
persisted loyally and firmly in it to the very last, through excessive ^oil and
many great difficulties, misregarding all personal inconveniences, and choosing
the loss of Friends, Fortune, and all private Concernments, and to endure the
utmost extremities, rather than to swerve in the least from his Duty; or taint
his Reputation with the meanest shadow of disloyalty and dishonor. I do
therefore hereby testify and declare, That I am perfectly satisfied with his
whole Deportments, in relation to the Enemy, and this late War; and do highly
approve them, as being not only above all I can express of their worth, but
almost beyond all parallel. And I do withal hereby both allow, and most
earnestly desire, and wish him, to lose no time in taking such course for his
safety and preservation by Treaty and Agreement, or Capitulation, as he shall
judge most fit and expedient for the good of his Person, Family, and Estate,
since inevitable and invincible necessity has forced us to lay aside this War.
And I can now no other way express my respects to him, nor contribute my
endeavor to do him Honor and Service. In testimony whereof I have signed and
sealed these Presents at Dunveagave, the last day of March, 1655.

JOHN MIDDLETON.

Another Letter from the Earl of Middleton, to the same purpose.
Paris, April 17. 1655. My Noble Lord,
I Am hopeful, that the Bearer of this Letter will be found one who has been a
most faithful Servant to your Lordship, and my kind Friend, and a sharer in my
Troubles. Indeed I have been strengthened by him to support and overcome many
difficulties. He will acquaint you with what has past, which truly was strange
to both of us, but your own Re-encounters will lessen them. My Lord, I shall be
faithful in giving you that Character which your Worth and Merit may justly
challenge. I profess it is, next to the ruin of the Service, one of my
chiefest Regrets that I could not possibly wait upon you before my going from
Scotland, that I might have settled a way of Correspondence with you, and that
your Lordship might have understood me better than yet you do; I should have
been plain in every thing, and indeed have made your Lordship my Confessor: and
I am hopeful the Bearer will say somewhat for me, and I doubt not but your
Lordship will trust him. If it shall please God to bring me safe from beyond
Sea, your Lordship shall hear from me by a sure hand Sir To M. will tell you a
way of corresponding. So that I shall say no more at present, but that I am
without possibility of change,

My Noble Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, JO.
MIDDLETON.

A Letter from the Earl of Glencairn, testifying his esteem for this Noble
Person; and the sense he had of his loyalty to the King, when fevv had the
Courage to own him
My Lord,
LEst it may be my misfortune, in all these great Revolutions, to be
misrepresented to your Lordship, as a person unworthy of your favorable
Opinion (an Artifice very frequent in these times) I did take occasion to call
for a Friend and Servant of yours, the Lord of Spanie, on whose discretion I
did adventure to lay forth my hearts desire, to obviate in the bud any of these
misunderstandings. Your Lordships true worth and zeal to your Countries
happiness, being so well known to me (...) and confirmed by our late suffering
acquaintance: And now finding how much it may conduce to these great ends we
all wish that a perfect Unity may be amongst all good and honest - hearted
Scotchmen, tho there be few more insignificant than my self; yet my zeal for
those ends obligesme to say, that if your Lordships health and affairs could
have permitted you to have been at Edinburgh in these late times, you would
have seen a great inclination and desire amongst all here of a perfect Unity,
and of a mutual respect to your Person, as of chief eminence and worth. And I
here shall set it under my Hand, to witness against all my Informers, that none
did with more passion, nor shall with more continued zeal, witness themselves
to be true Honourers of you than he who desires infinitely to be esteemed.

My Lord, Your most Humble Servant, GLENCAIRN.
What I cannot well writ e I hope this discreet Gentleman will tell you in
my Name: and I shall only beg leave to say, that I am your most Noble Ladies
Humble Servant. After the reading of which order and letters, which yet the
Court refused to record, The Earl's Advocator Council Sir George Lockhart said
in his defense as follows.
Sir George Lockhart's Argument and Plea for the Earl of Argyle.
SIR George Lockhart for the Earl of Argyle alleges, That the Libel is not
Relevant, and whereupon he ought to be put to the knowledge of an Inquest. For,

It is alleged in the general, That all Criminal Libels, whereupon any persons
Life, Estate, and Reputation, can be drawn in question, should be founded upon
clear, positive, and express Acts of Parliament, and the matter of Fact, which
is libelled to be the Contravention of those Laws, should be plain, clear, and
direct Contraventions of the same, and not argued by way of Implications and
Inferences. Whereas in this Case, neither the Acts of Parliament, founded upon,
and libelled, can be in the least the foundation of this Libel: nor is the
Explication which is pretended to be made by the Panel at the time of the
taking of his Oath (if considered,) any Contravention of those Laws; which
being premised, and the Panel denying the Libel, as to the whole Articles and
Points therein contained; it is alleged in special:

That the Libel, in so far as it is founded upon the 21 st Chap. Stat. 1.
Robert 1. and upon 83d Act; Par. (...) James 5. the 43d Act, Par. 2. James 1.
and upon the 83d Act, Par. 10. James 5. and upon 84th Act, Par. 8. James 6. and
upon the 10th Act, Par. 10. James 6. and upon the 2d Act, Par. 1. Ses. 2. of
His Sacred Majesty; and inferring thereupon, That the Panel, by the pretended
Explication given in by him to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, as the
sense of the Oath he had taken, does commit the Crime of Leasing-making, and
depraving. His Majesty's Laws: The Inference and Subsumption is most
unwarrantable, and the Panel, tho any such thing were acknowledged or proved,
can never be found guilty of contraveening these Acts of Parliament. In respect
it is evident, upon perusal and consideration of these Acts of Parliament, that
they only concern the case of Leasing-making, tending to Sedition, and to beget
Discord betwixt His Majesty and His Subjects, and the dislike of His Majesty's
Government, and the reproach of the same. And the said Laws and Acts of
Parliament were never understood or libelled upon, in any other Sense. And all
the former Acts of Parliament, which relate to the crime of Leasing-making in
general terms, and under the qualification foresaid, as tending to beget
discord betwixt His Majesty and his Subjects, are explained and fully declared,
as to what is the true meaning and import thereof, by the 134th Act, Par. 8.
James 6. which relates to the same Crime of Leasing-making and which is
expressly described in these terms, To be wicked and licentious, publik and
private Speeches, and untrue Calumnies to the disdain and contempt of His
Majesty's Council and Proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of his
Highness and his Estate, stirring up his Highness's Subjects to misliking, and
Sedition, and unquietness which being the true sense and import of the Acts of
Parliament made against Leasing-makers, there is nothing can be inferred from
the Pannel's alleged Explic^tion, which can be wrested or construed to be a
Contravention of these Laws: In respect,

First It is known by the whole tenor of his Life, and graciously acknowledged
by His Sacred Majesty, by a Letter under His Royal Hand, that the Panel did
ever most zealously, vigotously, and faithfully promote and carry on His
Majesty's Service and Interest, even in the worst and most difficult times:
Which is also ackowledged by a Pals under the Earl of Middleton's hand, who had
then a special Commission from His Majesty, for carrying on His Majesty's
Service in this Kingdom, as Lieutenant General under His Majesty; and by a
Letter under the Earl's hand, of the date -- both which do contain high
expressions of the Pannels Loyalty, and of the great Services he had performed
for His Majesty's Interest. And His Majesty, as being conscious thereof, and
perfectly knowing the Pannels Loyalty, and his zeal, and faithfulness for his
Service, did think fit to entrust the Panel in Offices and Capacities of the
greatest trust of the Kingdom. And it is a just and rational presumption, which
all Law makes and infers. That the words and expressions of persons, who by the
tenor and course of their Lives have expressed their Duty and Loyalty to His
Majesty's Interest, are ever to be interpreted and understood in meliorem
partem. And by way of Implication and Inference, to conclud and infer crimes
from the same, which the user of such words and expressions never mean'd nor
designed, is both unreasonable and unjust.

2. As the foresaid Acts of Parliament made against Leasing-makers, and
depravers of His Majesty's Laws, only proceed in the terms foresaid, where the
words and speeches are plain, tending to beget discord between the King and his
Subjects, and to the reproach and dislike of his Government, and when the same
are spoke and vented in a subdolous, pernicious, and fraudulent manner: So they
never were, nor can be understood to proceed in the case of a person offering
in the presence of a publik udicature (whereof he had the honor to be a
Member) his sincere and plain meaning and apprehension of what he conceived to
be the true sense of the Act of Parliament im^osing and enjoining the Test:
There being nothing more opposite to the Acts of Parliamen^ made against
Leasing-making, and venting and spreading abroad the same upon seditious
designs, than the foresaid plain and open declaration of his sense and
apprehension, what was the meaning of the said Act of Parliament. And it is of
no import to inter any crime and much less any of the crimes libelled, albeit
the Panel had erred and mistaken in his apprehension of the Act of Parliament.
And it were a strange extention of the Act of Parliament made against Leasing
makers, requiring the qualifications foresaid and the Acts against depraving
His Majesty's Laws, to make the Panel, or any other person guilty upon the
mistakes and misapprehensions of the sense of the ^aws, wherein men may mistake
and differ very much, and even eminent Lawyers and Judges. So that the Acts of
Parliament against Leasing-making, and depraving His Majesty's Laws, can only
be understood in the express terms and qualifications ^oresaid. Like as it
neither is libelled, nor can be proven, that the Panel, before he was called
and required by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to take the Oath, did
ever, by word or practice, use any reproachful speeches of the said Act of
Parliament, or of His Majest^es Government: But being required to take the
Oath, he did humbly, with all submission declare what he apprehended to be the
sense of the Act of the Parliament, enjoining the Test, and in what sense he
had freedom to take the same.

3. The Act of Parliament enjoining the Test does not enjoin the same to be
taken by all persons whatsoever, but only prescribes it as a qualification
without which persons could not assume or continue to act in publik Trust:
Which bein an Oath to be taken by so solemn an invocation of the Name of
Almighty God, it is not only allowable by the Laws and customs of all Nations,
and the Opinion of all Divines, ad Casuists, Popish or Protestant, but also
commended, that where a Party has any scrupulosity, or unclearness in his
conscience, as to the matter of the Oath, that he should exhibit and declare
the sense and meaning in which he is willing and able to take the Oath. And it
is not at all material whether the scruples of a man's conscience, in the matter
of an Oath, be in themselves just or groundless, it being a certain maxim,
both in Law and Divinity, that Conscientia etiam erronea ligat: And therefore
tho the Panel had thought fit, for the clearing and exoneration of his own
conscience, in a matter of the highest concern as to his peace and repose, to
have expressed and declared t e express sense in which he could take the Oath,
whether the said sense was consistent with the Act of Parliament or not, yet it
does not in the least import any matter of reproach or reflection upon the
justice or prudence of the Parliament in imposing the said Oath: but alenarly
does evince the weakness and scrupulosity of a man's conscience, who neither
did, nor ought to have taken the Oath but with an explanation that would have
saved his conscience to his apprehension. Otherwise he had grossly sinned before
God, even tho it was Conscientia errans. And this is allowed and prescribed by
all Protestant Divines, as indispensibly necessary and was never thought to
import any crime, and is also commended even by Popish Casuists themselves, who
tho they allow, in some cases, of mental reservations and equivocations, yet
the express declaration of the sense o the party is allowed and commended, as
much more ingenuous* and tutius Remedium Conscientiae ne illaqueetur, as
appears by Bellarmine de Iuramento, and upon the same Title de Interpretatione
Iuramenti; and Lessius, that famous Casuist, de Iustitia and Iure, Dubitatione
8, 9. utrum siquis salvo animo aliquid Iuramento promittat obligetur, and quale
peccatum hoc sit. And which is the general opinion of all Casuists, and all
Divines, as may appear by Amesius, in his Treatise de Conscientia, Sanderson de
Iuramento, Praelectione secunda. And such an express Declaration of the sense
and meaning of any party, when required to take an Oath, for no other end but
for the clearing and exoneration of his own Conscience, was never in the
opinion of any Lawyer, or any Divine, construed to be the Crime of
Leasing-making, or of defamatory Libels, or depraving of publik Laws, or
reproaching or misconstruing of the Government: but on the contrary, by the
universal suffrage of all Protestant Divines, there is expressly required, in
Cases of a scrupulous Conscience, an abhorrence and detestation of all reserved
senses, and of all Amphibologies and Equivocations, which are in themselves
unlawful and reprobate, upon that unanswerable Reason, that Juramentum being
the highest Act of Devotion and Religion in eo requiritur maxima simplicitas;
and that a party is obliged, who has any scruples of Conscience, publikly and
openly to clear and declare the same.

4. Albeit it is not controverted, but that a Legislator, imposing an Oath, or
any publik Authority, before whom the Oath is taken, may, after hearing of the
Sense and Explication which a person is willing to put upon it, either reject
or accept of the same, if it be conceived not to be consistent with the genuine
sense of the Oath: Yet tho it were rejected, it was never heard of or
pretended, that the offering of a sense does import a crime, but that
notwithstanding thereof, Habetur pro Recusante, and as if he had not taken the
Oath, and to be liable to the certification of Law, as if he had been a Refuser.

5. The Panel having publikly, and openly declared the sense in which he was
free to take the Oath, it is offered to be proved that he was allowed, and did
accordingly proceed to the taking of the Oath, and did thereafter take his
place, and sit and vote, during that Sederunt of Privy* Council. So as the
pretended Sense and Explication, which he did then emit and give, can import no
Crime against him.

6. It is also offered to be proved, that before the Panel was required to
take the Oath, or did appear before his Royal Highness, and Lords of
Privy Council, to take the same, there were a great many Papers spread abroad
from persons, and Ministers of the Orthodox Clergy; and as the Panel is
informed some thereof presented to the Bishops of the Church, in the name of
Synods and Presbyteries which did, in downright terms, charge the Test and Oath
withalledged contradictions and inconsistencies. And for satisfaction whereof
some of the Learned and Reverend Bishops of the Church did write a learned and
satisfying Answer, called A Vindication of the Test, for clearing the Scruples,
Difficulties and mistakes that were objected against it. And which Vindication
and Answer was exhibited, and read before the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, and allowed to be printed: And from which the Panel argues.

1. That it neither is, nor can be pretended in this Libel, that the alleged
Explication, wherein he did take the Oath, does propose the scruples of his
Conscience in these terms, which were proposed by the Authors of these
Objections which do flatly and positively assert, that the Oath and Test do
contain matters of inconsistency and contradiction, whereas all that is
pretended in this Libel, with the most absolute violence can be put upon the
words, is arguing Implications and Inferences, which neither the words are
capable to bear, nor the sincerity of the Earls intention and design, nor the
course of his by - past Life can possibly admit of. And yet none of the persons
who were the Authors of such Papers were ever judged or reputed Criminal or
Guilty, and to be prosecuted for the odious and infamous Crimes libelled, of
Treason, Leasing-making, Prejury, and the like.

2. The Panel does also argue from the said matter of Fact, that the alleged
Explication libelled can neither in his intention and design, nor in the words,
infer or import any Crime against him, because, before his being required, or
appearing to take the Oath, there were spread abroad such Scruples and
Objections, by some of the Orthodox Clergy and others: So that the Earl can
never in any sense be construed in his Explication wherein he took the Oath, to
have done it animo infamandi, and to declaim against the Government: For the
Scruples and Objections that were spread abroad by others were a fair and
rational occasion why the Earl in any sense or explication which he offered
might have said that he was confident the Parliament never intended to impose
contradictory Oaths; and this is so far from importing the insinuation and
inference made by the Libel, that thereby the Parliament were so impious as to
impose contradictory Oaths, as on the contrary, considering the Circumstances
forementioned, that there were Papers spread abroad, insinuating. That there
were inconsiltencies and contradictions contained therein, the said expression
was an high Vindication of the Honor and Justice of the Parliament, against
the Calumnies and Mis-representations which were cast upon it, and was also a
just Rise for the Panel, for the clearing and exonoration of his own
Conscience, in the various senses and apprehensions which he found were going
abroad as to the said Test, humbly to offer his sense, in which he was clear
and satisfied to take the Oath.

7. To the Libel in so far as it is founded upon the Act of Parliament, viz.
Act 130 Par. 8 James 6 declaring. That none should presume to impugn the
Dignity or Authority of the Three Estates of Parliament or procure any invasion
or diminution thereof, under the pain of Treason; as also in so far as it is
pretended in the Libel. That the Panel by offering the Sense and Explication
libelled, has assumed the Legislative Power, which is incommunicable, and has
made a Law, or a part of a Law.

It is answered. The Libel is most groundless and irrelevant, and against which
the Act of Parliament is opponed, which is so plain and evident upon the
reading thereof, that it neither is nor can be subject to the least
cavillation: And the plain meaning whereof is nothing else but to impugn the
Authority of Parliaments, as if the King and Parliament had not a Legislative
Power or were not the highest Representative of the Kingdom; or that any of the
Three Estates were not essentially requisite to constitut the Parliament. And
besides there is nothing more certain, than that the occasion of the said Act
its being made was in relation to the Bishops and Clergy: And there is nothing
in the pretended Explanation that can be wrested to import the least
Contravention of the said Act, or to be an impugning of the Three Estates of
Parliament, or a seeking any innovation therein. And it is admired, with what
shadow of Reason it can be pretended, That the Panel has assumed a Legislative
Power, or made a part of a Law, seeing all that is contained in the alleged
Explication libelled is only a Declaration of the Earl's sense in which he was
satisfied to take the Oath, and so respected none but himself, and for the
clearing of his own Conscience, which justly indeed the Word of God calls a Law
to himself, without any incroaching upon the Legislative Power. And where was
it ever debated, but that a man in the taking of an Oath, if as to his
apprehensions he thought any thing in it deserved to be cleared, might declare
the same, or that his exhibiting, at the time of the taking of the Oath, his
sense and explication wherein he did take it, was ever reputed or pretended to
be the assuming of a Legislative Power, it being the universal practice of all
Nations to allow this liberty; and which sense may be either rejected or
accepted, as the Legislator shall think fit, importing no more but a Parties
private sense^ for the exoneration of his own Conscience? And as to that Member
of the Libel founded upon Act 19. Par. 3. Queen Mary, it contains nothing but a
Declaration of the pain of ^erjury, and there is nothing in the Explication
libelled, which can in the least be inferred as a Contravention of the said
Act, in respect if it should be proved. That the Panel, at the time of the
taking of the Oath did take it in the words of the said Explication, as his
sense of the Oath, it is clear that the sense being declared at the time of
taking the Oath, and allowed as the sense wherein it was taken the Panel can
only be understood to have taken it in that sense. And although publik
Authority may consider whether the sense given by the Panel does satisfy the
Law or, not yet that can import no more though it was found not to satisfy,
but to hold the Panel as a Refuser of the Oath: but it is absolutely
impossible to infer the Crimes of Perjury upon it, being as is pretended by the
Libel the Panel did only take it with the Declaration of the Sense and
Explication libelled.

8. As the Explication libelled does not at all import all, or any of the
Crimes contained in the said Libel, so by the common Principles of all Law,
where a person does emit words for the clearing and exoneration of his own
Conscience, although there were any ambiguity, or unclearness, or involvedness in
the tenor or import of the expressions or words, yet they are ever to be
interpreted, Interpretatione benigna and favorab ili according to the general
Principles of Law and Reason. And it never was, nor can be refused to any
person to interpret and put a congruous sense upon his own words, especially
the Panel being a person of eminent Quality, and who has given great
demonstration, and undeniable evidences of his fixed and unalterable Loyalty to
His Majesty's Interest and Service, and, at the time of emiting the said
Explication, was invested and entrusted in publik Capacites. And it is a just
and rational interpretation and caution which Sanderson, that judicious and
eminent Casuist, gives, Praelect: 2. That dicta and facta principum, parentum,
rectorum, are ever to be looked upon as benignae Interpretationis, and that
Dubia sunt interpretanda in meliorem partem. And there is nothing in the
Explication libelled which, without detortion and violence, and in the true
sense and design of the Panel, is not capable of this benign Interpretation
and construction, especially respect being had to the Circumstances wherein it
was emitted and given, after a great many Objections, Scruples, and alleged
Inconsistencies, were owned, vented and spread abroad, which was a rise to the
Earl for using the expressions contained in the pretended Declaration libelled.

10. These words whereby it is pretended the Panel declares, he was ready to
give obedience as far as he could, first, do not in the least import That the
Parliament had imposed any Oath which was in it self unlawful: but only the
Pannel's scrupulosity and unclearness in matter of Conscience. And it is hoped
it cannot be a Crime, because all men cannot go the same length. And if any
such thing were argued it might be argued ten times more strongly from a simple
refusing of the Oath, as if any thing were enjoined which were so hard that it
is not possible to comply with it: And yet such Implications are most
irrational and inconsequential, and neither in the case of a simple and
absolute refusing or the Oath, nor in the case of an Explication of the parties
sense wherein he is willing to take the Oath, is there any impeachment of the
Justice and prudence of the Legislator, who imposes this Oath, but singly a
declaration of the scrupulosity and weakness of the party, why he cannot take
the Oath in other terms: and such Explications have been allowed by the Laws
and Customs of all Nations, and are advised by all Divines, of whatsoever
Principles, for the solace and security of a Man's Conscience.

2. As to that point of the Explication libelled, That I am confident the
Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; it respects the former
answer, which, considering the plain and down right Objections which were
spread abroad, and made against the Oath, as containing inconsistencies and
contradictions, was an high Vindication of the Justice and Prudence of the
Parliament.

3. As to these words, And therefore I think no body can explain it but for
himself. The plain and clear meaning is nothing else but that the Oath being
imposed by Act of Parliament it was of no private interpretation; And that
therefore every man who was to take it behooved to take it in that sense which
he apprehended to be the genuine sense of the Parliament. And it is impossible,
without impugning common sense, that any man could take it in any other sense,
it being as impossible to see with another man's eyes as to see with his private
Reason. And a man's own private sense and apprehension of the genuine sense was
the only proper way wherein any man could rationally take the Oath.

And as to these words, That he takes it as far as it is consistent with it
self and the Protestant Religion. The Panel neither intended nor expressed more,
but that he did take it as a true Protestant, and he hopes all men have taken
it as such.

And as to that Clause, Wherein the Panel is made to declare, That he does not
bind up himself in his station, in a lawful way, to wish and endeavor any
alteration he thinks to the advantage of Church or State, not repugnant to the
Protestant Religion and his Loyalty.

It is answered, There is nothing in this expression that can import the least
Crime, or give the least umbrage for any Mistake, For,

1. It is most certain, it is impossible to elicite any such thing from the
Oath, but that it was the intention of the Parliament, That persons,
notwithstanding of the Oath, might concur in their stations, and in a lawful
way, in any Law to the advantage of Church and State. And no rational man ever
did, or can take the Oath in other terms, that being contrary to his Allegiance
and Duty to His Sacred Majesty and Prince.

2. There is nothing in the said Expression which does in the least point at
any alteration in the Fundamentals of Government, either in Church or State;
but on the contrary, by the plain and clear words and meaning, rather for its
perpetuity, stability and security. The Expression being cautioned to the
utmost scrupulosity, as that it was to be done in a lawful manner; that it was
to be to the advantage of Church or State; that it was to be consistent with
the Protestant Religion, and with his Loyalty, which was no other but the duty
and Loyalty of all faithful Subjects; and which he has signally and eminently
expressed upon all occasions. So that how such an expression can be drawn to
import all or any of the Crimes libelled passes all Natural Understanding.

And as to the last words, And this I understand as a part of my Oath, which is
libelled to be a treasonable Invasion, and assuming of the Legislative Power.
It is answered, It is most unwarrantable; and a Parties declaring the sense and
meaning in which he was free to take an Oath does not at all respect or invade
the Legislative Power, of which the Panel never entertained a thought, but has
an absolute abhorrence and detestation of such practices. But the plain and
clear meaning is, That the Sense and Explication was a part of his Oath, and
not of the Law imposing the Oath these being as distant as the Two Poles: and
which Sense was taken off the Earl's Hands and he accordingly was allowed to
take his Place at the Council Board, and therefore repeats the former general
Defenses.

And to convince the Lords of Justitiary, that there is nothing in the
pretended Explication libelled which can be drawn to import any Crime, even of
the lowest size and degree, and that there is no expression therein contained
that can be detorted or wrested to import the same, is evident from that
learned Vindication published and spread abroad by an eminent Bishop, and which
was read in the face of the Privy Council and does contain expressions of the
same nature; and to the same import contained in the pretended Explication
libelled as the ground of this Indictment libelled against the Panel. And it
is positively offered to be proven, That these terms were given in, and read,
and allowed to be Printed, and (without taking notice of the whole tenor of the
said Vindication, which the Lords of Justiciary are humbly desired to peruse,
and consider, and compare the same with the Explication libelled) the same
acknowledges, that Scruples had been raised and spread abroad against the
Oath; and also acknowledges, that there were Expressions therein that were
dark and obscure; and likewise takes notice, that the Confession ratified Par.
1 James 6. to which the Oath relates, was hastily made, and takes notice of
that Authority that made it, and acknowledges in plain terms, that the Oath
does not hinder any regular endeavor to regulate or better the Established
Government; but only prohibits irregular endeavors and attempts to invert the
substance or body of the Government; and does likewise explain the Act of
Parliament anent His Majesty's Supremacy, that it does not reach the alteration
of the external Government of the Church. And the Panel and his Proctors are
far from insinuating in the least, that there is any thing in the said
Vindication but what is consistent with the exemplary Loyalty, Piety and
Learning of the Writer of the same. And tho others perhaps may differ in their
private opinion, as to this interpretation of the Act of Parliament anent the
Kings ^upremacy, yet it were most absurd and irrational to pretend that whether
the mistake were upon the interpretation of the Writer, or the sense of others,
as to that point, that such mistakes or misapprehensions, upon either hand,
should import or infer against them the Crimes of Leasing-making, or depraving
His Majesty's Laws: For if such Foundations were laid, Judges and Lawyers had a
dangerous employment, there being nothing more ordinar^ than to fall into
differences and mistakes of the sense and meaning of the Laws and Acts of
Parliament. But such Crimes cannot be inferred but with and under the
qualifications abovementioned, of malicious and perverse designs, joined with
licentious, wicked and reproachful speeches spread abroad, to move sedition and
dislike of the Government. And the said Laws were never otherwise interpreted,
nor extended in any case. And therefore the Explication libelled, neither as
taken complexly, nor in the several expressions thereof, nor in the design of
the ingiver of the same, can in Law import against him all or any of the Crimes
libelled.

In like manner the Panel conjoins with the grounds abovementioned the
Proclamation issued forth by His Majesty's Privy Council, which acknowledges
and proceeds upon a Narrative, that scruples and jealousies were raised and
spread abroad against the Act of Parliament enjoining the Test. For clearing
and satisfaction whereof the said Proclamation was issued forth, and is since
approved by His Sacred Majesty.

The Kings Advocate's Argument and Plea against the Earl of Argyle.
HIS Majesty's Advocate, for the foundation of his Debate, does represent, That
His Majesty, to secure the Government from the Rebellious Principles of the
last Age, and the unjust Pretexts made use of in this, from Popery, and other
Jealousies; as also to secure the Protestant Religion, and the Crown, called a
Parliament; and that the great security resolved on by the Parliament was this
excellent Test, in which, that the old juggling Principles of the Covenant might
not be renewed, wherein they still swore to serve the King in their own way,
the Parliament did positively ordain, That this Oath should be taken in the
plain genuine meaning or the words, without any evasion whatsoever.
Notwithstanding whereof, the Earl of Argyle, by this Paper, does invent a new
way, whereby no man is at all bound to it. For how can any person be bound, if
every man will only obey it as far as he can, and as far as he conceives it
consistent with the Protestant Religion, and with it self, and reserve to
himself, notwithstanding thereof, to make any alteration that he thinks
consistent with his Loyalty? And therefore His Majesty's Advocate desires to
know to what the Earl of Argyle, or any man else, can be bound by this Test?
what the Magistrate can expect, or what way he can punish his Perjury? For if
he be bound no farther than he himself can obey, or so far as this Oath is
consistent with the Protestant Religion or it self, quomodo constat, to whom or
what he is bound? And who can determine that? Or against what alteration is the
Government secured, since he is Judge of his own alteration? So that that Oath,
that was to be taken without any evasion is evaded in every single word or
Letter; and the Government as insecure as before the Act was made, because the
taker is no farther bound than he pleases. From which it cannot be denied, but
his Interpretation destroys not only this Act, but all Government, since it
takes away the security of all Government, and makes every man's Conscience,
under which Name there goes ordinarily in this Age Humor and Interest, to be
the rule of the takers obedience. Nor can it be conceived to what purpole Laws,
but especially Oaths, needed to be made, if this were allowed; or how this
cannot fall under the 107th Act, Par. 7. James 6. whereby it is statuted, That
no man interpret the Statutes otherwise than the maker understood. For what can
be more contrary to the taking of them in the makers sense, than that every man
should obey as far as he can, and be allowed to take them in a general sense,
so far as they are consistent with themselves, and the Protestant Religion,
without condescending wherein they do not agree with the Protestant Religion?
and that they are not bound not to make any alteration which they think good
for the States? For all these make the rule of obedience in the taker, whereas
the positive Law makes it to be in the maker. O^ how could they be punished for
Perjury after this Oath? For when he were quarrelled for making alterations
against this Oath; and so to be perjured, he might easily answer, That he took
this Oath only in so far as it was consistent with the Protestant Religion, and
with a Salvo, that he might make any alteration that he thought consistent with
his Loyalty. And as to these Points, upon which he were to be quarrelled, he
might say, he did not think them to be inconsistent with his Loyalty, think we
what we pleased, and so needed not be perjured, except he pleased to decide
against himself: For in these Generals he reserves to himself to be still Judge.
And this were indeed a fine security for any Government. And by the same rule
that it looses this Oath, it shows a way of loosing all Oaths and Obedience:
And consequently strikes at the root of all Laws, as well as this: Whereas to
shun all this, not only this excellent Statute 107. has secured all the rest,
but this is common Reason: And in the opinion of all Divines, as well as
Lawyers in all Nations, Verba juramenti intelliguntur secundum meant em and
intentionem ejus, cui fit juramentum. Which is set down, as the grand position,
by Sandersone (whom they cite,) Page 137. and is founded upon that Mother-Law,
Leg. 10. cui interrogatus f. f. de interrogationibus in Iure faciendis; and
without which no man can have sense of Government in his head, or practice it
in any Nation. Whereas on the other hand there is no danger to any tender
Conscience, since there was no force upon the Earl to take the Oath, but he
took it for his own advantage, and might have abstained.

2. It is inferred from the above-written matter of Fact, That the Earl is
clearly guilty of contravention of the 10. Act, Parl. 10. James VI. Whereby the
Liedges are commanded not to write any purpose of Reproach of His Majesty's
Government, or misconstrue his Proceedings, whereby any misliking may be raised
betwixt his Highness, his Nobility, or his People. And who can read this Paper,
without seeing the King and Parliament reproached openly in it? For who can
hear, that the Oath is only taken as far as it is consistent with it self and
the Protestant Religion, but must necessarily conclude, that in several things
it is inconsistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion? For if it were
not inconsistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, why this Clause at
all but it might have been simply taken? For the only reason of hindering it to
be taken simply, was because of the inconsistency: ergo there behoved
necessarily to be an inconsistency. And if there be any inconsistency with the
Protestant Religion, or any contradiction in the Oath it self, can there be any
thing a greater Reproach on the Parliament, or a greater ground of mislike to
the People? And whereas it is pretended, That all Laws and Subsumptions should
be clear, and these are only Inferences. It is answered, That there are some
things which the Law can only forbid in general: And there are many Inferences
which are as strong and natural, and reproach as soon, or sooner, than the
plainest defamations in the world do: For what is openly said of reproach to
the King does not wound him so much as many seditious Insinuations have done in
this Age and the last: So that whatever was the Earl's design (albeit it is
always conceived to be unkind to the Act, against which himself debated in
Parliament,) yet certainly the Law in such cases is only to consider what
essect this may have amongst the People: And therefore the Acts of Parliament,
that were to guard against the misconstruing of His Majesty's Government, do
not only speak of what was designed, but where a disliking may be caused, and
so judges ab effectu: And, consequentially to the same emergent Reason, it
makes all things tending to the raising of dislike to be punishable by the Act
60. Parl. 6. Queen Mary; and the 9. Act. Parl. 20. James VI. So that the Law
designed to deter all men by these indefinite and comprehensive Expressions:
And both in this and all the Laws of Leasingmaking, the Judges are to consider
what falls under these general and comprehensive words, Nor could the Law be
more special here, since the makers of Reproach and Slander are so various that
they could not be bound up or expressed in any Law: But as it evidently appears,
that no man can hear the words expressed, if he believe this Paper, but he must
think the Parliament has made a very ridiculous Oath, inconsistent with it self
and the Protestant Religion, the words allowing no other sense, and having that
natural tendency; Even as if a man would say, I love such a man only in so far
as he is an honest man, he behoved certainly to conclude, that the man was not
every way honest; So if your Lordships will take measures by other Parliaments,
or your Predecessors, ye will clearly see, That they thought less than this a
defaming of the Government, and misconstruing His Majesty's Proceedings. For in
Balmerino's Case the Justices find an humble Supplication made to the King
himself to fall under these Acts now cited. Albeit as that was a Supplication
so it contained the greatest expressions of Loyalty, and offers of Life and
Fortune that could be expressed, Yet because it insinuates darkly, That the King
in the preceding Parliament had not favored the Protestant Religion, and they
were sorry he should have taken Notes with his own hands of what they said,
which seems to be most innocent, yet he was found guilty upon those same very
Acts. And the Parliament 1661. found his Lordship himself guilty of Leasing -
making, tho he had only written a Letter to a private Friend, which requires no
great care nor observation, (but this Paper which was to be a part of his own
Oath does) because after he had spoken of the Parliament in the first part of
this Letter, he thereafter added, That the King would know their Tricks: Which
words might be much more applicable to the private Persons therein designed,
than that the words now insisted on can be capable of any such Interpretation.
And if either Interpretations, upon pretext of exonering of Conscience, or
otherwise, be allowed, a man may easily defame as much as he pleases: And have
we not seen the King most defamed by Covenants entered into upon pretense to
make him great and glorious, By Remonstrances made to take away his Brother and
best Friend, upon pretense of preserving the Protestant Religion, and His
Sacred Person? And did not all who rebelled against him in the last Age
declare, That they thought themselves bound in duty to obey him, but still as
far as that could consist with their respect to the Protestant Religion, and
the Laws and Liberties, which made all the rest ineffectual? And whereas it is
pretended, That by these words, I take the same in as far as it is consistent
with it self and the Protestant Religion, nothing more is meant, but that he
takes it as a true Protestant: His Majesty's Advocate appeals to your
Lordships, and all the Hearers, if upon hearing this Expression they should
take it in this sense, and not rather think that there is an inconsistency. For
if that were possible to be the sense, what need he say at all, as far as it is
consistent with it self? Nor had the other part, as far as it is consistent
with the Protestant Religion, been necessary. For it is either consistent with
the Protestant Religion, or otherwise they were Enemies to the Protestant
Religion, that made it. Nor are any Lawyers or others in danger, by pleading or
writing: For these are very different from; and may be very easily pleaded
without defaming a Law, and an Oath, when they go to take it. But if any Lawyer
should say, in pleading or writing; That the Test was inconsistent, or, which
is all one, that it were not to be taken by any man, but so far as it was
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, no doubt this would be a
crime even in pleading, tho pleading has a greater allowance than deliberate
swearing has: And as there is nothing wherein there is not some inconveniency,
so the inconveniency of defaming the Government is much greater than that of
any private man's hazard, who needs not err except he please.

Whereas it is pretended, That before the Earl gave in this Explication, there
were other Explications spread abroad, and Answers read to them in Council, and
that the Council it self gave an Explication. It is answered, That if this
Paper be Leasing-making, or misconstruing His Majesty's Proceedings, and
Treasonable, as is contended, then a thousand of the like offenses cannot
excuse it. And when the King accused Noblemen, Ministers, and others, in the
Year 1661. for going on in the Rebellions of that Age, first with the
Covenanters, and then with the usurpers, it was found no Defense, That the
Nation was overgrown with those Crimes, and that they were thought to be
duties in those days, Yea, this were to invite men to offend in multitudes. And
albeit sometimes these: who follow the examples of multitudes may thereby
pretend this as an excuse to many, yet this was never a formal Defense against
Guilt, nor was ever the chief of the Offenders favorable on that Head. And it
is to be presumed, That the Earl of Argyle would rather be followed by others,
than that he would follow any example. But His Majesty's Advocate does
absolutely decline to debate a point that may defame a constant and standing
Act of Parliament, by leaving upon record a memory of its being opposed. Nor
were this Relevant, except it could be said, the Council had allowed such
Explications which reflected upon the King and the Government: For the writing
an Answer is no allowance, but a condemning: Not can the Council allow any more
than they can remit: And tho it may justly be denied that the Council heard
even the Earl's own Explanation, yet the hearing or allowing him to sit is no
Relevant Plea, because they might very justly have taken a time to consider how
far it was fit to accuse upon that Head. And it is both just and fit for the
Council to take time; and by express Act of Parliament the negligence of the
Kings Officers does not bind them. For if this were allowed, Leading men in the
Council might commit what Crimes they pleased in the Council, which certainly
the King may quarrel many years after. And tho all the Council had allowed him
that day, any one Officer of State might have quarrelled it the next day. As to
the Opinion of Bellarmine, Sanderson, and others, it is ever contended, that
the Principles of the Covenant agree very well with those of the Jesuits, and
both dostill allow Equivocations and Evasions: But no solid, Orthodox Divine
ever allowed, That a man who was to swear without any Evasion should swear so
as he is bound to nothing, as it is contended the Earl is not, for the Reasons
represented. And as they still recommend, That when men are not clear they
might abstain, as the Earl might have done in this Case, so they still
conclude. That men should tell in clear terms what the sense is by which they
are to be bound to the State: Whereas the Earl here tells only in the general,
and in most ambiguous terms, That he takes it as far as he can obey, and as far
as it is consistent with the Protestant Religion, and that he takes it in his
own sense, and that he is not bound by it from making alterations, but as far
as he thinks it for the advantage of Church or State: Which sense is a thousand
times more doubtful than the Test, and is in effect nothing but what the taker
pleases himself.

As to the Treason founded on, His Majesty's Advocate founds it first upon the
Fundamental and Common Laws of this and all Nations, whereby it is Treason for
any man to make any alteration he shall think for the advantage of Church or
State: Which he hopes is a Principle cannot be denied in the general. And
whereas it is pretended, That this cannot be understood of mean alterations,
and of alterations to be made in a lawful way: It is answered, That as the
thing it self is Treason; so this Treason is not taken off by any of these
qualifications; because he declares, he will wish and endeavor any alteration
he thinks fit: And any alteration comprehends all alterations that he thinks
fit: Nam propositio indefinita aequipollet universali. And the word any is
general in its own nature, and is in plain terms a reserving to himself to make
alterations, both great and small. And the restriction is not, all alterations
that the King shall think fit, or are consistent with the Laws and Acts of
Parliament; but he is still to be Judge of this, and his Loyalty is to be the
Standard. Nor did the Covenanters in the last Age, nor do these who are daily
executed, decline that they are bound to obey the King, simply, but only that
they are bound to obey him no otherwise than as far as his Commands are
consistent with the Law of God, of Nature, and of this Kingdom, and with the
Covenant: And their Treason lies in this. And when it is asked them, Who shall
be judge in this, they still make themselves Judges. And the reason of all
Treason being, that the Government is not secure; it is desired to be known,
what way the Government can be secured after this Paper, since the Earl is
still Judge how far he is obliged, and what is his Loyalty. And if this had
been sufficient, the Covenant had been a very excellent Paper: for they are
there bound to endeavor, in their several stations, to defend the Kings
Person: but when the King challenged them, how they came to make War against
him? their great Refuge was, That they were themselves still ludges as to that.
And for illustrating this Power, the Lords of Justitiary are desired to
consider, quid Iuris, if the Earl, or any man else should have reserved to
himself in this Oath a liberty to rise in Arms, or to oppose the lineal
Succession, tho he had added, in a lawful manner: For the thing being in it
self unlawful, this is but shamm, and Protestatio contraria facto. And if these
be unlawful, notwithstanding of such additions, so much more must this general
reservation, of making any alterations, likewise be unlawful, notwithstanding
of these additions: For he that reserves the general power of making any
alteration, does, a fortiori, reserve power to make any alteration, tho never
so fundamental. For all particulars are included in the General; and whatever
may be said against the Particulars may much more strongly be said against the
General.

2. The 130. Act. Par. 8. James VI. is expressly founded on, because nothing can
be a greater diminution of the power of the Parliament, than to introduce a way
or mean whereby all their Acts and Oaths shall be made insignificant and
ineffectual, as this Paper does make them, for the Reasons represented. Nor are
any of the Estates of Parliament secure at this rate, but that they who
reserved a general power to make all alterations, may, under that General, come
to alter any of them.

3. What can be a greater impugning of the Dignity and Authority of
Parliaments, than to say, That the Parliament has made Acts for the security of
the Kingdom, which are in themselves ridiculous, inconsistent with themselves
and the Protestant Religion?

And as to what is answered against invading the Kings Prerogative, and the
Legislative Power in Parliaments, in adding a part to an Oath or Act, is not
relevantly inferred, since the sense of these words, And this I understand as a
part of my Oath, is not to be understood as if any thing were to be added to
the Law, but only to the Oath, and to be an interpretation of the Oath. It is
replied, That after this, no man needs to add a Caution to the Oath in
Parliament. But when he comes to take the Oath, do the Parliament what they
please, he will add his own part. Nor can this part be looked upon as a sense:
For if this were the sense before this Paper, he needed not understand it as a
part of it, for it wanted not that part. And in general, as every man may add
his own part, so the King can be secure of no part. But your Lordships of
Justitiary are desired to consider, how dangerous it would be in this Kingdom,
and how ill it would sound in any other Kingdom, That men should be allowed to
reserve to themselves liberty to make any alteration they thought fit in Church
or State, as to the legality of which, they were themselves to be Judges: And
how far, from Degree to Degree, this at last may come to absolute Anarchy, and
how scandalous a thing, as well as unsecure, this new way may look in an Age
wherein we are too much tracing the steps of our rebellious Progenitors in the
last, whose great detection and error was, That they thought themselves, and
not the King the Authors of Reformation in Church and State. And no man ever
was barred by that, that the way he was upon was not a lawful way: For if it be
allowed to every man to take his own way, every man will think his own way to
be the lawful way.

As to the Perjury, it is founded on this, first. That perjury may be
committed, not only by breaking an Oath, but even in the swearing of it, viz.
to swear it with such Evasions as make the Oath ineffectual: For which
Sandersone is cited, Page 138. Alterum Perjurii genus est novo aliquo
excogitato Commento Iuramenti vim declinare, aut eludere, and Iurans tenetur
sub poena Perjurii implere Secundum Intentionem deferentus; both which are
here. For the Earl being bound by the very Oath, to swear in the genuine
meaning, without any evasion, he has sworn so as he has evaded every word,
there being not one word to which it can be said particularly he is bound, as
is said. And it is undeniable, that he has not sworn in the sense of the makers
of the Law, but in his own sense, which is Perjury, as is said. And
consequentially, whatever sense may be allowed in ambiguous Cases, yet there
can be none where the Paper clearly bears Generals: And where he declares, That
he takes it in his own sense, His Majesty's Advocate declares, he will not
burden himself, that Copies were dispersed, tho it is certain, since the very
Paper it self by the giving in is chargeable with all that is above charged
upon it.

Sir John Dalrymple's Defense and Plea for the Earl of Argyle, by way of Reply
upon the King's Advocate.
SIR John Dalrymple replies for the Panel, That since the solid grounds of Law
adduced in the Defenses have received no particular Answers, in relation to the
common consent of all Casuists, viz. That a party who takes an Oath is bound in
Conscience to clear and propose the terms and sense in which he does understand
the Oath; Nor in relation to the several Grounds adduced concerning the legal
and rational Interpretation of dubious Clauses. And since these have received
no Answers, the Grounds are not to be repeated: but the Proctors for the Panel
do farther insist on these Defenses.

1. It is not alleged, That any Explanation was given in by the Panel to any
person, or any Copy spread, before the Panel did take the Test in Council: So
that it cannot be pretended, That the many Scruples that have been moved
concerning the Test, did arise from the Pannel's Explication: But on the
contrary, all the Objections that are answered, and obviated in the Pannel's
Explication, were not only privately muttered, or were the thoughts of single
or illiterate persons, but they were the difficulties proposed by Synods and
Presbyteries, long before the Panel came from home, or was required to take
the Test: So that the general terms of the Acts of Parliament founded upon in
the Libel are not applicable to this Case: For as these Laws, in relation to
Leasing makers, are only relative to atrocious wilful Insinuations, or
misconstructions of His Majesty's Person or Government, or the open depraving
of his Laws, so the restrictive Clause, whereby sedition or misconstructions
may be moved, raised, or engendered betwixt His Majesty and his Liedges, cannot
be applied to this Case, where all these Apprehensions and Scruples were on
foot, and agitated long before the Pannel's Explanation.

As it cannot be pretended, That any new dust was raised by the Pannel's
Explanation, so it is positively offered to be proved, That there is not one
word contained in this Explanation, but that either these individual words, or
much worse, had been publikly proposed, and verbatim read in Council, without
the least discouragement, or the least objection made by any Member of the
Council. And where a Writing, ex proposito read in so high a Court, was
universally agreed upon, without the alteration of a Syllable, how can it be
pretended, That any person thereafter using the said in ^ividual terms in any
Explanation, and far easier terms, that they shall incur the high and infamous
Crimes libelled? And the question is not here. Whether the Council was a proper
Judicature to have proposed, or imposed a sense, or allowed any Explanation of
the Test to be published; but that it is impossible that a sense they allowed,
or being publikly read before them, and which the Kings Advocate did not
control, that this should import Treason, or any Crime: And tho the Pannels
Advocate will not pursue or follow the Reply that has been made to this point
yet certainly no man of sober sense will think that it is fit to insinuate that
so high a judicature might have authorized or acquiescedin such Explanations as
the Liedges thereafter should be entrapped to have used

If the Panel had officiously or ultr^neously offered a sense or Explanation
of His Majesty's Laws, which the Laws themselves could not have born, it might
justly have been alleged, that he was extraordinem, and meddling in a matter he
was not concerned in but where the Act of Council did enjoin, and he was
required and cited to that effect, It could neither be constructed as
ostentation, or to move or encourage Scruples or Resistance but it was
absolutely necessary, either for to have refused the Test, or else to have
declared what he thought to be the true and genuine meaning of it. And there
being so many objections publikly moved and known, his Explanation was nothing
else but to clear, That he did not look upon these Scruples and Objections
moved by others as well founded and rational in themselves; and therefore he
was able to take the Test in that sense the Council had heard or allowed. And
it is not controverted, that the sense of the Legislator is the genuine sense
both of Laws and Oaths: And if a person were only interpreting the meaning of
either a Law or an Oath imposed, he should deprave and misconstruct the Law and
Oath, if he rendered it wittingly and willingly in terms inconsistent with the
meaning of the imposer: But there is a great difference betwixt taking of
Oaths, and interpreting Oaths; For when a man comes to take an Oath, except his
particular sense did agree with the genuine meaning of the imposer, he cannot
take that Oath, tho he may very well interpret and declare what is the sense of
the Legislator, which he may know, and yet perhaps not be able to take the Oath.

And therefore when there is any doubtfulness in an Oath, and a party is bound
to take it, if then he gives in an Explication of the sense which he in his
private judgment does apprehend to be the genuine meaning, if that private
sense be disconform to the Legislators sense in the Oath, then the Imposer of
the Oath, or he that has power to offer it to the party, if he consider the
parties sense disconform, he ought to reject the Oath, as not fulfilling the
intent of the Law imposing it.

But it is impossible to state that as a Crime, That a party should neither
believe what is proposed in the Oath, nor be able to take it; And he can run no
farther hazard, but the penalty imposed upon the Refuser. And therefore in all
Oaths there must be a concourse both of the sense imposed by Authority, and of
the private Sense, Judgment or Conscience of the party. And therefore if a
party should take an Oath in the Sense proposed by Authority contrary to his
own sense, he were perjured: whereby it is evident that the sense of Authority
is not sufficient, without the acquiescence and consent of the private person.
And therefore it is very strange, why that part of the Pannel's Explanation
should be challenged, that he takes it in his own Sense, the posterior words
making it as plain as the light, that that sense of his own is not what he
pleases to make of the Oath, for it bears expressly, that no body can explain it
but for himself, and reconcile it as it is genuine, and agrees in its own
sense: So that there must be a Reconciliation betwixt his own sense and the
genuine sense, which upon all hands is acknowledged to be the Sense of
Authority. And if the Panel had been of these lax and debaucht Principles,
that he might have evaded the meaning and energy of the Oath, by imposing upon
it what sense he pleased, certainly he would have contented himself in the
general refuge of Equivocation, or Mental Reservation, and he would never have
exposed his sense to the world, in which he took this Oath, whereby he became
absolutely fixed and determined to the Oath, in that particular sense, and so
had no latitude of shuffling off the Energy or Obligation of the Oath. And it
is likewise acknowledged, That the Cases alleged in the Reply are true, viz.
That the person is guilty of Perjury, si aliquo novo Commento he would elude
his Oath, or who does not fulfill the Oath in the sense of the Imposer. But that
does not concern this Case: For in the foresaid Citation, a person, after he
has taken an Oath, finding out some new conceit to elude it he is perjured: but
in this Case the Panel did at, and before his taking the Test, declare the
terms in which he understood it; So that this was not nov^ aliquo commento to
elude it. And the other Case, where a party takes it in the sense of Authority,
but has some subterfuge, or concealed Explanation, it is acknowledged to be
Perjury. But in this Case there was no concealed Explanation, but it was
publikly expressed, and an Explanation given, which the Panel designed, and
understood as the meaning of Authority, and had ground to believe he was not
mistaken, since upon that Explanation he was received and allowed to sit and
vote in Council.

And as to that part of the Reply, that explains the Treason, there can be no
Treason in the Pannel's Case, because the express Act of Parliament founded
upon does relate only to the Constitution of the Parliament: And I am sure His
Majesty's Advocate cannot subsume in these terms: And therefore in the Reply he
recurs to the general Grounds of the Law, That the usurping of His Majesty's
Authority, in making a part of the Law; and to make alterations in general, and
without the King, are high and treasonable words or designs, and such as the
party pleases, and such designs as have been practiced in the late times. And
that even the adjection of fair and safe words, as in the Covenant, does not
secure from treasonable Designs; and that it was so found in Balmerino's Case,
tho it bear a fair Narrative of an humble Supplication.

It is replied, That the usurpation of making of Laws is undoubtedly
treasonable; but no such thing can be pretended or subsumed in this Case: For
albeit the Panel declares his Explanation to be a part of his Oath, yet he
never meaned to impose it as a part of the Law, or that this Explanation should
be a thing distinct, or a separate part even of his Oath. For his Explanation
being but exegetik of the several parts of the Oath, it is no distinct thing
from the Oath, but declared to be a part of the Oath de natura rei. And it was
never pretended, That he that alleged any thing to be de natura rei, did say,
That that was distinct and separate, which were a Contradiction. And therefore
the Argument is retorted, the Panel having declared, this Explanation was, de
natura rei, implied in the Oath, he necessarily made this Explanation no
addition or extention of the Oath. So that for all this Explanation, the Oath
is neither broader nor longer than it was.

And as to these words, I do not mean to bind up my self in my station, and in
a lawful way, to wish and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of
Church or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty. It
is a strange thing how this Clause can be drawn in question, as treasonable,
when it may with better Reason be alleged, That there is no good Subject but
is bound to say it. And albeit the words to endeavor in my station, be words
contained in the Covenant, yet that is no Reason, why two words in the Covenant
may not be made use of in another very good and loyal sense. And there is no
man that shall have the honor either to be entrusted by His Majesty in his
Council, or any other Judicature, or to be a Member of Parliament, but he is
bound by his Loyalty to say the same thing. And there was never a Clause more
cautiously expressed, for the words run, to endeavor any alteration I shall
think to the advantage of Church and State. And tho that was sufficient, yet
the Clause is so cautiously conceived, that it contains another Restriction,
not repugnant to Religion and his Loyalty. So that except it could be alleged,
That a man by lawful means, to the advantage of Church and State, consistent
with his Religion and Loyalty, could make treasonable alterations, and
invasions upon the Government and Monarchy, which are the highest
Contradictions imaginable, there can be nothing against the Panel. And albeit
the Clause, any alterations, might, without the Restrictions and Qualifications
foresaid, be generally extended, yet the preceding words of lawful way, and
the rational Interpretation of the emission of words especially before a solemn
Judicatory, leaves no place or shadow to doubt, that these alterations were no
fundamental or treasonable alterations, but such as the frailty of humane
Affairs and Constitutions, and vicissitude of things and circumstances, do
constantly require in the most exact Constitutions under Heaven. And the clause
does not so much as import, that there is a present necessity of alteration,
but it was a necessary and rational prospect, That albeit at present all things
under Heaven had been done to secure the Religion and Government, yet there
might occur Cases that would require new helps, alterations, and remedies. And
it is not pretended in this Case for the Panel, That he desires to alleviate,
or take off words truly treasonable, or having an ill design, by the mixing of
fair and safe, dutiful and submissive Expressions, which indeed are
Protestations contrari^ facto. For there is nothing in his Explanation, that
either in his design, or in the words themselves, being rationally and
naturally interpreted, can infer the Crimes libelled, or any of them. And the
Pannel's known Principles, and known Practices, do not only clear that Loyalty
that he has professed before the Lords of Justitiary, and instructed by
unquestionable Documents, but they put him far from the suspicion of these
damnable Principles related in the Reply, Of which the whole tract of his Life
has been an entire evidence of his abhorrency and detestation. And in the last
place, It is thought strange, why that should be represented as an affront or
disgrace to the Government, That the Parliament imposed a Test which the Panel
is not able to take simply. And it is not pretended, That he has defamed,
written or spoken against the Test it self, or for the inconvenience of it; but
only that he has not been able to see the good ground upon which it may be
simply taken. And this were to condemn him for want of sight or sense, when the
Law has punished no man for not taking the Test, but only turned him out of
the Government. And it is as strange an Inference, That because the Panel
declares, He believes the Parliament meaned no Contradiction and would take the
Test, in as far as it is consistent, that therefore he said, the Parliament
imposed Contradictions: Which is so far from a rational Induction, that the
Contradiction of these Subsumptions, in all congruity of Language and Sense, is
necessarily true. And therefore the last part of that Clause, in so far as it
is consistent, is a Consequence inferred upon the former: viz. I believe the
Parliament designed to impose no Contradictions: ergo, I take the Test as
consistent, and in so far as it must be consistent, if the Parliament did not
impose Contradictions, as certainly they have not; and to convince the world,
that in this sense this Explanation is receivable, it was proposed in Council,
and allowed, and therefore without the highest reflection, it cannot now be
quarrelled.

Sir George Lockhart's second Plea for the Earl of Argyle, by way of Reply upon
the King's Advocate.
SIR George Lockhart Duplies, That the Defender repeats and oppones his former
Defenses, which are no ways elided, nor satisfied by the Reply made by His
Majesty's Advocate. And although it be easy for the Kings Advocate, out of his
zeal, to pretend and argue Crimes of the highest Nature upon Inferences and
Consequences, neither consistent with the Pannel's design nor with his words
and expressions, yet there cannot be a more dangerous foundation laid, for the
security and interest of the Government, and the security and protection of the
Subjects, than that Crimes should be inferred but from clear, evident; and
express Laws, and plain palpable Contravention of these Laws, It being both
against the Laws of God and Man, that a Man should be made an Offender for a
word, and especially for expressions which according to Sense and Reason, and
considering the time and place where they were spoken by the Panel, viz. as a
Member of His Majesty's Privy Council, and in presence of his Royal Highness,
and the Members of Council, and when required to take the Test, were safe and
Innocent: and it were against all Law and Reason, to suppose that the Panel
either did, or designed to do any thing which may, or did import the Crimes
libelled against him. And whereas it is pretended, That the Oath required and
imposed by Act of Parliament was for the security of the Government; and that
the Panel by his Explication does evade the Oath, by taking it only so far as
it is consistent with the Protestant Religon, and his own Loyalty, whereof he
was Judge. It is answered, That the pretense is most unwarrantable, and the
security of His Majesty's Government is not at all endangered (as God forbid it
should,) tho the Panel, and a Thousand more had simply refused the Test, or
had taken it in a sense which does not satisfy the Law; it being competent to
publik Authority to consider, whether the Pannels Oath, in the terms of the
Explication wherein he did take it, does satisfy the Act of Parliament or not;
And if not, there can be no rational consequence inferred thereupon, but that
he is holden as a Refuser of the Oath, and liable to the Certification of the
Act of Parliament, of not assuming and continuing in any publik Trust: And no
more was intended or designed by the Act of Parliament it self, than strictly
to make the Oath in the true and genuine sense and meaning of the Parliament,
an indispensible qualification of persons admitted to publik Trust. So that it
is not at all material to dispute, whether the Pannel's Explication can be
looked upon as a full satisfaction of the Act, which whether it should or not,
it can import no Crime against him, it not being consistent with Sense and
Reason, that a person who absolutely refuses the Test, upon the scrupulosity
of his Conscience, albeit he be not capable of publik Trust, should be,
notwithstanding, looked upon as guilty of no Crime: and yet another who was
willing to go a greater length, albeit he did demur and scruple as to the full
length, that he should be reputed criminal and guilty of a Crime.

2. The Panel repeats and conjoyns with this the grounds abovementioned,
contained in his Defenses, viz. That neither the Crimes libelled, nor any other
Crime, were ever pretended or made use of against any others, who did spread
abroad Objections of an high nature, which yet were so favorably looked upon,
as to be construed only to proceed from scrupulosity of Conscience, as also the
satisfaction endeavored is in such terms, and by such condescensions, as do
take in, and justify the whole terms of the Explication libelled.

It is of great moment, and whereof the Lords of Justitiary are desired to take
special notice, both for clearing the absolute innocence of the Pannel's
meaning and intention, and to take off all possible misconstruction that can be
wrested or detorted from the tenor and expressions of the libelled Explication,
That the Panel was put to, and required to take the Oath, before the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council did pass and pubish their Proclamation explaining
the Oath, and declaring the genuine sense and meaning thereof, namely. That it
did not tie to the whole Articles of the Confession of Faith, ratified by Act
of Parliament, James 6. and which, as to several Articles thereof, had
occasioned the scruples, and difficulties, and alleged inconsistency and
contradiction betwixt the last part of the Oath and the said Confession, and
betwixt some of these Articles, and the Current of the Protestant Doctrine,
received and contained in the Syntagma of the Protestant Confessions. And
therefore if the Panel at that time did think fit, for the clearing and
exoneration of his own Conscience, to use the expressions in the Explication
libelled, and yet with so much duty and confidence of the Parliaments Justice,
as to their meaning and intention, That the Parliament never intended to impose
contradictory Oaths; and that he did take it so far as it was consistent with
it self, and the Protestant Religion, not knowing then, whether the whole
Confession was to be reputed a part of the Oath, and doubting there-anent; and
which the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council and his Sacred Majesty by his
approbation since, have thought a difficulty of so great moment as it was fit
to clear the same by a publik Proclamation; How now is it possible, that any
Judicatory under Heaven, which proceeds upon the solid grounds of Law and
Reason, and who (it cannot be doubted) will have a just regard to the intrinsik
Principles of Justice, and to all men's security, that they can now believe all,
or any of the Crimes libelled, should be in the least inferred from all, or any
of the expressions contained in the said Explication? But that on the contrary
it was a warrantable allowance, and Christian practice, condemned by the Law
and Custom of no Nation, That having scruples in the matter of an Oath which
should be taken in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness, and upon full
deliberation, and with a full assurance and sincerity of mind, That he did
plainly, openly, and clearly declare the sense in which he was willing to take
it; and if Authority did allow it as the genuine sense of the Oath, the Panel
to be holden as a Taker of the Oath: And if upon farther consideration,
Authority think not, that habetur pro Recusante, and a Refuser of the Oath, but
no ways to be looked upon as a criminal or guilty person.

And the Panel repeats and conjoyns with this point of the Reply that point in
his Defense, whereby he positively offers to prove, 1. That his Explication,
and the sense wherein he took the Oath, was heard, and publikly given and
received in Council, and the Panel thereafter allowed to take his place, and
sit and vote in that Sederunt.

2. The Panel also offers positively to prove, That the tenor and terms of his
Sense and Explication wherein he did take the Oath, is contained in that Solid,
Learned, and Pious Vindication, written by the Bishop of Edinburgh, in answer
to the Objections and alleged inconsistencies and contradictions in the Oath,
and which Vindication was publikly read in Council, and so far approved, that
it was allowed to be printed and published; and was accordingly dispersed and
spread abroad. And it is not of the least import, that the Proclamation of the
Lords of Privy Council, although it does only allow the same to be taken by the
Clergy, yet at the same time they expressly declare the genuine sense and
meaning of the Parliament not to comprehend the whole Articles of the
Confession, which was not cleared before the Pannel's taking his Oath.

And whereas it is pretended, That the Acts of Parliament libelled upon,
against Leasing makers, depravers of His Majesty's Laws, do obtain and take
place, wherever there are any words or expressions that have a tendency in
themselves, or by a natural consequence, and rational inferences, to reflect
upon the Government, or misconstrue His Majesty's Prooceedings; and that the
Explication libelled is such, and that it was found so in the Case of
Balmerino, albeit it was drawn up by way of humble Petition and Address to His
Majesty, and with great Protestations and Expressions of Loyalty. It is
answered, The Acts of Parliament libelled upon are opponed, and the 43d Act,
Par. 8. James 6. and the other Acts, making the depraving of His Majesty's Laws
to be Crimes, do expressly require, that Speeches so judged be perverse and
licentious Speeches, ex natura sua probrosae and reproachful, and spoke animo
defamandi, and which could not receive any other rational Construction, which
cannot in the least be applied to, or subsumed upon the words, or Explication
given in by the Panel. And Law and Reason never infers or presumes a Crime,
where the thing is capable of a fair and rational Construction, and where it
was done palam and publikly, and in presence of His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, whereof the Panel had
the honor to be a Member, Persons commiting and designing to commit Crimes
making use of Times, and Places, and Companies of another nature, on whom their
suggestions and insinuations may prevail. But it is a violence to the common
Reason of mankind, to pretend, that a person of the Pannel's Quality, having
the honor to serve His Majesty in most eminent Capacities, and devoted to His
Majesty's Interest and Service; beyond the strictest ties of Duty and
Allegiance, by the transcendent Favors he had received, that the Panel in
those Circumstances, and in presence of his Royal Highness and Lords of
Privy Council, should design to declame, and de facto, declame against, and
defame His Majesty's Government: To suppose this is absolutely contradictory to
the common Principles and Practices of Law, and common Topiks of Reason.

And as to Balmerino's Case, it is answered, That the Lords of Justitiary are
humbly desired to call for, and peruse the said Petition, and Books of
Adjournal, which was certainly a defamatory Libel of His Majesty's Father, of
blessed Memory, and of the States of Parliament in the highest degree, bearing
expressly, that there was nothing designed but an innovation of the Protestant
Religion, and the subversion and over-turning the Liberties and Privileges of
the Parliament, and the Constitutions of the Articles, and other things of that
kind, which made certainly of it self a most villainous and execrable Libel,
containing the highest Crimes of Treason and Perduellion, and was not capable
of any good sense or interpretation, but was absolutely pernicious and
destructive: So that it is in vain to pretend, that the said Libel did contain
Prefaces and Protestations of Loyalty, which no Law regards, even in simplici
injuria and maledicto, tho committed by a private person, cum praefatione,
salvo honor, or the like, and which were certainly ridiculous to sustain in a
Libel concerning Crimes of Treason.

And whereas it is pretended, That tho others were guilty of these Crimes, it
does not excuse the Earl: and that the Lords of Privy Council cannot remit
Crimes; and the negligence of the Kings Officers cannot prejudg his Interest.
It is answered, The Panel is very confident, that neither the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, consisting of persons of eminent Loyalty and Judgment,
nor His Majesty's Officers, were capable of any such escape as is pretended:
and if the tenor of the Pannels Explication did in the least import the high
and infamous Crimes libelled, as beyond all peradventure it does not, it were
strange, how the same being contained in the foresaid vindication, and the
whole Clauses thereof justified, that this should have been looked on as no
Crime, and allowed to be published. And the Panel neither does, nor needs to
make farther use thereof, but to convince all dis-interested persons, that his
Explication can import no Crime.

And whereas it is pretended, That the Crime of Treason is inferred from the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and from that Clause of the Pannel's
Explication, wherereby he declares, he is not bound up by any thing in this
Oath not to endeavor any alteration in a lawful way: which being an indefinite
Proposition is equipollent to an univetsal, and is upon the matter coincident
with a Clause which was rebellious in its consequences, contained in the Solemn
League and Covenant. It is answered, That it is strange, how such a plain and
innocent Clause, whereby, beyond all question, he does express no more than was
naturally imported in the Oath it self, whether expressed or not, should be made
a foundation to import the Crime of Treason, which no Lawyer ever allowed,
except where it was founded upon express Law and Luce Meridiana Clari^r: And
indeed if such stretches and inferences can make men guilty of Treason no man
can be secure. And the words in the Pannel's Declaration are plain and clear
(yet non sunt cavillanda) and import no more, but that, in his station, and in
a lawful way, and consistent with the Protestant Religion, and his Loyalty, he
might endeavor any alteration to the advantage of Church and State. And was
there ever any loyal or rational Subject, that does, or can doubt, that this is
the natural import of the Oath? And indeed it were a strange Oath, if it were
capable of another sense, and being designed for the security of the
Government, should bind up men's hands to concur for its advantage. And how was
it possible, that the Panel, or any other in the capacity of a
Privy-Councellor, or a Member of the Parliament, would have satisfied his Duty
and Allegiance in other terms? And whereas it is pretended that there was the
like case in the pretended League and Covenant, it is answered The Assertion is
evidently a Mistake; and tho it were, the Argument is altogether
inconsequential: For that League and Covenant was treasonable in it self, as
being a Combination entered into without His Majesty's Authority, and was
treasonable in the glosses that were put upon it, and was imposed by absolute
violence on the Subjects of this Kingdom And how can the Panel be in the least
supposed to have had any respect to the said League and Covenant, when he had
so often taken the Declaration, disowning and renouncing it, as an unlawful and
sinful Oath, and concurred in the many excellent Laws and Acts of Parliament
made by His Majesty, condemning the same as seditious and treasonable? And
whereas it is pretended. That the Panel is guilty of Perjury, having taken the
Oath in another sense than was consistent with the genuine sense of the
Parliament, and that by the Authority cited he does commento eludere
Iuramentum, which ought always to be taken in the sense of him that imposes
the Oath: It is answered, The Pretense is most groundless, and Perjury never
was, nor can be inferred, but by the commission, or omission of something
directly contrary to the Oath. And although it it is true, That where an Oath is
taken, without any Declaration of the express sense of the persons who take it,
it obliges sub poena Perjurii, in the sense, not of the taker, but of the
imposer of the Oath, because expressing no Sense, Law and Reason presumes there
is a full acquiescence in the sense and meaning of the imposer of the Oath: and
then if an Oath be not so taken, he that takes it is guilty of Perjury. Yet
there was never Lawyer nor Divine, Popish or Protestant, but agree in this,
That whatever be the tenor of the Oath, if before the taking thereof, the party
in express terms does publikly and openly declare the sense in which he takes
it, it is impossible it can infer the Crime of Perjury against him in any other
sense, this not being Commentum excogitatum, after the taking of the Oath. And
if this were not so, how is it possible in Sense and Reason; that ever any
Explication or Sense could solve the Scruples of a man's Conscience? For it
might be always pretended, That notwithstanding of the express sense wherein he
took it, he should be guilty of Perjury from another sense. And that this is
the irrefragable opinion of all Divines, of whatever persuasion, is not only
clear from the Authority abovementioned, even those who allow of reserved
senses, but more especially by the universal suffrage of all Protestant
Divines, who tho they do abominate all thoughts of Subterfuges or Evasions,
after taking of the Oath, yet they do always allow and advise for the safety
and security of a doubting and scrupulous Conscience, that they should express
and declare, before the taking of the Oath, the true sense and meaning wherein
they have freedom to take it; and for which Sandersone de Iuramento is cited,
Prelect. 6. Sect. 10. page 75. where his words are, Sane ut inter Iurandum
omnia recte fiant, expedit ut de verborum sensu inter omnes parts quarum
interest liquido constet, quod veteribus dictum, liquido Iurare. And an Oath
being one of the highest Acts of Devotion, containing Cultum Latriae, there is
nothing more consonant to the Nature of all Oaths, and to that Candor,
Ingenuity, and Christian simplicity, which all Law and Religion requires in
such cases.

The Kings Advocate's Third Plea against the Earl of Argyle.
HIS Majesty's Advocate conceives he has nothing to answer as to depraving,
Leasing-making; and mis-interpreting, etc. save that this Oath was only
designed to exclude Recusants; and consequently the Panel may thereby be
debarred from his Offices, but not made guilty of a Crime. To which he
Triplies, 1. If ever the Earl had simply refused, that had been true, but that
did not at all excuse from defaming the Law, for a defamer is not punished for
refusing, but for defaming.

2. If he had simply refused the Government had been in no more hazard, but if
men will both retain their Places, and yet take the same in such words as
secure not the Government, it were strange to think, that the design of the Law
being to secure against men's possessing who will not obey, that yet it should
allow them possession who do not obey. Nor is the Refuser here in a better Case
than the Earl, and others, who offered to obey, because it is the defaming the
Law, as ridiculous, and inconsistent with that Protestant Religion, and
Leasing-making betwixt the King, the Nobility, and the People, the
misconstruing, and misrepresenting, as has been formerly urged, that puts the
Earl in a worse Condition. And all those Arguments might be as well urged for
any who had uncontrovertedly contraveened these Acts, as for the Panel.

Whereas it is pretended, That the King emitted a Proclamation to satisfy
Dissenters; it is answered, That the Proclamation was designed for none who had
been Members of Parliament, and so should have known the sense; but it was
designed for mere ignorants, not for such as had defamed the Law, which is
still here charged upon the Panel.

As to the Article of Treason, it is conceived, That it is unanswerably founded
upon the Common Law, discharging all men to make alteration of the Government.
As to which there needs no express Statute, that being the very essence of
Government, and needing no Laws. Like as it falls positively under all the Laws
that discharge the assuming the Royal or Legislative Power; For to alter the
Government, is inseparably united to the Crown. Like as the Subsumption is as
clear, the express words not bearing, That the Earl reserves to himself a power
to propose to His Majesty any alterations, or to concur to serve His Majesty in
making alterations; but owning in most general and arbitrary terms, to wish and
endeavor any alteration he should think fit for the advantage of Church or
State, and not determining any thing that could bind him otherwise than
according to his own pleasure: For the word (lawful) is still subjected to
himself, and has subjoyned to it, as he should think fit, which governs the
whole Proposition; and in that sense, and as the words are here set down, the
greatest Rebel in Scotland will subscribe that Explanation: For there is no man
but will restrict himself to a lawful obedience, providing he be Judge of the
lawfulness. And seeing all Oaths proposed for the security of Government
require a certain depending upon the Legislator, and not upon the Taker, it is
impossible that that end could be attained by any qualification, how special
soever, which is made to depend absolutely upon the Taker, and not upon the
Legislator. And we have often seen, how little security there is in those
specious words, the very Covenant it self having not only the very words
above-repeated, but attesting all the world to be witnesses to their Loyalty
and Sincerity. And as to the former Instances, viz. rising in Arms, or opposing
the lawful Successor, there is no Covenanter in Scotland, but will say, he will
do neither, but in a lawful way, and in his station, and in a way consistent
with his Loyalty, for a man were mad to say otherwise: But yet when they come
to explain this, they will only do it as they think fit, and will be Judges
themselves; and then will tell us, That defensive Arms are lawful; and that no
Popish Successor should succeed, nor no Successor unless he subscribe the
Covenant. And whereas it is pretended, That no Clause in the Test does exclude
a man from making alterations; it is answered, That the alterations which the
Test allows are none at all but in subordination to Authority. And as to the
Two Points abovementioned, it excludes all alterations as to these Points. And
as to the making fundamental alterations, this reservation allows to make any
alteration; and consequently fundamental alterations; to preclude which
Libertinisme this excellent Law was invented.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Panel designs not to add any thing as a
part of the Law, but as a part of his Oath, it is duplied, Since the Oath is a
part of the Law, whoever adds to the Oath, adds to the Law.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Crime of Perjury cannot be inferred here,
because all Divines allow, That the Taker of an Oath is still allowed to
declare in what sense he takes the Oath; and that this is clear from
Sandersone, Page 175. It is triplied, That where there are two dubious senses,
Lawyers and Divines allow, That the Taker should clear himself, which of the
Two he should take; which is very just, because to which soever of the two he
determines himself, the Legislator in that Case is sure of him. But here it is
not pretended, That there are two senses; nor does the Panel declare in which
of the two he takes it, or in what clear sense at all he takes it, which is
indeed liquido Iurare. But here the Panel neither condescends, what particular
clause of the Test is unclear; nor after he has condescended upon the Articles,
does he condescend upon the sense, but in general mysterious words, where he
can neither be followed, nor found out, He only takes it in so far as it is
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, reserving the squaring
all by his own Loyalty, as he did in the beginning declare, That he took it in
his own sense, By which general sense, neither is the Government secure of any
thing it does enjoin, nor could he be punished if he transgressed. Nor can it
be doubted, but Perjury may be inferred by any equivocal or evading sense,
inter Iurandum, as well as by breaking an Oath afterward: Which is very clear
from Sandersone, Page 138. The words whereof are alterum Perjurii genus
estinter Iurandum detorquere verba; and which is farther clear by the 28. Page;
but above all, from the Principles of Reason, and the necessity of Commerceand
Government: For if men may adhibit such glosses, even whilst they swear, as may
make the Oath useless, what way will either Government or Commerce be
maintained? And he deceives as much that deceives in swearing salvis verbis, as
he who after he has sworn, does break the Oath; nay and more too, because the
breaking may come rom forgetfulness, or other accidents: but the evading by
general Clauses, which bind no man, does from the first Instance originally
make all Oaths useless and dangerous, and that this interpretation eludes the
Oath absolutely is very clear from what has been formerly debated. For It may
be argued, That the Earl broke the Oath in so far as the first day he swears
the Oath, which bears to be without any evasion (and must be so,
notwithstanding of whatever he could say;) And the next day he gives in this
evasion, which is a downright violation of that Oath, and inconsistent with
it. Nor was this Oath forced, but voluntarily emitted, to keep his own Places.
And it was the greater Crime that it was done in the Council, because that was
to make it the more publik, and consequently the more to misrepresent the
Government.

After this debate, which, according to the custom of the Court, was verbatim
dictat by the Advocats of either side, and written by the Clerk, and so took up
much time, and the Court having sat, at least twelve hours, without
intermission, it adjourned till the nixt day being Tuesday the 13. of December,
at two of the clock in the afternoon: And then the Earl being again brought to
the Bar, the following Interloquutour (that is judgment and sentence) of the
Lords of Iustitiary, on the forgoing debate, was read, and pronounced in open
Court.

Edinburgh, December 12. 1681. The Interloquutour of the Lords of Iustitiarie.
THE Lords, Justice general, and Commissioners of the Justitiary, having
considered the Libel and debate, they sustain the defense proponed for the Earl
of Argyle, the Panel, in relation to the perjury libelled, viz. That he
emitted this Explanation at, or before his taking the Test, first before His
Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, relevant, to elude that Article of the Libel.

The Lords sustain the Libel, as being founded upon the common Law, and
Explication libelled, and upon Act 130, Parl. 8. James VI. to infer the pain of
Treason.

They likewise sustain the Libel, as founded upon the 10. Act, Parl. 10. James
VI. to infer the pain of death; and likewise sustain that part of the Libel
anent Leasingmaking, and Leasing-telling, to infer the particular pains
mentioned in the several acts libelled.

And repel the whole other defenses, duplies, and quadruplies, and remits the
Libel, with the defenses anent the Perjury, to the knowledge of an Assize.

Thereafter the Assize, that is the Jury, being constitut and sworn, viz.

List of the Assizers.
Marquis Montross, E. Middleton, E. Airlie, E. Perth, P. Cr E. Dalhousie, E.
Roxburgh, P. Cr E Dumfries, E. Linlithgow, P. Cr Lord Lindoors, Lord Sinclare,
Lord Bruntisland, Lord of Gosfoord, Lord of Claverhouse, Lord of Balnamoon,
Lord of Park Gordon.
HIS Majesty's Advocate adduced four witnesses, to prove the points of the
indictment, remitted to the knowledge of the Assize, viz. John Drummond of
Lundie, then Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, now Treasurer-depute, Sir
William Paterson, and Mr Patrik Menzies, Clerks of the privy Council, and H.
Stevenson, their Underclerk: Who deponed, That on the 4. of November, the Earl
did give in an unsubscribed Explanation of the Test, which he refused to sign;
One of the witnesses also adding, That he heard him make the same Explanation,
the day before, in Council, and that it was there accepted.

Then His Majesty's Advocate asked, if the Earl would make use of his
Exculpation for eliding the perjury libelled; to wit, That he had emitted the
same Explanation, before taking the Test, in presence of His Royal Highness,
and the Council. To which the Earl answered, That, seeing they had sustained
the Libel, as to the alleged Treason, he would not trouble them about the
Perjury: Especially the matter of fact, referred by the Interloquutour to his
probation, being of it self so clear and notour.

But the truth is, the Interloquutour pronounced was so amazing that both the
Earl, and his Advocats, were struk with deep silence: For they plainly
perceived that, after such a Judgment in the case, all further endeavors would
be in vain: It being now manifest, that seeing the Earis innocnce had so little
availed, as that his plain and honest words, purely uttered for the necessary
satisfaction of his own conscience, and clearing of his Loyalty, had been
construed, and detorted, to infer Leasing-making, Depraving, and Treason; The
tongues of men, and Angels (as some of his Advocats also said) could not do any
good: And therefore neither did the Earl, nor they Object any thing, either
against the Assizers, or Witnesses, though liable to obvious, and unanswerable
exceptions: Nor did the Earl's Advocats, say any thing to the Assize, as the
custom is, and as in this case they might well have done to take off the force
of the Evidence, and to demonstrat that the depositions instead of proving the
indictment did rather prove the Earle's defenses: But, as I have said, they now
plainly saw, that all this had been unnecessary work; And, in effect, were of
opinion, that after so black, and dreadful a sense put upon what the Earl had
spoke and done, in such fair, and favorable circumstances, there could be
nothing said, before such a Court, which might not expose themselves to the
like hazard, and more easily be made liable to the same misconstruction.

But, upon this silence, the Advocat, taking instruments, Protests (whether in
form only or from a real fear let others judge) for an Assize of error, in
case the Assizers should Assoil or acquit. Whereupon the Assize removing was
enclosed: And, after sometime, returned their Verdict, which was read in open
Court of this tenor.

The Verdict of the Assize.
THE Assize having elected, and chosen the Marquis of Montrole to be their
Chancellor, they all in one voice find the Earl of Argyle guilty, and culpable
of the Crimes of Treason, Leasing-making, and Leasing-telling, And find, by
plurality of votes, the said Earlinnocent and not guilty of Perjury.

And then the Court again adjourned: And the Privy Council wrote the following
Letter to His Majesty.

The Councils Letter to the King, desiring leave to pronounce Sentence against
the Earl of Argyle.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty. Halyrudhouse, December 14. 1681.
IN Obedience to your Majesty's Letter, dated the 15th of November last; we
ordered your Majesty's Advocat to insist in that Process, raised at your
Instance, against the Earl of Argyle: And having allowed him a long time for
his appearance, and any Advocates he pleased to employ, and Letters of
exculpation, for his Defense; He, after full Debate, and clear Probation, was
found guilty of Treason, Leasing-making betwixt your Majesty, your Parliament,
and your People, and the reproaching of your Laws and Acts of Parliament. But
because of your Majesty's Letter, ordaining us to send your Majesty a
particular account of what he should be found guilty of, before the pronouncing
of any Sentence against him, we thought it our duty to send your Majesty this
account of our, and your Justices proceedings therein; And to signify to your
Majesty, with all Submission, That it is usual, and most fit for your Majesty's
service and the Advantage of the Crown, that a Sentence be pronounced, upon the
Verdict of the Assize, without which the process will be still imperfect. After
which, your Majesty may, as you in your Royal Prudence, and Clemency shall
think fit, Ordain all farther execution to be sisted, during your Maesties
pleasure: Which shall be dutifully obeyed by.

Your Majesty's most Humble, Most Faithful, and most Obedient, Subjects and
Servants Sic Subscribitur, Alex. St. And. Athol, Douglas, Montrose, Glencairn
Wintoun Linlithgow, Perth, Roxburgh, Dumfries, Strathmore, Airlie, Ancram,
Livingstoun, Io. Edinburgens. Elphingstoun, Dalziell, Geo. Gordon, Chapter
Maitland, Geo Mc kenzie, G. Mc kenzie, Ramsay, I. Drummond.


THE Earl, as well as the Lords of privy Council, waited some days for the
Answer of this Letter: But the Earl making his escape, a day or two, before it
came, I shall take occasion to entertain you, in the mean time, with ane
account of some thoughts that the Earl had set down in writing, in order to
some discourse he intended to have made to the Lords of Justitiary, before
their pronouncing sentence. And then, I shall subjoyn the motives, and
arguments, which (as he has since informed some of his friends) did induce him
to make his escape: Which, with what I have said before, will give you a full
account of all matters, till His Majesty's return came, and the sentence past.

And first, he takes notice, that on Moonday the twelfth of December, the day
of his arraignment, the Court adjourned, before he was aware: And it being then
late, about nine of the clock, and after a sederunt of twelve hours, He did
not imagine, they would have proceeded further, that night; But only heard
afterward that they sat it out till two or three after midnight: And was
surprised the next morning, to understand, that without calling him again, or
asking at him, or hearing, or considering his own sense of his own words, they
had not only found the Libel relevant, but repelled his defenses, and with one
breath rejected all his most material reasons of exculpation, root and branch.
This seemed hard, though the words had been worse, and no way capable of a
favorable construction (which none, no not the judges themselves, can be so
void of sense as to think really they were not) and this was so far beyond all
imagination, that, neither the Earl, nor his Advocats did ever dream it could
fall out, though all was not said might have been said, nor what was said so
fully enforced as the Earls Advocats could easily have done, if the case had
not been thought so very clear, and the Earl his innocence so obvious, and
apparent, and they unwilling unnecessarily to irritat many concerned.

This great haste, and strange proceeding, did so surprise, and astonish him
(as I have said) that it caused him, the next day when the Sentence was read,
to keep deep silence, and suffer the Interloquutour to be pronounced, the
Assizers chosen, and sworn, and the Witnesses received, and examined, without
once offering to say, or object any thing, or so much as inquiring, at either
Assizers, or Witnesses, whether they had not been tampered with, and practiced
by promises, and threatenings, or whether some of them had not previously, and
publikly declared themselves in the Case, and others of them had not partially
advised, and solicited against him; Which, as they are just, and competent
exceptions, So he was able to have proven them, against most of them,
instantly, and fully.

And indeed as to such of the Assizers as were Counselors, (whom for your
better information, I have marked in the list of Assizers thus P. C.) and had
first ordered his imprisonment, next signed the Letter to His Majesty, and then
ordered the Process, and therein manifestly fore-stalled their own judgment
(had they done no more) it was a wonder, beyond parallel, That, neither their
own honor, nor the common decency of justice, nor even His Majesty's Advocat's
interest, did prevent their being impannelled on that Assize.

But the truth is, the Earl did so far neglect, and abandon himself, and give
way to the Court, that he did not so much as open his mouth, to clear himself
of the Perjury laid to his charge, which yet God Almighty was pleased to do, by
the plurality of voices of the same Assize. who it appears plainly did bear
him little kindness: For whereas Assizers do usually return their Verdict,
proven or not proven rather then guilty or not guilty, and ought alwise to do
so, where the relevancie is in dubio, and especially in a case of this nature,
in which the alleged treason is no ouvert act, and indeed no act, nor so much
as a real ground of offense, But plainly such a subtle, chimerical, and
non-sensical consequence, that the finding it does quite surpass the
comprehension of all unbyassed men; it might have been expected that persons of
their quality would have chosen the more moderate form of proven or not proven,
and not involved themselves unnecessarily upon Oath in adjudging the relevancy
of a guilt, which so few are able to imagine, and none will ever make out; Yet
you see in their Verdict, that all in one voice they did find the Earl guilty,
in the most positive, and strong form: Adding, for superabundance, culpable,
for sooth, the better to demonstrate their good will. Nor is it unworthy of
remark, that when such of the Assizers as were present at the Council declared
the Earl innocent of the Perjury (which His Majesty's Advocate did only pretend
to infer from the Earls alleged silence, or not speaking loud eneugh, the
first day, when he signed the Test.) Because they heard him, at the same time,
pronounce his explanation: Yet some other Assizers that were no Counselors,
and knew nothing of that matter of fact, but by hearsay, without all regard to
the witnessing of these Counselors their fellow Assizers, voted him guilty:
And so took it formally on their consciences, that he had said nothing, in the
Council, at his taking the Test; Albeit all the Council knew the contrary (by
which they are clearly perjured) nay such was the earnestness of some (who
thought it scarce possible to carry the treason upon words so safe and
innocent) to have the Earl found guilty of Perjury, that it was particularly
recommended to His Majesty's Advocate to get him made guilty of that point, to
render him for ever incapable of publik employment. And the Clerk of the Assize
was so concerned in it that He twice misreckoned the votes, before he would
yield that the Earl was assoyled, or acquit of the Perjury And this, among
other things, may serve to clear, how that whole matter was influenced, and
managed: For, as the Earl cannot be charged with Perjury, the second day,
because he swore none at all; So as little the first day, seeing whether he
took the Test with an Explanation (as certainly he did,) or simply without
saying any thing, It is equally apparent, there was no Perjury in the case: But
it appears, their Assizers were of the Opinion, that the Indictment or Libel
alone (as it was indeed the only evidence) was a sufficient proof of the Earl
his being guilty of Perjury. And indeed for any other Rule or Reason that
occurs, They might as well have sound him Guilty of the Perjury as of the
Treason: But the Assizers that were Counselors being under a Particular check,
apprehending they might be found perjured themselves, if they had not
acknowledged the hearing of the words, that all others present could have
attested to have been audibly spoken, and some of themselves had confessed to
have heard, before they knew the tenor of the Libel; And, the great crime of
Treason being sufficient to do the Job, it is like they judged it advisable to
give this insignificant absolution from Perjury, That their Verdict of Treason
might have the greater color, and show of candor, and sincerity. However it
seems to be without measure hard to be prosecut with such a deadly Dilemma of
either Treason or Perjury, for you see, in their account, if the Earl swear
with an Explanation, his Life is knocked down by Treason, and if without an
Explanation, his Honor, which is dearer to him then his Life, is run through
with Perjury. But, to complete a fancy beyond bedlam, The Advocate urges, and
several Assizers agree, at the same time, to condemn the Earl as Perjured, for
not Explaining, and for Treason, for Explaining: Quis talia fando?

In the next place, the Earl's Papers contain some thoughts, and endeavors, to
remove certain mistakes, which, he had good ground to believe, did so much
prompt, and precipitat the Judges to pronounce so important a sentence against
him, upon so weak and sandy foundations, and which were indeed either mere
fancies, or so frivolous that though they were true they could never excuse
them before men, far less exoner them before God Almighty. Where, laying down a
true ground, that nunquam concluditur in criminalibus, etc. and withal
representing, how his Advocats were questioned, in so extraordinary a manner,
for signing their opinion (which you have above Number. 32. Where you may see how
fair, just, and safe it was) that now they da^ no more plead for him, He says,
He cannot be denied to plead for himself, as he best may.

The first ground of mistake then that he was to represent was that he knew it
had been told them, it was very much His Majesty's Interest, and necessary for
the support of the Government, to divest, and render him incapable of publik
trust: Which words had been often said, and said to himself to persuade him there
was no further rigor intended: But as he is very confident, our gracious King
will never, upon any such pretense, allow any innocent person to be condemned,
far less to be destroyed, in a picque or frolik, where his Majesty can reap no
advantage; So he is persuaded, His Majesty has no design to render him
miserable, far less to cut him off, without a cause. And therefore concluds, it
is only his misfortune, in his present circumstances, never having access to,
nor being heard by His Majesty, nor the case perfectly understood by him, that
has made His Majesty give so much as way to a process to be raised or led, far
less to a Sentence to be pronounced against him. But in effect, as this affair
has been managed all alongs, and somany engaged, in so extraordinary ways, to
act, and write against him, first and last, nothing should appear strange or
surprising: However, as their own consciences, and God Almighty, knows how they
have been brought to meddle, and act, as they have done, So, one day or other,
the world may likewise know it:

A second ground of mistake, which, he says may impose upon them, is a
confidence of his Majesty's pardon intended for him, a pretense only given out
to render the condemnation more easy; yet indeed least wished for by those who
where readyest to spread the report, and whereof the Earl had indeed more
confidence then any that talked of it, if His Majesty were left to himself, and
had the Case fully, and truly represented to him: but as His Majesty needs not
this false occasion to make his clemency appear, which is so well known over
all his Dominions, by far more true and genuine discoveries, so it were the
hight of injustice in their Lordships of the justitiary to proceed to sentence
against him, upon such apprehensions, in case in their hearts they believe him
innocent (as he certainly knows they do) besides, they cannot but see, their
acting, upon so unjust a ground, will not only stain their names, and memories,
but instead of alleviating rather aggravat their guilt, both in their own
consciences when they reflect on it in cold blood, and in the sight of God
Almighty: And if His Majesty, on importunity and a third application, should
give way to execution, as he has already given way, first to the process, and
then to the sentence; or if (as some may design) execution shall be adventured
on, without the formality of a new order (as the process was at first
commenced, before His Majesty's return, and so is not impossible) would not
their Lordships be as guilty of his blood as if they had cut his throat?

And in effect, these are the grounds and excuses pretended, at this day, in
private, by such of his Judges, for their procedour, who are not yet come to
have the Confidence, at all Occasions, to own directly what they have done.

A third reason why his Exculpation was not allowed, he says, might be, because
the sustaining of it might have brought other Explanations above board, and
discover both these who had made, and those who had accepted them, and perhaps
not have left their own bench untoutched. But as this Artifice will not keep up
the Secret; And as this way of shifting is neither just nor equal, so to all
interested it is the meanest of Securities; For His Majesty's Advocate has
already told us, that His Majesty's Officers can never wrong him: And although
the Lords and He should conceal what others had done, it might make themselves
more guilty, But not prove any Exoneration to those concerned, without a
downright Remission: Whereas it is manifest, that if their Lordships had
admitted the Earl's Exculpation, upon the sure and evident grounds therein
contained, it would not only have answered the Justice of his case but
vindicated all concerned.

And lastly, he was to tell them, that possibly they might be inclined to go
on, because they were already so far engaged as they knew not how to retreat
with their honor: but, as there can be no true honor where there is manifest
wrong, and injustice, so, in the frail and fallible condition of human things,
there can be no delusion more dangerous, and pernicious then this, that unum
scelus est alio scelere tegendum. And here, the Earl thought to lay before
them, very plainly and pertinently, some remarkable and excellent Rules,
whereby L. Chief justice Hales, a renouned judge of our nighbour nation, tells
he did govern himself, in all criminal cases, which (adds the Earl) if they
took a due impression, would certainly give them peace, and joy, when all the
vain considerations that now amuse will avail them nothing.

The Rules are these

I. Not to be rigid in matters purely consciencions, where all the harm is
diversity of judgment. II. That Popular, or Court applause, or distaste, have
no influence on any thing is to be done, in point of distribution of justice.
III. In a criminal case, if it be a measuring cast, then to incline to mercy
and acquital. IV. In criminal things, that consist only of words, where no more
harm ensues, moderation is then no injustice. V. To abhor all private
solicitations, of what kind soever, and by whomsoever. VI. In matters depending,
not to be solicitous what men will say or think, so long as the rule of justice
is exactly kept. VII. And lastly, never to engage themselves in the beginning of
a cause, but reserve themselves un-prejudged, till the whole bussines be heard.
Then the Earl goes on, and makes notes, for additional defenses, reducible to
these heads.

I. The absolute innocence of his Explication, in its true, and genuine
meaning, from all crime or offense, far more from the horrible crimes libelled.
II. The impertinency, and absurdity of His Majesty's Advocat's arguings, for
inferring the crimes libelled from the Earl's words. III. The reasonableness of
the Exculpation. IV. The Earl's Answers to the Advocat's groundless pretenses
for aggravating of his case.
As to the first, the Earl, waving what has been said, from common reason, and
humanity it self, and from the whole tenor, and circumstances of his life,
comes closs to the point by offering that just, and genuine Explanation of his
Explication which you have above Number. 21.

I have delayed hitherto to take the Oath appointed by the Parliament to be
taken, betwixt and the first of January nixt: But now being required, near two
months sooner, to take it: this day peremptorly, or to refuse: I have
considered the Test, and have seen several objections moved against it,
especially by many of the Orthodox clergy, notwithstanding whereof, I have
endeavored to satisfy my self with a just explication, which I have offer,
that I may both satisfy my Conscience, and obey Your Highness, and Your
Lordships Commands in taking the Test, though the Act of Parliament do not
simply command the thing, but only under a certification, which I could easily
submit to, if it were with Your Highness favor, and might be without offense;
But I love not to be singular: and I am very desirous to give obedience in this
and every thing, as far as I can, and that which clears me is that I am
confident, what ever any man may think or say to the prejudice of this Oath,
the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths, and because their
sense (they being the framers and imposers) is the true sense, and that this
Test, enjoined, is of no private interpretation, nor are the Kings Statuts to be
Interpreted, but as they bear, and to the intent they are made, therefore I
think no man, that is no private Person, can Explain it for another, to amuse or
trouble him with (It may be) mistaken glosses: But every man, as he is to take
it, so is to explain it, For himself, and to endeavor to understand i^,
notwithstanding all these exceptions, in the Parliaments which is its true, and
genuine sense; I take it therefore, notwithstanding any scruple made by any, As
far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, which is
wholly in the Parliaments sense and their true meaning; Which (being present).
I am sure, was owned by all to be the securing of the Protestant Religion,
founded on the Word of God, and contained in the Confession of Faith recorded
I. 6. p. 1. c. 4. And not out of Scruple as if any thing in the Test did import
the contrair: But to clear my self from Cavils, as if thereby I were bound up
further then the true meaning of the Oath; I do declare that by that part of
the Test that there lies no Oblgation on me etc. I mean not to bind up my self
in my station, and in a lawful way; still disclaiming all unlawful
endeavors, To wish, and endeavor any alteration, I think, According to my
conscience, to the advantage of Church, or State, not repugnant to the
Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty: And by my Loyalty I understand no other
thing then the words plainly bear, to wit the duty and allegiance of all Loyal
Subjects; and this Explanation I understand as a part, not of the Test or Act
of Parliament, but as a qualifying part of my Oath that I am to swear, and with
it I am willing to take the Test, if your Royal Highness and your Lordships
allow me. Or otherwise, in submission to Your Highness and the Councils
pleasure, I am content to be held as a refuser, at present.

Which Explanation does manifestly appear to be so just, and true, without
violence or straining, so clear and full without the least impertinency, so
notour and obvious to common sense, without any Commentary, so Loyal, and
honest, without ambiguity, and lastly so far from all, or any of the crimes
libelled that it most evidently evinceth that the words thereby explained are
altogether innocent: And therefore it were lost time to use any arguments to
enforce it.

Yet seeing this is no trial of wit, but to find out Common sense, let us
examine the Advocats fantastical paraphrase, upon which he bottoms all the
alleged crimes, and see whether it agrees, in one jot, with the true and right
meaning of the Earl's words; and (as you may gather from the indictment) It is
plainly thus.

I have Considered the Test; which ought not to be done, And am very desirous
to give obedience, as far as I can, but am not willing to give full obedience;
I am confident, the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths;
that is, I am confident they did intend to impose contradictory Oaths; And
therefore I think no man can explain it but for himself; that is to say, every
man may take it in any sense he pleases to devise, and thereby render this Law,
and also all other Laws, though not at all concerned in this affair, useless:
And so make himself a Legislator, and usurp the supreme Authority: And I take
it, in so far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion,
whereby I suppose that it is not at all consistent with either; nor was ever
intended by the Parliament it should be consistent: And I declare that, by
taking this Test, I mean not to bind up my self, in my station, and in a
lawful way, to wish, or endeavor any alteration, I think, to the advantage of
Church, or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty:
Whereby I declare my self, and all others, free from all obligation to the
Government, either of Church, or State, as by law established, and from the
duty, and Loyalty of good Subjects; Resolving of my self to alter all the
Fundamentals, both of Law, and Religion, as I shall think fit: And this I
understand as a part of my Oath: that is as a part of the Act of Parliament, by
which I take upon me, and usurp the Royal Legislative power.

Which sense and Explanation as it consists of the Advocat's own words, and was
indeed, every word, necessar to infer these horrible crimes contained in the
Indictment, So, to speak with all the modesty that truth will allow, I am sure,
it is so violent, false, and absurd, that the greatest difficulty must be to
believe that any such thing was alleged, far more received, and sustained in
Judgment, by men professing only Reason, far less Religion.

But thirdly, if neither the Earl's true, genuine, and honest sense, nor this
violent, corrupt, and false sense, will satisfy, let us try what transprosing
the Earl's Explanation will do, and see how the just contrary will look. -- And
it must be thus.

I Have considered the Test, nor am I at all desirous to give Obedience, so far
as I can; I am confident the Parliament intended to impose contradictory Oaths;
And therefore I think, every man can explain it for others, as well as for
himself, and take it, without reconciling it, either to it self or his own
sense of it: And I do take it, though it be inconsistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion: And I declare, that I mean thereby to bind up my self
never (either in my station, or in any lawful way whatsoever) to wish; or
endeavor, in the least, any alteration, tho to the advantage of Church, or
State, and tho never so suitable, and no way repugnant, to the Protestant
Religion, and my Loyalty: And, though this be the express quality of my
swearing, yet I understand it to be no part of my Oath.

Now whether this contradictory conversion be not treason or highly criminal,
at best, I leave all the World to Judge; and to make both s^^es of a
contradiction, that is both the Affirmative and Negative of the same
proposition, treason is beyond ordinary Logik. Escobar finds two contrary ways
may both be probable and safe ways to go to heaven but neither he nor the
Devil himself have h^th^rto adventured to declare two contradictory
propositions both damnable, and either of them a just cause to take away men's
Lives, Honors, and Fortunes.

But where the disease is in the will it is lost Labor to apply Remedies to
the understanding; and must not this be indeed either the oddest treason, or
strangest discovery that ever was heard of? The Bishop of Edinburgh sees it
not, witness his Vindication saying the same, and more, Nor many of the
Orthodox Clergy, witness their Explanations, Nor his Royal Highness, in
private, nor at first in Council nor all the Counselors, when together at the
Council Board, Nor the President of the Council nor the then President of the
Session (now Chancellor) though He rose from his seat, to be sure to hear, nor
any of the most learned lawyers, witness their signed Opinion, nor the most
learned of the Judges on the bench, nor the Generality of the knowing persons,
either in Scotland, or England: wonderful treason one day seen by none,
another day seen by so many! A stander-by hearing the trial, and the Sentence,
said, he believed the Earl's words were by Popish magik transsubstantiat, for
he saw them the same as before; Another answered, that he verily thought it was
so, for he was confident, none could see Treason in the words that would not,
when ever it was a proper time, readily also profess his belief of
transubstantiation, but he believed many that professed both believed neither.

The second Head of the Earl's additional defenses contains the impertinencies,
and absurdities of the Advocat's Arguings: And here you must not expect any
solid debate, For as there is no disputing with those that deny Principles, so
as little with those who heap up Fantastical, and inconsequential inferences,
without all shadow of Reason. If a stone be thrown though it may do hurt, yet
having some weight it may be thrown back, with equal or more force: But if a
man trig up a feather, and fling it, It is in vain to throw it back, and the
more strength the less success: It shall therefore serve, by acurso^y discourse,
to expose his arguments, which are in effect easier answered then understood;
and, without any serious arguing, which they cannot bear, rather leave him to
be wise in his own eyes then by too much empty talk hazard to be like him.

He alleges first, that the Earl, instead of taking the Test in its plain and
genuine meaning, as he ought, does declare against, and defame the Act that
enjoined it, which is certainly a great crime: But how? In as much, says the
Advocate, as he tells us, That he had considered the Test: Which I have indeed
heard say was his greatest crime, and that he ought to have taken it, with a
profound and devout ignorance, as some of our most inventive Politicians
boasted they had done. But the Earl says, that he was desirous to give
obedience, as far as he could; whereby, says the Advcat, He insinuats that he
was not able to give full obedience. This is not the meaning; but what if it
were, and that indeed he coud not? Have not thousands given no obedience yet
even in law are guiltless? And ought not that to please his Highness, and the
Council, that is accepted of God Almighty, and is all any Mortal can perform?
But the Earl, says the Advocate, Goes on, that he was confident the Parliament
never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; whereby, says the Advocat, He
abuses the people with a belief that the Parliament did intend to impose such.
Wonderful reasoning! All men know that Parliaments neither are, nor pretend to
be infallible: And in our present case, hundreds of Loyal subjects complain of
contradictions, and inconsistencies, some way or other, creept into this Oath;
And even the Council have yielded, so far, to their Exceptions, as to make an
alteration upon it, for satisfying those scruples, far beyond any thing the
Earl said; and such an alteration, as, I believe, few dreamed of, and I am
certain, none durst have attempted, without their express command and
Authority: and yet, in the midst of all this, the Farl's charitable, and honest
Opinion, in behalf of the Parliaments good intentions, must be perverted to a
direct slander. But, the Earl says That every man must explain it for himself;
And so, no doubt, he must, if the Test be either in it self, or in his
apprehension, ambiguous, otherwise how can he swear in Judgment? But this the
Advocate will have to be a man's own sense, and thereupon runs out, That Hereby
this Law, and Oath, and all Laws, and Oaths are rendered useless, and to no
purpose: And further the legislative Power is taken from the Imposer, and
settled in the Taker of the Oath, Which certainly is a most treasonable
presumption. But first, although there be no Reason to strain, or mistake the
Expression, yet the Earl did not say, That every man must take the Test in his
own sense.

II. The Council has now explained the Test, for the clergy: Might not then
the Earl, before their Explanation was devised, say, by the Councils allowance,
which he had, That he might explain it for himself? For if an ambiguous
proposition, (the Test for example) may be reconciled to it self, two different
ways, must not the Taker reconcile it, as in his own sense he thinks it does
best agree with the genuine meaning of the words themselves, and with the
sense, he conceaves, was intended by the Parliament that formed it; especially
before the Parliament emitt their own Explanation? And is it not juster to do
it so then in any other man's sense, which he thinks agreesless with the words,
abeit they may be thought by others to be reconciliable another way?

III. All this looks like designed mistakes and traps; for should any man
swear, unless he understand? And where an Oath is granted to be ambiguous, can
any man understand, unless, in want of the imposers help, he explain it for
himself?

IV. Was ever a man's Explaining an Oath for himself, before taking it, far
less his bare saying that he must explain it, before he take it, alleged to
be, The overturning of all Laws, and Oaths, and the usurping of the Legislative
power, and making of new Laws? certainly to offer to answer such things were to
disparage common Reason.

And lastly this is strange Doctrine from the Advocate, who himself, in
Council, did allow, not only the Earl his Explanation, but that Explanation to
the Clergy, contrary, as appears by their Scruples, to what they that took it
thought either the Parliaments design or the plain words of the Test could
bear, and certainly different from the sense many had already taken it in, and
wherein others were commanded to take it. And whatever the Advocate may cavil
to ensnare the Earl, sure he will not allow that by his explaining this Oath he
himself has taken on him the Legislative power of the Parliament. far less,
though he should acknowledge it, will any believe that he has, or could
thereby make all Laws or Oaths useless. By this you see what strange stuff he
pleads which deserves no answer.

But, says the Advocate, the Earl affirms, He takes the Test, only as far as
it consists with it self, and with the Protestant Religion, by which he most
maliciously insinuats that it is inconsistent with both. But, first this only
is not the Earl's but the Advocat's addition. 2ly I would soberly ask the
Advocate, or any man, whether the Test, as it includs the Confession in
general, and consequently all contained in it, was not either really, or at
least might not have been apprehended to be inconsistent with it self? Else
what was the use or sense of the Councils explanation, wherein it is declared,
that men do not swear to every proposition of the Confession, but only to the
Protestant Religion therein contained? And if it was either inconsistent, or
apprehended to be so, how could the Earl, or any honest man swear it in other
terms, with a safe Conscience? But thirdly. If Parliaments be fallible, and
this Oath, as being ambiguous, needed the Councils Explanation to clear it from
inconsistencies, must the Earl's words, when he was to swear, that he took it
in so far as it was consistent, be in this case understood as spoken
maliciously, and with a criminal intent, when all Sense, Reason, and Religion,
made this caution his duty? And if it be so criminal for one going to swear to
suppose a possibility of inconsistencies in it, Is it not manifestly more
criminal in others plainly to confess, and grant that there are inconsistencies
in it, after they have swallowed it in gross, without any explanation
whatsoever?

But, says the Advocate, The Earl has invented a new way, whereby no man
is at all bound to the Test; For how can any man be bound, if he will obey
only as far as he can? And yet, it will be hard even for the Advocate, tho
hesometimes attempts indeed more then he and all the World with him can do, to
tell how a man can obey farther: and I am sure, that in a matter of this kind,
viz. the free tender of an Oath, all discreet men will Judge the Earl's offer
both frank and obliging. Then he asks, To what the Earl is bound, if he be
bound no further then he himself can obey? manifest confusion! and never either
spoke by the Earl, nor at all pertinent to his case; besides he freely
acknowledges, that all men are bound to more then they can do) or so far as the
Test is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion (a strange
doubting or! yet, I dare say, imports as much as his Majesty expects of any,
and more then the Advocate will ever perform) But, says the Advocate, who can
determine to what the Earl is bound? Which says plainly, that either the Test
agrees with it self, and the Protestant Religion in nothing, or that the
Protestant Religion is nothing, Both which the Earl thinks far from truth. But
the Advocat's reasoning reflects far more on the Councils Explanation, where it
is plainly said, That the Confession is not svvorn to in the Test, but only the
Protestant Religion contained in the Confession, so that the Protestant
Religion indefinitly is that which is said to be sworn to: Now, pray, is it not
much worse for a man to say, that by taking the Test he svvears only to the
Confession as it contains or agrees with the Protestant Religion (which is in
effect to set the Protestant Religion at variance with its own Confession, and
so to reproach and ranverse the standard, and make void the very security that
the Parliament intended) then to say, That he swears the Test as it agrees with
it self and the Protestant Religion, which imports no such insinuation? But
from these pleasant Principles He jumps in to this Fantastik Conclusion, That
therefore it cannot be denied but the Earl's interpretation destroys, not only
this Act, but all Government, and makes every man's conscience or humor the
Rule of his obedience.

But first, as to the whole of his arguing, the Earl neither invents, says,
nor does any thing, except that he offered his Explanation to the Council,
which they likewise accepted. 2ly. What mad inferences are these, You say, you
will explain this Oath for your self, therefore you overturn all Government,
and what not? Whereas it is manifest, on the other hand, that if the Earl
apprehending, as he had reason, the Oath to be ambiguous, and in some things
inconsistent, had taken it without explaining it for himself, or respect to
its inconsistency, it might have been most rationally concluded, that in so
doing he was both impious and perjured. 3ly. It is false, that the Earl does
make his Conscience, any other way, the rule of his obedience, then as all
honest men ought to do: That is, as they say, To be Regula regulata, in
conformity to the undoubted Regula regulans, the eternal rules of truth and
righteousness, as is manifest by his plain words. As for what the Advocate
insinuats of humor instead of Conscience, it is very well known to be the
Ordinary reproach whereby men that have no Conscience endeavor to defame it in
others.

But the Advocate is again at it, and having run himself out of all
consequences, he insists and inculcats, that the Earl has sworn nothing. But,
it is plain that to swear nothing is none of the crimes libelled. 2ly. The Earl
swears positivly to the Test as it is consistent with it self and the
Protestant Religion, which certainly is something; unless the Advocate prove,
as he insinuats, that there is nothing in the Test consistent with either. And
3ly. if the Protestant Religion, and the Earl his reference to it be nothing,
then is not only the Council sadly reproached, who, in their Explanation,
declare this to be the only thing sworn to, in the first part of the Test, but
our Religion quite subverted, as far as this Test can do it.

But next for the treason, the Advocate says, That the Earl expressly declares,
he means not by the Test to bind up himself, from vvishing, or endeavoring, in
his station, and in a lavvful way, any alteration he shall think for the
advantage of Church, or State; whereby, says he, the Earl declares himself,
and others, loosed from any obligation to the Government, and from the duty of
all good Subjects, and that they may make what alterations they please. A
direct contrariety, instead of a just consequence; as if to be tied to Law,
Religion, and Loyalty, were to be loosed from all three; can there be a flatter
and more ridiculous contradiction? Next the Advocate pretends to found upon the
fundamental Laws of this, and all nations, whereby it is treason for any man to
make any alteration he thinks fit for the advantage of Church or State. But
first, The Earl is not, nor cannot be accused of so much as wishing, much less
endeavoring or making any alteration, either in Church or State, only he
reserves to himself the same freedom, for wishing, which he had before his
Oath, and that all that have taken it do in effect say they still retain. 2ly.
For a man to endeavor, in his station and in a lavvful way, such alterations
in Church, or state, as he conceives to their advantage, not repugnant to
Religion, and Loyalty, is so far from being treason that it is the duty of
every subject, and the Svvorn duty of all His Majesty's Counselors, and of all
Members of Parliament: But the Advocate by fancying, and misapplying Laws of
Nations, wresting Acts of Parliaments, adding, taking away, chopping and
changing words, thinks to conclude what he pleases. And thus he proceeds, That
the treason of making alterations is not taken off by such qualifications, of
making them in a lavvful way, in ones station, to the advantage of Church, or
State, and not repugnant to Religion or Loyalty. But how then? Here is a
strange matter! Hundreds of alterations have been made, within these few years,
in our Government, and in very material points, and the Kings best Subjects,
and greatest Favorites, have both endeavored, and effectuat them: And yet,
because the things were done according to the Earl's qualifications, instead of
being accounted treason they have been highly commended and rewarded. The
Treasury has been sometimes in the hands of a Treasurer, sometimes put into a
Commission, backward and forward: And the Senators of the College of Justice
(the right of whose places was thought to be founded on an Act of Parliament
giving His Majesty the Prerogative only of presenting) are now commissioned
by a Patent under the great Seal, both which are considerable alterations in
the Government, which some have opposed, others have wished and endeavored,
and yet without all fear of treason, on either hand; only because they acted
according to these qualifications, in a lawful way, and not repugnant to
Religion and Loyalty. But that which the Advocate wilfully mistakes (for it is
impossible he could do it ignorantly) is, that he will have the endeavoring of
alteractions in general not to be of it self a thing indifferent, and only
determinable to be good or evil by its qualifications (as all men see it
plainly to be) but to be, forsooth, in this very generality intrinsecally evil;
a notion never to be admitted on earth, in the frail and fallible condition of
human affairs. And then he would establish this wise Position by an example he
adduces, That rising in arms against the King (for so sure he means, it being
otherwise certain that rising in arms in general is also a thing indifferent,
and plainly determinable to be either good or evil as done with or against the
Kings Authority) is treason, and says, If the Earl had reserved to himself a
liberty to rise in arms against the King, though he had added in a lavvful
manner, yet it would not have availed, because, (and he says well) This being
in it self unlawful the qualifications had been but shamms and contrariae
facto. But why then does not his own reason convince him, ^here the difference
lies? viz. That rising in arms against the King is in itself unlawful, whereas
endeavoring alterations is only lawful, or unlawful, as it is qualified; and,
if qualified in the Earl's Terms, can never be unlawful. But, says the
Advocate, The Earl declares himself free to make all alterations, and so he
would make men believe that the Earl is for making All or Any, without any
reserve, whereas the Earl's words are most express, that he is, Neither for
making all or any, but only for wishing and endeavoring for such as are good,
and lawful, and in a lawful way, which no man can disown, without denying
common reason, nor no sworn Counselor disclaim, without manifest perjury.
But the Advocat's last conceit is, That the Earl's restriction is not as the
King shall think fit, or as is consistent with the Law, but that himself is
still to be judge of this, and his Loyalty to be the standard. But first, The
Earl's restriction is expressly according to Loyalty, which in good sense is the
same with according to Law, and the very thing that the King is ever supposed
to think. Secondly, as neither the Advocate, nor any other, hitherto, have had
reason to distinguish the exercise, and actings of the Earl's Loyalty from
those of His Majesty's best Subjects, so is it not a mavelous thing that the
Advocate should prosesse to think (for in reality he cannot think it) the
Earl's words, His Loyalty, which all men see to to be the same with his duty,
and sidelity, or what else can bind him to his Prince, capable of any quible,
far more to be a ground of so horrid an accusation? And whereas the Advocate
says, The Earl is still to be judge of this; It is but an insipid calumny, it
being as plain as any thing can be that the Earl does nowise design His
thinking to be the rule of right, and wrong, but only mentions it as the
necessary application of these excellent, and unerring rules of Religion, Law,
and Reason, to which he plainly resers, and subjects, both his thinking and
himself, to be judged accordingly. By which it is evident, that the Earl's
restriction is rather better, and more dutyful then that which the Advocate
seems to desiderat: And, if the Earl's restrictions had not been full eneugh,
it was the Advocat's part, before administrating the Oath, to have craved what
more he thought necessary, which the Earl, in the case, would not have refused.
But it is believed, the Advocate can yet hardly propose restrictions more full
and suitable to duty then the forementioned of Religion, Law, and Reason,
which the Earl did of himself profer. As for what His Majesty's Advocate add's,
That under such professions, and reserves, the late Rebellions, and disorders,
have all been carried on, and fomented; It is but mere vapor; for, no
rebellion ever was, or can be, without a breach of one, or other of the Earl's
Qualifications; which does sufficiently vindicat that part of the Earl's
Explanation.

The Advocate insists much, that Any is equivalent to All; and that All
comprehends Every particular under it; which he would have to be the deadly
poison in the Earl's words: And yet the Earl may defy him, and all his
detracters, to find out a case of the least undutifulness, much less of
rebellion, that a man can be guilty of, while he keeps within the excellent
Rules, and limitations, wherewith his words are cautioned. I could tell you
further, that so imaginary, or rather extravagant, and ridiculous is this
pretended Treason that there is not a person in Scotland, either of these who
have refused, or who by the Act are not called to take the Test, that may not
upon the same ground and words be impeach't, viz. That they are not bound (and
so without doubt both may and do sa^ it) by the Test, in their station, etc. to
wish and endeavor any alteration, etc. Nay I desire the Advocate to produce
the man, among those that have taken the Test, that will affirm, that by taking
it he has bound up himself never to wish or endeavor any alteration, etc.
according to the Earl's Qualifications, and I shall name hundreds (to Whom his
Highness, as you have heard, may be added) that will say they are not bound up.

So that by this conclusion, if it were yielded, all Scotland are equally
guilty of treason, the Advocate himself, to say nothing of His Royal Highness,
not excepted: Or if he still think he is, I wish he would testify under his
hand to the World, that, by his Oath he is bound up never to wish, nor
endeavor any alteration he thinks to the advantage of Church or State. in a
lavvful way, nor in his station, though neither repugnant to the Protestant
Religion, nor his Loyalty. And if this he do, he does as a man, if not of
sense, at least of honor; but if not, I leave a blank for his Epithets.

But that you may see that this whole affair is a deep Mystery, Pray, notice
what is objected against the last part of the Explanation. This I understand as
a part of my Oath. Which, says the Advocate, Is a treasonable invasion upon
the Royal Legislative power, as if the Earl could make to himself an Act of
Parliament, since he who can make any part of an Act may make the whole. And
then, say I, farewell all Takers of the Test with an Explanation, whether the
Orthodox clergy, or Earl Queensberry (tho himself Justice general) who were
allowed by the Council so to do: seeing that whether they hold their Explanation
for a part of their Oath or not yet others may, and in effect all men of sense
do understand it so: and thus, in the Advocat's Opinion, they have treasonably
invaded the Legislative power, and made an Act of Parliament to themselves:
Neither, in that case, can the Councils allowance excuse them, seeing not only
the Earl had it, as well as they, but even the Council it self cannot make an
Act of Parliament, either for themselves, or others. But Sir, I protest, I am
both ashamed, and wearied of this trifling; And therefore to shut up this Head,
I shall only give a few remarks. First, you may see, by the Acts of Parliament
upon which the Advocate sounds his indictment, that as to Leasing-making and
depraving Laws, all of them run in these plain, and sensible terms; The
inventing of narrations, the making, and telling of lies, the uttering of
wicked, and untrue calumnies, to the slander of King, and Government, the
depraving of his Laws, and misconstruing his proceedings, to the engendering of
discord, moving and raising of hatred, and dislike betwixt the King and his
People. And, as to treason, in these yet more positive terms; That none impugn
the dignity and authority of the three Estats, or seek, or procure the
innovation, or diminution thereof. Which are things so palpbale, and easily
discerned, and withal so infinitely remote both from the Earl's words and
intentions, or any tolerable construction can be put on either, that I confess,
I never read this indictment but I was made to wonder that its forget and maker
was not in looking on it deterred by the just apprehensions he might have not
only to be sometime accused as a manifest depraver of all Law but to be for
ever accounted a gross, and most disingenuous perverter of common sense. The
Earl's words are sober, respectful, and duty fully spoken, for the exoneration
of his own Conscience, without the least insinuation of either reflection or
slander. much less the impugning of the Authority of Parliament, as the Earl
may appeal not only to his Majesty's true and Royal sense, but to the most
scrupulous, and nyce affecters of the exactest discerning, besides that they
were first formally tendered in Council, for their approbation, and by them
directly allowed; How then can any man think, that they could be charged with
the greatest and vilest of crimes, Leasing-making, depraving, perjury, and
treason? But the Advocate tells us, That there are some things which the law
commonly forbids in general, and that some inferences are as natural, and
strong, and reproach as soon or sooner then the plainest defamations. But what
of all this? Must therefore such generals be left to the phantastik
application of every wild imagination, to the confounding of the use of speech,
and subverting of of humane Society, and not rather be still submitted to the
Judgment of common sense, for their true and right understanding, and the
deducing thence these strong and natural inferences talked of? Of which good
sense if the Advocate do but allow a grain weight, it is evident that the
inferences he here libells against the Earl must infallibly be cast, and by all
rational unbyassed men be found strange, unnatural, and monstrous.

For Sr 2ly, pray, observe these rational, and sound Maxims he sounds his
inferences on, and they are manifestly these. First, That he who says he will
only obey as far as he can invents a new way whereby no man is at all bound to
obey. 2ly, That he who in the midst of hundreds of exceptions, and
contradictions objected against on Oath, enjoined by Act of Parliament, and
still unanswered, says, that he is confident the Parliament never intended to
impose contradictory Oaths, reproaches the Parliament. 3ly. That he that says
he must explain an ambiguous Oath for himself, before he take it, renders all
Laws, and Oaths useless and makes himself the Legislator. 4ly, That he that
says that he takes this Oath, as far as it is consistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion, swears nothing. 5ly, That he that declars himself not tied
up by the Test from endeavoring, in a lawful way, such alterations as he
thinks to the advantage of Church, and State, consistent with Religion, and
Loyalty, declares himself, and all others, loosed from the Government, and all
duty to it, and free to make any, and all alterations that he pleases. And 6ly
That he that takes the Test with an explanation, and holds it to be a part of
his Oath, invads the Legislative power, and makes Acts of Parliament.

Upon which rare, and excellent propositions, I dar say, The Earl is content,
according to the best Judgment, that you, and all unbyassed men, can make
either of their truth, or of my ingenuity in excerping them, to be adjudged
guilty or not guilty, without the least fear, or apprehension of the issue.

And in the third and last place, I shall only entreat you to try how the
Advocat's reasoning will proceed in other cases, and what brave work may be
wrought by so useful a tool. Suppose then a man refuse the Test simply, or
falls into any other kind of nonconformity, either civil, or Ecclesiastik, or
pay's not the Kings custom, or other dues, or lastly understands an Act
otherwise then the Advocate thinks he should, is not his Indictement already
formed, and his process as good as made? viz. That he reguards not the Law,
that he thinks it is unjustly, or foolishly enacted, that he will only obey as
far as he can, and as he pleases, and thereby renders all Laws useless, and so
reproaches the King and Parliament, and impugns their Authority, and assumes to
himself the Legislative power, and therefore is guilty of Leasing-making,
depraving his Majesty's Laws, and of treason; of which crimes above mentioned
or one or other of them, he is actor art and part: Which being found by an
Assize, he ought to be punished, with the pains of death, forfaulture and
escheat of lands and goods, to the terror of others to do or commit the like
hereafter. And, if there be found a convenient Judge, the poor man is
undoubtedly lost.

But, Sir, having drawn this parallel, rather to retrive the Earl's case, then
to make it a precedent, which, I hope, it shall never be, and choosing rather
to leave the Advocate then follow him in his follies, I forbear to urge it
further.

These things considered, must it not appear strange, beyond expression, how
the Earl's Explanation, such as it is, did fall under such enormous and
grievous misconstructions: For, setting aside the Councils allowance, and
approbation, (which comes to be considered under the next head) suppose the
Earl, or any other person, called before the Council, and there required to
take the Test, had, in all due humility, said, either that he could not at all
take it, or, at least not without an Explanation; because the Test did contain
such things as, not only he, but many other, and those the best of the Loyal
and Orthodox Clergy, did apprehend to be contradictions, and inconsistencies:
And thereupon had proponed one or two such as the Papers above set down do
plainly eneugh hold out, and the Bishop in his Explanation rather evades then
answers; would it not be hard, beyond all the measures of equity, and charity,
to look upon this as a designed reflection, far more a malicious and wicked
slander and the blackest treason? We see the Act of Parliament does not
absolutely enjoin the taking of the Test, but only proposes it to such as are
entrusted in the Government, with the ordinary certification, either of losing,
or holding their Trusts, at their option. We know also, that, in cases of this
nature, it is far more suitable both to our christian liberty, and the respect
we ow to a christian Magistrate, to give a reason of our conscientious
non-complyance, with meekness, and fear, then, by a mute compearance, to fall
under the censure of a stubborn obstinacy. And lastly, it is certain, and may
safely be affirmed, without the least reproach, that Parliaments are not
infallible, as witness the frequent changes, and abrogations of their own Acts,
and their altering of Oaths imposed by themselves, and even of this Oath, after
it was presented, which the Earl was not for altering, so much as it was done,
as I told you before: How then can it be that the Earl appearing before a
christian Council, and there declaring in terms, at the worst a little obscure,
because too tender, and modest, his Scruples at an Oath presented to him,
either to be freely taken, or refused, should fall under any censure? If the
Earl had, in this occasion, said, he could not take the Test. unless liberty
were given him first to explain himself, as to some contradictions, and
inconsistencies, which he conceaved to be in it, though he had said far more
then is contained in his contraverted Explanation, yet he had said nothing but
what Christian liberty has often freely allowed, and christian charity would
readily construe for an honest expression of a commendable tenderness, without
any imputation of reproach against either King or Parliament. How much more
then is his part clear and innocent, when, albeit so many thought the
contradictions to be undeniable, yet such was his well tempered respect, both
to God, and man, to his own conscience, and his Majesty's Authority, that
before, and not after, the taking of this Oath, to clear himself (in the midst
of the many exceptions, and scruples raised) of all ambiguities in swearing, he
first applies himself, for a satisfying Explanation, to the Parliament, the
prime imposers, their true intentions and genuine meaning, and then gathering
it, very rationally, from the Oaths consistency with it self, and with the
Protestant Religion, the Parliaments aim and scope, and so asserting the King
and Parliaments truth, and honor, he places the relief, and quiet of his own
Conscience in his taking the Test with this Explanation, and in declaring its
congruity with his Oath, and duty of Allegiance.

The third Head of the Earl's additional defenses is the further clearing, and
improving of his grounds of Exculpation, above adduced, and repelled: Which
were, first, that, before the Earl did offer his Explanation to the Council, a
great many Papers were spread abroad, by some of the Orthodox Clergy, charging
the Test with contradictions and inconsistencies. 2ly. That there was a paper
penned by a reverend Bishop, and presented and read in Council, and by them
allowed to be printed, which did contain the same, and far more important
things then any can be found in the Earl's Explanation: And consequently, far
more obnoxious to all His Majesty's Advocat's accusations. 3ly. That the
Explanation upon which he was indicted was publikly by himself declared in
Council, and by the Council allowed, so that the Oath was administrat to him,
and he received to sit in Council and vote, by His Highness, and the rest of
the Members, with and under this express qualification.

But, to all urged for the Earl's Exculpation the Advocate makes one short
answer, viz. That if the Earl's paper did infer the crimes charged on it, a
thousand the like offenses cannot excuse it: And his Majesty is free to pursue
the offenders, when, and in what Order, he thinks fit: which answer does indeed
leave the Council, and all concerned, in his Majesty's mercy: But that it does
no way satisfy the Earl's plea is manifest: For, the first ground of
Exculpation, viz. that before the Earl did offer his Explanation a great many
papers, writ by the Orthodox Clergy, and others, were abroad, charging the Test
with Contradictions, etc. was not alleged by the Earl merely to justify his
Explanation by the multitude of the like papers, and so to provide for an
escape in the crowd: But, the Earl having most rationally pleaded, that his
Explanation was given in by him, after these many Scruples and Objections
raised by others were abroad, it was a good Plea, from a most pregnant
circumstance, clearing, both the design, and sense of his words, from the soul
aspersions of reproaching, and depraving, thrown upon them: Seeing the words
spoken by him under the motive of such a circumstance, by all fair rules of
interpretation, instead of being judged misconstrueing and depraving, could
only be understood as a seasonable asserting of the integrity of the
Parliaments intentions, and the uprightness of the Earl's Conscience: which
argument being in reason unanswerable, it necessarly follows that the Advocat's
return to the first ground: was neither sufficient nor pertinent, and that
therefore the Exculpation was unjustly repelled. But next, the second ground of
Exculpation is so far from being answered by the Advocate that it does not
appear it was so much as understood; For, the Earl's argument being, That words
allowed and approven by the Council can never fall under the accusation, either
of Leasing-making, or slandering his Majeslies proceedings, or depraving Laws,
and Acts of Parliament, as is evident in it self, and granted by the Advocate,
where he says that an Explanation, though reflecting on the King, and
Government (which the Earl's was not) yet if allowed by the Council, is to be
sustained. But so it is that the Council has allowed the words contained in
this Explanation contraverted, both in themselves, and also in their
equivalent, and far more important expressions: As for instance, not only by
accepting the Earl's Explanation (as shall be cleared in the next place) but by
giving warrant for the publication of the Bishop of Edinburgh his Vindication,
wherein, First, for obviating the contradictions objected from the Confession
of Faith, he positively asserts, that by the Test men do not swear to own every
Article of that Confession; and yet the Test binds expressly to believe that
Confession to be founded on and agreeable to the Word of God, and never to
consent to any alteration contrary thereto, or inconsistent therewith: So that
he gives both the Test and the Parliament the Lie. And then, for removing
another Scruple, he tells us, that By the Test men are not bound up from
regular endeavors to rectify or better the established government, both of
Church, and State, which is clearly the same thing, (but not so well cautioned)
with that which in the Earl's case is made a ground of treason: From which it
unquestionably follows, that the Earl's words, having been allowed, and
approven by the Council, could never, in Law, or reason, be thereafter made a
ground of accusation, by any, much less by themselves. Now I desire to know
where the Advocate, in all his Plea, does so much as notice, far less answer,
this defense, or what his telling us, A thousand offenses of the like nature
does not excuse one, either does, or can signify? seeing this argument for the
Farl, instead of pleading excuses, does justify the matter, and for ever purge
all shadow of offense or ground of quarrel, which will be yet more apparent,
when you shall add to this the third ground of the Earl's exculpation, viz.
That the explanation, whereupon the Earl was indicted, was publikly by himself
declared in Council, and by the Council allowed and accepted: In so much as,
after he had given his Explanation as the sense wherein he was free to swear
the Test, the Oath was thereupon administrat to him, and he received to sit,
and vote as a Counselor. Whereby it is evident, That, by this allowance, and
acceptance, the Earl's Explanation became the Councils, as much as if, after
the Earl's pronouncing the words, they had verbatim repeated them, and told
him, they were satisfied he should swear the Test in these terms: And whether
this ought not to be a sufficient exoneration to the Earl, let all men judge.
The Advocate makes a noise, That in the case of an Oath required the taker
ought to swear it in the sense of the imposer, (which none doubts) and then
runs out, That The Earl in place of taking it in the imposers sense, did
unwarrantably intend a sense of his own, to the eluding and frustrating of the
obligation of this, and all other Oaths. But all this is nothing to the
purpose, for waving that in the Earl's case it is most impertinent to talk of
his obtruding of a sense, to the eluding, and frustrating of the obligation of
his Oath, seeing his Oath was not then given, or at all in being, it is
expressly alleged by the Earl, and notour that the Explanation tendered by him,
when called to take the Test, was accepted by the Council, and the Oath
thereupon administrated, and so the Earl freely joins issue with the Advocate,
and acknowledging that the taker of the Oath ought to swear in the sense of the
imposer, subsumes in terminis, that he himself did swear so, and not otherwise,
in as much as he did swear in a sense accepted by the Council, before he gave
his Oath, as is evident. 1. By their commanding him to sit after he had sworn,
and 2. In that neither the Advocate, nor any other, had ever the confidence to
quarrel his sitting, as a breach of the Law, which no doubt they had done, if
not convinced that by taking the Oath he had satisfied the Act of Parliament;
which things, in true dealing and the construction of all honest men, are the
same as if the Oath had been required of him by the Council, in the very sense
and words of this Explanation. Neither is it material whether the Explanation
offered by the Earl does deserve (as certainly it does not) these many ill
names, which the Advocate would fix upon it, because though it had been much
worse then it is, yet being offered to the Council, and submitted to their
judgment, and they having accepted it, the thing became quasi res judicata, and
cannot be retracted, without subverting the surest Rules, both of truth, and
government. The Advocate indeed tells us, 1 That the Council heard not the
Earl's Explanation: But I have already told you they did hear it, and the Earl
is still ready to prove it: And suppose some say they did not hear it
distinctly, (As what thing spoke in Council is distinctly heard and considered
by all?) Yet it being certain that they did all approve it it is sufficient to
the Earl: And it is only their concern, whether in approving what they did not
hear they observed their Oath De fideli, etc. or not. His Highness, who the
Earl was most concerned should hear, did certainly hear, as himself afterward
acknowledged. 2. The Advocate says, That the hearing and allowing the ^arl to
sit is no relevant plea; yea further though all the Council had allowed him
that day, yet any of his Majesty's Officers might have quarrelled him the next
day. But first, I would gladly know, upon what head? For if upon obtruding a
sense of his own, it is undeniable that whatever the sense was the obtruding of
it was purged by the Councils acceptance, and it became theirs, and was no
more his. Butif the Advocate does think, that even the matter of the
Explanation, though allowed and accepted, may still be quarrelled: Then. 1. I
hope, he will consider in what terms he does it, for if he charge it after it
becomes the Councils (as in truth he has done already) with the same liberty
wherewith he treats it as the Earl's, he runs fair to make himself the
Arrantest defamer and slanderer of the King and Council, that ever yet
attempted it. But 2ly, It merits a worse name then I am free to give it to say,
That an Explanation allowed by the Council, in the administrating of an Oath
proper to be administrat by them, does not secure the taker as to that sense,
both in Law and Conscience: Seeing in effect this quite takes away the best
grounds of assurance among men, and turns their greatest security to their
greatest snare. And 3ly, If this be sound Doctrine, it is worth the enquiring,
what security the Clergy, to whom the Council, as you have heard, did indulge
an explanation, have thereby obtained: For as to such Laiks as did only at
their own hand take hold of, and snatch at this indulgence, not provided for
them by the Councils Act, it is clear their doom is dight. It is not here
debated how far that Explication of the Councils may satisfy, and quiet
Conscience, let such concerned see to it. Some please themselves with a general
notion. That if the sense given by the Administrator be sound then it is also
safe, whether it be agreeable to the plain, and genuine meaning of the Oath or
not, nay whether it be agreeable to the sense of the first Imposers or not: But
others, who consider, more rendetly, what it is to swear in Truth, and in
Judgment, think it rather a profanation, and a sinful preferring of the credit
of men to the glory of the Almighty, to offer to smooth an Oath by a
disagreeable interpretation, when in effect the Oath it self ought to be
changed: But the thing in question is about the security of life and fortune,
for seeing the Councils Explanation is, at least, to say no worse, liable
enough to the calumnies of an inventive malice, and the Advocate tells us,
Though all the Council had allowed a man to swear with an Explanation, yet any
of His Majesty's Officers may, the next day, quarrel him, It is evident that
this allowance can afford him no security. It is true the Advocate may
allege, and possibly find a difference betwixt the Councils emitting and their
accepting of an Explanation But as in truth there is none, more then betwixt a
Mandat and a Ratihabition, so I am confident, if ever the thing come to be
questioned, this pretense will evanish and come to nothing.

It is likewise to be remembered, that when the Earl, the next day after he took
the Test; was questioned for the Explanation he had made, and required to
exhibit a copy (which was afterward made the ground of his indictment) so
soon as he observed that some began to carp, he refused to sign it, demanded it
back, and would have destroyed it, as you have heard, which were all clear Acts
of disowning and retracting, for eviting offense, and of themselves sufficient
to have prevented any further enquiry, there being nothing more just and humain
then that words, though at the first hearing offensive, yet if instantly
retracted when questioned, should be past: But this, as well as other things,
must in the Earl's case be singular, and whether he plead the Councils allowing
or his own disowning (as in effect he does both) it is equally to no purpose,
the thing determined must be accomplished. You heard before, how that a
reverend Bishop, and many of the Orthodox Clergy did take a far greater liberty
of Explanation then the Earl pretended to: you see also that first the Council
allows his words, whereupon he rests: And when he finds that they begin to
challenge he is willing to disown: And withal it is undeniable, and
acknowledged by the Council themselves, that the Test, as it stands in the Act
of Parliament, is ambiguous, and needs to be explained: And the Earl may
confidently averr, that of all the Explanations that have been offered (even
the Councils not excepted) his is the mostsafe, sound, and least disagreeable
to the Parliaments true sense and meaning. And yet, when all others escape, he
alone must be seized, and for a thing so openly innocent, clearly justifiable,
and undeniably allowed, found guilty of the worst of crimes, even
Leasing-making, Leasing-telling, Depraving of Laws, and Treason; but all these
things God almighty sees, and to him the judgment yet belongs.

And thus I leave this dscourse shutting it up with the case of Archbishop
Cranmer, plainly parallel to the Earl's, to show how much he was more
favorably dealt with by the King, and Government, in those days, then the
Earl now is, though he live under a much more merciful; and just Prince then
that worthy Prelate did, for Cranmer being called and promoted by Henry VIII.
of England to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and finding an Oath was to be
offered to him, which, in his apprehension, would bind him up from what he
accounted his duty, he altogether declined the dignity and preferment, unless
he were allowed to take the Oath with such an Explanation as he himself
proposed, for salving of his Conscience; and though this Oath was no other then
the statut, and solemn Oath, that all his Predecessors in that See, and all the
mitered Clergy in England had sworn, yet he was admitted to take it, as you see
in Fuller's Church hist: Of Britain Lib: 5 p. 185 and 186, with this formal
Protestation.

In nomine Domini, Amen. Coramvobis etc. Non est, aut erit meae voluntatis, aut
intentionis, per hujusmodi juramentum veljuramenta, qualitereunque verba in
ipsis posita sonare videbuntur, me obligare ad aliquid, ratione ^orundum, post
hac dicendum, faciendum, aut attentandum, quod erit, aut esse videbitur, contra
Legem Dei, vel contra illustrissimum Regem nostrum Angliae, Legesve, aut
Praerogativas Esusdem: Et quod non intendo per hujusmodi juramentum,
veljurament^, quovis modo me obligare, quo minus libere loqui, consulere, aut
consentire valeam; in omnibus, and singul^s Reformationem Religionis
Christianae, Gubernationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Praerogativam Coronae
ejusd^m Reipublicae, vel commoditatem earundem, quoquo modo concernentibus; and
e^ ubique exequi, and reformare, quae mihi in Ecclesia Anglicana reformanda
videbuntur: Et secundum hanc interpretationem, and intellectum hunc, and non
aliter, neque alio modo, dictum juramentum me praestiturum protestor, and
profiteor. That is to say. In the Name of God, Amen. Before you etc. It neither
is, nor shall be, my will or meaning, by this kind of Oath, or Oaths, and
however the words of themselves shall seem to sound or signify, to bind up my
self, by virtue hereof to say, do or endeavor any thing, which shall really
be, or appear to be, against the Law of God, or against our most illustrious
King of England or against his Laws and Prerogatives: And that I mean not, by
this my Oath, or Oaths any ways to bind up my self from speaking, consulting,
and consenting freely, in all, and every thing in any sort concerning the
Reformation of the Christian Religion, the Government of the Church of England,
and the Prerogative of the Crown of the Commonwealth thereof, or their
advantage and from executing, and reforming such things as I shall think need
to be reformed in the Church of England: And according to this Explanaton, and
sense, and not otherwise nor in any other manner, do I protest, and profess,
that I am to take, and perform this Oath.

Nor did that excellent Person, says Mr Fuller, smother this privately in a
corner, but publikly interposed it, three several times, once in the
Charter House, before authentik witnesses, again upon his bended knees, before
the high Alter, in view and hearing of many people, and Bishops beholding him,
when he was consecrated, and the third time, when he received the Pall, in the
same place.

Now would it not be very strange if the like liberty should not be allowed to
the ^arl, under His Majesty, in reference to the Test, which Henry the VIII. a
Prince that stood as much on his Prerogative as ever any, did vouchafe to this
Thomas Cranmer, who, as another Historian observes acted fairly, and
above-board: But there wanted then the high and excellent designs of the great
Ministers, The rare fidelity of Counselors, sound Religion and tender piety of
Bishops, solid Law and Learning of Advocates, incorruptible integrity of
Judges, and upright honesty of Assizers, that now we have, to get Archbishop
Cranmer accused, and condemned, for Leasing-making, depraving Laws, Perjury,
and Treason, to which accusation his Explanation was certainly no less
obnoxious then the Earl's.

But I hasten to the fourth, and last head of the Earl's additional defenses,
viz The removing certain groundless pretenses, alleged by the Advocate, for
aggravating the Earl's offense: ASI. That the Earl, being a Peer, and Member of
Parliament, should have known the sense of the Parliament, and that neither the
Scruples of the Clergy, nor the Councils proclamation, designed for mere
Ignorants, could any way excuse the Earl for offering such an Explanation. But,
first, the Advocate might have remembered, that in another passage he taxes the
Earl as having debated in Parliament against the Test, whereby it is easy to
gather, that the Earl having been in the matter of the Test a dissenter, this
quality does rather justify then aggravat the Earl's Scrupling. 2ly. If the
proclamation was designed for the mere Ignorants of the Clergy, as the Advocate
calls them, who knew nothing of what had past in Parliament, an Explanation was
far more necessary for the Earl, who knows so little of what the Advocate
alleges to have past in Parliament, viz. That the Confession of Faith was not
to be sworn to as a part of the Test, that of necessity (as I think) he must
know the contrary; In as much as, first, this is obvious from the express tenor
of the Test, which binds to own, and profess the true Protestant Religion,
contained in the Confession of Faith, and to believe the same to be agreeable to
the Word of God; as also to adhere thereto, and never to consent to any change
contrary to, or inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and Confession
of Faith: Which to common sense appears as plain, and evident, as can be
contrived, or desired. But 2ly, It is very well known, that it was expressly
endeavored, and carried in Parliament, that the Confession of Faith should be
a part of the Test and Oath: For the Confession of Faith being designed to be
sworn to, by an Act, for securing the Protestant Religion (which you have heard
was prepared in the Articles, but afterward thrown out) when this Act for the
Test was brought in to the Parliament, some days after, by the Bishop of
Edinburgh, and others, the Confession was designedly left out of it: But it
being again debated, that the bare naming of the Protestant Religion, without
condescending on a Standard for it, was not sufficient, the Confession of Faith
was of new added: And, after the affirmative clause for owning it, and adhering
to it was insert, upon a new motion, the negative, never to consent to any
alteration, contrary to, or inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and
Confession of Faith was also subjoyned: But not without a new debate and
opposition made against the words, And Confession of Faith, by the Bishop of
Edinburgh, until at length he also yielded, All which, it is hoped, was done
for some purpose: And if, at that time, any had doubted of the thing, he had
certainly been judged most ridiculous: For it was by that addition concluded by
all that the Confession was to be sworn, and further it appears plainly, by the
Bishop of Edinburgh his vindication, that, when he wrote it, he believed the
Confession was to be sworn to, for he takes pains to justify it (though
calumniously enough) alleging, That it was hastily compiled, in the short
space of four days, by some Barrons and Ministers, in the infancy of our
Reformation. (Where, by the by, you see that he makes no reckoning of what the
Act of Parliament, to which the Test refers, expressly bears, viz. That that
second Ratification 1567. which we only have recorded, was no less then seven
years after this Confession was first exhibited, and approven Anno 1560. But
moreover, he tells us, That the Doctors of Aberdeen, who refused the Covenant,
were yet vvilling not only to subscribe, but to svvear this Confession of
Faith. Which again, to answer the Bishops critik of four days, was more then
70. years after it was universally received. It Is true, that, when the Bishop
finds himself straightened how to answer objections, he is forced to make use of
the new Gloss (I shall not call it of Orelans) whereby the Protestant Religion
is made to be sworn to only as far as every man pleases to interpret, and as
far as may be consistent with any new principles of state. But the Parliament
certainly (I do not speak ironically) did intend by this Test to swear and
assert the True Protestant Religion, and the said Confession of Faith, whatever
may be now pretended. The Earl could not also but very well remember what His
Highness had said to himself, about the inserting of the Confession, and no
doubt, the Advocate, if ingenuous, knows all this: For the thing was at that
time matter of common talk, and indeed, till Papers objecting contradictions,
and inconsistencies betwixt the Confession and the rest of the Test began to be
so numerous (which was about the end of October) that there was no possibility
left to answer them, but by alleging. That in the Test men do not swear to
every article and proposition of the Confession, but only to the Protestant
Religion therein contained, this point was never doubted. And whether this
answer be true, and a solid Vindication, consonant to the words of the Test, or
a circulating evasion enervating all its force, let others judge. But the
Advocate says, When it was moved in Parliament to read the Confession it was
waved: Most true: and the reason given by the Bishops for it was that it was
notour, they knew it. and it was already insert in the Acts of Parliament: And,
the truth was, the reading of it would have spent more time then was allowed on
examining the whole Test. It was likewise late, after a long Sederunt, and it
was resolved to have the Act passed that night, and so it went on. But it was
likewise moved to read the Covenant, seeing it was to be disclaimed, and this
was flatly refused. And will the Advocate thence infer, That by the Test the
Covenant is not abjured, albeit it be most certain, that many in the
Parliament, at that time, had never read the one or the other? But to follow
the Advocat's excursions, and answer them more particularly: The motion for
reading the Confession being made, on this very occasion, because it was to be
insert in the Test and sworn to, concluds enough against him: For no body can
be so effronted as to say, it was used in Parliament as an argument not to read
it, because it was not to be sworn to, but (though it cost a debate) it was
plainly agreed to be sworn to, and therefore insert. 2ly. Can any man doubt,
the Confession was to be sworn to, when it is notour that severalls who were
members of Parliament, and, by reason of offices they enjoyed, were called to
swear the Test, pretending, with reason, tenderness of an Oath, did, before
swearing, make a fashion at least of reading and studying the Confession, to
satisfy themselves how far they might swear it. And that this was done by an
hundred, I can attest themselves. Lastly it is certain that, when, in the end
of October, the Bishop of Edinburgh did quarrel Sr George Lockhart for causing
the Confession to be insert in the Test, and he answered that without it a Turk
might sign the Test, it was not then pretended by the Bishop that the
Confession was not to be svvorn to, and therefore he at that time had no reply

But this is a debate, I confess, not altogether necessary for my present task,
only thereby you may see ground enough for the Earl to believe the Confession
was svvorn to: And all that did svvear, before the Councils Explanation,
having svvorn in that sense, and, for ought I know, all (except the Clergy)
being by the Councils Act still bound to do so, It was not strange the Earl
might be of this Opinion. And seeing that many of the Contradictions were
alleged to arise hence, and the Earl being a dissenter, it was yet less
strange that the Earl did scruple; nor is it unreasonable that his modest
Explanation should have a most benign acceptance.

The second pretense of aggravation is, That his Majesty did not only bestow on
the Earl his Lands, and Jurisdictions fallen into his Majesty's hands by the
forfaulture of his Father, but also pardon him the crimes of Leasing-making and
Misconstruing, whereof he was found guilty by the Parliament 1662. And raised
him to the title and dignity of an Earl, and to be a member of all his
Majesty's Iudicatories. All which the Earl, as he has ever, does still most
thankfully acknovvledge. But seeing the Advocate has no vvarrand to upbraid
him with his Majesty's favors, and that these things are now remembered with
a manifest design to raise dust, and blind strangers, and to add a very ill
thing, Ingratitude, to the heap of groundless calumnies cast upon him, I must
crave leave to answer a little more particularly, and refute this new tout (as
the scots proverb is) in an old horn. This old Leasing-making is then now
brought in seriously after it has been treated in ridicule for 18 years, by
the very Actors who did never pretend to defend it in cold blood: And, were
it not to digress too much, I could name the persons, and make them (if
capable) think shame of their falsehood, and prevarications in that point, and
of their abusing His Majesty, and prostrating Justice, but I forbear.

The Advocate, in his book of pleadings, makes this a Stretch, and says, His
Majesty rescinded it. And His Majesty himself has, several times, expressed his
sense of the stretches made by some against the Earl, at that time. It is well
known the Family of Argyle is both ancient and honorable, and has been Loyal
and serviceable to the Crown for several hundreds of years: but they must now
be destroyed, for having done, and being able, as they say, to do too much,
which others neither can nor will do.

Neither is the Advocate ignorant that the only failing that Family has been
charged with, in all that long tract of time, was a compliance of the late
Marqueis of Argyle the Earl's Father, in the time of the late Usurpation, by
sitting in the then Parliament of England, some years after all the standing
forces of the Kingdom were broken, His Majesty beyond sea, the whole Country
overrun, the Usurpers universally acknowledged, and neither probability of
resistance, nor possibility of shelter left to any that were most willing to
serve His Majesty, as the Advocate himself has published in his printed
pleadings, in which he likewise lays out the special and extraordinary
Circumstances whereby the Marqueis was necessitate to do what he did. And the
compliance charged on him was so epidemik that all others were pardoned for the
same, except he alone, though none had such favorable Arguments to plead, and
though he pleaded the same indemnity that saved others. And seeing he
submitted, and delivered up himself, and lost his life, and seeing, at the same
time of the compliance that he suffered for, the Earl his son was actually
serving and suffering for his Majesty, as you find in the former part of this
Letter, the Earl's restitution was no less then He and his Family might well
expect of his Majesty's Goodness and Justice. It is true the Earl was again
accused and condemned (which may appear indeed strange to such as know not all
particulars) upon the same Old Acts of Leasingmaking, and with as little ground
(if possible) as now, and was pardoned by his Majesty, for which he has
often, and does always acknowledge that he owes to his Majesty both his Life
and Fortune: But upon this occasion, and being baited as he is, he hopes his
Majesty will not take it ill that he say, That his Majesty's mercy was in this
case determined by Justice: And for proof that his Majesty did then know him to
be innocent, did not his Majesty then say, It was impossible to take a man's
life upon so small an account? Tho nevertheless it had been done, if his Majesty
had not interposed and pardoned him. Did not the Chancellor Clarendoun (who
was Patron to the most considerable of the Earl's pursuers) hearing of his
condemnation, Bless God, he lived not in a Country where there were such
Laws? (He should have said such Judges) And I believe many more will say the
same now. Did it not plainly appear, at that time, that his principal pursuers
were very bitter, malicious, and unjust to him? For the Earl had not only
served his Majesty in that troublesome and hazardous appearance in the Hills,
but he had been particularly useful to Earl Midletoun then his Majesty's
Lieutenent General, and had stood by him, when these deserted him, whom
notwithstanding he took afterward by the hand, when he was his Majesty's
Commissioner in the Year 1661, and then designed new Interests and new
alliances, whereof some did hold and some never held. And then indeed it was
that he and others thought it proper for them to destroy the Family of Argyle,
to make their own Fortunes; But it pleased God and his Majesty to dispose
otherwise: Then it was that the Earl was so hotly pursued for his life; having
at that time no Fortune, all being in his Majesty's hands: Then was the
accusation of Treason likewise urged by the samepersons, and must have carried,
but it was not found necessary, Leasing-making being sufficient to take his
life, and, as it falls out when any game is started and the hounds in chase,
all the little currs run alongs, So the Earl wanted not then many pursuers that
are now scarce to be heard of. And further, some of the parties themselves
confessed the particulars to the Earl afterward, who yet now return to Act
their former parts, and that they had then laid down a resolution to entrap
him, per fas, aut nefas, but notvvithstanding all this ill humor and violence,
all the ground they could get for a quarrel, in two Years time, was one
single letter, among many they intercepted, the occasion and import whereof
was as follows. About a tvvelve-month after the death of the late Marqueis of
Argyle, The Earl his son being, by the loss of his estate, and burden of his
debts, brought into straits, a friend from Edinburgh wrote to him, then at
London, to do what he could for himself at Court, and the sooner the better;
For he needed neither expect favor nor Justice from some in Scotland, and, if
matters were delayed, his Fathers whole estate would be begged away in parcels.
His Friend likewise complained, that the Earl did not write to inform his
friends in Scotland; and on this he insisted several post-dayes, which, at
last, drew an answer from the Earl, that he had been to wait upon his Majesty,
and had found him both just and kind to him, and doubted not the effects of his
Royalfavour, that he was sensible of his loss by delay, yet must proceed
discreetly, and not press to give His Majesty trouble, but must take His
Majesty's method, and wait his time; That he judged, much of what his Friend
told him was true, but he must have patience: It was his misfortune that some
took pains to make His Majesty believe, that the Parliament was his Enemy, and
the Parliament to believe, the King was his Enemy, and by such informations he
was like to be a sufferer, but he hoped in God all should be well. This blast
must blow out, and will blow over. The King will see their tricks: And upon
this letter, specially those last words, the Earl was accused of Leasing-making
betwixt King and Parliament, and that he expected changes, and so had a great
deal of the same stuff laid to his charge, as now you have heard: And if the
now Register will produce the Earl's principal Letter, and the Paper the Earl
gave in to the Parliament, these two would clear all, the case then, and now,
as you may see, Mutatis Mutandis, being much the same, and some of the same
tools used. But to go on. The Earl's words in that Letter being clear, and
plain viz. That he complained of others that reported lies to King and
Parliament but did himself report none to either, He acknowledged the Letter,
which could never have been proven to be his, and as soon as he heard that it
was intercepted did render himself to his Majesty before he was called for.
But, which very much troubled him, had not access: Yet his Majesty was so
gracious that in stead of sending him prisoner to Scotland with a guard (as was
much pressed) he allowed him to go down on a verbal bale: And his Majesty was
pleased to say, That he saw nothing in the Earl's Letter against his Majesty or
the Parliament, but believed the Earl did design to reflect on the Earl of
Midletoun. The Earl came to Edinburgh, a fourthnight before the day appointed
by his Majesty, and thought to have had the liberty of the city, till that day
should come, but was sent to the Castle, the next day after his arrival: Upon
which he advertised his Majesty of his condition, who would hardly believe they
would take his life, till it was told plainly it was designed, and if he died
it lay at his Majesty's door, upon which his Majesty was graciously pleased to
send immediately an order to the Earl of Midletoun not to proceed to Execution
against him: Yet the Sentence of death was pronounced, and the day of Execution
remitted by the Parliament to the Earl of Midletoun: Which he accepted of,
albeit he had no particular instruction for it from his Majesty, which, before
a year went about, Earl Midletoun found could not be justified by him, and some
of the Earl's chief accusers were declared by his Majesty to be themselves
Leasing-makers; And then the Earl, by his Majesty's favor, and goodness, was
restored to a part of his Predecessors estate, and titles, which he took as
thankfully as if a new estate, and new and greater honors had been conferred
upon him. And though His Majesty was pleased, at the granting of these titles,
to say he could help them when he pleased, yet his Majesty knows, that the Earl
never troubled him about any such matter, nor solicitedh im now these eighteen
years, for any Title, Office, or Employment (though he confesses he had of all
sorts) nor has he been burdensome to his Majesty's Exchequer (500l yearly for
4 or 5 years that the Earl served in the Treasury being all that ever he
touched of his Majesty's money) albeit few attended more, and none so much that
lived at his distance. He was also twice at London, to kiss his Majesty's
hands, but still on his own charges: Which things are not said to lessen his
Majesty's bounty, and goodness, whereof the Earl still retains all just,
tender, and dutiful impressions, but to answer the Advocate, and to teach
others to hold their peace, that cannot say so much.

His life is known to have been true, honest, and of a piece, and all alongs he
has walked with that straightness that he can compare his integrity with all
that now attacque him.

By all which it is apparent, that what the Advocate here pretends for an
aggravation may well be accounted a second part of the Earl's persecutions, but
cannot, in the least, impair either his innocence, or his honor.

Seeing therefore the ground of the Earl's present accusation, with all he
either designed, said, or did, in this matter, was only that, when called, nay
required to take the Test, and after leave first obtained from his Highness and
Council, he did in their presence, before the giving of his Oath, declare, and
propose to them the sense wherein he was willing to take it; That this his
sense neither contains, nor insinuats, the least slander, reproach, or
reflection, either upon the King, the Parliament, or any Person whatsomever,
but, on the contrair, is in effect ten fold more agreeable to the words of the
Test, and meaning of the Parliament that framed it, then the Explanation
emitted by the Council; and was also most certainly, the first day, by them
accepted; and, when the next day challenged, by him offered to be retracted,
and refused to be signed: That the whole Indictment, and more especially that
part of it about the Treason, is a mere Rapsody of the most irrational, absurd,
and pernicious consequences, that ever the sun beheld, not only forcing the
Common rules of speech, charity, and humanity, but ranversing all the Topiks of
Law, Reason, and Religion, and threatening no less, in the Earl's person, then
the ruin of every man's fortune, life, and honor; That the Earl's Defenses,
and grounds of Exculpation, were most pregnant, and unanswerable, and either in
themselves notour, or offered to be instantly verified. And lastly, That the
aggravations pretended against him do either directly make for him, or most
evidently discover the restless malice of some of his implacable enemies: Shall
our Gracious King, who not only clearly understands right, and hates
oppression, but also, to all his other excellent qualities, has by his
Gentleness, and Clemency, even toward his Enemy, added that great Character
of Goodness, upon vain, and false insinuat ions, and unreasonable, and violent
stretches, not only take away the Life of an innocent person, but of one who
himself, and his family (be it said without disparagment) have, for a longer
time, and more faithfully, and signally served His Majesty and the Croun, then
any person, or family of his degree and quality, of all his Persecuters can
pretend to? Shall his numerous family, hopeful children, his friends and
creditors, all be destroyed? Shall both former services be forgot, innocence
oppressed, and all rules of justice, and Laws of society and humanity for his
sake overturned? Shall not only the Earl be cut off, and his noble and ancient
Family extinguished, but his Blood and Memory tainted with as black and
horrible a stain as if he had conspired with Jacques Clement, Ravillack, The
gun-pouder Miscreants, The bloody Irish Rebels, and all the other most wicked
and heinous traitors of that gang. And all this for a mere imaginary crime,
whereof it is most certain that no man living has, or can have, the least
real conviction, and upon such frivolous allegations as all men see to be, at
the top, mere moon - shine, and at the bottom, villainy unmixed.

After clearing these things, the Earl, it seems, intended to have addressed
himself to his Majesty's Advocate, in particular, and to have told him, that he
had begun very timously in Parliament to fall first on his heritable
jurisdictions, and then, upon his Estate, and that now he was fallen upon his
life and honor, whereby it was easy to divine that more was intended, from the
beginning, then the simple taking away of his Offices: seeing that some of
them, on his refusing the Test, were taken away by the certification of the Act
of Parliament, and that those that were heritable he offered, in Parliament, to
present and surrender to his Majesty on his knee, if his Majesty, after hearing
him, should think it fit; only he was not willing to have them torn from him,
as has been said; and if that were all were designed, as was at first given
out, the Advocate needed not have set him o^ high as Naboth, and accus^ him as
a blasphemer of God, and the King.

Then turning his speech to the Lords of Iustitiary he thought to have desired
that they would yet seriously consider his words, in their true sense and
circumstances, his own Explanation of his Explication, and especially the
forgoing matter of fact, to have been laid before them, with his Defenses, and
grounds of Exculpation; as also to have told them that they could not but
observe how that he was singled out amongst thousands, (against whom much more
then all he is charged with could be alleged) and that they must of necessity
acknowledge (if they would speak out their own conscience) that what he had
said was spoke in pure innocence, and duty, and only for the exoneration of
himself, as a Christian, and one honored to be of His Majesty's Privy Council
(where he was bound, by his Oath, to speak truth freely) And not to throw the
smallest reproach on either person or thing. Adding that he was ^oath to say
any thing that looks like a reflection upon His Majesty's Privy Council: but
if the Council can wrong one of their own number, he thought he might demand if
he had not met with hard measure? For first he was pressed, and persuaded to
come to the Council, then they receive his Explanation, and take his Oath, then
they complain of him to His Majesty, where he had no access to be heard, and by
their Letter, under their hands, affirm that they had been careful not to
suffer any to take the Test with their own Explanations, albeit they had
allowed a thing very like it, first to Earl Queensberry, then to the Clergy;
And the President now Chancellor had permitted several members of the College
of Justice to premise, when they swear the Test, some one sense, some another,
and some nonsense, as one saying he took it, in sane sensu, another making a
speech that no man understood, a third, all the time of the reading, repeating,
Lord have mercy upon me miserable sinner: Nay even an Advocate, after being
debarred, a few days, because albeit no Clerk yet he would not take it without
the benefit of his clergy, viz. the Councils Explanation, was yet, thereafter
admitted without the Warrant of the Councils Act: but all this in the case of
so many other was right and good. Further the Council expressly declare the Earl
to be Guilty, before he had ever said one word in his own defense. Thereafter
some of them become his Assizers, and others of them witness against him; and
after all, they do of new concern themselves, by a second Letter to His Majesty
(wherein they assert, That after full debate, and clear probation, he was found
guilty of Treason etc.) to have a sentence past against him, and that of so
high a nature, and so dreadful a consequence, as suffers no person to be
inconcerned, far less their Lordships his Judges, who upon grounds equally
just, and, which is more, already predetermined by themselves, may soon meet
with the same measure, not only as Concealers of Treason; but upon the least
pretended disobedience, or noncompliance with any Act of Parliament: and,
after all, must infallibly render an accunt to God Almighty. He bids them
therefore Lay their hands to their hearts, and whatever they shall judge, he is
assured that God knows, and he hopes all unbyassed men in the world will or may
know, he is neither Guilty of Treason, nor any of the Crimes libelled. He says
he is glad how many out - do him in asserting the true Protestant Religion, and
their Loyalty to His Majesty; Only, he adds, If he could justify himself to
God as he can to His Majesty, he is sure, he might account himself the happiest
man alive. But yet, seeing he has a better hope in the mercy of God through
Jesus Christ, he thereupon rests, whether he find Justice here on earth or not.
He says, he will add nothing to move them either to tenderness or pity; he
knows that not to be the place, and pretends to neither from them; He pleads
his Innocence, and craves Justice, leaving it to their Lordships to consider
not so much his particular case as what a Preparative it may be made, and what
may be its consequences: And if all he has said do neither convince, nor
persuade them to alter their judgment, yet he desires them to consider, whether
the case do not, at least, deserve to be more fully represented, and left to
His Majesty's wisdom and justice, seeing that if once the matter pass upon
record for Treason, it is undoubted, that hundreds of the best, and who think
themselves most innocent, may, by the same methods, fall under the like
Condemnation, when ever the Kings Advocate shall be thereto prompted.

And thus you have a part of what the Earl intended to have said, before
pronouncing Sentence, if he had not made his Escape before the day: Yet some
things I perceive by his notes are still in his own breast, as only proper to
be said to His Majesty. I find several Quotations out of the Advocates printed
books, that, it seems, he was to make some use of, but, seeing it would have
been too great an interruption to have applied them to the places designed, I
have subjoyned them together, leaving them to the Advocate's own, and all men's
consideration.

It was by some remarked, That when the Lords of Iustitiary, after the ending
of the first days debate, resolved that same night to give Judgment upon it,
they sent for the Lord Nairn, one of their number, an old and infirm man, who
being also a Lord of the Session, is so decayed through age, that he has not,
for a considerable time, been allowed to take his turn, in the Outer* house (as
they call it) where they judgelesser causes alone: But notwithstanding both his
age, and infirmity, and that he was gone to bed, he was raised, and brought to
the Court, to consider a debate, a great deal whereof he had not heard, in full
Court, and withal, as is informed, while the Clerk was reading some of it,
fell of new asleep.

It was also remarked that the Lords of Justitiary being, in all, five, viz.
the Lord Nairn abovementioned, with the Lords, Collintoun, Newtoun, Hirkhouse,
and Forret, the Libell was found relevant only by the odds of three to two viz.
the Lord Nairn foresaid, the Lord Newtoun since made President of the Session,
and the Lord Forret, both well enough known, against the Lord Collintoun, a
very ingenuous Gentleman, and a true old Cavalier, and the Lord Hirkhouse a
learned and upright judge: As for the Lord Justice General, who was also
present, and presided, his vote, according to the constitution of the Court,
was not asked, yet he is since made a Marquies, and Lord high Treasurer.

But to return to my Narrative, the Earl, as I have already told you, did not
think fit, for reasons that you shall hear, to stay till his Majesty's return
came to the Councils last Letter, but, taking his opportunity, made his escape
out of the Castle of Edinburgh, upon tuesday the twentieth of December, about
eight at night, and, in a day or two after, came his Majesty's answer here
subjoyned.

The Kings Answer to the Councils Letter
18 December: 1681. C. R.

MOst dearly etc. having, this day, received your Letter, of the 14. instant,
giving an account, that our Advocate having been ordered by you to insist in
that Process raised at our instance against the Earl of Argyle, he was, after
full debate, and clear probation, found guilty of Treason, and Leasing making,
betwixt us, our Parliament, and our people; and the reproaching our Laws and
Acts of Parliament: We have now thought fit, notwithstanding of what was
ordered by us* in our Letter to you of the 15. of November last, hereby to
authorize you to grant a warrant to our Justice General, and the remanent
Judges of our Justice Court, for proceeding to pronounce a Sentence, upon the
Verdict of the Jury, against the said Earl; nevertheless it is our express
pleasure, and we do hereby require you, to take care, that all execution of the
Sentence be stopped, until we shall think fit to declare our further pleasure
in this affair: For doing whereof, etc.


Which answer being read in Council on the thursday, and the Court of
Iustitiary, according to its last adjournment, as shall be told you, being to
meet upon the friday, after a little hesitation in Council whether the Court of
Iustitiary could proceed to the sentence of forfaulture against the Earl he
being absent, it was resolved in the affirmative; And what were the grounds
urged, either of hesitation or resolution, I cannot precisly say, there being
nothing on record that I can learn. But that you may have a full, and
satisfying account, I shall briefly tell you what was ordinarily discoursed, a
part whereof I also find in a petition given in by the Countess of Argyle to
the Lords of Justitiary, before pronouncing sentence, but without any answer or
effect. It was then commonly said, that by the old Law, and custom, the Court
of Iustitiary could no more in the case of Treason then of any other Crime
proceed further against a person not compearing, and absent, then to declare
him Outlaw, and Fugitive: And that, albeit it be singlar, in the case of
Treason that the trial may go on, even to a final sentence, tho the party be
absent, yet such trials were only proper, to and always reserved for
Parliaments: And that so it had been constantly observed until after the
Rebellion in the Year 1666: But there being several persons Notourly engaged
in that rebellion, who had escaped, and thereby withdrawn themselves from
Justice, it was thought, that the want of a Parliament, for the time, ought not
to afford them any immunity; and therefore it was resolved by the Council, with
advice of the Lords of Session, that the Court of Iustitiary should summond,
and proceed to trial, and sentence, against these absents, whether they
compeared or not, and so it was done: Only because the thing was new and indeed
an innovation of the old custom, to make all sure, in the first Parliament held
thereafter, in the Year 1669, it was thought fit to confirm these proceedings
of the Justitiary, in that point, and also to make a perpetual statut, that, in
case of open Rebellion, and Rising in arms against the King, and Government,
the Treason, in all time coming, might by an order from his Majesty's Council
be tried, and the actors proceeded against by the Lords of Iustitiary, even to
final sentence, whether the traitors compeared or not. This being then the
present Law, and custom, it is apparent in the first place that the Earl's
case, not being that of an open Rebellion and Rising in Arms, is not at all
comprehended in the Act of Parliament, So that it is without question that, if
in the beginning he had not entered himself prisoner, but absented himself, the
Lords of Iustitiary could not have gone further, then, upon a citation, to have
declared him fugitive. But others said that the Earl having both entered
himself prisoner, and compeared, and after debate having been found guilty,
before he made his escape, the case was much altered. And whether the Court
could, notwithstanding of the Earl's interveening escape, yet go on to sentence
was still debatable: for it was alleged for the affirmative that seeing the
Earl had twice compeared, and that, after debate, the Court had given judgment,
and the Assize returned their Verdict, so that nothing remained but the
pronouncing of sentence, It was absurd to think that it should be in the power
of the party, thus accused, and found guilty, by his escape to frustrate
justice, and withdraw himself from the punishment he deserved. But on the other
hand it was pleaded for the E^rl; That first, It was a fundamental rule, That
until once the cause were concluded no sentence could be pronounced: Nixt that
it was a sure Maxim in Law, that in Criminal Actions there neither is nor can
be any other conclusion of the cause then the parties presence and silence; So
that, after all that had past, the Earl had still freedom to add what he
thought fit, in his own defense, before pronouncing sentence, and therefore the
Lords of Iustitiary could no more proceed to sentence against him being escaped
then if he had been absent from the beginning, the cause being in both cases
equally not concluded, and the principle of Law uniformly the same, viz. that
in criminals (except in cases excepted) no final sentence can be given in
absence: For, as the Law, in case of absence from the beginning, does hold that
just temper as neither to suffer the contumacious to go altogether unpunished,
nor, on the other hand, finally to condemn a party unheard. And therefore does
only declare him fugitive, and there stops: So in the case of an escape, before
sentence, where it cannot be said the party was fully heard, and the cause
concluded, the Law does not distinguish, nor can the parity of reason be
refused. Admitting then that the Cause was so far advanced, against the Earl,
that he was found Guilty; Yet 1. This is but a declaring of what the Law does
as plainly presume against the party absent from the beginning, and
consequently, of it self can operate no further. 2ly. The finding of a party
Guilty is no Conclusion of the cause. And 3ly. As it was never seen, nor heard,
that a Party was condemned in absence, (except in excepted cases) whereof the
Earl's is none, so he having escaped and the Cause remaining thereby
unconcluded, the general rule did still hold, and no sentence could be given
against him,

It was also remembered that the dyets and days of the justice Court are
peremptour; and that in that case, even in Civil ^ar more in Criminal Courts
and Causes, a Citation to hear Sentence is constantly required: which induced
some to think, that at least the Earl should have been lawfully cited to hear
Sentence, before it could be pronounced. But it is like this course, as
confessing a difficulty, and occasioning too long a delay, was therefore not
made use of. However, upon the whole, it was the General Opinion, that seeing
the denouncing the Earl Fugitive would have wrought much more in Law then all
that was commonly said, at first, to be designed against him: And that his Case
did appear every way so favorable, that impartial men still wondered how it
came to be at all questioned, It had been better to have sisted the process,
with his escape, and taken the ordinary course of Law, without making any more
stretches.

But as I have told you, when the Friday came, the Lords of Iustitiary, without
any respect, or answer given to the Petition abovementioned, given in by the
Countess of Argyle to the Court for a stop, pronounced Sentence, first in the
Court, and then caused publish the same, with all solemnity, at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh.

FOr as much as it is found by an Assize That Archibald Earl of Argyle is
guilty and culpable of the crimes of Treason, Leasing-making, and
Leasing-^elling, for which he was detained within the castle of Edinburgh, out
of which he ^es now since the said Verdict made his Escape: Therefore the Lords
Commissioners of Justitiar^ decern and adjudge the said Archibald Earl of
Argyle to be execute to the death, demained as a traitor, and to underly the
pains of Treason, and other punishments appointed by the laws of this
Kingdom, when he shall be apprehended, at such a time, and place, and in such
manner as his Majesty in his Royal pleasure shall think fit to declare and
appoint: And his Name Memory and Honors, to be extinct: And his Arms to be
riven forth, and delete out of the Books of Arms, swa that his Posterity may
never have place nor be able hereafter to bruick or joyse any Honor, Offices,
Titles, or Dignities, within this Realm in time coming and to have for
faulted, ^mitted, and tint, all and sundry his Lands, Tenements, Annua-rents.
Offices, Titles Dignities, Tacks, Steedings, Rowmes, Possessiones, Goods, and
Geere what su^ever pertaining to him, to our Sovereign Lord, to remain
perpetually with his Highness in property. Which was pronounced for Doom -- 23
December 1681. After the reading (and publishing) whereof, The Earl's Coat of
Arms, by order of the Court, was also torn, and ranversed, both in the Court,
and at the Market Cross: Albeit some thought that this was rather a part of the
Execution, which his Majesty's Letter discharges, then a necessary Solemnity,
in the Publication, and the Advocate himself says. p 61. of his printed
Criminals. That it should only be practiced in the crime of Perduellion but not
in other Treasons.

The Reasons and Motives of the Earl's escape, with the Conclusion of the whole
Narrative
THE Earl's escape was at first a great surprise, both to his friends and
unfriends: for, as it is known that his Process, in the beginning, did appear,
to the less concerned, more like a piece of pageantry then any reality; and
even by the more concerned was accounted but a politik design, to take away his
Offices, and les^en his Power, and Interest: So neither did any of his Friends
fear any greater hazard, no^ did most of his unfriends imagine them to be more
apprehensive. Whereby it fell out, that upon report of his escape, many, and
some of his well-wishers, thought he had too lightly abandoned a fair Estate,
and the probable expectation he might have had of His Majesty's favor: As also
some, that were judged his greatest adversaries, did appear very angry, as if
the Earl had taken that course, on purpose to load them with the odium of a
design against his life. And truly, I am apt to think, it was not only hard and
uneasy for others to believe, that a Person of the Earl's quality, and
character, should, upon so slende^ a pretense, be destroyed, both as to life,
and fortune, but also that he himself was slow enough to receive the
impressions necessary to ripen his resolution; and that if a few Accidents, as
he says himself, happening a little before his escape, had not as it were
opened his eyes, and brought back, and presented to him several things past, in
a new light, and so made all to operate to his final determination, he had
stayed it out to the last.

Which that you may the better understand you may here consider the several
particulars, that, together with what he himself has since told some frineds,
apparently occurred to him in these his second thoughts, in their following
order.

And first you have heard, in the beginning of this Narrative, what was the
first occasion of the Earl his declining in his Highness favor: You may also
remember, that his Majesty's Advocate takes notice, that he debated against the
Act enjoining the Test, in the Parliament: And, as I have told you, he was
indeed the Person that spoke against excepting the King's Brothers, and Sons,
from the Oath then intended for securing the Protestant Religion, and the
Subjects Loyalty, not thinking it fit to complement with a Privilege where all
possible caution appears rather to be necessary: And this a reverend Bishop
told the Earl afterward had downright fired the kil^. What thereafter happened
in Parliament, and how the Earl was alwise ready to have laid all his Offices
at his Majesty's feet: And how he was content, in Council, to be held a Refuser
of the Test, and thereby incurr an entire deprivation of all publik Trust, is
above fully declared, and only here remembered, to show what Reason the Earl
had, from his first coming to Edinburgh, in the end of October, to think that
something else was intended against him then the simple devesting him of his
Employments and Jurisdictions. And yet such was his Assurance of his Innocence,
that when ordered by the Council to enter his Person in Prison under the pain
of Treason, he entered freely, in an Hakney coach, without either hesitation or
noise, as you have heard.

2ly, The same day of the Earl's commitment, the Council met, and wrote (as I
have told you) their Letter to His Majesty, above set down, Number. 22. Wherein
they expressly charge him with Reproaching, and Depraving: But yet neither with
Perjury no^ Treason; and a few days after, the Earl wrote a Letter to his
Highness; Wherein he did endeavor to remove his offense, in terms that, it
was said, at first had given satisfaction: But yet the only return the Earl had
was a criminal Summonds containing an Indictment, and that before any answer
was come from hi^ Majesty. And then, so soon as his Majesty's answer came,
there was a new Summonds sent him, with a new Indictment, adding the crimes of
Treason and ^erjury to these of Reproaching and Depraving, which were in the
first Libel, as you have heard above, whereby you may perceive, how early the
design against the Earl began to grow, and how easily it took increase, from
the least encouragment.

3ly. When the Earl petitioned the Council for Advocates to plead for him:
Albeit he petitioned twice, and upon clear Acts of Parliament, yet he had no
be^ter answer then what you have above set down. And when the Earl's Petition,
naming Sir George Lockhart as his ordinary Advocate, was read in Council, his
Highness openly threatened, that in case Sir George should undertake for the
Earl he should never more plead for the King nor Him. But the Earl taking
Instruments upon Sir George his refusal, and giving out, that he would not
answer a word at the Bar, seeing ^he benefit of Lawyers, according to Law, was
denied him; Sir George, and other lawyers, were allowed to assist him, but
still with a Grudge. Likeas afterward, they were qu^stioned and conveened
before the Council for having, at the Earl's desire, signed their positive
Opinion of the case. At which time it was also said in Council by His Highness,
That their fault was greater*then the Earl's: However we see that as he was the
occasion of the anger so he has only found the smart of it.

4ly. The whole Process, with the Judgment of the Lords of Iustitiary, an^
Verdict of the Assize, whereby the Earl was found guilty, as you have seen
(notwithstanding of what has so plainly appeared and was so strongly plea^ed
in his behalf) of Leasing-making, Depraving, and Treason, Is of it self a clear
Demonstration that either the highest punishment was intended for so high a
guilt, or that, at least, it was no small Humilation that some designed for him:
It being equally against reason, and prudence, setting aside the Interest of
Justice, to strain things of this nature beyond the ends truly purposed, and
which, in effect, are only the more to be suspected the more they are concealed.

5ly. The Process being carried on to the Verdict of the Assize, and the
Council being tied up by His Majesty's Letter, before pronouncing Sentence, to
send a particular account to his Majesty of what the Earl should be found
guilty of, for His Majesty's full information: The Council does indeed dispatch
away a new Letter immediately, for His Majesty's leave to proceed; but in stead
of that particular account required by his Majesty for his full information,
all the information was eve^ heard of to be sent by the Council was what is
contained in the body of the Letter, wherein they, briefly, bu^ positively,
affirm, That after full debate, and clear probation, he was found guilty of
Treason. Which, all men must say, was far better contrived to prompt his
Majesty to a speedy allowance then to give him that particular information of
the case which His Majesty's Letter expressly requires, and the Earl expected
should have been performed.

But further, the Council was commanded to sign this Letter, not simply in the
ordinary form, but by a special Command laid on every Member, and the Clerk
appointed to go about, and get their Subscriptions, telling them they were
Commanded, and complaining to the Duke when any scrupled to do it. The
strictness of which orders is apparent enough from the very Subscriptions,
where you may not only read the names of Bishops subscribing in causa
sanguinis, but some of the Earl's Friends and Relations who wanted courage to
refuse; And, in effect, how many of all the Members did it willingly is hard to
say, seeing generally they excuse the deed in private.

6ly. About a week or two before the Trial, the Earl had notice, that at a
closs Iuncto, where were Persons of the greatest eminency, it was remembered by
one present, how that Anno 1663. The Earl had been pardoned by his Majesty,
after he had been found guilty by the Earl of Middletoun, and that Parliament.
And that then it was looked on as an error in the Earl of Middletoun, that he
had not proceeded to Execution, albeit his Majesty had given command to the
contrary, because (as it was said) it would have been but the same thing to
him. But now, adds this Kind Remembrancer, The case is much more easy: Now His
Royal Highness is on the throne: It might have cost Earl Middletoun a frown,
but now it can signify nothing, but will rather be commended in His Royal
Highness, as acting freely like himself. The stop of the sentence looks like a
distrust, but this will vindicate all and secure all: And as the first part of
the Story the Earl remembered well he had heard it from the same Person, An:
1664, and had reported it to the Duke of Lawderdale a little after: So the
second part being of a very wellknown dialect could not but give the Earl the
deeper impressions. It was further told the Earl, at the same time when the
Councils Letter to obtain his Majesty's assent to the pronouncing Sentence, and
leaving all to discretion, was sent, that it was thought fit that nothing
should appear but fair weather till the very close. Yet was the Earl so
confident of his own innocence, and His Majesty's Justice, that he did not
doubt but his Majesty seeing the Process would, at least, put a stop to the
Sentence. But after the Councils Letter was gone, in such Terms as you have
seen, to seek Liberty from his Majesty to proceed to Sentence (without either
double, or abbreviat of the Process sent with it) and no doubt smooth
insinuations made with it that all designed was to humble the Earl, or clip his
wings: And that this Letter was hasted away by a fleeing packet to prevent the
Earl's Application, which it could not but do; and so could not but have
weight, and prevail with his Majesty, (to whom the Earl's Petition, as coming
too late, was indeed never presented) Then, and not till then, The Earl began
to have new thoughts.

7ly The Earl's Trial having been upon moonday, and twesday the 12th and 13th
of December: upon the 14th, the Councils Letter was dispatched: and upon the
15th, The Earl entreated, by a ^riend, for liberty to speak to His Royal
Highness; whose answer was, That it was not ordinary to speak to criminals,
except with Rogues on some plot, where discoveries might be expected: Yet his
Highness said, he would advise upon it. But, upon friday the 16. he did refuse
it. Yet the Earl did renew his suit, and urged, that he had sent a Petition to
his Majesty, which was the first he had sent upon that occsiaon, and that,
before the return should come, he was desirous to have his Highness answer,
that he might owe some part of the favor he expected to his Highness.

But on Moonday morning, the 19. the Earl was told, he was not like to have any
access, and, in the afternoon, he heard that the return of the Councils Express
was looked for, on thursday the 22. being the Council day. And further, That
the Justice court (which according to its custom had sat the same Moonday, and,
in course, should have adjourned till Moonday the 26 of December, or, because
of Christmas, to the first Moonday of January, was, for the Earl's sake,
adjourned till Friday the 23. to the end that immediately upon the Kings Return
they might pronounce Sentence. He was moreover informed that his Royal Highness
was heard say, that, if the express returned not timeously, he would take upon
himself what was to be done. Which being general, and dark, was the more to be
suspected. All this, the Earl told, made him the same Moonday late cast in his
thoughts whether it were not fit for him to attempt an escape; but his
doubtings were so many he could resolve nothing, that night, except to put off
till Wednesday. Yet on Twesday morning he began to think, if he did at all
design to escape, he had best do it that same evening. However he was, even
then, not fully resolved, not had he as yet spoke one word of it to any mortal.
But about ten of the Clock this Twesday, his Highness absolute refusal to
suffer the Earl to see him, until his Majesty's Return came, was confirmed:
And about Noon the Earl heard that some Troops and a Regiment of foot were come
to Town: And that, the Next day, he was to be brought down from the Castle to
the common Jail (from which Criminals are ordinarily carried to Execution) and
then he resolved to make his escape, that very night, and yet did not conclud
it thoroughly till five of the Clock in the evening: At which time he gave
directions about it, not thinking to essay it, till near ten: But at seven one
coming up from the city, and telling him that new orders were privately given
for further securing of him, that the Castle guards were doubled, and none
suffered to go out without showing their faces, and that some Ladies had been
already put to do it, and therefore dissuading him to attempt any escape,
because it was impossible: the Earl said, No, then it is full time. And so he
made haste, and within half an hour after, by Gods blessing, got safe out,
questioned pretty warmly by the first sentry, but not at all by the main guard,
and then, after the great gate was opened, and the lower guard drawn out
double, to make a lane for his company, one of the guard who opened the gate
took him by the arm, and viewed him: But it pleased God he was not discerned.
When he was out, he was not fully resolved whither to go: Home he had judged
safest: But he thought it might breed Mistakes and Trouble that he designed
not: So he resolved to go for England, and to take the road; That by Post he
might be his Majesty's first informer of his escape, But, being disappointed of
horses that he expected, he found that the notice of his escape was got before
him; And soon after, as he came the length of Newcastle, heard that his Majesty
had given way to pronounce Sentence against him, according as he had
apprehended from the circumstances and other grounds I have told you, which
made him judge, it would be an undiscreet presumption, in that state, to offer
himself to his Majesty, while he knew none durst address him, and so he rather
choosed to shift in the wide World, till his Majesty might be at some greater
freedom both to understand his case and apply suitable remedies. His Majesty's
clear and excellent understanding, and gracious and benign disposition, do
fully assure him, that his Majesty does not, in his thoughts, charge him with
the least Disloyalty, and that he has no Complacence in his ruin. But if His
Majesty do, at present, ly under the pressure ofsome unlucky influences, not so
easy to his Royal inclinations, the Earl, it seems, thinks it reasonable to
wait patiently for a better opportunity. It may indeed appear strange, that
Innocence, and Honor, oppressed in his Person, almost beyond a parallel,
should not, ere now, have constrained him to some publik Vindication:
Especially when to the horrid Sentence given against him his Adversaries have
further prevailed to cause His Majesty dispose, not only of his Heritable
Offices, and Jurisdictions (the pretended eye - sore) But also upon his whole
Estate, and Fortune, with as little consideration of the Earl's personal
Interest as if he had fallen for the blackest Treason, and most atrocious
Perduellion. But, besides that some things are of themselves so absurdly wicked
that all palliating pretenses do only render them the more hateful, and the
very simple hearing does strike with an horror, not to be hightned by any
representation: Next that the Earl, being so astonishingly overtaken for words,
as fairly and honestly uttered as he could possibly devise, does, with reason,
apprehend that there is nothing he can say in this matter, though with the
serenest mind, and in the greatest truth, and sobriety, that may not be
construed to flow from a design to lay blame where hitherto he has been tender
to give any ground of offense. I say (beside these things) he is withal (I
know) most firmly persuaded, That, if ever he shall have the happiness to be
once heard by His Majesty, and in his presence allowed to explain a few
Particulars, in duty here omitted, His Majesty's justice, and goodness will
quickly dispell all the clouds that now hang over him, and restore him to that
favor wherein he has sometime reckoned himself very happy, and which he will
ever be most ready to acknowledge. And therefore all that in the mean time he
judged necessary, or would give way to, was that for preserving the remembrance
of so odd a Transaction, until a more seasonable juncture, some Memorials
should be drawn, and deposited in sure keeping: which being grown under my hand
unto this Narrative, I thought, I could not better observe his order then by
transmitting it to your faithful custody. I have carefully there in observed
the truth, in point of fact, avouching nothing but upon the best and clearest
evidence can possibly be expected: not have I, as to the manner, licenced or
indulged my self in any severity of expression, which, I thought, could be
justly, in such a case, omitted, without betraying the Cause. Yet if you now,
or any other hereafter, shall judge, that I do sometime exceed, let it not be
imputed to him, for, as he did indeed charge me to guard against any more warm
or vehement expression then the merit and exigence of the subject do
indispensibly require, so I am assured that he silently, and patiently, waits
on the Lord, committing his way to him, and trusting in him, that he may bring
it to pass: and that he shall bring forth his righteousness as the light, and
his judgment as the noonday.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
HAving in this Narrative sometimes adduced, as you have seen, the Advocate's
own authority, ad hominem, I shall here, as I promised, subjoin such passages
out of his printed Book as, though they deserved not a place above, may yet
make a pertinent POSTSCRIPT.

And, omitting what in that Book, called The Laws and Customs of Scotland in
matters criminal he frequently repeats, from the known grounds of Law, of the
nature of crimes and the design of criminal Laws; viz. That as there can be no
crime without a fraudulent purpose, either apparent or proven; So it was the
design of Lawgivers, only to punish such acts as are designedly malicious. I
desire you only to consider the particulars following. And

1 Page (...) l. 7. of his Book of Criminals, having made the question, Whether
what tends to a crime, not perfected, does fall under the Statut, or Law, by
which that crime to which it approaches is punished: He instances in the crime
of Misconstruing His Majesty's Government, and Proceedings, or depraving his
Laws, which as he says, is punishable by death Ja. 6. Par. 10. Act 10. And
then further moves, Whether papers, as tending to misconstrue His Majesty's
proceedings, and Government, or bearing insinuations which may raise in the
people jealousy against the Government, be punished by that Law. Which being
one of the great crimes pretended and libelled against the Earl, I shall here
(omitting his reasons in the affirmative, which have not the least ground in
the Earl's case, as you have heard) represent to you how exactly he himself,
and others, have acted, for the Earl's overthrow, all these dangerous, and
pernicious things, from which he argues in the negative. His words then are
these.

And that such insinuations, and tendencies are not punished criminally, he
says. 1. It is the interest of mankind to know expressly what they are to obey,
especially where such great certifications are annexed as in crimes. 2. The
Law, having taken under its consideration this guilt, hes punished the actual
misconstruing, or depraving; but hes not declared such insinuations or
tendencies punishable: Et in statutis casus omissus habetur pro omisso. 3. This
would infallibly tend to render all judges arbitrary; for tendencies and
insinuations are in effect the product of conjecture, and papers may seem
innocent, or criminal, according to the zeal, or humor, as well as malice of
judges; men being naturally prone to differ in such consequentiall inferences,
and too apt to make constructions in such, according to the favor or malice
they bear to the Person or Cause: Are not some men apt to construct that to
tend to their dishonor which was designed for their honor; and to think every
thing an innovation of Law or Privilege which checks their inclination and
design? Whereas some judges are so violent in their Loyalty as to imagine the
meanest mistaks do tend to an opposition against Authority; and thus Zeal,
Jealousy, Malice, or Interest would become judges. 4. Men are so silly, or may
be in such haste, or so confounded, (and the best are subject to such mistakes)
as that no man could know when he were innocent; simplicity might often times
become a crime, and the fear of offending might occasion offense, and how
uncomfortably would the people live, if they knew not how to be innocent.

2ly. p: 47 l 9. Of the same Book, he says, That the 8th Point of Treason is
to impugn the dignity, and Authority of the three Estates; or to seek, and
procure the innovat on and diminution of their Power, and Authority. Act 103.
Ja. 6. p. 6. Now this being another of the crimes charged upon the Earl, hear
how the Advocate there understands it. But this (he adds immediately) is to be
understood of a (N. B.) direct impugning of their Authority; as if it were
contended, that Parliaments were not necessary, or that one of the three
Estates might be turned out. Which how vastly different from his indirect,
forced, and horrible inferences, in the Earl's case, is plain and obvious.

3ly, ibid. p. 58. l. 2. After having said, That, according to former Laws, no
sort of Treason was to be persued in absence before the Justices; And urging it
to be reasonable, he adds, Nor is it imaginable but if it had been safe it had
been granted formerly. And l. 31. he says, The Justices are never allowed,
even by the late Act of Parliament, to proceed to sentence against absents, but
such as are persued for Rising in Arms against the King The true reason
whereof, he tells us, is that the Law is not so inhumane as to punish equally
presumed and real guilt: And that it has been often found, that men have
absented themselves rather out of fear of a prevailing Faction, or currupt
witnesses etc. then out of consciousness of guilt: Reasons which albeit neither
true nor just, (seeing that the Law punishes nothing, even in case of absence,
but either manifest contumacie, or crimes fully proven: And that the only
reason why it allows no other crime save Perduellion to be proceeded against
in absence is because it judges no other crime tanti) yet you see how this
whole passage quadrats with the Earl's case; Who being neither persued for
perduellion, nor present at giving sentence, was yet sentenced in absence, as a
most desperate traitor.

4ly. ibid: p. 60. l. 24. Speaking of the Solemnities used in Parliament, at
the pronouncing sentences for Treason; viz. That the Panel receives his
sentence kneeling: and that after the doom of for faulture pronounced against
him, the Lion, and his Brethren the Heralds, in their formalities come and
tear his Coat of arms at the Throne; and thereafter hang up his Eschucheon
ranversed upon the market Cross: he adds, But this, I think, should only hold,
in the crime of Perduellion, and then goes on to add. That the children of the
delinquent are declared incapable to bruik any Office or Estate is another
Speciality introduced in the punishment of Perduellion only. And yet both these
terrible Solemnities were practiced against the Earl, even by a Court of
Iustitiary, and not in Parliament: albeit he was not accused of Perduellion,
nor be indeed more guilty of any crime then all the world sees.

5ly ibid: page 303 l. ult, he says, That verbal injuries are these that are
committed by unwarrantable expressions, as to call a man a Cheat, a woman
whore: But because expressions may vary, according to the intention of the
speaker; therefore except the words can allow of no good sense, as whore or
thief, or that there be strong presumptions against the speaker, the injuriandi
animus, or design of injuring, as well as the injuring words, must be proven:
and the speaker will be allowed to purge his guilt by declaring his intention;
and his declaration, without an Oath, will be sufficient. 2ly. The persuer
should libell the design, and prove it, except the words clearly infer it.
3ly. The persuer is presently to resent the injury, and if, at first, the
words be taken for no injury they cannot afterward become such. Which things,
being applied to the Earl's words, do evident I, say: That unless his words
could allow of no good sense, or that there were strong presumptions against
him, or that he could not purge his guilt, by declaring his intention, or that
his words did clearly infer the guilt, there could be no crime of Slandering
Reproaching or Depraving, charged against him, except the injuriandi animus, as
well as the words, had been both libelled, and proven. But so it is that his
words do manifestly a low of a good sense, that there is not the least
presumption of injury can be alleged against him; That he did most plainly
purge himself of all suspicion of guilt, by declaring his sound and upright
intention; And that his words do not infer, either clearly, or unclearly, the
smallest measure of guilt; And withal neither was the injuriandi animus at all
proven; But on the contrary, the words at first were taken for no injury; so
that they could not afterward become such, As is above fully cleared: Ergo,
even the Advocate being judge, the Earl is no Slanderer.

6ly. If it were necessary, I could further tell you several things that he
alleges to be sufficient for purging a man of any criminal intention: As,
where he says, ibid. p. 563. l. 2. That, in matters of fact, persons, even
judicious, following the Faith of such as understand, are to be excused. And l.
30. That, if it appear by the meanness of the crime (he should say the smalness
of the deed: And what can be less then the uttering of a few words in the
manner that the Earl spoke them?) That there was no design of transgression;
And that the committer designed not, for so small a matter to committ a crime
(much less such horrid ones as Depraving and Treason) In that case, the
meanness of the transgression (or deed) ought to defend against the relevancy
etc. But to give you one instance for all, how much the Advocate may, one day
or other, be oblidged to plead the innocence of his intentions, to free himself
of words downright in themselves slanderous and depraving an act of Parliament;
much better nor he understands it, and in fresh, and constant observance. Ibid.
p: 139, toward the middle, speaking of the 151. Act. Ja. 6. P. 12. Whereby it
is statut: That seeing diverse exceptions, and objections riles upon criminal
libells, and parties are frustrate of Justice by the alleged irrelevancy
thereof. That in time coming all criminal libells shall contain, that the
persons complained on are Art and Part of the crimes libelled; which shall be
relevant to accuse them thereof: swa that no exception, or objection take away
that part of the libell in time coming. He says, That he finds no Act of
Parliament more unreasonable, For the statutory part of that Act, committing
the trial of Art and Part to Assizers, seems most unjust: Seeing in
committing the greatest questions of the Law to the most ignorant of the
Subjects, it puts a sharp sword in the hands of blind men. And the reason of
this Act* specified in the Narrative is likewise most inept, and no ways
illative etc. What reproaches! What Blasp hemies! The Earl said not one word
against any Act of Parliament: But on the contrary, that he was confident the
Parliament intended no contradiction, and that he was willing to take the Test
in the Parliaments sense. But here the Ad^ocate both says and prints it, That
an Act of Parliament is most unreasonable and most unjust, and its reason most
inept, and that it puts a sharp sword in the hands of blind men Whereof the
smallest branch is infinitely more reproachful then all can be strained out of
the Earl's words. But Sir, Speculation is but Speculation and if the Advocate
when his day comes, be as able to purge himself of practical depravations as I
am inclined to excuse all his visionarie lapses, notwithstanding of the famous
Title Quod quisque juris in alt^r^m statuerit utipse eodem jure utatur, he
shall never be the worse of my censure.

FINIS.
APPENDIX In Answer to a late Pamphlet called, A Vindication of His Majesty's
Government, and Judicatories, in Scotland, -- Especially with a Relation to the
late Earl of Argyl's Process, In so far as concerns the said Process.
IT now remains that we consider the forementioned Paper called a Vindication
etc., And though the account you have had in the Narrative may abundantly
satisfy all rational men as to any thing contained in this Vindication, in
relation to the Earl's process (my only concern) yet because the Writer of it
has taken liberty to vent many falsehoods, known to be such to himself, and the
whole Kingdom; and that in such a positive, presuming Style, as, with his
insinuat character, seems to be purposely designed to impose upon strangers,
and lead them from the Mist he pretends to discuss into gross Darkness; I shall
here, without giving you the trouble of letter upon letter, transcribe shortly
what my friend, who sent me the Narrative, has since given me the occasion to
remark upon this Vindication, in so far as it refers to it; without digressing
to other things, which no doubt others, more concerned, and better qualified,
will not fail to examine.

And, after having first wisely projected to disarm all his opponents, by
robbing them of the liberty of the press; that himself may use it, without
control, and spread his informations, and vindications without reply, as
Diurnals writ for Regulation
Of Lying to enform the Nation.


And, in the nixt place, chaffed himself by some rambling reflections on past
controversies (which yet, for all the boast he makes of the present blessed
composure of affairs in Scotland, if he and his associats still persist to
treat them after their manner, will, I fear, never finally end, until they be
reacted, and all former errors for ever corrected) He comes to notice the
Earl's Process, and a pamphlet called, the Scotch mist, that takes pains, as he
says, to make it appear an unanswerable instance of the arbitraryness of
Scotch Judges. Where having prefaced just as much in their vindication as may
be said for all the Judges of the world, whereof yet we know that thousands are
ignorant, corrupt, and violent: And nixt told us, very discreetly, that Earl
Strafford was murdered by King, Lords, and Commons, because forsooth that they
following the known rule of the civil Law, Si quam paenam Princeps irrogavit
nec ad exemplum trahitur, nec per sonam transgreditur, made an Act, That none
should die by that preparative; with some other stories of the like nature,
backed with a few fables of his own invention. For clearing matter of Fact he
says, first, That the Earl of Argyl's learned Judges were not a pack't
Commission, but the ordinary judges of the Nation. But what then, if this
lessen their tentation, does it not rather aggravat their injustice? But 2ly.
Not to trouble you with the just and true characters of some of them (which to
persons unacquainted might possibly appear a libel) is it not well known, that,
at the first, and until sufficient assurances of the bench were obtained,
there was a resolution to have given, or pack't (as our Author speaks)
Assessors with them? 3ly. Were they not all Judges of the late edition, to wit,
no more advitam, or culpam, as of old, but durante beneplacito? And 4ly. Are
not such as were most forward, and active, in the Earl's comdemnation,
proportionally rewarded? And as for the Earl's Jurors or Assizers, you have
heard a full account of them, in the Narrative.

2ly. Our Author tells us, That the King, and his Ministers were under no
tentation, against the Earl: That there was no design against his life: That
His Royal Highness, albeit informed of an escape intended, yet gave express
order not to keep him strictly, even after he was found guilty; As also His
Highness ordered, that Advocates should be pressed to appear for him: And in fine
that the Earl was very discreetly, and respectfully used.

And. 1. As to His Majesty, He is indeed most freely assoiled of all, either
inclination or tentation in this matter, except that of importunity. But 2ly.
For His Ministers the contrivers, and actors, their tentations may be guessed
at, by what is said in the Narrative: And if they also had none, it only says
that they run without driving, and are the less excusable. 3ly. How forward
His Highness and the Council were to press Advocates, in the Earl's cause, and
to grant his Petitions, though founded on clear Acts of Parliament; how false
it is that his Royal Highness had any information of the Earl's intention to
escape, and notwithstanding ordered that he should not be strictly keept; and
whether or not there was a design to take the Earl's life; you have already
(and I hope plainly and satisfyingly) seen in the Narrative: But pray remark
the solly of this self-condemned reasoning. For. 1. If the Earl was truly
guilty of these worst of crimes, Leasing-making, Depraving, and Treason, why
should he not have died? And if he was not guilty, what wickedness was it to
give Sentence against both his Life and Fortune, and since, by disposing on his
whole estate, to execut it as far as possible? And 2ly. Is it not a pleasant
conceit to imprison, arraign for Treason, and find guilty, and crave leave to
Sentence, a Person of the Earl's quality; And then to take away all his Estate;
and yet to tell the world, there was no design against his Life? Solomon says,
As a Mad man, who casts firebrands, arrows, and death, so is the man that
deceives (much more condemns) his nighbour, and says, am not I in sport?
And Machiavel (whose Politiks, may be, with some are in more request then
Solomon's Proverbs) taxes it as no less impolitik to take away a man's Estate,
and yet spare his Life. And yet notwithstanding ou^ wiser, and more politik
Author will have us to believe neither. But 4ly. Yet the Earl was very
respectfully used. And this must go far from such hands: And was he not indeed
so, when he was. 1. Summarly imprisoned, without Bale, or Mainprise? 2ly.
Arraigned before the Justice-Court, and not reserved to the Parliament, as is
usual for Persons of his rank, especially the Parliament being then current,
and its next Session near approaching? 3ly. Refused access to, or opportunity
to speak with His Royal Highness, though it was often and much desired? And
4^ly. When by the Sentence his Blood was tainted, his Posterity disabled, and
his Escucheon and Arms thereafter torn, and ranversed, as if he had been the
worst of traitors? I grant, it was observed, that the debate in the Process was
managed, on both hands, with a more then ordinary coolness: but as something
must be imputed, on the one part, to His Majesty's Advocat's secret conviction
of these strange impertinencies whereunto the discharge of his Office obliged
him, and on the other hand, to the Earl's Advocates their persuasion, that his
words were so innocent that hardly any thing could be said that was not equally
criminal; so it is certain that the main cause was, that both the one and the
other knew that the design was laid, and the issue inevitable.

Thirdly. This Vindicator says, That the Earl's Jurisdictions and Estate could
be no tentation; for the late Advocate had given such reasons against his Right
to these Jurisdictions and Superiorities as could not be answered; and that the
King got nothing; for his Royal Highness procured more of it to his children
then belonged to the Family, debts being paid: And the remainder was given
among the Creditors, and the tithes returned to the Church.

But. I. Our Author goes on still to disown tentations, which can signify
nothing, save to confirm more and more that the Earl was overthrown and ruined
by pure Mal^ce. For if there was no tentation, either against his Person, or
Estate, and yet notwithstanding of his innocence (which all men see) the former
be subjected to a Sentence of death, and the later quite taken from him, must
not this strange severity proceed from a very extraordinary good Nature? 2ly.
Our Author disowns any design against the Earl's life: But affirms, That there
are reasons unanswerable against his Jurisdictions, and Estate. And yet instead
of making use of these reasons civily, to take away his Jurisdictions, and
Estate, his life is criminally, and principally persued. How are these things
consistent? But that which is crooked cannot be made straight. 3ly. It is false
that ever the late Advocate, or any other, represented any reasons, far less
unanswerable ones, against the Earl's Rights, either to his Estate* or
Superiorities. And the whole truth in this matter is that he did indeed offer
some reasons to the Exchequer, against the Earl's Right to his Jurisdictions,
but which, at the same time, were so evidently refelled, by showing, that the
Earl's Rights were long anterior, and no way touched by all the Acts of
Parliament whereon he founded, that His Majesty, after full information, did,
first by his Letter (a copy whereof ye will find subjoyned) expressly order the
passing, and confirming of the Earl's Rights; and then give a special
Instruction unto his Commissioner, to ratify it, in plene Parliament, which was
also done. And what the present Advocate did, in the last Parliament, and how
it succeeded, with what else may be needful for clearing of this point, you
have already in the Narrative. 4ly. Our Author, first, confounds the Earl's
Estate and his Superiorities, as if one and the same thing: Whereas a man's
Estate includs also his Property. But the Second mistake, and the greater cheat
is, because the word Superiority sounds more of power then the word Property
does, therefore the Earl's enemies do in his case constantly join his
Jurisdictions, and Superiorities, as if both of the same nature, and equally
amissable, for not taking the Test, or any the like cause. And hereby have they
so far impressed His Majesty as to cause him also speak at the same rate:
Whereas it is an uncontestable truth, that a Superiority in its Right, and as
to the person that enjoyes it, is plainly Property, and is only called
Superiority because the Owner by granting, according to the use of the Feudal
Law, a Subaltern Right to a Vassal, holding, or releving of himself, for
certain Services, or for a Quit-rent, thereby becomes his Vassal's Superior; a
practice plainly authorized, and much* recommended by old Acts of Parliament,
as the best advancement of Policy. Which things are not said, as if the Earl
had not as good a Right to his Jurisdictions as to his Superiorities; Seeing he
is fully secured in both, by the Laws of the land; but Jurisdictions being of
their own nature subject to many Laws and regulations that nowise concern
Superiorities, or Property, and the Earl's Superiorities being in effect a
considerable part of his Estate, it is very much his interest that they be
distinguished, to prevent his adversaries imposings. But 5ly. That you may the
better discover their designs against the Earl: Here, you see, the world is
told, that he hes no right to his Jurisdictions, and Superiorities: But, in the
Gift that they have lately moved His Majesty to grant of the Earl's
forfaulture, they make His Majesty's deed to proceed upon quite different
reasons, in these terms viz, That His Majesty, in the first place, wills, and
declares, that all the Earl's Iurisaictions, Offices, Superiorities, etc. Shall
for ever be consolidat, and remain with the Croun, as being necessary for the
support of his Government, and too dangerous for him, and his people, to be,
heritably, in the hand of any of his subjects; and his Majesty never having
designed to dispon the same.

Which considerations, though they might be of some moment in the case of a
just forfaulture, yet in the Earl's case, wherein it is known that before his
trial they were the main reasons pretended to work his overthrow, by this
sham-Treason, they can nowise be regarded, because it is most certain, 1. That
the Earl's Superiorities do no more concern the Crown, and Government, then his
Property; and that by the same reasoning, or rather Ostracism, any man's
Estate, whether Superiority, or Property, as men may fancy them to exceed
their arbitrary measures, may be taken from him, on as good pretexts. 2ly. That
the reasons assigned do so little militate against the Earl's Jurisdictions
that these Jurisdictions were expressly given to his Predecessors, and made
heritable in his Family, for eminent Services peformed to the Crown, and upon
convincing experience that they could not be better disposed on, for the
support of his Majesty's Government, and protection of his people, especially
against the savage Islanders, and their partakers: However some, because of
their Popery, and Barbarity, think fit at present to patronize them. 3ly. With
what color can these things be alleged for consolidating with the Crown the
Earl's Jurisdictions, and Superiorities, When we see Jurisdictions, and
Superiorities, as considerable, that were taken from his Family, by his
Father's forfaulture (whereof you have a just account in the Narrative)
conferred upon the Marquess of Huntly; and new Regalities, and Jurisdictions,
of as great import, bestowed upon the Marquess of Queensberry, and others,
against most express Acts of Parliament. But 4ly. The Truth and ingenuity of
all this procedure may be best judged by the last allegiance, wherein they
cause His Majesty affirm, under his great Seal* That he never designed to
dispon these Superiorities and Jurisdictions to the Earl: Albeit as to the
Superiorities his Majesty never scrupled, and as to the Jurisdictions he did
not only actually dispon them, but after being fully informed of all the
objections could be moved in the contrary he did expressly own, ratify, and
confirm the deed, first by his Letter, hereafter set down, then by his special
Instruction to his Commissioner, and 3ly. by his solemn Ratification in
Parliament.

But suppose the Earl be unjustly spoiled ofall his fortune, yet, says our
Author, the King, by the generous interposition of his Royal Highness (for, if
you will believe this Loyal Vindicator, it is still His Highness Clemency that
mitigats His Majesty's rigours) has administrat very honestly, getting nothing
to himself (for as to the Earl's Jurisdictions and Superiorities, though they
were just now of that value as to be necessary to the King, for the support of
the Government, and dangerous in the Earl's person to both King and people, yet
here they are accounted less then nothing) but giving more of it to his
Children then belonged to the Family (debts being paid) and the rest to the
Creditors, and the tithes to the Church. A short specious account of a world of
iniquity! for though the Earl be fully persuaded that his Majesty neither
desires any thing of his Estate, nor expects any advantage by the destruction
of his Family: yet is it not, in the first place, hard above measure, that the
Earl should be in the same manner deprived, and divested of all, without the
least consideration of his Person, as if he had been sentenced for the most
heinous Perduellion? 2ly. Notwithstanding all here said, and though it was once
given out that the Earl's eldest Son should have a considerable addition to
what he presently enjoyes and that the rest of the Children should get their
just Provisions, yet the eldest is still left liable to the provisions of his
Brothers and Sisters, and to several of his Father's debts, without any
releef; and has not yet got one farthing, either in money or security, more
then the setlement made upon him by the Earl at his marriage, wherein he was,
and is, in Law secured, beyond the reach of any forfaulture could fall upon his
Father. And for the rest of the Children, not only have they got no sufficient
security, but some small Payments, appointed them by his Majesty, are said to be
restrained unless the Earl's Rights be delivered up: A thing altogether
unusual, and which argues in the Demanders a manifest diffidence of the Right
of forfaulture, and were both inhumane, and is impossible for the Children to
do. 3ly. Waving the false, and invidious insinuation here made of the Earl's
debts, take this brief account of the condition whereunto, at present, his
Estate and Creditors are reduced. When His Majesty returned, the late Marquess
of Argyle (as you may read in the Narrative) had undertaken, and stood engaged
for debts of the House of Huntly, amounting to 35000l Sterling: Yet upon Argyle's
forfaulture the Marquess of Huntly's Estate, extending to 4000l Ster: yearly
Rent, whereof Argyle was legally possessed, for his releef, was taken from
Argyle, and given to Huntly, without any burden, and all that debt left on the
Family of Argyle. Thereafter his Majesty thought fit to restore this Earl of
Argyle to a part of his Father's old Estate, and to appoint the rest of it for
payment of Creditors, in the order then prescribed; whereupon the Earl,
agreeing with as many of the Creditors as according to His Majesty's assignment
acclaimed the remainder, he was settled in what he possesses, with a
considerable burden. And thus his Right was then established, though with the
heavy prejudice of a great many other Creditors, who being truly Creditors of
the House of Huntly became only Creditors to the late Marquess of Argyle, in
the manner you have heard, and by the abovementioned Restitution of the
Marquess of Huntly were miserably cut off: But upon the Earl's present
disaster, what neither material justice nor the merit of the Persons could
obtain, against the House of Huntly, is now by importunity procured, against
the Earl of Argyle, for the more effectual ruin of his Family and Friends, and
these old Creditors of Huntly, who were no original Creditors of Argyle,
brought in upon Argyl's Estate, to the exclusion of his proper Creditors. And
further, least the real Securities, by Morgages, and otherwise, that some of
the Earl's Creditors have, should avail them, these are also made void, by the
Act of Quinquennial Possession, and the other Rigours of forfaultures, only
accustomed to be practiced (and yet not without some mitigation) in the case of
atrocious, and open Rebellion against the King and Kingdom. And besides all
this, his Majesty has been also moved to give away considerable Superiorities,
and Lands, pertaining to the Earl, to several Persons, having no other
pretension, or merit, saving an unreasonable enmity against the Family of
Argyle. By all which it is evident, that, besides the horrible usage the Earl
met with, in his Trial, and Sentence, not only is He himself wholly neglected,
and his Children little regarded, in this late disposal of his Estate, but his
proper Creditors and Friends are also prejudged, and postponed: And in effect
his whole Estate, fair and opulent enough to have paid all his debts honestly,
provided his Children competently, and sustained the dignity of his Rank
honorably, cutted and carved on, before his eyes, at pleasure, and much of it
parcelled out, and bestowed upon the worst of his neighbors, and his greatest
enemies.

But to make a mends for all, our Author says, The Tiends are returned to the
Church. But seeing the Earl possessed all his tithes, by good and lawful
purchases, and undoubted rights from the Church, whereof the Church neither
did, nor could complain, our Author should have remembered, that The Lord loves
Judgment, and hates Robbery for burnt offering.

Yet, in all this, the Earl does not intertain one hard thought of His Majesty,
knowing certainly that notwithstanding all was prepared for him by his learned
Judges and wife Councillors, Yet he has not stepped one step, in this affair,
but by importunity; even tho all access to represent any thing to him, on the
Earl's behalf, was waylaid. Nor did his Majesty yield to pass the late
Signature disposing of the Earl's Estate (albeit the Earl of Middletoun was
sent express about it) until his Royal Highness arrived from Scotland at
Newmarket, and prevailed.

As for the three capital Sentences, against the Earl's Family, which our
Author mentions, you have a full account of them in the Narrative.

What return shall we then make to our Author's Euge, for a happy Kingdom, but,
O unhappy happy Kingdom! Wherein the fairest words are made the foulest
offense, and the smallest offense punished as the greatest Treason, where
dreams and visions are exhibited for Indictments, and Judges, and Jurors find
them to be Realities, where Right is turned to precarious Gift, and then taken,
and retaken, at pleasure: And yet all these things gloried in as the greatest
marks of its felicity: And, in a word, whose misery is lamented by all, except
a few that enrich themselves with its spoils, and triumph in its Ruins?

Our Author comes, in the next place, to give an account, in what manner the
Earl gave in his Explanation, and took the Test: Where denying and affirming
many things, at random, which are all distinctly set down, and cleared in the
Narrative, I shall here only briefly remark his own (as he pretends to do other
men's) Mistakes. And first, albeit the Earl was not publikly desired to take the
Test, yet it is most true, that, in private, his Royal Highness did much press
him to it: and, after a meeting of Council had been designedly appointed for
the Earl's taking or resussing, his Highness did peremptorily oblidge him to
attend the next Council-day in course, and plainly refused to give him leave to
withdraw, and take the benefit of the two months longer time, allowed by the
Act of Parliament. 2ly. It is false, That the Earl had assured both his Royal
Highness and many others that he would not take the Test; that he came in
abruptly to the Council; that he spoke with so slow (or soft) a voice that none
say they heard him, that he clapped down on his knees, and took the Test. When
as. 3ly. It is certain, That what passed betwixt his Royal Highness, and the
Earl, about the Test, is faithfully setdown in the Narrative, and the Earl was
not more positive with any other on that subject: That it was with difficulty
that the Earl got his appearance before the Council delayed until the day he
presented hemself: And that that day he was expected, and also spoke to, and
treated with by several Counselors, before he entered, about the swearing with
an Explication: That being entered, and a stool set to him, to kneel upon, he
first gave in, or (which is more) declared openly, and, word by word, directed
toward his Royal Highness the Sense and Explanation wherein he was content to
swear: That his Highness heard it, and told the Earl so much, the next morning:
That the Clerks heard it, and repeated it to several persons, and one of them
in his Witnessing against the Earl expressly swears that he heard it, and saw it
accepted: That some that sat remotest in the Council both heard and repeated
the Earl's words: That, after the Earl had pronounced them, the Oath was
administrat to, and sworn by him; Which was the most proper, natural, and
direct Acceptance that could be desired: So that, after this business was thus
publikly transacted, for our Author to say, either that the Earl spoke softly,
or that he (specially being himself a Privy Counselor) should first have
given in his Sense, and petitioned to know if it was acceptable, is a silly
pretense. But 4ly. Our Author, not only contrary to truth, but, which is more
remarkable, in contradiction even to his Majesty's Advocate, and the Records of
the Court, proceeds to affirm. 1. That the Earl dispersed copies of his
Explanation, albeit his Majesty's Advocate, having libelled the same thing, was
necessitat to pass from it, because absolutely false, and destitute of all
evidence. And next, That his Majesty's Advocate having allowed the Earl to
prove, That the Council heard and approved it, yet he failed in the probation.
Whereas it is manifest from the Process, that the Earl, having alleged, for a
defense against the crimes of Leasing - making, Depraving, and Treason, That
the Council had accepted his Explanation, in manner above* declared, and that
therefore it could not be made a ground to infer any of these crimes against
him: The Lords by their Judgment Interloquutour did expressly repel this
defense; And all they sustained was a defense proponed to elude the Perjury, to
wit. That the Earl emitted his Explanation at, or before, his taking of the
Test: Which emitting, as it plainly differs from the point of Acceptance, so
was the proving of it justly neglected by the Earl, because the Emission
notour, and the charge of Perjury ridiculous; as you have it more fully in the
Narrative.

But these things our Author wilfully mistakes, that he may the more easily
abuse strangers. As for what our Author here adds, That the Earl's Explanation
made the Oath no Oath, and the Test no Test, and would have evacuated the whole
Act, as, he says, he will prove, shall be noticed, when he comes to his
proofs: Only where he says, The greatest Fanatiks in Scotland owned they would
take the Test in the Earl's Sense, without prejudice to their Principles; It is
a groundless assertion, and by all of them utterly denied. He says, The Mist
puts a strange abuse upon the world, as if the scruples that he sets down were
only the scruples of the conformed Clergy, whereas many Papers, bearing that
title, were drawn by the Presbyterians. But seeing the Paper that the Mist sets
down was certainly emitted by one of the conformed Clergy, and does fully
homologat with the Rest above-insert in the Narrative (which without doubt are
all of their fabrik) the pretended abuse is altogether groundless.

But now our Author comes to make good the Earl's Indictment, in point of Law:
And though here we find nothing new, or repeated with any advantage, and though
all* be already fully answered, in the Narrative, yet, lest he complain of
neglect, I shall run over what he alleges, as briefly as I can. And having set
down the words of the Earl's Explanation, The first Crime, says he, charged
upon the Earl, from this Paper, is that, albeit it be statut, That no man
interpret the King's Statuts otherways then they bear, and to the intent and
effect they were made for: And that the King, and Parliament did appoint the
Test to be taken for securing the Protestant Religion, and the King's
Prerogative, without any evasion: Yet, notwithstanding thereof, the Earl did
take the Oath, in such a sense as did not only evacuate his own taking but
learn others how to do the like, and evacuate all Acts of the same nature that
can be made. But seeing that in matter of crimes Statuts are certainly designed
for Beacons, Landmarks, and the most clear distinctive Directions that could
be invented, as well to hinder men from transgressing as to guard them against
the Pains, and therefore are to be understood in the most obvious signification
that the words do bear, Is it not an odd stretch for our Author to think that a
man's taking of an Oath, enjoined by a Statut, in any sense, whether true or
false, pertinent or impertinent, if simply offered by him, for expeding of his
own Conscience, should be looked upon as an interpreting or misinterpreting of
the Statute, which oftentimes happens to be but to clear, when the Oath is
confessedly ambiguous?

Thus, as to the sense and meaning of the Act in hand, viz. That all men,
therein comprehended, should take the Test, in manner, and under the
certification therein contained, the Earl never had the least hesitation about
it. All his difficulty was to clear himself and his own Oath, as to the
ambiguities acknowledged even by the Council to be in the Test, (though not in
the Act) and this he does, by referring explicitly to the Parliaments sense,
and design, as it stands expressed in the Act, without ranversing either the
words of the Test or meaning of the Act, as an other approven Explication does:
How is it then possible, that for this he should be thought concerned in this
Statute, as a Misinterpreter? And is it not, on the other hand, very evident,
that both the Advocate, and our Author, and their Associats, in wresting this
Statute (which seems principally to have been made against the misinterpreting
and wresting of Laws in Judgment) to so remote and extraneous a case, are
themselves the only Misinterpreters, and Transgressors?

But waving the connection let us hear how our Author proves the subsumption,
viz. That the Earl did take the Test in such a sense as did evacuate his own,
and teach others to do the like, and evacuate all other Acts of that nature:
And (to repeat as little as possible) he says, That the design of Laws, and
Oaths, is to procure a certainty of obedience, and performance, but the Earl's
qualified Oath everts this design. Wonderful! The Test is in it self granted
to be ambiguous, and reaches not this design. The Earl, that he may deal more
clearly with God and the Government, declares explicitly a plain and certain
sense, wherein he is willing to take it; and the Council, who might, and ought
to have rejected it, if not satisfieing, do accept of it. And yet hereupon he
is immediately by them staged as an Everter, Depraver, and Traitor. And
wherefore? Because forsooth the Earl promises only to obey the Act as far as he
can. (A most absurd and ridiculous pretense) And tells us not in what he will
obey. Which (albeit no crime though true) is yet a great falsehood: For the Earl
immediately subjoins a very certain and congruous sense, in which he is willing
to take the Test, all the obedience here in controversy.

2ly. Because the Earl says that no body can explain it but for himself, and
reconcile it as it is geuuine etc. which, (adds our Author) implies that it had
no plain genuine sense. But though the Council did explain this Oath, and in so
far grant that it had no plain genuine sense (for what is already plain without
doubt needs no Explanation) yet the Earl goes not so far: But all he meant was,
that, in the midst of so many Objections made against the Test, he could only
clear it for himself: Which also he does most safely and soundly, in referring
to its self-consistency, and the Parliaments sense, and scope, the best Rules
of interpretation.

3ly. Because the Parliament designed the Test as a security for the Protestant
Religion. But, says our Author, The Earl, by saying He did only take it in as
far as it is consistent with itself, and with the Protestant Religion, implies
that in some things it is not consistent. But, 1. Implications, which may be so
easily strained, and oftentimes are found to be as the Fool thinks, are
terrible grounds of Crimes. 2ly. If the Parliament designed the Test as a
security for the Protestant Religion, and the Earl did take it, in so far as it
is consistent with the same Protestant Religion, what can be more agreeable?
And 3ly. It was neither the Earl's words, nor intention, that the Parliament
had framed a Test in some things not consistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion, but the true sense of his words was, and is, That however
many did allege both yet he took it in as far as it was consistent, which he
was sure (as our Author says) was the Parliaments purpose.

4ly. Because the design of this Oath being to preclude the Takers from
reserving a liberty to rise in arms, upon any pretext whatsoever: The Earl
(says our Author) by his Explication, reserves to himself a power to make any
alterations that he shall think for the advantage of Church and State. But, not
to stay you here with what you have so fully cleared in the Narrative, Dare any
man (even our Author not excepted) say, That he who reserves a liberty to
himself, in his station, and in a lawful way, to wish and endeavor, any
alteration, he thinks, to the advantage of Church and State, not repugnant to
the Protestant Religion, and his Loyalty (which are the Earl's words) eo ipso,
reserves to himself a liberty to rise in arms upon any pretext whatsoever?
Certainly to assert this, (as our Author here does) is not only to deny common
sense, but desperately to affirm, That to rise in arms, upon any pretense
whatsoever, is a lavvful thing, advantageous to Church and State, and agreeable
both to Religion, and Loyalty; The most traitorous and irreligious Position
that can be devised; and which, one day or other, our Author may be more
straightened to answer then at present he is to maintain the gros^est absurdities.

Now whether by all these fine Remarks our Author hes concluded, as he
alleges, that the Earl hes interpret his Oath otherwise then it bears
(although this be also a wide, and weak impertinency, as to the inferring of
any crime) let the world judge.

But. 2ly. Says our Author. If the Earl's glossing were allowable then there
were no need to propose doubts in Parliament, but Oaths might be left to be
formed at the Takers pleasure. But. 1. Is not this consequence far more clearly
deducible from the Councils emitting their Explanation? 2ly. What sense or
nonsense could induce our Author to dream, that because Inadvertency may
necessarily occasion Explications, therefore men should be still Inadvertent?
Our Author desires to know, from any man of sense, if the Earl would have
obtained, from the Parliament, at the passing of the Test, That everyman should
be allowed to take it, as far as it was consistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion, and with the Earl's other Qualifications? And (if I, in
this contest, may pretend to this quality) I would answer him roundly. That
albeit, I think, hardly any man of sense could make a proposition, in their
terms, to that sovereign Court, that had full power to change the Test, at
their pleasure; Yet I am very confident, that had any man suggested the half of
the objections that have since been started against it, they would very readyly
have endeavored to obviat all reasonable exceptions of Inconsistency; though
neither by our Author's wise Expedient, nor yet by reserring them to the
Councils just and accurate Explanation. And for the other Qualifications in the
Earl's words, I am most assured, and have his Highness for my Voucher, that had
the Parliament been ask't, Whether or not the Test did bind up a man, in a
lawful way, and in his station etc? They would have answered, Not, and that
therefore, though they might have judged the Reservation not necessary, yet,
for the greater ease of conscience, they would never have stuck to allow any
honest man, in swearing, to express it or not, at his pleasure.

3ly, Our Author asks, If a man should by Oath oblige himself simply to make me
a Right to Lands. could this sense be consistent with it, I Will make it as far
as I can? Or would a Right so qualified satisfy the Obligation? But, if I were
to oblige a man simply by his Oath to make me a Right, and he should answer,
Ple do all I can to satisfy you; and then tell me distinctly what he would
sweat to do, and what not, (which is the plain parallel of the Earl's case,
cleared from our Author's Inversions,) I should think my self bound, whether I
accepted his offer or not, to judge him a fair plain-dealing man. But if once I
accepted, and should afterward call him a Cheat, certainly all men would esteem
me the greater Cheat of the two.

4ly, 5ly, and 6ly, Says Our Author, Oaths should be so taken as that the
Taker may be persued for perjury: That the Covenanters would not have suffered
a man to take the Covenant as far as consistent with his Loyalty. And are not
the enemies of the King's Supremacy content to swear in so far as is consistent
with the Word of God? So that if the Earl's sense were allowed every man should
swear upon his own terms, and upon contrary terms. But, 1. Without question,
the Earl turning either Papist or Disloyal might have been persued for perjury
upon his Oath as qualified. 2ly, Albeit the Covenanters might have laughed at a
man for adjecting a caution which they thought expressed, yet I am sure, at
worst, they would never have judged the offer a crime, much less accused the
offerer, after having accepted it. 3ly, It is nothing to the purpose what
Declarations the enemies of the Supremacy make: But, if these our Author
mentions be criminal (as he would have us to believe) I would entreat him to
tell us why their makers are not persued: and unless he say, It is because
these Declarations were not made before, and accepted by the Council, I hope he
will be so ingenuous as to confess, that it is because, albeit these
Declarations be judged eversive of the Oath, yet they are not accounted Crimes,
in respect they are only well meant proposals, which when rejected evanish.
And, 4ly, Our Author's Consequence, If the Earl's sense be allowed then every
man should swear upon his own terms, as it does not at all concern the Earl, so
has it no connection, except in so far as it reflects on His Majesty's Council,
the alone Masters of such Allowances.

7ly. Says Our Author, Former Statuts having discharged Conventions, or
Convocations, and Bonds, or Leagues, without the Kings consent, The Covenanters
protested, that their Covenant was not against these Acts; because they could
not be meaned of Meetings and Bonds for preservation of the King, Religion, and
Laws, And the 4. Act: Par: 1661. Declares all such glosses false, and disloyal:
And therefore the Earl's gloss must be so too. But, 1. The Earl's gloss is no
such gloss, it does not at all touch these Conventions or Bonds said to be
discharged; therefore it must not be so. 2ly. The Earl's Explanation is
expressly qualified, in a lawful way, and not repugnant to his Loyalty: which
words plainly respect the Act 1661. as well as all other Acts made for defining
our allegiance, and duty: And therefore it cannot possibly fall under its
compass as a Contravention.

But now, after we have done with our Author's Critique, which, he says, makes
his subsumption clear and undeniable, I freely appeal to all men of ordinary
ingenuitie, whether he has proved so much as the first Article of it, viz.
That the Earl took the Test in such a sense as did evacuate his own Oath, much
less the other parts of it (mere extravagant improvements of a lesed phansy)
viz. That he did thereby teach others to do the like. And evacuate all other
acts of that nature. And yet our Author, as if he had fully made out his
Charge, goes on to answer, not the Mist in the pertinent contexture of its
whole discourse, but a few such Objections as he thought fit lamely to excerp
out of it. And the first he takes notice of is, where the Mist or Mr Mist (as
this Brouillon calls him) says, That if the Authority which is to administer
the Oath accept the Takers sense, the Taker is only bound in that sense: But so
it is the Council accepted the Earl's sense, and if they had refused it the
Earl had not taken the Oath, nor had his refusal been a crime. Which being
indeed an unanswerable Defense for the Earl, and largely insisted on in the
Narrative, I shall only shortly consider our Author's Reply: whereof the sum
and force is, That the Council, not having the power to pardon Crimes, their
connivance at the Earl's misinterpreting the Law cannot exoner him: Which he
illustrats by putting the case, That a man having many Friends in Council gives
in an Explication incontrovertedly treasonable: for example, That he minds not
thereby to bind up himself from rising in Arms; yet it would be no defense
(says our Author) that the Council did not challenge it, for the time. But
(waving the Author's confounding of misinterpreting of a Law with the
missensing of an Oath, His lessening the Councils Acceptance of the Earl's
Explanation into a bare connivance, and lastly his reproaching their Lordships
with a very palpable insinuation of partiality) The question is not, If the
Council have the power of pardoning, as our Author goes about to pervert the
argument, on purpose that he may presuppose a Crime, but plainly, If they have
not the Authority to administer the Oath of the Test, by express provision of
the Act of Parliament: Which our Author cannot deny. Now, If the Council, by
the Act of Parliament, have the Authority to administer, and did really accept
the Earl's Explanation (and not only connive at it) which on his part was a
mere proposal, and, in effect, by their acceptance became as truly their
Explanation as if they themselves had emitted it, how is it possible that, in
this matter, he should be thought guilty, without overturning all the
principles of Reason, Sense, and common Honesty? I grant, If the Earl, or any
man else, had, under the pretext of offering an Explanation, taken occasion
openly to misinterpret the Laws, or utter speeches manifestly treasonable, the
Councils connivance could not fully assoil him But, 1. What have we to do with
such absurd, and incredible suppositions? And is it not the hight of calumny
to compare the Earl's Explanation, which both in it self, and in all its
circumstances, manifestly appears to be most ingenuously, and dutyfully, by him
tendered, for the exoneration of his conscience, and was no less really
accepted as such by the Council, with imaginary criminal Wrestings, and
treasonable Declamations, which, as proposed, scarce any man, in his right
wits, can judge caseable? 2 ly. The Earl, and his words, being charged with
Misinterpreting, Slandering, Reproaching, and Depraving his Majesty's Statuts,
and Proceedings: If the Lords of Council, who represent his Majesty by a
commission, unaccountable save to his Majesty alone, accept his words, is it
not the same thing as if his Majesty himself had done it? Which certainly is
more significant, as to the cutting off of any pretense of Injury, then either
Dissimulation, or Remission, which yet all Law does constantly sustain for that
end. 3ly, As to the Treason objected, though there were some ground for it, as
there is none, yet seeing the Earl's Explanation was tendered to the Council,
to be by them authorized, and if by them rejected had indeed evanished as never
uttered, It Is yet further evident, that their Acceptance could not be made a
snare to the Earl, without the greatest injustice. But 4ly, The Council being
empowered by the Parliament to administer, and having accepted the Earl's
Explanation, it is the same thing as if the Parliament had accepted it, in
which case, even our Author must acknowledge that all ground of accusation
would have been for ever excluded. But, instead of noticing these things, all
that our Author says is. 1. That the Paper containing the Earl's Explanation
was not given in till the next day after that the Earl had sworn the Test. But
was it therefore not delivered verbally in Council the day before? And was not
this Delivery enough? And 2ly, That tho the Judges had allowed the Earl to
prove that he had emitted these words, at the swearing of the Test, yet he
failed in the probation. But in what manner, and for what intent, this
Allowance was given, and how disingenuously it is here obtruded, I have already
cleared.

In the 2d. Place, Our Author affirms the Mists alledgeance for clearing the
Earl of the Charge of Misinterpreting, viz. That the Law does only discharge
publik Misinterpreting to the abusing of others, to be most false. But, althouh
I have already told you, that to extend the Law against Misinterpreting the
King's Statuts to a man's Missensing of an Oath, is a wide stretch, which both
Papists and Fanatiks, who vastly disagree from our Author as to the sense of
the Oath of Supremacy, and yet have no difference with him as to the sense of
the Acts imposing it, may justly call absurd. Yet, to assist my Friend the Mist
(who, tho a stranger, has yet said things ten times more justly then our
Author, albeit, apparently, a piece of a Scotch aspiring Lawyer.) 1. I would be
content to know, If so be our Author think every private misinterpretation of
Laws to be a transgression of this Act of Parliament What shall become, not
only of thousands of the King's best subjects, who fall daily in such mistakes,
but also of Advocates, and Lawyers themselves, who are continually, by the Ears
about such controversies? Nay even of his Majesty's Advocate, who in his prined
Criminals, as you may see above in the first Pos^script to the Narrative, calls
an Act of Parliament, an unreasonable, unjust, murdering, and inept Act? And I
am very confident, whatever our Author shall think fit to allege, either from
the Direction of the Intention, or favor of Circumstances, for acquitting
these Misinterpreters, it shall fully quadrate to the Earl's case, and with
many and clear advantages. 2ly. When our Author jumps from the Misinterpreting
of Laws to the Missensing of Oaths, and thereon tells us, how dangerous and
criminal it is to take Oaths in wrested senses, contrair to the design of the
Legislator: He, first, supposes what is already showed to be false, viz. That
the Earl's Explanation of the Test is wrested: And next, he quite forgets that
no sense of the Test can avail, unless accepted by the Council the great
Administrators. So that, for all his flanting, the Government does still retain
its outmost and best Security viz. The Fidelity of such as it intrusts, without
whose allowance all senses and Explications are utterly insignificant.

In the 3d. place, Our Author offends at the Mist, for saying, That the
Legislator is surest of those who give Explanations, and plain dealing is
always honest dealing: Because, says our Author, If this prove any thing, it
will prove that any man may adject any quality, and so render all Oaths
useless, etc. But. 1. You have just now heard, That the Takers adjecting,
without the Administators accepting, signifies nothing. 2ly. Our Author
acknowledges, That where the sense is previously offered to, and accepted by
the Legislator (or such who are by him authorized to administrate, which
certainly in Law and sense is the same thing) it secures the Taker. Which,
notwithstanding of our Author's reasonless denial, is, in terminis, the Earl's
case. But 3ly. Our Author adds, That the Earl's saying, He is content to take
the Test, as far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion,
condescends to nothing. Strange! The Parliament in the Test expressly make the
Confession the standard of the Protestant Religion: The Council in their
Explanation ran verse this, and make the Protestant Religion the standard of
the Confession, and the very fixed point of the Test. And yet when the Earl
swears the Test, without the least reflection on the Confession, as far as it
is consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion, All this must be
nothing.

As to what our Author adds, That he is desirous to know in what part of
Europe such Qualities were ever allowed? Would he allow me the like liberty,
I would ask him, 1. In what part of Europe was ever such a Test framed? 2ly. In
what part of it was ever such an Explanation as the Earl's, after acceptance,
made a crime? And 3ly. In what part of the whole world was ever such an
Indictment contrived, and Judgment past? And, in the mean time, he may find in
the Narrative just such a quality as the Earl's allowed in a far plainer Oath,
by a far severer Prince, and in a far more publik manner, to Archbishop
Cranmer, in England. And. 2. ly. A much more odd One, in the same matter, by
the Scotch Council, to the Scotch Clergy.

Our Author repeats, -- And says, It were most absurd to think that
misinterpreting of Laws, and defaming of Parliaments should be suffered,
because thrown in into Explications; and that adjected Qualities are worse then
Equivocations, and mental Reservations. But there being neither
Misinterpreting nor Defaming in the Earl's case, and the Quality by him
adjected being in itself sound and congruous, and by the Council accepted
(Notwithstanding our Author's foolish pretense, That it was not first offered
by way of Petition) I cannot stand to refute all impertinencies. And, as to
what he adds, about the Councils Explanation, emitted in favors of the Clergy,
that it does not unsecure the Legislator, not admit the Takers to be Judges
(as he falsely insinuats that the Earl's does) all these things are already
fully examined.

The second Crime, says our Author, fixed upon the Earl, from his Explanation,
was grounded on the Act Ja: 6. Par: 10. c. 10. Made against defaming of King
and Parliament, and depraving their Laws. But this Crime, and all that our
Author says for enforcing it, being so largely, and clearly answered, in the
Narrative, I freely grant, That, Defaming, and Depraving are great Crimes; That
it is one of the principal Concerns of Governors to have themselves esteemed
by their People; That Laws for this effect have been consented to by our
Parliaments, to serve (as our Author loves to speak) instead of Armies (though
yet we have the misfortune to have both) That even Insinuations and Inferences
if plainly tending to the Reproach and Slander of Rulers, may be in so far
criminal as to deserve an extraordinary, though not the ordinary pain. And
lastly, That in Crimes Dolus malus is for the most part presumed from the
nature and circumstances of the Deed it self. And shall only add. 1. That
where our Author asserts, That the forementioned Act of Parliament was made
against Words, and Papers, in general, whereby misliking might be moved
betwixt the King and his Subjects; And that it regards the effect only,
without respect to the Author's design, the same is false, inconsistent, and
dangerous: False, because it is a known Maxim of Law, and Reason, That
Maleficia, Voluntas, and Propositum Delinquentis distinguit l. 53 ff: de
Furtis. And to think that the Law punishes any thing, without either apparent,
or presumed dole, and malice, is to confound Crime and Chance, Guilt and
Innocence. 2. Inconsistent, because, albeit our Author do here tell us, that
the Parliament looked only to the effect, yet afterward, He not only alleges
that the Earl's malice may be gathered from the nature and strain of the Paper,
but endeavors to clear it, by several circumstances. And lastly, Dangerous,
because thereby a man's best security, Innocence, and a Conscience void of
offense, is quite taken away, and the man and his words, and writings, exposed
to every perverse Inference that Madness* prompted by Malice may suggest.

2ly, That, notwithstanding all the evil inferences, and worse consequences,
that our Author charges upon the Earl's words, yet it is impossible for any
man, considering without prejudice the Circumstances wherein they were emitted,
not to acknowledge, that as they were plainly intended by the Earl, for the
Exoneration of his own Conscience, so in place of Defaming, and Depraving,
they evidently contain a very seasonable Vindication of the Parliaments honor,
and integrity. If the Test had been unanimously concluded in Parliament, and
universally received by the People, without hesitation, or exception: And if,
in that case, a man had idly and officiously said, That he believed, that the
Parliament did not intend to impose contradictory Oaths, and that he, for his
part, could take it as far as it is consistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion: I grant that a nice or malicious Hearer might possibly
have formalized, and made it a matter of Explication: But when it was notour,
and offered to be proven, that contradictions in the Test were the common
discourse: That almost a third of the orthodox Clergy did, on this account,
scruple at it; And several of them had published their scruples in writing;
That the Earl, when desirous to absent, was ordered to be called to the
Council, either to take the Test, or refuse it: And that, the very day he
appeared before them, they voted their own Explanation in favors of the
Clergy: I appeal to all impartial men, if the Earl's Asserting publikly his
Confidence, and Willingness, as you have heard, instead of a Reflection, was
not, in such a juncture, a most just, and fair Declaration, as well in behalf
of the Parliament, as of his own Conscience. But our Author strains, and
insists upon Consequences from the precise and abstract words, without regaird
to either occasion, time, place, manner, or end, albeit the principal
significators, in cases of this nature, and in effect the main hinges of all
morality: A Logic capable to pervert the best words, and subvert all
ingenuity, and honesty, amongst men. For put the case that, to satisfy the
apprehensions and doubts that were so frequent of Contradictions and
Inconsistencies in the Test, His Highness himself, or the President of the
Council, had said to these Scruplers, in these or the like words, That he was
confident the Parliament had no intention to impose contradictory Oaths, It is
evident, That by our Author's reasoning, this very apology, how fairly soever
intended, in charity to these dissenters, and for the Parliaments vindication,
might, as well as the Earl's words, be urged with all our Author's
misconstructions, and made a mortal Crime.

But leaving things so obvious, and already so fully cleared, take a short
account of the Circumstances wherewith our Author does further charge the Earl.
And, first. He says, That the Earl's Father, and Family had owned eminently
the Principles against which this Oath was taken. But our Author cannot deny
that they owned yet more eminently the Protestant Religion, the only subject of
this Part of the Test, and of the Earl's Explanation now questioned. And for
the other Principles here named, they owned them no otherwise then the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms did. 2ly. He says, The Earl himself had taken the
Covenant. And so did -- -- And many thousands of his good Subjects beside. 3ly.
He tells us, The Earl had all along opposed the Test in Parliament: But
therefore there was the greater reason that his offer to take it, with an
Explanation, should have been favorably accepted. 4ly. Our Author adds, The
Earl had positivly told his Royal Highness, he would not take the Test. But
this is both false and impertinent. 5ly. He says, Neither the Ministers, nor
others in the Earl's country, upon whom he had influence, had taken the Test.
But (beside that this is not true absolutely, and that in effect Few Ministers
in Scotland had, at that time, taken the Test, in respect there were about two
months of the time allowed by the Act of Parliament then to run) how iniquous
is it to make the Earl accountable for other men's inclinations? 6ly. The
Concern and Kindness the Fanatiks show for the Earl is also objected, but with
the same truth and pertinency as all the rest. And yet our Author concluds, All
which demonstrate. That he had an aversion from the Test. Which indeed might
very well have been, without this demonstration: But that therefore what he
said about it, or (as our Author speaks) did against it was done dolo malo is
just as much as to say that he who, in candid and honest dealing, goes about to
explain an ambiguous Oath, before he take it, speaks maliciously against it.

But our Author tells us, That the Lords of Justitiary had a clear Precedent
for what they did against the Earl, in the like Judgment given in the same
Court against the Lord Balmerino; Who for a Petition presented to, and
accepted, and once read by his late Majesty, was found guilty, upon far
remoter inferences, of Misconstruing his Majesty's Proceedings. But this being
particularly answered by the Earl's Lawyers, in the Process, I shall only here
add. 1. That Balmerino's Petition, containing many positive alledgeances
reflecting on several passages of the Government, in order to a redress,
wherein his design might very readily fall under suspicion, holds no parallel
with the Earl's Explanation, on his part a mere Proposal made with all due
respect to the Parliament, and simply tendered for the clearing of his Oath and
Conscience, and not indeed capable of another construction. 2ly. The King never
accepted Balmerino's Petition by way of Approbation, nor was it so much as
delivered to him by Balmerino. But our Author, by this false phrasing of the
King's having seen, and read this Petition, would take off the Councils formal,
and direct Acceptance of the Earl's Explanation. And 3ly. That albeit
Balmerino's Petition, and the Earl's Explanation hold no manner of proportion,
yet even Balmerino's case was generally judged so hard that his Jurours
themselves divided upon it, and he was only found guilty by eight of them
against seven that assoiled him, and immediately after Sentence he was freely
pardoned.

As to what our Author adds Of this same Earl's being formerly found guilty
Anno 1662. Of the like Crime, upon the like Ground: It is very true: He was
indeed then found guilty of the like Crime, and upon the like Ground. And not
only by the same party, but by some of the same Persons, who and semel and
semper are, and will be -- in eodem genere. But of this you have already had a
large and full account.

Our Author comes to review the Mist's Justification of the Earl's words. To
which opposing his former Perversions he only repeats, with some new
extravagancies, what is already answered. Thus, for instance, where the Earl,
in duty and civility, says, by way of Preface, That he was desirous to give
obedience as far as he could, which clearly refers to the Act of Parliament,
and the Councils Requisition, whereunto he professes his willingness to give
all possible satisfaction: Our Author, to show his good Breeding, and better
sense, tells us, That these words were intended by the Earl for a quality and
part of his Oath, as if he had said that though he was content to svvear, yet
he was only minded to keep so as far as he could: Whereas it is evident, as
the sun-light, that the quality that the Earl adjects, and which he would have
understood for a part of his Oath begins after these words, And therefore I
take the Test; And that this quality is both certain, sound, and most genuine.
But having already told you that before the Earl's appearance the Country was
filled with the noise of Contradictions, and Inconsistencies, in the Test; So
that the Earl's words in stead of Reproaching were, in effect, a direct and
very seasonable Vindication of the Government, as well as of his own
Conscience; And that the Security of the Government as to Oaths is not
concerned in the senses that men devise, or propose (as our Author perpetually
mistakes) but in such as it pleases the Council, the grand Administrators, to
accept; I shall not trouble you with further Reflections on this head:
Specially seeing that albeit the importunity of the Earl's Accuser have
occasioned, what in the Narrative, and what in this Preface, a sensing and
resensing of his words, almost ad Nauseam. Yet the plain truth, and my opinion
is, that the Earl's words never had, nor can have but two senses, and these
most distinct, and constant, The one genuine, just, and honest, which all
indifferent men ever did, and do acknowledge, The other most strained, crooked,
and calumnious, which yet his Adversaries will alwise adhere to.

But, says our Author, these words, I take it in so far as it is consistent
with it self, and the Protestant Religion, do so openly import that in some
things it is inconsistent that whosoever would persuade him to the contrary
must think him Fool or Idiote. But. 1. Since the Earl does not say what our
Author would have openly imported, either positively or designedly, it is
impossible he could say it Criminally. 2ly. Since his words do manifestly
referr to the many Exceptions that were abroad against the Test; And that it is
no less evident that by his Explanation he singlely intended to clear his own
Conscience, and deal heartily with the Government: Whosoever would persuade
that there is in it any ground of Offense or Crime, specially after it was
accepted by the Council, must be really either Fool or Worse.

Our Author indeed tells us, That the words were spoke by the Earl to inflame
the people: That they reflect upon the Prudence and Conduct of the Parliament,
and so prove Defaming and Depraving unansvverably. And what can be more
Depraving of a Law then to make it Pravam Legem? And what Law can be more
prava or pernicious then that which is inconsistent with the Protestant
Religion, and which ties to svvear things contradictory? And the having svvorn
and dispersed his Explications shows a firm and passionat Design to poison
the People with a belief of all these ill things of the Parliament.

But seeing the common and certain understanding of Depraving is to wrest by a
false and malicious construction to a bad end what was designed for a good:
That, for certain, there is no falsehood so much as alleged by our Author to be
in the Earl's words: And for malice all the circumstances above adduced do
undoubtedly purge them of it: That no man in a studied Apology can say, The
Parliament did not intend contradictions, but his words by this calumnious
Logic may be charged with the same train of absurd Consequences: That the
Councils Explication is, in every respect, more obnoxious to them then the
Earl's: That our Author knows Dispersing neither was nor could be proven: And
that in effect the Earl's Explanation was accepted by, and so became the
Councils more then his (as you have fully heard in the Narrative) This
groundless violent Invective is already answered.

But, if I may take a little more liberty then my Narrator thought fit to use,
Dare our Author state the controversy upon this issue, Whether there be
Contradictions and Inconsistencies in the Test or not? Or if they be (as the
Council has implicitly granted, and all men may explicitly see in the
Paraphrase above set down) will he have it a Crime for a man to say, He
believes the Parliament intended no Contradictions, and that he is content to
take the Test in so far as it is consistent? Or would he have us to believe,
either that all Scotch Parliaments, (or, at least, the Last, by reason of an
extraordinary assistance) are infallible? Or if they be fallible, as they
confess themselves, thinks he the People either so Blockish as not to see their
Failings, tho never so palpable, and also important to men's salvation, or so
Brutal as to break all Measures, if once they conceive their Rulers to be but
Men? But though here you may indeed perceive the Grounds whereupon all our
Author's discourses in this Pamphlet do proceed, Yet seeing they are manifestly
calculate to some men's unhappy Designs, who on purpose inveigh against the
People, as either ignorant or insolent, that they may be arbitrary: and would
have all Dissenters from their designs to be Suspect, and all Suspect to be
Traitors, that they may be uncontrollable: I hope men are not yet brought to
that pass either of Simplicity or Terror as to be cajolled or cudgelled into a
compliance with such pernicious Insinuations.

The third Crime wherewith the Earl was charged was Treason: A Crime now become
with us (and so much the more pity that we live under a Prince so quite
different) as it was of old said to be under Tiberius, Omnium accusationum
complementum: And which, says our Author, was inferred against the Earl from
these words. I do declare, I mean not to bind up my self, in my station, and
in a Lawful way, to wish, and endeavor any Alteration I think to the
advantage of Church and State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my
Loyalty; And this I understand as a part of my Oath. And this, our Author tells
us, he will make out, in a plain, familiar, unanswerable way: And, for that
effect, gives us this demonstration, in Mode and Figure. He that reserves to
himself the power of reforming Church or State, commits Treason. But the Earl
in his Explication reserves to himself a power of reforming. Ergo. And not to
amuse you with repeating what is already so fully said, in answer to this
Pretense, equally ridiculous and pernicious; To this formal Argument take this
formal Answer. He that reserves to himself the power of reforming, etc. By
asserting or assuming to himself the power of reforming, either proper to the
Prince alone, or in a way without his line, or without warrant of Law, or to
the hurt of Church, and State, and repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and
his Loyalty, commits Treason: Transeat, be it so. He that reserves to himself
the power of reforming, etc. By declaring he minds not to bind up himself, in
his Station, and in a lawful way, to endeavor Alterations, he thinks to the
advantage of Church, and State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and
his Loyalty, commits Treason. Is denied. Nay in effect this is so far from
being Treason that the thing thus reserved is the indispensible duty of our
Allegiance: And for a subject, specially a privy Councellor, not to wish, and
endeavor, in his station, and in a lawful way, such Alterations as he thinks
to the advantage of Church and State, and not repugnant to the Protestant
Religion, and his Loyalty, were a Lash Disloyalty, and plain Perjury. But so it
is that the Earl in his Explication reserves to himself a power of reforming,
in the former sense, is false, and the very thing denied by his words: In the
later, and second, sense, it is indeed true, but, in steed of being a Crime, a
most clear, and certain duty.

But, our Author says, That any is as comprehensive as all: which he gravely
proves by several instances: and thence infers, That therefore the Earl has
reserved to himself to endeavor all Alterations. And, says he, If that be not
Treason nothing can be Treason. But albeit to endeavor any, or all Alterations
simply (as our Author sophistically, and calumniously divides the Earl's words)
may be Treason, dare he affirm, That for a man in his station, and in a lawful
way, to endeavor any or all alterations, to the better, and not repugnant to
Religion, and Loyalty (which are the Earl's words) is Treason? Or can he, or
any man, deny, that the doing of this very thing may be the necessary duty of
every good subject, much more of one of his Majesty's svvorn Counselors. Our
Author says indeed well, but to no purpose. That it is Treason L. 1.
Majestatis ff ad L. Iuliam Majestatis, to attempt against the security of the
Government. But can he, or any man, in his right senses, conceive, that for a
man to endeavor any, or all Alterations, as above qualified by the Earl, is to
attempt against the Government? Certainly he may as soon prove that to assist
and advance the Government, faithfully, and strenuously (the true, and obvious
import of the Earl's words) is to overturn it traitorously.

But our Author has a clear Statut for him viz. P. 1. Sess: 2. Act. 2. Chapter 2.
Whereby it is declared that these Positions, That it is lawful for subjects,
upon any pretense, to enter into Leagues, or take up Arms against the King, Or
that it is lawful for subjects, pretending his Authority, to take up Arms,
against his Person, or those commissionat by him, Or to suspend him from the
exercise of his Royal Government. Or to put Limitations on their due Obedience,
and Allegiance, are rebellious and treasonable. From which words, says he, I
infer, most clearly, That for a subject to declare, he is not tied up from
wishing any Alteration is Treason: For, any Alteration comprehending all
Alterations, can any man of sense and ingenuity deny but this is a putting
Limitations upon his Obedience (why not due obedience?) and Allegiance? But,
admitting any to be comprehensive of all Alterations, can any man of common
ingenuity say, That he that declares himself not tied up from endeavoring, in
his station, and in a lawful way, all Alterations to the advantage of Church
and State, not repugnant to Religion and Loyalty, declares himself not tied up
from endeavoring all simply? Which is a quite different thing: Or that he that
purposely declares in the former manner, that he may preserve the just latitude
of his Allegiance, does put Limitations upon his due Obedience, and Allegiance,
when, in effect, he most expressly ampliats and explains it?

But our Author coming to see that the deadly thing in the Eal's words is
neither the Any, nor the All, adds. For what is a greater Limitation then to
reserve to himself to be Judge how far he is tied? But, because the Earl, in
his sincerity, professes that he minded to endeavor, in his Station, and in a
Lawful way, such Alterations as he should truly think, and not barely allege,
to be to the advantage of Church, and State, Does he therefore make Himself, or
his Opinion, the only Rule of his Oath, and performance, and not rather the
Law, to which he so plainly refers? Or has our Author either so little
Understanding, or so little Honesty as not to acknowledge, that though, de
jure, all men be obliged to regard Law, and Reason, as the great Directors of
duty, Yet, de facto, they can only apply them (providing they would do it
ingenuously) according to their own conceptions? So that to accuse a man for
such an Expression is to put off all professions of Sincerity, and to subvert
the very use of thinking among men, as is more fully above held forth.

Our Author, in the next place, gives us many reasons, why the Earl's Cautions,
in my Station, and in a Lawful way, not repugnant to Religion and Loyalty,
cannot salve his Reservation; But still seduced by one and the same foolish and
wretched Error viz. That because such Cautions do not justify the contrary
Transgressions therefore all Professions so cautioned are a crime. Thus he
tells us, first, That the Covenant (as criminal as it was) was so qualified.
But who ever thought that these qualified Professions in the Covenant,
condescended on by our Author, were the Covenanters guilt? Sure I am, it is
only for the opposite Practices, and not at all for these Professions, that the
Act of Parliament condemns them. 2ly. He says, These Cautions never hindered
any man to committ Treason. And what then? Have not the best Cautions and
highest Professions in the world been in like manner violate? Whereas the thing
our Author should have said is, That an Endeavor every way qualified as the
Earl professes has been found treasonable. But knowing this to be certainly
false you see how he here declines to averr it. 3ly. He tells us, That they
that rebelled in the 1666, and 1679. professed great love to his Majesty. And
had they never said, or done more, does our Author think they had been found
guilty of Treason? 4ly, He tells us, That the adjecting of such Cautions is
reckoned by Lawyers as Protestatio contraria facto. And so indeed they may
justly be (as they only are) when any Fact is committed contrary to them, as
for example, when the Earl shall turn Papist. But was it ever heard, since Law
was named, or Reason understood amongst men, that a man's declaration, That he
did not mean to bind up himself in his Station, and in a lawful way, to
endeavor Alterations he should think to the advantage of Church and State, not
repugnant to Religion and Loyalty, was judged either Protestatio illicita, aut
cuivis facto licito contraria? And 5ly, Our Author repeats the Statut
condemning glosses put upon the Laws by the late Rebellious Parliaments, to the
prejudice of their Allegiance. But I have already told you, there is no such
gloss contained in the Earl's words: And I further appeal to all men (our
Author not excepted) whether ever these Parliaments, if they had only
professed, That in their station, and in a lawful way, they would endeavor
any Alteration they thought to the advantage of Church and State, not repugnant
to Religion and Loyalty, would have incurred his late Majesty's displeasure,
much less the atrocious Character of Rebellious, here cast upon them? But,
says our Author, Their Explanation declaring that what they did was for the
preservation of Religion, which is the very Explanation put by the Earl upon
this Oath, was particularly condemned as false and disloyal. But (not to tell
you that by our Author's words a man would think that even to say, The Test was
made for the preservation of Religion, may be found both false, and disloyal;
which I heartily wish may never come to pass) may not this passage alone
convince our Author, That it neither was nor could be the Parliaments precise
professing themselves to be for Religion but only their professing and
justifying of what they did to be for Religion which was judged false and
disloyal? And that because their Profession, or Protestation, was thought
contrary to their Deed; with which the Earl's case, Qui adeo factorum innocens
ut verba ejus arguantur (as a noble Roman said in the like case) and who is not
so much as accused of having done any thing, holds not the least similitude.

And yet says our Author, From all this it clearly follows, That the Earl, by
reserving a power to himself to endeavor Alterations, did committ Treason,
notwithstanding all his Cautions. Where, that you may understand the Man, and
then see how fairly, and justly, he dra^s this Conclusion, be pleased to
notice, That where the Earl declares, in one speech, That he means not to bind
up himself, in his Station, and in a lawful way, to endeavor Alterations, not
repugnant to Religion, and Loyalty, Our Author (not to speak of his changing)
first honestly divides the Earl's words, whereby he, or any man, may, with the
same ease, turn Scripture into Blasphemy, telling us, That the Earl reserves to
himself a power to make any Alterations: Just as if he had said this simply,
and no more. Then, straining, and affirming these words to be Treason, he
rejects all the Earl's Cautions, in the same manner as if they had not been
manifest parts of his Declaration, uttered with one and the same breath, but
adjected, ex post facto, to palliate some high Rebellion. According to the
Candor and Justice of which Procedure it is obvious, That a man's professing,
he would take up Arms, at his Majesty's Command, for the advantage of Church
and State, conform to his Allegiance and Loyalty, might be equally judged to be
Traitorous and Rebellious. For, Rising in Arms sounding evidently much worse
then the endeavoring of Alterations, Let our Author once divide the words, and
affirm, That the first Part of them is Treason, and then all that follows
shall be held for Insufficient, Cheating, and contrary Cautions, and the man
irrecoverably cast as guilty of Treason: How justly or unjustly let all men
judge.

But our Author proceeds to answer what the Mist objects: And. 1. Where the
Mist says: That Treason requires a special Law, Our Author denies it, telling
us, That so soon as Kings were, and before there was Law, it was Treason to
rise in Arms against them; That Treason is the fence of the Government, as
murder is of private men's lives (as our Author strangely words it) That Law
thought it unnecessary to provide against the greatest Treasons; and that
Traitors would easily elude the expressvvords of a Statut. Which things albeit
they be partly true: Yet, 1. I hope, these who in the beginnings of Kingdoms
died for Treason died by less then bills of Attainder, viz. by bare Royal
Decrees, which I cannot think our Author imagines were then drawn in Exemplum.
2ly. It is to be considered, that because in these beginnings of Kingdoms some
Crimes, that are such by the light of Reason, were necessarily punished without
Statut, it will not follow, That therefore Crimes may now be made at Random,
and punished at Pleasure. 3ly. It is without controversy, That whatever, at
present, is not Treason, jure gentium, ought not to be persued, and punished,
as such, without a positive Law: Specially to infer the pains of For
faulture, which, exceeding the prescript of common Reason, do certainly in all
cases require an Express Statut. 4ly. It is most dangerons, and tends visibly
to defeat all the providence and security of Law, to allege, That, even in
the case of an express Statut, Traitors may elude its words: And that
therefore something else (no doubt the Judge's arbitrary Arbitriment) must be
necessary. And 5ly. It is most certain, and evident, that neither by Statut,
Law, Reason, nor Sense, the Earl's words are chargeable with the smallest
delinquency, much less the heavy Crime of Treason.

2ly. Where it is objected, That the Earl by his Oath as a Privy Counselor is
obliged, in that his Station, and in a Lawful way, to propone and advise, and
so to wish and endeavor any Alteration he thinks to the advantage of Church
and State, not repugnant to Religion and Loyalty: And that therefore his
Reservation in these terms was necessary, at least, unde nyably good, and
lawful. Our Author knowing this to be an unanswer able Defense against this
imaginary Treason, first, propones it most lamely, and overly, and then for a
Reply returns us a full Concession; Which that you may the better perceive take
the Argument for the Earl thus.

What the Earl is certainly bound to, both by his Peerage, and Oath as a
Counselor, the Reservation of a freedom to do it cannot be Treason. But to
wish, and endeavor, in his Station, and in a lawful way, any Alteration he
thinks to the advantage of Church, and State, not repugnant to Religion, and
Loyalty, is that which the Earl is bound to, both by his Peerage, and Oath as a
Counselor. Therefore the Reservation of a freedom to do it cannot be Treason.

The Proposition is founded on clear Law, and Reason, it being evidently
impossible to conceive that the Reservation of a freedom to do what is my bound
duty, by Oath, should fall under the construction of Treason.

The Subsumption is proven thus, The Earl is bound by his Peerage, and by his
Oath as a Counselor, to assist His Majesty with his best advice, and
concurrence, in all things. Ergo, By his Peerage and Oath he is bound to wish,
and endeavor, in his Station, and in a lawful way, any Alteration he shall
think to the advantage of Church, and State, not repugnant to Religion, and
Loyalty.

The reason of the Connection is, because, as our Author says, All comprehends
Any; and Things, no doubt, includs Alterations, and Wishes, and Endeavors, in
a lawful way; for Alterations to seen advantage not only may but must be
imported by the Advice and Assistance sworn to; when ever His Majesty's Command
or undoubted Interest shall call for them; It being undeniable, that, as Wishes
and Endeavors are included in Advice and Concurrence, so for a sworn Member of
His Majesty's Privy Council not to give His Majesty, in such an exigent, his
best Wishes and Advice, and his most hearty Endeavor and Concurrence, would
be manifest Perjury and Disloyalty. Nor does it at all alter the Case though we
restrict the Quality precisely to His Majesty's Pleasure: For, if that be the
only Lawful and Loyal Way of Wishing, Advising, Endeavoring, and Concurring,
It is evident that the Earl's words do reserve this alone, and no other way
beside. So that there could be nothing more justly said by him for asserting
that due liberty which his Peerage and Oath do indispensibly require, and
consequently, his Words, being plain Duty, and Conscience, could never be made
Treason.

Now after our Author has shuffled over this Defense, and Exception, as you
may see in his Vindication: For an easy answer (as he calls it) he tells us
frankly, That no Oath does hinder a man from doing what is lawful, and so there
needed be no Reservation, nor Exception, on that Consideration: And again that
the Oath did not exclude any Lawful Endeavors, at the Desire or Command of the
Prince (which the Earl, as I have told you, is here as well content to admit
for the qualification of Lawfulness as our Author) and so there needed no
Exception as to these. And thus you see that the Earl, for a Reservation, even
in our Author's judgment, neither false nor unlawful, but only judged by him to
be needless, is found guilty, and condemned of high Treason; which is as full a
Concession, in my opinion, as could have been desired. Ay but, says our
Author, The former argument still recurs. viz. He that will not bind up himself
as to any thing reserves a power as to all things; which must, at least, be
interpret of unlawful things; for lavvful things need no Exception. But (not to
notice our Authors Christian charity, and far more observable justice, that
because Lavvful things need not be reserved (though in all cases dubious it be
certainly the more tender part to reserve them) will therefore have the Earl's
Reservation to be of Things unlawful, and treasonable) The Earl's Reservation
is most expressly of Things lawful; in so far as he only refuses to bind up
himself, in his Station, and in a lawful way, as to things advantageous to
Church, and State, not repugnant to Religion, and Loyalty: Which is a full and
cumulative Expression of their Lawfulness. And as to what our Author subjoyns
of the Earl's putting Limitations on his Allegiance (in so far as what he says
is intelligible) it is already answered: It being manifest that the Earl's
words, in stead of being a Limitation, are a designed and ample Extension.

In the next place our Author comes to tell us, That the Earl's Qualifications
take off the whole force of his Oath, either as to rising in Arms, or any other
unlawful thing: For. 1. Says he, He takes the Oath only in so far as it is
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion: So that if he think the
Protestant Religion shall require rising in Arms he is not tied. But. 1. I have
told you how false it is that the Earl resolves the force of his Oath upon his
own thinking, which here he does not so much as mention. 2ly. Is it not strange
how our Author should judge that the Protestant Religion may not make as
certain a Qualification in the Earl's Explanation as it does in the Councils?
Where yet, in liew of the Confession of Faith, the standard appointed by the
Parliament, it is made the only bar against Popery. 3ly. What a ridiculous
Conceit it is to think that the Earl, by offering to take the Test, in as far
as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, did reserve to
himself a liberty to rise in Arms, when by an Article of the Test, which can
neither be taken off, nor eluded by any part of the Earl's Explanation, he was
to swear liquidly, and distinctly, not to rise in Arms?

2ly. Says our Author, The Earl's Oath only ties him as far as he can, which
may leave him yet bound by the Covenant. But I have already cleared how the
Earl did only profess his readiness to obey the Act of Parliament as far as he
could, without intending by these Words any restriction of his Oath; and that
to wrest them as if designed for that end is an absurd and wilful error.
3ly. Says he, The Earl takes it only as far as it is consistent with it self.
And God and the Earl only know how far that is. A noble Testimony to the Test!
And as plain a declaration that our Author neither knows nor ca^es to know how
far it is consistent. But having already told you, that the Earl did certainly
use this Expression to vindicate the Test, and his own Conscience, from other
men's Exceptions, and Scruples; And that no man, in reason, either ought to take
it, or can be bound by it otherwise, I shall not here add any thing.

And lastly, our Author repeates the danger of Limitations, telling us, That if
after the dreadful effects we have seen produced by them, and that Parliaments
have condemned them as Treason, we should still be secure, and unconcerned, all
the world might laugh at our ruin. But seeing it is. 1. Most ridiculous to
call a manifest Extension an undue Limitation. 2ly. Most false that ever the
Parliament condemned any Limitation of the nature of the Earl's Reservation, or
that ever a Deed qualified in the Earl's terms, was, or can be thought
dangerous, far less rebellious. 3ly. Most certain that nothing, in all times,
has so much ruined Government, and Governors, as the unjust Iealousies, and
pretended legal, but really violent Proceedings of its Ministers, I shall not
trouble our Author with any further Remarks.

In the close of his Discourse, he thinks fit to instigate Judges to Severity,
and to guard them against insolent Pity, as he calls it, which truly, after
what all men have seen of their frank Procedure against the Earl, appeared to
me, at first reading, a very superfluous Caution. But my Surprise was only from
the want of our Author's foresight, and was soon entirely discussed: For, just
as I am writing, there is come to my hand His Majesty's gracious Proclamation,
for compleeting, no doubt, the selicity of our Author's happy Kingdom, by
ordering the Prosecution of all Rebels, and their Resetters, etc. In the
Execution whereof, now after the Government had, for several years, connived
at many hundreds of these Rebels, and out-Lavvs, and thereby rendered the
people secure and careless; It is easy to demonstrate, that more then ten
thousand of his Majesty's peaceable Subjects may be prosecute, and punished as
Traitors, and above forty thousand beside made liable to Fining, and
Imprisonment, at the Councils pleasure. A work which, I confess, requires the
highest measures of severity that our Author could prompt to, and does indeed
leave the far better part of the Kingdom without all refuge, or relief, save in
his Majesty's Clemency: But where I also hope they shall seasonably, and
comfortably find it, notwithstanding all our Author's many sly and mischievous
Insinuations to the contrair.

He vvishes the Earl had come in will, as if forsooth he had proven him to be
guilty: And as falsely insinuats this to be usual, that he may represent him,
not only as Criminal, but a Contemner of his Majesty's Mercy.

He likewise tells us, That he does not admire that this Author, and these of
his way see not this Paper to be Treason, since they will not acknovvledge it
to be Treason to oppose the Succession, and to say, that it can be altered by a
Parliament: Which yet the Scotch Parliament thought to be Treason: Nor in the
last age thought they it Treason to rise in arms against the King, and call
Parliaments without him: So that, says our Author, The fault is only in the
depraved Intellectuals of such as have, by a long custom of hating Authority,
bred in themselves a hatred of every Person and thing that can maintain it. But
not to stay here to discuss all the Calumny, and Envy, wrapped up in this
passage, I shall only desire you to consider. 1. That our Author would have it
a transcendent wonder, that the Author of the Mist should say, The Succession
can be altered by a Parliament: And yet he cannot but know that that Person
lives under an express Act of Parliament declaring it Treason to say the
contrary. 2ly. He says, The Scotch Parliament thought it to be Treason to
oppose the Succession, and to say that it can be altered by Parliament. And yet
the same Scotch Parliament judged it proper for them to declare and confirm the
Succession: And Law and Reason say that, Constituere and destituere sunt
ejusdem facultatis.

But not to insist upon these things, For a Conclusion I shall only take the
liberty to protest for my self (without offering to anticipate the better
judgment of others, as our Author visibly does) That were I as clear for the
Succession as his Royal Highness, As dissatisfied with the old Statut, and late
Proceedings of the English Parliaments about it, as our Author, As zealous for
the Honor, and Infallibility of the last Scotch Parliament as his Majesty's
Advocate, As enraged against former Practices as the greatest Torry in Britain,
And yet more tender and respective of Authority then my own heart: I could not
have imagined, that either Misinterpreting, Defaming, Depraving, or Treason,
should have been found in the Earl's words: And am very apprehensive, that the
Judgment so given against him may prove a greater bar to the Succession, and
Reflection on Scotch Parliaments, and Judges, then all that our Author has
labored to squeese out of them.

COPY OF His Majesty's Letter, ordering the passing of his two former
Signatures for the Earl's Offices and Jurisdictions.
AT Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of January, 1669 Years, His Majesty's Letter
under-vvritten, direct to the Lords Commissioners of his Treasury, and
Exchequer, was presented, and read, and ordained to be recorded, whereof the
Tenor follows. Sic suprascribitur CHARLES. R. Right trusty, and right well
beloved Cousins and Counselors, and right trusty, and well beloved
Counselors, we greet you well. We did, upon the fyfteenth day of October
1667, sign a Signature, in favors of the Earl of Argyle, and another, shortly
after, for the Lands of Knoydart: The Signatures, we are informed, are not past
And in August last, our Secretary acquainted us with a Letter, which he had
received from our Advocate, bearing date the thirteenth day of August 1668
Years, together with an Information, containing thirteen Reasons, against some
heritable Offices, comprehended in the said Signature: We are also acquainted
with the Earl of Argyle's Answers. All which we have taken into our
consideration: And, although we are very well satisfied with our Advocate, in
his doing of his duty, in representing to us what he conceives to be fit for
our service in this particular; as also with his Fiaelity, and Diligence in
other things relating to his Place; Yet, upon serious Consideration of the
whole matter, It is our Gracious Pleasure, That the said Signatures, with
these Offices, be past our Exchequer; and that, in the terms expressed in our
Letter, signed by us soon after the signature, any thing in our Instructions to
the contrary notvvithstanding. For all which this shall be your vvarant. And
so we bid you farewell. Given at our Court at White^al, the seventh day of
January, 166 9/8, and of our Reign the 20 Year. By His Majesty's Command. Sic
subscribitur Lawderdale. Extractum de Libris Actorum Scacarii per me. Sic
subscribitur

THO. MURRAY Clericus Reg.

FINIS.

