Experiments, Notes, etc. ABOUT THE Mechanical Origin or Production Of diverse
particular QUALITIES: Among which is inserted a Discourse of the IMPERFECTION
OF THE CHYMIST's Doctrine OF QVALITIES; Together with some Reflections upon the
HYPOTHESIS OF ALCALI and ACIDUM. By the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; Fellow of
the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

Directions for the Book-binder; to be put immediately after the general Title
Page.
THE several Tracts of this Book are to be bound in the order following, viz.

After the Preface of the Publisher to the Reader, and the Advertisements
relating to the whole Treatise, is to follow, 1. The Tract of Heat and Cold. 2.
Of Tastes. 3. Of Odours. 4. Of the imperfection of the Chemists Doctrine of
Qualities. 5. Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum. 6.
Advertisements relating to Chemical Qualities, to be bound next after the Title
Page to Volatility. 7. Of Volatility. 8. Of Fixtness. 9. Of Corrosiveness and
Corrosibility. 10. Of Chemical Precipitation. 11. Of Magnetism. 12. Of
Electricity.


ERRATA.
IN the Tract of Heat and Cold, p. 28. at the end of the page dele Finis* and
go* on to Exp. IX. p. 40. l. 21. r. degree of rapidness. p. 102. l. 15. put a
comma after the word before.

In the Tract of Corrosiveness and Corrosibility read in the current Title on
the top of p. 2. and 3. and seqq. Corrosiveness and Corrosibility, nor or.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE Reader.
TO keep the Reader from being at all surpised at the Date of the Title Page,
I must inform him, that a good part of the ensuing Tracts were Printed off, and
in my custody, the last year; and the rest had come out with them diverse
months ago, if the Noble Author had not been hindered from committing them to
the Press by the desire and hope of being able in a short time to send them
abroad more numerous, and by his being hindered to do so partly by Remove,
partly by the want of some Papers that were odly lost or spoiled, and partly by
the sickness of himself, and diverse of his near Relations. And some of these
Impediments do yet suppress what the Author intended should have made a part of
the Book, which now he suffers to be published without them, though diverse of
his Papers about some other particular Qualities have been written so long ago,
as to have lain for many years neglected among other of his old Writings: Which
that he may have both leisure and health to review, and fit for publication, is
the ardent wish of the sincere Lovers of Real Knowledge, who have reason to
look on it as no mean proof of his constant kindness to Experimental
Philosophy, that in these Tracts he perseveres in his course of freely and
heartily communicating his Experiments and Observations to the public,
notwithstanding the liberty that has been too boldly taken to mention them as
their own by some later Writers; as particularly by the Compiler of the
Treatise, entitled Polygraphice, who in two Chapters has allowed himself to
present his Reader with above Fifty Experiments, taken out of our Authors Book
of Colors, without owning any one of them to Him, or so much as naming him or
his Book in either of those Chapters* nor, that I remember, in any of the
others. Nor did I think this practice justified by the confession made in the
Preface, importing, that the Compiler had taken the particulars he delivered
from the Writings of others. For, this general and perfunctory acknowledgment
neither does right to particular Authors, nor, by naming them, enables the
Reader to know, whether the things delivered come from persons fit to be
credited or not: And therefore, since it is but too likely, that such
Concealment of the Names, if not Usurpation of the Labors of the Benefactors
to Philosophy, will prove much more forbidding to many others to impart their
Experiments, than as yet they have to our generous Author; it seems to be the
Interest of the Commonwealth of Learning openly to discountenance so
discouraging a practice, and to show, that they do not think it fit that
Possessors of useful pieces of knowledge should be strongly tempted to envy
them to the Public, to the end only that a few Compilers should not be put
upon so reasonable and easy a work, as by a few words or names to show
themselves just, if not grateful.

But not to keep the Reader any longer from the perusal of these Tracts
themselves, I shall conclude with intimating only, that what our Author says
in one of them concerning the Insufficiency of the Chemical Hypothesis for
explaining the Effects of Nature, is not at all intended by him to derogate
from the sober Professors of Chemistry, or to discourage them from useful
Chemical Operations; forasmuch as I had the satisfaction, some years since, to
see in the Authors hands a Discourse of his about the Usefulness of Chemistry
for the Advancement of Natural Philosophy; with which also it is hoped he will
e're long gratify the Public.

ADVERTISEMENTS Relating to the following TREATISE.
TO obviate some misapprehensions that may arise concerning the ensuing Notes
about Particular Qualities, it may not be improper to add something in this
place to what has been said in another See Tracts about Cosmical Qualities,
etc. to which is prefixed an Introduction to the History of Particular
Qualities; Printed at Oxford 1671.
Paper in reference to those Notes, and consequently to premise to the
particular Experiments some few general Advertisements about them.

And I. we may consider, that there may be three differing ways of treating
Historically of Particular Qualities. For either one may in a full and
methodical History prosecute the Phenomenon; or one may make a Collection of
various Experiments and Observations whence may be gathered diverse Phenomenon
to illustrate several, but not all of the Heads or Parts of such an ample or
methodical History; or (in the third place) one may in a more confined way
content ones self to deliver such Experiments and Observations of the
Production, or the Destruction or Change of this or that Quality, as, being
duly reasoned on, may suffice to show wherein the nature of that Quality does
consist, especially in opposition to those erroneous conceits that have been
entertained about it. Of the First of these three ways of treating of a Quality
I pretend not to have given any complete example; but you will find, that I
have begun such Histories in my Specimens about Fluidity and Firmness, and in
the Experiments, Observations, etc. that I have put together about Cold. The
Second sort of Historical Writings I have given an Instance of in my
Experiments about Colors; but in these ensuing Notes, the occasion I had to
make them having obliged me chiefly to have an eye to the disproval of the
errors of the Peripateticks and the Chemists about them, I hope I shall not be
thought to have fallen very short in my Attempt, if I have (here and there)
performed what may be required in the Third way of writing Historically of a
Quality; my present Design being chiefly to give an Intelligent and Historical
Account of the Possible Mechanical Origination, not of the various Phenomenon
of the particular Qualities succinctly mentioned in these Notes; though, my
secondary end being to become a Benefactor to the History of Qualities by
providing Materials for my self or better Architects, I have not scrupled to
add to those, that tend more directly to discover the Nature or Essence of the
Quality treated of, and to derive it from Mechanical Principles, some others
(which happened to come in my way) that acquaint us but with some of the less
luciferous Phenomenon.

II. That you may not mistake what is driven at in many of the Experiments and
Reasonings delivered or proposed in the ensuing Notes about Particular
Qualities, I must desire you to take notice with me, what it is that I pretend
to offer you some proofs of. For, if I took upon me to demonstrate, that the
Qualities of bodies cannot proceed from (what the Schools call) Substantial
Forms, or from any other Causes but Mechanical, it might be reasonably enough
expected, that my Argument should directly exclude them all. But since, in my
Explications of Qualities, I pretend only, that they may be explicated by
Mechanical Principles, without enquiring, whether they are explicable by any
other; that which I need to prove, is, not that Mechanical Principles are the
necessary and only things whereby Qualities may be explained, but that
probably they will be found sufficient for their explication. And since these
are confessedly more manifest and more intelligible than substantial Forms and
other Scholastic Entities (if I may so call them) it is obvious, what the
consequence will be of our not being obliged to have recourse to things, whose
existence is very disputable, and their nature very obscure.

There are several ways that may be employed, some on one occasion, and some on
another, either more directly to reduce Qualities (as well as diverse other
things in nature) to Mechanical Principles; or, by showing the insufficiency of
the Peripatetic and Chemical Theories of Qualities, to recommend the
Corpuscularian Doctrine of them.

For further Illustration of this Point, I shall add on this occasion, that
there are three distinct sorts of Experiments (besides other proofs) that may
be reasonably employed, (though they be not equally efficacious) when we treat
of the Origin of Qualities. For some Instances may be brought to show, that
the proposed Quality may be Mechanically introduced into a portion of matter,
where it was not before. Other Instances there may be to show, that by the same
means the Quality may be notably varied as to degrees, or other not essential
Attributes. And by some Instances also it may appear, that the Quality is
Mechanically expelled from, or abolished in, a portion of matter that was
endowed with it before. Sometimes also by the same Operation the former quality
is destroyed, and a new one is produced. And each of these kinds of Instances
may be usefully employed in our Notes about Particular Qualities. For, as to
the first of them, there will be scarce any difficulty. And as to the second,
since the permanent Degrees as well as other Attributes of Qualities are said
to flow from (and do indeed depend upon) the same Principles that the Quality
it self does; if, especially in bodies inanimate, a change barely Mechanical
does notably and permanently alter the degree or other considerable attribute;
it will afford, though not a clear proof, yet a probable presumption, that the
Principles whereon the Quality it self depends are Mechanical. And lastly, if,
by a bare Mechanical change of the internal Disposition and structure of a
body, a permanent Quality, confessed to flow from its substantial Form or
inward Principle, be abolished, and perhaps also immediately succeeded by a new
Quality Mechanically producible; if, I say, this come to pass in a body
Inanimate, especially if it be also, as to sense similar, such a Phenomenon
will not a little favor that Hypothesis which teaches, that these Qualities
depend upon certain contextures and other Mechanical Affections of the small
parts of the bodies, that are endowed with them, and consequently may be
abolished when that necessary Modification is destroyed. This is thus briefly
premised to show the pertinency of alleging differing kinds of Experiments and
Phenomenon in favor of the Corpuscular Hypothesis about Qualities.

What has been thus laid down, may, I hope, facilitate and shorten most of the
remaining work of this Preamble, which is to show, though but very briefly,
that there may be several ways, not impertinently employable to recommend the
Corpuscularian Doctrine of Qualities.

For first, it may sometimes be shown, that a Substantial Form cannot be
pretended to be the necessary Principle of this or that Quality; as will (for
instance) hereafter be made manifest in the Asperity and Smoothness of bodies,
and in the Magnetical Virtue residing in a piece of Iron that has been
impregnated by a Loadstone. It Is true, that the force of such Instances is
indirect, and that they do not expressly prove the Hypothesis in whose favor
they are alleged; but yet they may do it good service by disproving the
Grounds and Conclusions of the Adversaries, and so (by removing Prejudices,)
making way for the better entertainment of the truth.

Secondly, we may sometimes obtain the same or the like Quality by Artificial
and sometimes even temporary Compositions, which, being but factitious bodies,
are by Learned Adversaries confessed not to have Substantial Forms, and can
indeed reasonably be presumed to have but resulting Temperaments: As will be
hereafter exemplifi'd in the production of Green by compounding Blew and
Yellow, and in the Electrical Faculty of Glass; and in the temporary whiteness
produced by beating clear Oil and fair Water into an Ointment, and by beating
water into a froth, and, more permanently, in making Coral white by flawing it
with heat; and in diverse other Particulars, that will more properly be
elsewhere mentioned.

Thirdly then, in some cases the Quality proposed may be either introduced; or
varied, or distroy'd in an inanimate body, when no change appears to be made in
the body, except what is Mechanical, and what might be produced in it,
supposing such a parcel of matter were artificially framed and constituted as
the body is, though without any Substantial Form, or other such like internal
Principle. So when a piece of Glass, or of clarified Rosin, is, by being beaten
to powder, deprived of its Transparency, and made white, there appears no
change to be made in the pulverized body, but a comminution of it into a
multitude of Corpuscles, that by their number and the various scituations of
their surfaces are fitted copiously to reflect the sincere Light several ways,
or give some peculiar Modification to its Rays; and hinder that free passage
of the beams of Light, that is requisite to Transparency.

Fourthly, as in the cases belonging to the foregoing number there appears not
to intervene in the Patient or Subject of the change, any thing but a
Mechanical alteration of the Mechanical Structure or Constitution; so in some
other cases it appears not, that the Agent, whether natural or factitious,
operates on the Patient otherwise than Mechanically, employing only such a way
of acting as may proceed from the Mechanisme of the matter, which it self
consists of, and that of the body it acts upon. As when Goldsmiths burnish a
Plate or Vessel of Silver, that having been lately boiled looked white before,
though they deprive it of the greatest part of its color, and give it a new
power of reflecting the beams of Light and visible Objects, in the manner
proper to specular bodies; yet all this is done by the intervention of a
burnishing Tool, which often is but a piece of Steel or Iron conveniently
shaped; and all that this Burnisher does, is but to depress the little
prominencies of the Silver, and reduce them, and the little cavites of it, to
one physically level or plain Superficies. And so when a Hammer striking often
on a Nail, makes the head of it grow hot, the Hammer is but a purely Mechanical
Agent, and works by local motion. And when by striking a lump of Glass, it
breaks it into a multitude of small parts that compose a white powder, it acts
as Mechanically in the production of that Whiteness as it does in driving in a
Nail to the head. And so likewise, when the powdered Glass or Colophony lately
mentioned is, by the fire, from a white and opacous body, reduced into a
colorless (or a reddish) and transparent one, it appears not, that the fire,
though a natural Agent, need work otherwise than Mechanically, by colliquating
the incoherent grains of powder into one mass; wherein, the ranks of pores not
being broken and interrupted as before, the incident beams of Light are allowed
every way a free passage through them.

Fifthly, the like Phenomenon to those of a Quality to be explicated, or at
least as difficult in the same kind, may be produced in bodies and cases,
wherein it is plain we need not recurre to Substantial Forms. Thus a varying
Color, like that which is admired in a Pigeons Neck, may be produced in
changeable Taffety, by a particular way of ranging and connecting Silk of
several Colors into one piece of Stuff. Thus we have known Opals casually
imitated and almost excelled by Glass, which luckily degenerated in the
Furnace. And somewhat the like changeable and very delightful Color I remember
to have introduced into common Glass with Silver or with Gold and Mercury. So
likewise merely by blowing fine Crystal-Glass at the flame of a Lamp to a very
extraordinary thinness, we have made it to exhibit, and that vividly, all the
Colors (as they speak) of the Rainbow; and this power of pleasing by
diversifying the Light, the Glass, if well preserved, may keep for a long time.
Thus also by barely beating Gold into such thin leaves as Artificers and
Apothecaries are wont to employ, it will be brought to exhibit a green Color,
when you hold it against the Light, whether of the day, or of a good Candle;
and this kind of Greenness as it is permanent in the foliated Gold, so I have
found by trial, that if the Sunbeams, somewhat united by a Burning-glass, be
trajected through the expanded Leaf, and cast upon a piece of white paper, they
will appear there as if they had been tinged in their passage. Nay, and
sometimes a flight and almost momentany Mechanical change will seem to
overruled Nature, and introduce into a body the quite opposite Quality to that
she had given it: As when a piece of black Horn is, only by being thinly
scraped with the edge of a knife or a piece of glass, reduced to permanently
white Shavings. And to these Instances o^ Colors, some Emphatical and some
Permanent, might be added diverse belonging to other Qualities, but that I ought
not to anticipate what you will elsewhere meet with.

There is yet another way of arguing in favor of the Corpuscularian Doctrine
of Qualities, which, though it do not afford direct proofs of its being the
best Hypothesis, yet it may much strengthen the Arguments drawn from other
Topics, and thereby serve to recommend the Doctrine it self. For, the use of
an Hypothesis being to render an intelligible account of the Causes of the
Effects or Phenomenon proposed, without crossing the Laws of Nature or other
Phenomenon, the more numerous and the more various the Particulars are, whereof
some are explicable by the assigned Hypothesis, and some are agreeable to it,
or at least are not dissonant from it, the more valuable is the Hypothesis, and
the more likely to be true. For it is much more difficult, to find an
Hypothesis that is not true which will suit with many Phenomenon, especially if
they be of various kinds, than but with few. And for this Reason I have set
down among the Instances belonging to particular Qualities some such
Experiments and Observations, as we are now speaking of, since, although they
be not direct proofs of the preferrableness of our Doctrine, yet they may serve
for Confirmation of it; though this be not the only or perhaps the chief Reason
of their being mentioned. For whatever they may be as Arguments, since they are
matters of fact, I thought it not amiss to take this occasion of preserving
them from being lost; since, whether or no they contribute much to the
establishment of the Mechanical Doctrine about Qualities, they will at least
contribute to the Natural History of them.

III. I shall not trouble the Reader with a Recital of those unlucky Accidents,
that have hindered the Subjects of the following Book from being more numerous,
and I hope he will the more easily excuse their paucity, if he be advertised,
that although the particular Qualities, about which some Experiments and Notes,
by way of Specimens, are here presented, be not near half so many as were
intended to be treated of; yet I was careful to choose them such as might
comprehend in a small number a great variety; there being scarce one sort of
Qualities, of which there is not an Instance given in this small Book, since
therein Experiments and thoughts are delivered about Heat and Cold, which are
the chief of the four FIRST QVALITIES; about Tastes and Odours, which are of
those, that, being the immediate objects of Sense, are wont to be called
SENSIBLE QVALITIES; about Volatility and Fixity, Corrosiveness and
Corrosibility, which, as they are found in bodies purely natural, are
referrable to those Qualities, that many Physical Writers call SECOND
QVALITIES, and which yet, as they may be produced and destroyed by the Chemists
Art, may be styled Chemical Qualities, and the Spagyrical ways of introducing
or expelling them may be referred to Chemical Operations, of which there is
given a more ample Specimen in the Mechanical account of Chemical
Precipitations. And lastly, some Notes are added about Magnetism and
Electricity, which are known to belong to the Tribe of Occult Qualities.

IV. If a want of apt Coherence and exact Method be discovered in the following
Essays, it is hoped, that defect will be easily excused by those that remember
and consider, that these Papers were originally little better than a kind of
Repsody of Experiments, Thoughts, and Observations, occasionally thrown
together by way of Annotations upon some Passages of a Discourse* (about the
differing Parts and Red integration of Nitre) wherein some things were pointed
at relating to the particular Qualities that are here more largely treated of.
And though the Particulars that concern some of these Qualities, were
afterward (to supply the place of those borrowed by other Papers whilst these
lay by me) increased in number; yet it was not to be expected, that their
Accession should as well correct the Form as augment the Matter of our
Annotations. And as for the two Tracts, that are inserted among these Essays
about Qualities; I mean the Discourse of the Imperfection of the Chemical
Doctrine of them, and the Reflections on the Hypothesis of Acidum and Alcali,
the occasion of their being made parts of this Book is so far expressed in the
Tracts themselves, that I need not here trouble the Reader with a particular
Account of it.

V. I do not undertake, that all the following Accounts of Particular Qualities
would prove to be the very true ones, nor every Explication the best that can
be devised. For besides that the difficulty of the Subject, and Incompleatness
of the History we yet have of Qualities, may well deter a man, less diffident
of his own abilities than I justly am, from assuming so much to himself, it is
not absolutely necessary to my present Design. For, Mechanical Explications of
natural Phenomenon do give so much more satisfaction to ingenious minds, than
those that must employ Substantial Forms, Sympathy, Antipathy, etc. that the
more judicious of the vulgar Philosophers themselves prefer them before all
others, when they can be had; (as is elsewhere shown at large,) but then they
look upon them either as confined to Mechanical Engines, or at least but as
reaching to very few of Nature's Phenomenon, and, for that reason, unfit to be
received as Physical Principles. To remove therefore this grand Prejudice and
Objection, which seems to be the chief thing that has kept off Rational
Inquirers from closing with the Mechanical Philosophy, it may be very
conducive, if not sufficient, to propose such Mechanical accounts of Particular
Qualities themselves, as are intelligible and possible, and are agreeable to
the Phenomenon whereto they are applied. And to this it is no more necessary
that the account proposed should be the truest and best that can possibly be
given, than it is to the proving that a Clock is not acted by a vital
Principle, (as those Chinese thought, who took the first, that was brought
them out of Europe, for an Animal,) but acts as an Engine, to do more than
assign a Mechanical Structure made up of Wheels, a Spring, a Hammer, and other
Mechanical pieces, that will regularly show and strike the hour, whether this
Contrivance be or be not the very same with that of the Particular Clock
proposed; which may indeed be made to move either with Springs or Weights, and
may consist of a greater or lesser number of Wheels, and those differingly
situated and connected; but for all this variety 'twill still be but an
Engine. I intend not therefore by proposing the Theories and Conjectures
ventured at in the following Papers, to debar my self of the Liberty either of
altering them, or of substituting others in their places, in case a further
progress in the History of Qualities shall suggest better Hypotheses or
Explications. And 'twas but agreeable to this Intention of mine, that I should,
as I have done, on diverse occasions in the following Notes, employ the word Or,
and express my self somewhat doubtingly, mentioning more than one Cause of a
Phenomenon, or Reason of an opinion, without dogmatically declaring for
either; since my purpose in these Notes was rather to show, it was not
necessary to betake our selves to the Scholastic or Chemical Doctrine about
Qualities, than to act the Umpire between the differing Hypotheses of the
Corpuscularians; and, provided I kept my self within the bounds of Mechanical
Philosophy, my design allowed me a great latitude in making explications of the
Phenomenon, I had occasion to take notice of.

FINIS.
OF THE MECHANICAL ORIGIN OF HEAT and COLD. By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL
Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGIN OR PRODUCTION OF HEAT and
COLD.
SECT. I. About the Mechanical Production of Cold.
HEAT and COLD being generally looked upon as the most active among Qualities,
from which many other Qualities are deducible, and by which many of Nature's
Phenomenon, especially among the Peripateticks, are attempted to be explicated;
I suppose it will be very proper to begin with Instances of them to show, that
Qualities may be Mechanically produced or destroyed. A not useless Paraphrase
of which expression may be this, That a portion of matter may come to be
endowed with a Quality, which it had not before, or to be deprived of one that
it had, or (sometimes) to acquire or lose a degree of that Quality; though on
the part of the Matter (or, as some would speak, of the Patient) there do not
appear to intervene any more than a change of Texture, or some other Mechanical
Alteration; and though the Agents (on their part) do not appear to act upon it
otherwise, than after a Mechanical manner, that is, by their bigness, shape,
motion, and those other Attributes by virtue whereof Mechanical Powers and
Engines perform their operations; and this without having recourse to the
Peripatetic Substantial Forms and Elements, or to the Hypostatical Principles
of the Chemists.

And having here (as in a proper place) to avoid ambiguity, premised once for
all, this See more of this in the Preamble.
Summary Declaration of the sense, agreeably whereunto I would have these Terms
understood in the following Notes about the Origin of Particular Qualities; I
proceed now to set down some few examples of the Mechanical Production of Cold
and Heat, beginning with those that relate to the former, because by reason of
their Paucity they will be quickly dispatched. And I hope I shall not need to
make an Apology for mentioning no greater number; since I scarce remember to
have met with any Instances of this kind in any of the Classick Writers of
Natural Philosophy.

EXPER. I.
MY first Experiment is afforded me by the Dissolution of Sal Ammoniac, which I
have somewhat wondered, that Chemists having often occasion to purify that
Salt by the help of Water, should not have, long since, and publicly, taken
notice of. For if you put into three or four times its weight of Water a pound
or but half a pound (or even less) of powdered Sal Armoniack, and stir it about
to hasten the dissolution, there will be produced in the mixture a very intense
degree of Coldness, such as will not be only very sensible to his hand that
holds the Glass whilst the Dissolution is making, but will very manifestly
discover it self by its Operation upon a Thermoscope. Nay, I have more than
once by wetting the outside of the Glass, where the dissolution was making, and
nimbly stirring the Mixture, turned that externally adhering water into real
Ice, (that was scraped off with a knife) in less than a minute of an hour. And
this thus generated Cold continued considerably intense, whilst the action of
dissolution lasted; but afterward by degrees abated, and within a very few
hours ceased. The particular Phenomenon I have noted in the Experiment, and the
practical uses that may be made of it I reserve for another place Diverse of the
Phenomenon, etc. of this Experiment were afterward printed Numb. 15. of the
Ph. Transact.
, the knowledge of them being not necessary in this, where what I have already
related, may suffice for my present Argument.

And to show, that not only a far more intense degree of Cold may emerge in
this Mixture, than was to be found in either of the Ingredients before they
were mingled, but a considerable Coldness may be begun to be produced between
Bodies that were neither of them actually Cold before they were put together, I
will subjoin a Transcript of what I find to this purpose among my Adversaria.

EXPER. II.
[I Remember that once I had a mind to try, Whether the Coldness produced upon
the Solution of beaten Sal Ammoniac in water, might not be more probably
referred to some change of Texture or Motion resulting from the action of the
Liquor upon the Salt, than to any Infrigidation of the water made by the
sudden dispersion of so many Saline grains of powder, which by reason of their
Solidity may be suspected to be actually more cold than the Water they are put
into; I therefore provided a Glass full of that Liquor, and having brought it
to such a Temper, that its warmth made the Spirit of Wine in the sealed
Weather-glass manifestly, though not nimbly, ascend; I took out the
Thermoscope, and laid it in powdered Sal Ammoniac, warmed beforehand; so that
the tincted Liquor was made to ascend much nimblier by the Salt than just
before by the Water; and having presently removed the Instrument into that
Liquor again, and poured the somewhat warm Sal Ammoniac into the same, I found,
as I imagined, that within a space of time which I guessed to be about half a
minute or less, the Spirit of Wine began hastily to subside, and within a few
minutes fell above a whole division and a quarter below the mark at which it
stood in the water, before that Liquor or the Salt were warmed. Nor did the
Spirit in a great while reascend to the height which it had when the water was
cold.

The same Experiment, being at another time reiterated, was tried with the like
success; which second may therefore serve for a Confirmation of the first.]

EXPER. III.
HAving a mind likewise to show some Ingenious men, how much the production of
Heat and Cold depends upon Texture and other Mechanical Affections, I thought
fit to make again a Sal Ammoniac by a way I formerly published, that I might be
sure to know what Ingredients I employed, and show their effects as well before
conjunction as after it. I took then Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of fermented or
rather putrified Urine; and having put a sealed Weather-glass into an open
Vessel, where one of them was poured in, I put the other by degrees to it, and
observed, that, as upon their mingling they made a great noise with many
bubbles, so in this conflict they lost their former coldness, and impelled up
the Spirit of Wine in the sealed Thermoscope: Then slowly evaporating the
superfluous moisture, I obtained a fine sort of Sal Ammoniac for the most part
figured not unlike the other, when being dissolved and filtrated, it is warily
coagulated. This new Salt being gently dried I put into a wide Glass of water,
wherein I had before placed a sealed Weather-glass, that the included Spirit
might acquire the temper of the ambient Liquor, and having stirred this Salt in
the water, though I took it then off the mantle-tree of a Chimney that had had
fire in it diverse hours before, it did, as I expected, make the tincted Spirit
hastily subside and fall considerably low.

EXPER. IV.
SInce if two bodies upon their mixture acquire a greater degree of Cold than
either of them had before there is a production of this additional degree of
that Quality, it will be proper to add on this occasion the ensuing Experiment.

We took a competent quantity of acid spirit distilled from Roch-allom, (that,
though rectified, was but weak,) which, in the spirit of that salt, is not
strange. Of this we put into a wide mouthed Glass (that was not great) more
than was sufficient to cover the globulous part of a good sealed Thermoscope,
and then suffering the instrument to stay a pretty while in the liquor, that
the Spirit of wine might be cooled as much as the ambient was, we put in little
by little some volatile salt sublimed from Sal Ammoniac and a fixed Alcali, and
notwithstanding the very numerous (but not great) bubbles, and the noise and
froath that were produced, as is usual upon the reaction of Acids and Alcalys,
the tincted spirit in the Weather-glass, after having continued a good while at
a stand, began a little to descend, and continued (though but very slowly) to
do so, till the spirit of Allom was glutted with the volatile salt; and this
descent of the tincted liquor in the Instrument being measured, appeared to be
about an inch (for it manifestly exceeded seven eighths.) By comparing this
Experiment with the first part of the foregoing, we may gather, that when
Volatile and Urinous Salts or Spirits (for the saline particles appear
sometimes in a dry and sometimes in a liquid form) tumultuate upon their being
mixed with Acids, neither the Heat nor the Cold that ensues is produced by a
Conflict with the Acids precisely as it is Acid, since we have seen that an
urinous spirit produced an actual Heat with spirit of Salt, and the distilled
Salt of Sal Ammoniac, which is also Urinous, with the acid spirit of Roch-Allom
produces not a true effervescence, but a manifest Coldness: As the same Salt
also did in a Trial of another sort, which was this.

EXPER. V.
WE took one part of Oil of Vitriol, and shaking it into twelve parts of water
we made a mixture, that at first was sensibly warm; then suffering this to
cool, we put a sufficient quantity of it into a wide mouthed glass, and then we
put a good Thermoscope Hermetically sealed, above whose Ball the compounded
liquor reached a pretty way. After some time had been allowed that the liquor
in the Thermometer might acquire the temper of the ambient; we put in by
degrees as much volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac as would serve to satiate the
acid spirits of the mixture: for, though these two made a notable conflict with
tumult, noise, and froth, yet 'twas but a cold ebullition (if I may so style
it,) for the spirit in the Thermoscope descended about an inch beneath the mark
it rested at, when the seeming effervescence began.

EXPER. VI.
It Is known that Saltpeter being put into common water produces a sensible
Coldness in it, as it also does in many other Liquors: But that the same Salt
put into a Liquor of another Constitution may have a quite differing effect, I
have convinced some inquisitive persons by mingling eight ounces of fine
Saltpeter powdered with six ounces of Oil of Vitriol: For by that commixture
with a Salt that was not only actually, but, as to many other bodies,
potentially cold, the Oil of Vitriol, that was sensibly cold before, quickly
conceived a considerable degree of Heat, whose Effects also became visible in
the copious Fumes that were emitted by the incalescent Mixture.

EXPER. VII.
THis brings into my mind, that though Gunpowder seems to be of so igneous a
nature, that, when it is put upon a Coal, it is turned presently into flame
capable of promoting the deflagration of the Charcoal, and kindling diverse
bodies it meets with in its way; yet if some ounces of Gunpowder reduced to
powder be thrown into four or five times as much water, it will very manifestly
impart a Coldness to it, as experience made with, as well as without, a sealed
Thermoscope has assured me.

This and the foregoing Experiment do readily suggest an Inquiry into the
nature of the Coldness, which Philosophers are wont to oppose to that which
immediately and upon the first contact affect the organs of sense, and which
therefore they call Actual or Formal.

The success of this Experiment upon a second trial served to confirm it, which
is the more strange, because I have found, that a small quantity of Oil of
Vitriol, not beforehand mingled with water, would produce a notable heat in its
conflict with a small portion of just such Salt as I employed before (both the
parcels having been, if I well remember, taken out of the same Glass.) And this
heat did upon trial, made with the former Thermoscope, make the tincted Spirit
ascend much further than the lately recited Experiment made it subside.

A DIGRESSION ABOUT POTENTIAL COLDNESS.
POtential Coldness has been generally looked upon, and that partly perhaps upon
the score of its very name, as so abstruse a Quality, that it is not only
rational but necessary to derive it from the substantial Forms of bodies. But I
confess I see no necessity of believing it not to be referrable to Mechanical
Principles. For as to the chief Instances of Potential Coldness, which are
taken from the effects of some Medicines and aliments in the bodies of men, it
may be said without improbability, that the produced Refrigeration proceeds
chiefly from this, that the potentially cold body is made up of Corpuscles of
such size, shape, etc. that being resolved and disjoined by the Menstruum of
the stomach, or the fluids it may elsewhere meet with, they do so associate
themselves with the small parts of the blood and other liquors, as, by clogging
them or otherwise, to lessen their wonted agitation, and perhaps make them act
in a peculiar way as well as less briskly on the nervous and fibrous parts; and
the perception of this Imminution (and perhaps change) of motion in the organs
of feeling is that, which, being referred to the body that produces it, we call
its Potential Coldness. Which Quality* appears by this account to be, as I was
saying before, but a Relative thing, and is wont to require the diffusion or
dispersion of the small parts of the Corpuscles of the Agent, and their
mingling themselves with the liquors or the small parts of the body they are to
refrigerate. And therefore, if it be granted, that in Agues there is some
morbifick matter of a viscous or not easily dissipable texture, that is
harbor'd in some part of the body, and requires such a time to be made fluid
and resolvable; the Cold Fits of Agues need not be so much admired as they
usually are; since, though just before the Fit the same parcel of matter that
is to produce it were actually in the body, yet it was not by reason of its
clamminess actually resolved into small parts, and mingled with those of the
blood, and consequently could not make such a change in the motion of that
liquor as is felt in the Cold Fit of an Ague; (for, of the further Change that
occasions the Hot Fit, I am not here to speak) And in some other Diseases a
small quantity of matter, being resolved into minute parts, may be able to
produce a great sense of Coldness in some part of a body, which by reason of
the structure of that part may be peculiarly disposed to be affected thereby;
as I have known Hypochondriack and Hysterical women complain of great Degrees
of Coldness, that would suddenly invade some particular part, chiefly of the
Head or Back, and be for a good while troublesome there. And that, if a
frigorific vapor or matter be exceeding subtle, an inconsiderable Quantity of
it being dispersed through the blood may suffice to produce a notable
Refrigeration, I have learnt by Inquiry into the Effects of some Poisons; and
it is not very material, whether the Poison, generally speaking, be cold or hot,
if it meet with a body disposed to have those affections that pass for cold
ones produced in it. For I have made a Chemical Liquor, that was penetrant and
fiery enough to the Taste, and had acquired a Subtlety and briskness from
Distillation, with which I could almost in a trice, giving it but in the
quantity of about a drop, cast an Animal into that which appeared a sleep, and
the like Liquor, in a not much greater quantity, being, by I know not whose
mistake, applied to the aching Tooth of a very Ingenious Person, did presently,
as he soon after told me, give him an universal Refrigeration, and trembling,
worse than the cold Paroxisme of a Quartane. And though Scorpions do sometimes
cause, by their sting, violent Heats in the parts they hurt, yet sometimes also
the quite contrary happens, and their Poison proves, in a high degree,
potentially cold; as may be learnt from the two following Observations recorded
by eminent Physicians. Beniven. cap. 56. Abditorum apud Schenk. Lib. 7. de
venen. Observe. 24.
Famulum habui, (says Benivenius) qui a Scorpione ictus, tam subito ac tam
frigido sudore toto corpore perfusus est, ut algentissima nive atque glacie
sese opprimi quereretur. Verum cum algenti illi solam Theriacam ex vino
potentiore exhibuissem, illico curatus est: Thus far he: To whose Narrative I
add this of Amatus Lusitanus.

Vir qui a Scorpione in manus digito punctus fuit, Cent. 6. Observe.
multum dolebat, and refrigeratus totus contremebat, and per corpus dolores,
cute tota quasi acu puncta, formicantes patiebatur, etc.

I cannot now stay to enquire, Whether there may not be in these great
Refrigerations, made by so small a quantity of Poison, some small Concretions
or Coagulations made of the minute particles of the blood into little clots,
less agile and more unwieldy than they were when they moved separately: which
may be illustrated by the little Curdlings that may be made of the parts of
Milk by a very small proportion of Runnet or some acid liquor, and the little
coagulations made of the Spirit of Wine by that of Urine: Nor will I now
enquire, whether, besides the retardment of the motion of the blood, some
poisons and other analogous Agents may not give the motion of it a new
modification, (as if some Corpuscles that usually are more whirled or
brandished be put into a more direct Motion) that may give it a peculiar kind
of grating or other action upon the nervous and fibrous parts of the body.
These, I say, and other suspicions that have sometimes come into my thoughts, I
must not stay to examine; but shall now rather offer to Consideration, Whether,
since some parts of the humane body are very differing from others in their
structure and internal Constitution; and since also some Agents may abound in
Corpuscles of differing shapes, bulks, and motions, the same Medicine may not
in reference to the same humane body be potentially cold or potentially hot,
according as it is applied; or perhaps may, upon one or both of the accounts
newly mentioned, be cold in reference to one part of the body, and hot in
reference to the other. And these effects need not be always ascribed to the
mere and immediate action of the Corpuscles of the Medicine, but sometimes to
the new Quality they acquire in their Passage by associating themselves with
the blood or other fluids of the body, or to the expulsion of some calorific or
frigorific Corpuscles, or to the Disposition they give the part on which they
operate, to be more or less permeated and agitated than before by some subtle
ethereal matter, or other Efficients of Heat or Cold. Some of these
Conjectures about the Relative Nature of Potentially cold bodies, may be either
confirmed or illustrated by such Instances as these; that Spirit of Wine being
inwardly taken is potentially very hot, and yet being outwardly applied to some
Burns and some hot Tumors does notably abate the Heat of the inflamed parts,
though the same Spirit applied even outwardly to a tender eye will cause a
great and dolorous agitation in it. And Camphire, which in the Dose of less
than a half or perhaps a quarter of a Scruple, has been observed to diffuse a
Heat through the body, is with success externally applied by Physicians and
Surgeons in refrigerating Medicines.

But I leave the further Inquiry into the Operations of Medicines to
Physicians, who may possibly, by what has been said, be assisted to compose the
differences between some famous Writers about the temperament of some
Medicines, as Mercury, Camphire, etc. which some will have to be cold, and
others maintain to be hot; and shall only offer by way of confirming, in
general, that Potential Coldness is only a Relative Quality, a few
Particulars; the first whereof is afforded by comparing together the VI. and
the VII. Experiment before going, (which have occasioned this Digression about
Potential Coldness;) since by them it seems probable, that the same thing may
have it in reference to one body, and not to another, according to the
disposition of the body it operates upon, or that operates upon it. And the
Fumes of Lead have been observed sometimes (for I have not found the Effect to
succeed always) to arrest the fluidity of Mercury, which change is supposed to
be the effect of a Potential Coldness belonging to the Chemists Saturn in
reference to fluid Mercury, though it have not that operation on any other
liquor that we know of.

And lastly, (for I would not be too prolix) though Nitre and Sal Ammoniac be
both apart and jointly Cold in reference to Water, and though, however Nitre be
thoroughly melted in a Crucible, it will not take fire of it self, yet if,
whilst it is in Fusion, you shall by degrees cast on it some powdered Sal
Ammoniac, it will take fire and flash vehemently, almost as if Sulphur had been
injected.

But our Excursion has, I fear, lasted too long, and therefore I shall
presently re-enter into the way, and proceed to set down some Trials about Cold.

EXPER. VIII.
IN the first Experiment we observed, that upon the pouring of water upon Sal
Ammoniac there ensued an intense degree of Cold, and we have elsewhere recited,
that the like effect was produced by putting, instead of common water, Oil of
Vitriol to Sal Ammoniac; but now, to show further, what influence Motion and
Texture may have upon such Trials, it may not be amiss to add the following
Experiment: To twelve ounces of Sal Ammoniac we put by degrees an equal weight
of water, and whilst the Liquor was dissolving the Salt, and by that action
producing a great Coldness, we warily poured in twelve ounces also of good Oil
of Vitriol; of which new mixture the event was, that a notable degree of Heat
was quickly produced in the Glass wherein the Ingredients were confounded, as
unlikely as it seemed, that, whereas each of the two Liquors is wont with Sal
Ammoniac to produce an intense Cold, both of them acting on it together should
produce the contrary Quality. But the reason I had to expect the success, I met
with, was this, that 'twas probable the Heat arising from the mixture of the
two Liquors would overpower the Coldness produceable by the operation of
either, or both, of them upon the Salt.

FINIS.
EXPER. IX.
IN most of the Experiments that we have hitherto proposed, Cold is wont to be
regularly produced in a Mechanical way; but I shall now add, that in some sort
of Trials I found that the Event was varied by unobserved Circumstances; so
that sometimes manifest Coldness would be produced by mixing two Bodies
together, which at another time would upon their Congress disclose a manifest
Heat, and sometimes again, though more rarely, would have but a very faint and
remiss degree of either.

Of this sort of Experiments, whose Events I could not confidently undertake
for, I found to be, the dissolution of Salt of Tartar in Spirit of Vinegar, and
of some other Salts, that were not acid, in the same Menstruum, and even Spirit
of Verdigrease (made per se) though a more potent Menstruum than common Spirit
of Vinegar, would not constantly produce near such a heat at the beginning of
its operation, as the greatness of the seeming Effervescence, then excited,
would make one expect, as may appear by the following Observation transcribed
verbatim out of one of my Adversaria.

[Into eight ounces of Spirit of Verdigrease (into which we had put a while
before a standard-Thermoscope to acquire the like temper with the Liquor) we
put in a wide-mouthed Glass two ounces of Salt of Tartar, as fast as we durst
for fear of making the matter boil over; and though there were a great
commotion excited by the action and reaction of the Ingredients, which was
attended with a copious froth and a hissing noise; yet 'twas a pretty while
e're the Glass was sensibly warm on the outside; but by that time the salt was
all dissolved, the Liquor in the Thermoscope appeared to be impelled up about
three inches and an half.]

And yet, if my memory do not much deceive me, I have found, that by mixing
Salt of Tartar with another Salt, the Texture of the fixed Alkali was so
altered, that upon the affusion of spirit of Verdigrease, (made without spirit
of Vinegar and spirit of Wine,) though there ensued a great conflict with noise
and bubbles, yet, instead of an Incalescence, a considerable degree of Coldness
was produced.

EXPER. X.
It Is very probable that further Trials will furnish us with more Instances to
show how the Production of Cold may in some cases be effected, varied, or
hindered by Mechanical Circumstances that are easily and usually overlooked. I
remember, on this occasion, that though in the Experiment above recited we
observed, that Oil of Vitriol and water being first shaken together, the
volatile salt of Sal Ammoniac being afterward put to them, produced a sensible
Coldness; yet I found, that if a little Oil of Vitriol and of the volatile Salt
were first put together, though soon after a considerable proportion of water
were added, there would be produced not a Coldness, but a manifest degree of
Heat, which would impell up the liquor in the Thermoscope to the height of some
inches. And I remember too, that though Salt of Tartar will, as we shall see
e're long, grow hot in the water, yet having distilled some Salt of Tartar and
Cinaber in a strong fire, and put the whole Caput mortuum into distilled or
Rainwater, it made indeed a hissing there as if it had been Quicklime, but
produced no Heat, that I could by feeling perceive. I shall add, that not
only, as we have seen already, some unheeded Circumstances may promote or
hinder the artificial Production of Cold by particular Agents, but, which will
seem more strange, some unobserved, and perhaps hardly observable,
Indisposition in the Patient may promote or hinder the effects of the grand and
Catholic Efficients of Cold, whatever those be. This suspicion I represent as
a thing that further experience may possibly countenance, because I have
sometimes found, that the degree of the Operation of Cold has been much varied
by latent Circumstances, some bodies being more wrought upon, and others less,
than was upon very probable grounds expected. And particularly I remember, that
though Oil of Vitriol be one of the firiest liquors that is yet known, and does
perform some of the Operations of fire it self, (as we shall elsewhere have
occasion to show) and will thaw Ice sooner than Spirit of Wine or any other
liquor, as I have tried; yet having put about a pound or more, by our estimate,
of choice rectified Oil of Vitriol into a strong Glass-Vial proportionable to
it, we found, that, except a little that was fluid at the top, it was all
congealed or coagulated into a mass like Ice, though the Glass stood in a
Laboratory where a fire was constantly kept not far from it* and where Oil of
Vitriol very seldom or never has before or since been observed to congeal or
coagulate so much as in part. And the odness of our Phenomenon was increased
by this Circumstance, that the Mass continued solid* a good while after the
weather was grown too mild to have such Operations upon Liquors far less
indisposed to lose their fluidity by Cold, than even common Oil of Vitriol is.
On the other side I remember, that about two years ago, I exposed some Oil of
sweet Almonds hermetically sealed up in a Glass-bubble, to observe what
Condensation an intense cold could make of it, (for though Cold expands water,
it condenses common oil;) but the next day I found to my wonder, that not only
the oil remained unfrozen by the sharp frost it had been exposed to, but that
it had not its transparency troubled, though it is known, that oil will be
brought to concrete and turn opacous by a far less degree of Cold than is
requisite to freeze water; notwithstanding which this liquor, which was lodged
in a glass so thin, that 'twas blown at the flame of a Lamp, continued fluid
and diaphanous in very frosty weather, so long till I lost the expectation of
seeing it congealed or concreted. And this brings into my mind, that though
Camphire be, as I formerly noted, reckoned by many potentially cold, yet we
kept some oil of it, of our making, wherein the whole body of the Camphire
remained, being only by some Nitrous Spirits reduced to the form of an Oil; we
kept it, I say, in such intense degrees of Cold, that would have easily frozen
water, without finding it to lose its Transparency or its Fluidity.

And here I shall put an end to the first Section, (containing our Notes about
Cold) the design of which may be not a little promoted by comparing with them
the beginning of the ensuing Section. For if it be true, that (as we there
show) the nature of Heat consists either only or chiefly in the local motion
of the small parts of a body Mechanically modified by certain conditions, of
which the principal is the vehemence of the various agitations of those
insensible parts; and if it be also true, as Experience witnesses it to be,
that, when the minute parts of a body are in or arrive at such a state, that
they are more slowly or faintly agitated than those of our fingers or other
organs of feeling, we judge them cold: These two things laid together seem
plainly enough to argue, that a Privation or Negation of that Local Motion that
is requisite to constitute Heat, may suffice for the denominating a body Cold,
as Coldness is a quality of the Object, (which as it is perceived by the mind,
is also an affection of the Sentient:) And therefore an Imminution of such a
degree of former motion as is necessary to make a body Hot as to sense, and
which is sufficient to the Production of sensible Coldness, may be Mechanically
made, since Slowness as well as Swiftness being a Mode of Local motion is a
Mechanical thing: And though its effect, which is Coldness, seem a Privation or
Negation; yet the Cause of it may be a positive Agent acting Mechanically, by
clogging the Agile Calorific Particles, or deadning their motion, or perverting
their determination, or by some other intelligible way bringing them to a state
of Coldness as to sense: I say Coldness as to sense; because as it is a Tactile
Quality, in the popular acception of it, it is relative to our Organs of
Feeling; as we see that the same lukewarm water will appear hot and cold to
the same man's hands, if, when both are plunged into it, one of them shall have
been newly held to the fire, and the other be benumbed with frost. And indeed
the custom of speaking has introduced an ambiguity into the word Cold, which
often occasions mistakes, not easily without much attention and sometimes
circumlocution also to be avoided; since usually by Cold is meant that which
immediately affects the sensory of him that pronounces a body Cold, whereas
sometimes it is taken in a more general notion for such a Negation or Imminution
of motion, as though it operates not perceivably on our senses, does yet upon
other bodies; and sometimes also it is taken (which is perhaps the more
Philosophical sense) for a perception, made in and by the mind, of the
alteration produced in the Corporeal Organs by the operation of that, whatever
it be, on whose account a body is found to be cold.

But the Discussion of these Points is here purposely omitted, as for other
Reasons, so principally because they may be found expressly handled in a fitter
place.

SECT. II. Of the Mechanical Origin or Production of HEAT.
AFter having dispatched the Instances I had to offer of the Production of
Cold, it remains that I also propose some Experiments of Heat, which Quality
will appear the more likely to be Mechanically producible, if we consider the
nature of it, which seems to consist mainly, if not only, in that Mechanical
affection of matter we call Local motion mechanically modified, which
modification, as far as I have observed, is made up of three Conditions.

The first of these is, that the agitation of the parts be vehement, by which
degree or rapidness, the motion proper to bodies that are hot distinguishes
them from bodies that are barely fluid. For these, as such, require not near so
brisk an agitation, as is wont to be necessary to make bodies deserve the name
of hot. Thus we see that the particles of water in its natural (or usual)
state, move so calmly, that we do not feel it at all warm, though it could not
be a liquor unless they were in a restless motion; but when water comes to be
actually hot, the motion does manifestly and proportionably appear more
vehement, since it does not only briskly strike our organs of feeling, but
ordinarily produces store of very small bubbles, and will melt butter or
coagulated oil, cast upon it, and will afford vapors, that, by the agitation
they suffer, will be made to ascend into the air. And if the degree of Heat be
such as to make the water boil, then the agitation becomes much more manifest
by the confused motions, and waves, and noise, and bubbles, that are excited,
and by other obvious effects and Phenomenon of the vehement and tumultuous
motion, which is able to throw up visibly into the air great store of
Corpuscles, in the form of vapors or smoke. Thus in a heated Iron the vehement
agitation of the parts may be easily inferred from the motion and hissing noise
it imparts to drops of water or spittle that fall upon it. For it makes them
hiss and boil, and quickly forces their particles to quit the form of a liquor,
and fly into the air in the form of steams. And lastly, Fire, which is the
hottest body we know, consists of parts so vehemently agitated, that they
perpetually and swiftly fly abroad in swarms, and dissipate or shatter all the
combustible bodies they meet with in their way; fire making so fierce a
dissolution, and great a dispersion of its own fuel, that we may see whole
piles of solid wood (weighing perhaps many hundred pounds) so dissipated in
very few hours into flame and smoke, that oftentimes there will not be one
pound of Ashes remaining. And this is the first Condition required to Heat.

The second is this, that the determinations be very various, some particles
moving toward the right, some to the left, hand, some directly upwards, some
downwards, and some obliquely, etc. This variety of determinations appears to
be in hot bodies both by some of the Instances newly mentioned, and especially
that of flame, which is a body; and by the diffusion that metals acquire, when
they are melted, and by the operations of Heat that are exercised by hot bodies
upon others, in what posture or situation soever the body to be heated be
applied to them. As a thoroughly ignited Coal will appear every way red, and
will melt wax, and kindle brimstone, whether the body be applied to the upper
or to the lower, or to any other part of the burning Coal. And congruously to
this Notion, though air and water be moved never so vehemently, as in high
Winds and Cataracts, yet we are not to expect that they should be manifestly
hot, because the vehemence belongs to the progressive motion of the whole body;
notwithstanding which, the parts it consists of may not be near so much
quickened in their motions made according to other determinations, as to become
sensibly hot. And this Consideration may keep it from seeming strange, that in
some cases, where the whole body, though rapidly moved, tends but one way, it is
not by that swift motion perceived to be made Hot.

Nay, though the agitation be very various as well as vehement, there is yet a
third Condition required to make it Calorific, namely, that the agitated
particles, or at least the greatest number of them, be so minute as to be
singly insensible. For though a heap of sand or dust it self were vehemently
and confusedly agitated by a whirlwind, the bulk of the grains or Corpuscles,
would keep their agitation from being properly Heat, though by their numerous
strokes upon a man's face, and the brisk commotion of the spirits and other
small particles that may thence ensue, they may perchance occasion the
production of that Quality.

If some attention be employed in considering the formerly proposed Notion of
the nature of Heat, it may not be difficult to discern, that the Mechanical
production of it may be diverse ways effected. For, excepting in some few
Anomalous cases, (wherein the regular course of things happens to be
overruled,) by whatever ways the Insensible parts of a body are put into a
very confused and vehement agitation, by the same ways Heat may be introduced
into that body: agreeably to which Doctrine, as there are several Agents and
Operations by which this Calorific Motion (if I may so call it) may be excited,
so there may be several ways of Mechanically producing Heat, and many
Experiments may be reduced to almost each of them, chance it self having in the
Laboratories of Chemists afforded diverse Phenomenon referrable to one or other
of those Heads. Many of the more familiar Instances, applicable to our present
purpose, have been long since collected by our justly famous Verulam in his
short, but excellent, Paper de forma calidi, wherein (though I do not acquiesce
in every thing I meet with there) he seems to have been, at least among the
Moderns, the Person that has first handled the Doctrine of Heat like an
Experimental Philosopher. I shall therefore decline accumulating a multitude
of Instances of the Production of Heat, and I shall also forbear to insist on
such known things, as the Incalescence observable upon the pouring either of
Oil of Vitriol upon Salt of Tartar, (in the making of Tartarum Vitriolatum) or
of Aqua fortis upon Silver or Quicksilver, (in the dissolution of these Metals)
but shall rather choose to mention some few Instances not so notorious as the
former, but not unfit by their variety to exemplify several of the differing
ways of exciting Heat.

And yet I shall not decline the mention of the most obvious and familiar
Instance of all, namely the Heat observed in Quicklime upon the affusion of
cold water, because among learned men, and especially Peripateticks, I find
causes to be assigned that are either justly questionable or manifestly
erroneous. For as to what is inculcated by the Schools about the Incalescence
of a mixture of Quicklime and water by virtue of a supposed antiperistasis or
Invigoration of the internal Heat of the Lime by its being environed by cold
water, I have elsewhere shown, that this is but an Imaginary Cause, by
delivering upon Experiment (which any man may easily make) that, if instead of
cold water the liquor be poured on very hot, the ebullition of the Lime will
not be the less, but rather the greater: And Oil of Turpentine, which is a
lighter, and is looked upon as a subtiler liquor than water, though it be poured
quite cold on Quicklime, will not, that I have observed, grow so much as
sensibly hot with it.

And now I have mentioned the Incalescence of Lime, which, though an abvious
Phenomenon, has exercised the wits of diverse Philosophers and Chemists, I will
add two or three Observations in order to an Inquiry that may be some other
time made into the genuine Causes of it; which are not so easy to be found as
many learned men may at first sight imagine. The acute Helmont indeed and his
followers have ingeniously enough attempted to derive the Heat under
consideration from the conflict of some Alcalizate and Acid salts, that are to
be found in Quicklime, and are dissolved, and so set at liberty to fight with
one another by the water that slakes the Lime. But though we have some manifest
marks of an Alcalizate Salt in Lime, yet that it contains also an Acid Salt,
has not, that I remember, been proved; and if the emerging of Heat be a
sufficient reason to prove a latent acid Salt in Lime, I know not, why I may
not infer, that the like Salt lies concealed in other bodies, which the
Chemists take to be of the purest or meerest sort of Alcalys.

For I have purposely tried,

This Experiment seems to favor the opinion, that the Heat produced in Lime
whilst it is quenching, proceeds from the Empyreuma, as the Chemists call it, or
impression left by the violent fire, that was employed to reduce the stone to
Lime. But if by Empyreuma be meant a bare impression made by the fire, 'twill
be more requisite than easy, to declare intelligibly, in what that impression
consists, and how it operates to produce such considerable effects. And if the
effect be ascribed to swarms of Atoms of fire, that remain adherent to the
substance of the Lime, and are set at liberty to fly away by the liquor, which
seems to be argued by the slaking of Lime without water, if it be for some time
left in the air, whereby the Atoms of fire get opportunity to fly away by
little and little: If this, I say, be alleged, I will not deny but there may
be a sense, (which I cannot explicate in few words) wherein the Cooperation of
a substantial Effluvium, for so I call it, of the fire, may be admitted in
giving an account of our Phenomenon. But the Cause formerly assigned, as it is
crudely proposed, leaves in my mind some Scruples. For it is not so easy to
apprehend, that such light and minute bodies as those of fire are supposed,
should be so long detained as by this Hypothesis they must be allowed to be, in
Quicklime, kept in well-stopt vessels, from getting out of so laxe and porous
a body as Lime, especially since we see not a great Incalescence or Ebullition
ensue upon the pouring of water upon Minium, or Crocus Martis per se, though
they have been calcined by violent and lasting fires, whose Effluviums or
Emanations appear to adhere to them by the increase of weight, that Lead, if
not also Mars, does manifestly receive from the Operation of the Fire. To which
I shall add, that, whereas one would think that the igneous Atoms should
either fly away, or be extinguished by the supervening of water, I know, and
elsewhere give account, me by Nature, did by being several times separated and
reconjoyned without additament, at each congress produce a sensible Heat. And
an Instance of this kind, Empyreum upon all calcined bodies that will heat with
water.

And on this occasion I shall venture to add, that I have sometimes doubted,
whether the Incalescence may not much depend upon the particular Disposition of
the calcined body, which being deprived of its former moisture, and made more
porous by the fire, does by the help of those igneous Effluviums, for the most
part of a saline nature, that are dispersed through it, and adhere to it,
acquire such a Texture, that the water impelled by its own weight, and the
pressure of the Atmosphere, is able to get into a multitude of its pores at
once, and suddenly dissolve the Igneous and Alcalizate Salt it every where
meets with there, and briskly disjoyn the earthy and solid particles, that were
blended with them; which being exceeding numerous, though each of them perhaps
be very minute, and moves but a very little way, yet their multitude makes the
confused agitation of the whole aggregate of them, and of the particles of the
water and salt vehement enough to produce a sensible Heat; especially if we
admit, that there is such a change made in the Pores, as occasions a great
increase of this agitation, by the ingress and action of some subtle ethereal
matter, from which alone Monsieur des Carts ingeniously attempts to derive the
Incalescence of Lime and water, as well as that of metals dissolved in
corrosive Liquors; though as to the Phenomenon we have been considering, there
seems at least to concur a peculiar disposition of body, wherein Heat is to be
produced to do one or both of these two things, namely, to retain good store of
the igneous Effluvia, and to be, by their adhesion or some other operation of
the fire, reduced to such a Texture of its component Particles, as to be fit to
have them easily penetrated, and briskly as well as copiously dissipated, by
invading water. And this Conjecture (for I propose it as no other) seems
favored by diverse Phenomenon, some whereof I shall now annex. For here it may
be observed, that both the dissolved Salt of Tartar lately mentioned, and the
artificial Liquor that grows hot with the natural, reacquires that Disposition
to Incalescence upon a bare Constipation or closer Texture of the parts from
the superfluous moisture they were drowned in before: The Heat that brought
them to this Texture having been so gentle, that it is no way likely that the
igneous Exhalations could themselves produce such a Heat, or at least that they
should adhere in such numbers as must be requisite to such an effect, unless
the Texture of the Salt of Tartar (or other body) did peculiarly dispose it to
detain them; since I have found by Trial, that Sal Ammoniac dissolved in water,
though one would expect a great Cognation between the particles of Fire
adhering to Quicklime, and those of high rectified Spirit of Wine, which is of
so igneous a nature, as to be totally inflammable; yet I have not found, that
the affusion of Alkaol of Wine upon Quicklime, would produce any sensible
Incalescence, or any visible dissolution or dissipation of the Lime, as common
water would have done, though it seemed to be greedily enough soaked in by the
lumps of Lime. And I further tried, that, if on this Lime so drenched I poured
cold water, there insued no manifest Heat, nor did I so much as find the lump
swelled, and thereby broken, till some hours after; which seems to argue, that
the Texture of the Lime was such, as to admit the particles of the Spirit of
Wine into some of its pores, which were either larger or more congruous,
without admitting it into the most numerous ones, whereinto the Liquor must be
received, to be able suddenly to dissipate the Corpuscles of Lime into their
minuter particles, into which (Corpuscles) it seems that the change that the
aqueous particles received by associating with the spirituous ones, made them
far less fit to penetrate and move briskly there, than if they had entered
alone.

I made also an Experiment that seems to favor our Conjecture, by showing how
much the Disposition of Lime to Incalescence may depend upon an idoneous
Texture, and the Experiment, as I find it registered in one of my Memorials, is
this.

EXPER. V.
[UPon Quicklime we put in a Retort as much moderately strong Spirit of Wine
as would drench it, and swim a pretty way above it; and then distilling with a
gentle fire, we drew off some Spirit of Wine much stronger than that which had
been put on, and then the Phlegm following it, the fire was increased, which
brought over a good deal of phlegmatic strengthless Liquor; by which one would
have thought that the Quicklime had been slaked; but when the remaining matter
had been taken out of the Retort, and suffered to cool, it appeared to have a
fiery disposition that it had not before. For if any lump of it as big as a
Nutmeg or an Almond was cast into the water, it would hiss as if a coal of fire
had been plunged into the Liquor, which was soon thereby sensibly heated. Nay,
having kept diverse lumps of this prepared Calx well covered from the air for
diverse weeks, to try whether it would retain this property, I found, as I
expected, that the Calx operated after the same manner, if not more powerfully.
For sometimes, especially when 'twas reduced to small pieces, it would upon its
coming into the water make such a brisk noise, as might almost pass for a kind
of Explosion.]

These Phenomenon seem to argue, that the Disposition that Lime has to grow hot
with water, depends much on some peculiar Texture, since the aqueous parts,
that one would think capable of quenching all or most of the Atoms of Fire
that are supposed to adhere to Quicklime, did not near so much weaken the
disposition of it to Incalescence, as the accession of the spirituous
Corpuscles and their Contexture, with those of the Lime, increased that igneous
Disposition. And that there might intervene such an association, seems to me
the more probable, not only because much of the distilled Liquor was as
phlegmatic, as if it had been robbed of its more active parts, but because I
have sometimes had Spirit of Wine come over with Quicklime not in unobserved
steams, but white fumes. To which I shall add, that, besides that the Taste,
and perhaps Odor of the Spirit of Wine, is often manifestly changed by a
well-made Distillation from Quicklime; I have sometimes found that Liquor to
give the Lime a kind of Alcalizat penetrancy, not to say fieriness of Taste,
that was very brisk and remarkable. But I will not undertake, that every
Experimenter, nor I my self, shall always make trials of this kind with the
same success that I had in those above recited, in regard that I have found
Quick-limes to differ much, not only according to the degree of their
Calcination, and to their Recentness, but also, and that especially, according
to the differing natures of the stones and other bodies calcined. Which
Observation engages me the more to propose what has been hitherto delivered
about Quicklime, as only Narratives and a Conjecture; which I now perceive
has detained us so long, that I am obliged to hasten to the remaining
Experiments, and to be the more succinct in delivering them.

EXPER. VI.
ANd it will be convenient to begin with an instance or two of the Production
of Heat, wherein there appears not to intervene any thing in the part of the
Agent or Patient but Local Motion, and the natural Effects of it. And as to
this sort of Experiments, a little attention and reflection may make some
familiar Phenomenon apposite to our present purpose. When, for example, a
Smith does hastily hammer a Nail or such like piece of iron, the hammered metal
will grow exceeding hot, and yet there appears not any thing to make it so,
save the forcible motion of the hammer which impresses a vehement and variously
determined agitation of the small parts of the Iron; which being a cold body
before, by that superinduced commotion of its small parts, becomes in diverse
senses hot; first in a more lax acceptance of the word in reference to some
other bodies, in respect of whom 'twas cold before, and then sensibly hot;
because this newly gained agitation surpasses that of the parts of our fingers.
And in this Instance it is not to be overlookt, that oftentimes neither the
hammer, by which, nor the anvil, on which a cold piece of Iron is forged, (for
all iron does not require precedent ignition to make it obey the hammer)
continue cold, after the operation is ended; which shows, that the Heat
acquired by the forged piece of iron was not communicated by the Hammer or
Anvil as Heat, but produced in it by motion, which was great enough to put so
small a body as the piece of iron into a strong and confused motion of its
parts without being able to have the like operation upon so much greater masses
of metal, as the Hammer and the Anvil; though if the percussions were often and
nimbly renewed, and the Hammer were but small, this also might be heated,
(though not so soon nor so much as the iron;) by which one may also take
notice, that it is not necessary, a body should be it self hot, to be calorific.
And now I speak of striking an iron with a Hammer, I am put in mind of an
Observation that seems to contradict, but does indeed confirm, our Theory:
Namely, that, if a somewhat large nail be driven by a hammer into a plank or
piece of wood, it will receive diverse strokes on the head before it grow hot;
but when it is driven to the head, so that it can go no further* a few strokes
will suffice to give it a considerable Heat; for whilst, at every blow of the
hammer, the nail enters further and further into the wood, the motion that is
produced is chiefly progressive, and is of the whole nail tending one way;
whereas, when that motion is stopped, then the impulse given by the stroke being
unable either to drive the nail further on, or destroy its intireness, must be
spent in making a various vehement and intestine commotion of the parts among
themselves, and in such an one we formerly observed the nature of Heat to
consist.

EXPER. VII.
IN the foregoing Experiment the brisk agitation of the parts of a heated iron
was made sensible to the touch; I shall now add one of the attempts, that I
remember I made to render it discoverable to the eye it self. In order to this,
and that I might also show, that not only a sensible but an intense degree of
heat may be produced in a piece of cold iron by Local Motion, I caused a bar of
that metal to be nimbly hammered by two or three lusty men accustomed to manage
that Instrument; and these striking with as much force, and as little
intermission as they could upon the iron, soon brought it to that degree of
Heat, that not only 'twas a great deal too hot to be safely touched, but
probably would, according to my design, have kindled Gunpowder, if that which I
was fain to make use of had been of the best sort: For, to the wonder of the
bystanders, the iron kindled the Sulphur of many of the grains of the corns of
powder, and made them turn blue, though I do not well remember, that it made
any of them go off.

EXPER. VIII.
BEsides the effects of manifest and violent Percussions, such as those we have
been taking notice of to be made with a hammer, there are among Phenomenon
obvious enough, some that show the Producibleness of Heat even in cold iron, by
causing an intestine commotion of its parts: For we find, that, if a piece of
iron of a convenient shape and bulk be nimbly filed with a large rough File, a
considerable degree of Heat will be quickly excited in those parts of the iron
where the File passes to and fro, the many prominent parts of the Instrument
giving a multitude of strokes or pushes to the parts of the iron that happen to
stand in their way, and thereby making them put the neighboring parts into a
brisk and confused motion, and so into a state of Heat. Nor can it be well
objected, that upon this account the File it self ought to grow as hot as the
iron, which yet it will not do; since, to omit other answers, the whole body of
the File being moved to and fro, the same parts, that touch the iron this
moment, pass off the next, and besides have leisure to cool themselves by
communicating their newly received Agitation to the air before they are brought
to grate again upon the iron, which, being supposed to be held immovable,
receives almost perpetual shakes in the same place.

We find also, that Attrition, if it be any thing vehement, is wont to produce
Heat in the solidest bodies; as when the blade of a Knife being nimbly whetted
grows presently hot. And if having taken a brass Nail, and driven it as far as
you can to the end of the stick, to keep it fast and gain a handle, you then
strongly rub the head to and fro against the floor or a plank of wood, you may
quickly find it to have acquired a Heat intense enough to offend, if not burn
ones fingers. And I remember, that going once in exceeding hot weather in a
Coach, which for certain reasons we caused to be driven very fast, the
attrition of the Nave of the Wheel against the Axel-tree was so vehement as
obliged us to light out of the Coach to seek for water, to cool the over-chafed
parts, and stop the growing mischief the excessive Heat had begun to do.

The vulgar Experiment of strikeing fire with a Flint and Steel sufficiently
declares, what a heat in a trice may be produced in cold bodies by Percussion,
or Collision; the later of which seems but mutual Percussion.

But Instances of the same sort with the rest mentioned in this VI. Experiment
being obvious enough, I shall forbear to multiply and insist on them.

EXPER. IX.
FOr the sake of those that think the Attrition of contiguous air is necessary
to the Production of manifest Heat, I thought among other things of the
following Experiment, and made Trial of it.

We took some hard black Pitch, and having in a Basin, Poringer, or some such
Vessel, placed it a convenient distance under water, we cast on it with a good
Burning-glass the Sunbeams in such a manner, that notwithstanding the
Refraction that they suffered in the passage through the interposed water, the
Focus fell upon the Pitch, wherein it would produce sometimes bubbles,
sometimes smoke, and quickly communicated a degree of Heat capable to make
Pitch melt, if not also to boil.

EXPER. X.
THough the first and second Experiments of Section I. show, that a
considerable degree of Cold is produced by the dissolution of Sal Ammoniac in
common water; yet by an additament, though but single, the Texture of it may be
so altered, that, instead of Cold, a notable degree of Heat will be produced,
if it be dissolved in that Liquor. For the manifestation of which we devised
the following Experiment.

We took Quicklime, and slaked it in common cold water, that all the igneous
or other particles, to which its power of heating that Liquor is ascribed,
might be extracted and imbibed, and so the Calx freed from them; then on the
remaining powder fresh water was often poured, that all adhering relics of
Salt might be washed off. After this, the thus dulcified Calx, being again well
dried, was mingled with an equal weight of powdered Sal Ammoniac, and having
with a strong fire melted the mass, the mixture was poured out; and being
afterward beaten to powder, having given it a competent time to grow cold, we
put two or three ounces of it into a wide-mouthed Glass, and pouring water upon
it, within about a minute of an hour the mixture grew warm, and quickly
attained so intense a Heat, that I could not hold the Glass in my hand. And
though this Heat did not long last at the same height, it continued to be very
sensible for a considerable time after.

EXPER. XI.
TO confirm this Experiment by a notable variation; we took finely powdered Sal
Ammoniac, and filings or scales of Steel, and when they were very diligently
mixed (for that Circumstance ought to be observed) we caused them to be
gradually sublimed in a glass vessel, giving a smart fire toward the latter
end. By this Operation so little of the mixture ascended, that, as we desired,
far the greatest part of the Sal Ammoniac staid at the bottom with the metal;
then taking out the Caput mortuum, I gave it time thoroughly to cool, but in a
Glass well stopped, that it might not imbibe the moisture of the Air, (as it is
very apt to do.) And lastly, though the Filings of Steel, as well as the Sal
Ammoniac, were bodies actually cold, and so might be thought likely to
increase, not check, the coldness wont to be produced in water by that Salt;
yet putting the mixture into common water, there ensued, as we expected, an
intense degree of Heat. And I remember, that having sublimed the forementioned
Salt in distinct Vessels, with the Filings of Steel, and with Filings of
Copper, and for curiosities sake kept one of the Caput mortuums (for I cannot
certainly call to mind which of the two it was,) diverse months, (if I mistake
not, eight or nine,) we at length took it out of the Vessel, wherein it had
been kept carefully stopped, and, upon trial, were not deceived in having
expected, that all that while the disposition to give cold water a notable
degree of Heat was preserved in it.

EXPER. XII.
IF Experiments were made after the above recited manner with Sal Ammoniac and
other mineral bodies than Iron and Copper, it is not improbable, that some of
the emerging Phenomenon would be found to confirm what has been said of the
Interest of Texture, (and some few other Mechanical Affections) in the
Production of Heat and Cold. Which Conjecture is somewhat favored by the
following Trial. Three ounces of Antimony, and an equal weight of Sal Ammoniac
being diligently powdered and mixed, were by degrees of fire sublimed in a
Glass-vessel, by which Operation we obtained three differing Substances, which
we caused to be separately powdered, when they were taken out of the Subliming
Glass, lest the air or time should make any change in them; and having before
put the ball of a good sealed Weather-glass for a while into water, that the
Spirit of Wine might be brought to the temper of the external Liquor, we put on
a convenient quantity of the powdered Caput mortuum, which amounted to two
ounces, and seemed to be little other than Antimony, which accordingly did
scarce sensibly raise the Spirit of Wine in the Thermoscope, though that were a
tender one. Then laying aside that water, and putting the Instrument into
fresh, of the same temper, we put to it a very yellow Sublimate, that ascended
higher than the other parts, and seemed to consist of the more sulphurous
flowers of the Antimony, with a mixture of the more volatile parts of the Sal
Ammoniac. And this Substance made the tincted Spirit in the Thermoscope descend
very slowly about a quarter of an inch; but when the Instrument was put into
fresh water of the same temper, and we had put in some of the powder of the
lower sort of Sublimate, which was dark colored, though both the Antimony and
Sal Ammoniac, it consisted of, had been long exposed to the action of a
Subliming Heat; yet the water was thereby speedily and notably cooled,
insomuch, that the Spirit of Wine in the Weather-glass hastily descended, and
continued to sink, till by our guess it had fallen not much short of three
inches. Of these Phenomenon the Etiology, as some Moderns call the Theory,
which proposes the Causes of things, is more easy to be found by a little
consideration, than to be made out in few words.

We made also an Experiment like that above recited, by subliming three ounces
a piece of Minium and Sal Ammoniac; in which Trial we found, that though in the
Caput mortuum, the Salt had notably wrought upon the Calx of Lead, and was in
part associated with it, as appeared by the whiteness of the said Caput
mortuum, by its sweetish Taste, and by the weight (which exceeded four drams
that of all the Minium;) yet a convenient quantity of this powdered mixture
being put into water, wherein the former Weather-glass had been kept a while,
the tincted Spirit of Wine was not manifestly either raised or deprest. And
when in another Glass we prosecuted the Trial with the Sal Ammoniac that had
been sublimed from the Minium, it did indeed make the Spirit of Wine descend,
but scarce a quarter so much as it had been made to fall by the lately
mentioned Sublimate of Sal Ammoniac and Antimony.

EXPER. XIII.
It Is known that many learned men, besides several Chemical Writers, ascribe
the Incalescences, that are met with in the dissolution of Metals, to a
conflict arising from a certain Antipathy or Hostility, which they suppose
between the conflicting bodies, and particularly between the Acid Salt of the
one, and the Alcalizate Salt, whether fixed or volatile, of the other. But since
this Doctrine supposes a hatred between Inanimate bodies, in which it is hard to
conceive, how there can be any true passions, and does not intelligibly
declare, by what means their supposed Hostility produces Heat; it is not likely,
that, for these and some other Reasons, Inquisitive Naturalists will easily
acquiesce in it. And on the other side it may be considered, whether it be not
more probable, that Heats, suddenly produced in mixtures, proceed either from a
very quick and copious diffusion of the parts of one body through those of
another, whereby both are confusedly tumbled and put into a calorific motion;
or from this, that the parts of the dissolved body come to be every way in
great numbers violently scattered; or from the fierce and confused shocks or
justlings of the Corpuscles of the conflicting bodies, or masses which may be
supposed to have the motions of their parts differingly modified according to
their respective Natures: Or from this, that by the plentiful ingress of the
Corpuscles of the one into the almost commensurate parts of the other, the
motion of some etherial matter that was wont before swiftly to permeate the
distinct bodies, comes to be checked and disturbed, and forced to either
brandish or whirl about the parts in a confused manner, till it have settled it
self a free passage through the new mixture, almost as the Light does through
diverse troubled liquors and vitrified bodies, which at length it makes
transparent. But without here engaging in a solemn examination of the
Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, and without determining whether any one, or
more of the newly mentioned Mechanical Causes, or whether some other, that I
have not yet named, is to be entitled to the effect; it will not be impertinent
to propose diverse Instances of the Production of Heat by the Operation of one
Agent, Oil of Vitriol, that it may be considered whether it be likely, that
this single Agent should upon the score of Antipathy, or that of its being an
Acid Menstruum, be able to produce an intense Heat in many bodies of so
differing natures as are some of those that we shall have occasion to name. And
now I proceed to the Experiments themselves.

Take some ounces of strong Oil of Vitriol, and shaking it with three or four
times its weight of common water, though both the liquors were cold when they
were put together, yet their mixture will in a trice grow intensely hot, and
continue considerably so for a good while. In this case it cannot probably be
pretended by the Chemists, that the Heat arises from the conflict of the Acid
and Alcalizate Salts abounding in the two liquors, since the common water is
supposed an elementary body devoid of all salts; and at least, being an insipid
liquor, 'twill scarce be thought to have Alcali enough to produce by its
Reaction so intense a Heat. That the Heat emergent upon such a mixture may be
very great, when the Quantities of the mingled liquors are considerably so, may
be easily concluded from one of my Memorials, wherein I find that no more than
two ounces of Oil of Vitriol being poured (but not all at once) into four
ounces only of distilled Rainwater, made and kept it manifestly warm for a
pretty deal above an hour, and during no small part of that time, kept it so
hot, that 'twas troublesome to be handled.

EXPER. XIV.
THe former Experiment brings into my mind one that I mention without teaching
it in the History of Cold, and it appeared very surprising to those that knew
not the ground of it. For having sometimes merrily proposed to heat cold
liquors with Ice, the undertaking seemed extravagant if not impossible, but was
easily performed by taking out of a basin of cold water, wherein diverse
fragments of Ice were swimming, one or two pieces that I perceived were well
drenched with the liquor, and immersing them suddenly into a wide-mouthed Glass
wherein strong Oil of Vitriol had been put; for this Menstruum, presently
mingling with the water that adhered to the ice, produced in it a brisk heat,
and that sometimes with a manifest smoke, which nimbly dissolved the contiguous
parts of Ice, and those the next, and so the whole Ice being speedily reduced
to water, and the corrosive Menstruum being by two or three shakes well
dispersed through it, and mingled with it, the whole mixture would grow in a
trice so hot, that sometimes the Vial that contained it, was not to be endured
in ones hand.

EXPER. XV.
NOtwithstanding the vast difference betwixt common water and high rectified
Spirit of Wine, whereof men generally take the former for the most contrary
body to fire, and whereof the Chemists take the later to be but a kind of
liquid Sulphur, since it may presently be all reduced into flame; yet, as I
expected, I found upon trial, that Oil of Vitriol being mingled with pure
Spirit of Wine, would as well grow hot, as with common water. Nor does this
Experiment always require great quantities of the liquors. For when I took but
one ounce of strong Oil of Vitriol, though I put to it less than half an ounce
of choice Spirit of Wine, yet those two being lightly shaken together, did in a
trice conceive so brisk a Heat, that they almost filled the vial with fumes,
and made it so hot, thar I had unawares like to have burnt my hand with it
before I could lay it aside.

I made the like Trial with the same Corrosive Menstruum, and common Aqua vitae
bought at a Strong-water-shop, by the mixture of which Liquors, Heat was
produced in the Vial that I could not well endure.

The like success I had in an Experiment wherein Oil of Vitriol was mixed with
common Brandy; save that in this the Heat produced seemed not so intense as in
the former Trial, which it self afforded not so fierce a Heat as that which was
made with rectified Spirit of Wine.

EXPER. XVI.
THose Chemists, who conceive that all the Incalescencies of bodies upon their
being mixed, proceed from their antipathy or hostility, will not perhaps expect,
that the parts of the same body, (either numerically, or in specie, as the
Schools phrase it,) should, and that without manifest conflict, grow very hot
together. And yet having for trials sake put two ounces of Colcothar so
strongly calcined, that it was burnt almost to blackness, into a Retort, we
poured upon it two ounces of strong Oil of English Vitriol, and found, that
after about a minute of an hour they began to grow so hot, that I could not
endure to hold my hand to the bottom of the Vessel, to which the mixture gave a
heat, that continued sensible on the outside for between twenty and thirty
minutes.

EXPER. XVII.
THough I have not observed any Liquor to equal Oil of Vitriol in the number of
Liquors with which it will grow hot; yet I have not met with any Liquor
wherewith it came to a greater Incalescence than it frequently enough did with
common Oil of Turpentine. For when we caused diverse ounces of each to be well
shaken together in a strong vessel, fastened, to prevent mischief, to the end
of a pole or staff; the Ebullition was great and fierce enough to be not
undeservedly admired by the Spectators. And this brings into my mind a pleasant
adventure afforded by these Liquors, of each of which, having for the
Production of Heat and other purposes, caused a good bottle full to be put up
with other things into a box, and sent down into the Country with a great
charge, that care should be had of the Glasses; the Wagon, in which the box was
carried, happened by a great jolt, that had almost overturned it, to be so
rudely shaken, that these Glasses were both broken, and the Liquors, mingling
in the box, made such a noise and stink, and sent forth such quantities of
smoke by the vents, which the fumes had opened to themselves, that the
Passengers with great outcries and much haste threw themselves out of the
Wagon, for fear of being burnt in it.

The Trials we made with Oil of Turpentine, when strong Spirit of Nitre was
substituted in the stead of Oil of Vitriol, belong not to this place.

EXPER. XVIII.
BUt though Petroleum, especially when rectified, be, as I have elsewhere
noted, a most subtle Liquor, and the lightest I have yet had occasion to try;
yet to show you how much the Incalescence of Liquors may depend upon their
Texture, I shall add, that having mixed by degrees one ounce of rectified
Petroleum, with an equal weight of strong Oil of Vitriol, the former Liquor
seemed to work upon the Surface of this last named, almost like a Menstruum,
upon a metal, innumerous and small bubbles continually ascending for a while
into the Oleum Petrae, which had its color manifestly altered and deepen'd by
the operation of the spirituous parts. But by all the action and re-action of
these Liquors, there was produced no such smoking and boiling, or intense
heat, as if Oil of Turpentine had been employed instead of Oil of Vitriol; the
change which was produced as to Qualities being but a kind of Tepidness
discoverable by the Touch.

Almost the like success we had in the Conjunction of Petroleum, and Spirit of
Nitre, a more full account whereof may be elsewhere met with.

In this and the late Trials I did not care to make use of Spirit of Salt,
because, at least, if it be but ordinarily strong, I found its operation on the
Liquors above mentioned inconsiderable, (and sometimes perhaps scarce sensible)
in comparison of those of Oil of Vitriol, and in some cases of dephlegm'd
Spirit of Nitre.

EXPER. XIX.
EXperienced Chemists will easily believe, that 'twere not difficult to
multiply Instances of Heat producible by Oil of Vitriol upon solid bodies,
especially Mineral ones. For it is known, that in the usual preparation of
Vitriolum Martis, there is a great effervescence excited upon the affusion of
the Oil of Vitriol upon Filings of Steel, especially if they be well drenched
in common water. And it will scarce be doubted, but that, as Oil of Vitriol
will (at least partly) dissolve a great many both calcined and testaceous
bodies, as I have tried with Lime, Oyster-shells, etc. so it will, during the
dissolution, grow sensibly, if not intensely hot with them, as I found it to do
both with those newly named, and others, as Chalk, Lapis Calaminaris, etc. with
the last of which, if the Liquor be strong, it will heat exceedingly.

EXPER. XX.
WHerefore I will rather take notice of its Operation upon Vegetables, as
bodies which corrosive Menstruums have scarce been thought fit to dissolve and
grow hot with. To omit then Cherries, and diverse Fruits abounding in watery
juices, with which, perhaps on that very account, Oil of Vitriol will grow hot;
I shall here take notice, that for trial sake, having mixed a convenient
quantity of that Liquor with Raisins of the Sun beaten in a Mortar, the Raisins
grew so hot, that, if I misremember not, the Glass that contained it had almost
burnt my hand.

These kind of Heats may be also produced by the mixture of Oil of Vitriol with
diverse other Vegetable Substances; but, as far as I have observed, scarce so
eminently with any dry body, as with the crumbs of white bread, (or even of
brown) with a little of which we have sometimes produced a surprising degree of
Heat with strong or well-dephlegm'd Oil of Vitriol, which is to be supposed to
have been employed in the foregoing Experiments, and all others mentioned to be
made by the help of that Menstruum in our Papers about Qualities, unless it be
in any particular case otherwise declared.

EXPER. XXI.
It Is as little observed that Corrosive Menstruums are able to work, as such,
on the soft parts of dead Animals, as on those of Vegetables, and yet I have
more than once produced a notable Heat by mixing Oil of Vitriol with minced
flesh whether roasted or raw.

EXPER. XXII.
THough common Sea Salt does usually impart some degree, though not an intense
one, of Coldness unto common water, during the act of Dissolution; yet some
Trials have informed me, that if it were cast into a competent quantity of Oil
of Vitriol, there would for the most part ensue an Incalescence, which yet did
not appear to succeed so regularly, as in most of the foregoing Experiments.
But that Heat should be produced usually, though not perhaps constantly, by the
abovenamed Menstruum and Salt, seems therefore worthy of our notice, because
it is known to Chemists, that common Salt is one main Ingredient of the few that
make up common factitious Sal Ammoniac, that is wont to be sold in the Shops.
And I have been informed, that the excellent Academians of Florence have
observed, that Oil of Vitriol would not grow hot but cold by being put upon Sal
Ammoniac: Something like which I took notice of in rectified Spirit of Sulphur
made per Campanam, but found the effect much more considerable, when, according
to the Ingenious Florentine Experiment, I made the Trial with Oil of Vitriol;
which Liquor having already furnished us with as many Phenomenon for our
present purpose as could be well expected from one Agent, I shall scarce in
this Paper about Heat make any farther use of it, but proceed to some other
Experiments, wherein it does not intervene.

EXPER. XXIII.
WE took a good lump of common Sulphur of a convenient shape, and having rubbed
or chafed it well, we found, as we expected, that by this attrition it grew
sensibly warm; and, That there was an intestine agitation, which you know is
Local Motion, made by this attrition, did appear not only by the newly
mentioned Heat, whose nature consists in motion, and by the antecedent
pressure, which was fit to put the parts into a disorderly vibration, but also
by the sulphurous steams, which 'twas easy to smell by holding the Sulphur to
ones nose, as soon as it had been rubbed. Which Experiment, though it may seem
trivial in it self, may be worth the consideration of those Chemists, who would
derive all the Fire and Heat we meet with in sublunary bodies from Sulphur. For
in our case a mass of Sulphur, before its parts were put into a new and brisk
motion, was sensibly cold, and as soon as its parts were put into a greater
agitation than those of a man's fingers, it grew sensibly hot; which argues,
that 'twas not by its bare presence, or any emanative action, (as the Schools
speak) that the Sulphur communicated any Heat to my hand; and also that, when
'twas briskly moved, it did impress that Quality, was no more than another
solid body, though incombustible as common Glass, would have done, if its parts
had been likewise put into an agitation surpassing that of my organs of
feeling; so that in our Experiment, Sulphur it self was beholden, for its
actual Heat, to Local Motion, produced by external agents in its parts.

EXPER. XXIV.
WE thought it not amiss to try, whether when Sal Ammoniac, that much
infrigidates water, and Quicklime, which is known to heat it, were by the fire
exquisitely mingled, the mixture would impart to the Liquor a moderate or an
intense degree of either of those Qualities. In prosecution of which Inquiry we
took equal parts of Sal Ammoniac and Quicklime, which we fluxed together, and
putting an ounce, by ghess, of the powdered mixture into a Vial with a
convenient quantity of cold water, we found, that the colliquated mass did, in
about a minute, strike so great a heat through the Glass upon my hand, that I
was glad to remove it hastily for fear of being scorched.

EXPER. XXV.
WE have given several, and might have given many more, Instances of the
Incalescence of Mixtures, wherein both the Ingredients were Liquors, or at
least one of them was a fluid body. But sometimes Heat may also be produced by
the mixture of two powders; since it has been observed in the preparation of
the Butter or Oil of Antimony, that, if a sufficient quantity of beaten
Sublimate be very well mingled with powdered Antimony, the mixture, after it
has for a competent time (which varies much according to circumstances, as the
weather, vessel, place, etc. wherein the Experiment is made) stood in the air,
would sometimes grow manifestly hot, and now and then so intensely so, as to
send forth copious and fetid fumes almost as if it would take fire. There is
another Experiment made by the help of Antimony, and a pulverized body, wherein
the mixture, after it had been for diverse hours exposed to the air, visibly
afforded us mineral Fumes. And to these I could add more considerable, and
perhaps scarce credible, Instances of bodies growing hot without Liquors, if
Philanthropy did not forbid me. But to return to our Butter of Antimony, it
seems not unfit to be enquired, whether there do not unobservedly intervene an
aqueous moisture, which (capable of relaxing the salts, and setting them a
work) I therefore suspected might be attracted (as men commonly speak) from the
air, since the mixture of the Antimony and the Sublimate is prescribed to be
placed in Cellars; and in such we find, that Sublimate, or at least the saline
part of it, is resolved per deliquium, (as they call it) which is nothing but a
solution made by the watery steams wandering in the Air.

EXPER. XXVI.
I Have formerly delivered some Instances of the Incalescence produced by water
in bodies that are readily dissolved in it, as Salt of Tartar and Quicklime.
But one would not lightly expect, that mere water should produce an
Incalescence in solid bodies that are generally granted to be insoluble in it;
and are not wont to be, at least without length of time, visibly wrought on by
it; and yet trial has assured me, that a notable Incalescence may be produced
by common water in flower or fine powder of Sulphur, and Filings of Steel or
Iron. For when, in Summer time, I caused to be mingled a good quantity, (as
half a pound or rather a pound of each of the Ingredients) and caused them to
be thoroughly drenched with common water, in a convenient quantity whereof they
were very well stirred up and down, and carefully mingled, the mixture would in
a short time, perhaps less than an hour, grow so hot, that the Vessel that
contained it could not be suffered in ones hand; and the Heat was manifested to
other Senses than the Touch, by the strong sulphurous stink that invaded the
nose, and the thick smoke that ascended out of the mixture, especially when it
was stirred with a stick or spattle. Whether the success will be the same at
all times of the year, I do not know, and somewhat doubt, since I remember not,
that I had occasion to try it in other Seasons than in Summer, or in Autumn.

EXPER. XXVII.
IN the Instances that Chemistry is wont to afford us of the Heat produced by
the action of Menstruums upon other bodies, there intervenes some liquor,
properly so called, that wets the hands of those that touch it; and there are
diverse of the more judicious Chemists, that join with the generality of the
Naturalists in denying, that Quicksilver, which is indeed a fluid body, but not
a moist and wetting one in reference to us, will produce Heat by its immediate
action on any other body, and particularly on Gold. But though I was long
inclinable to their opinion, yet I cannot now be of it, several Trials having
assured me, that a Mercury, whether afforded by Metals and Minerals, or
impregnated by them, may by its preparation be enabled to insinuate it self
nimbly into the body of Gold, whether calcined or crude, and become manifestly
incalescent with it in less than two or three minutes of an hour.

EXPER. XXVIII.
SInce we know that some natural Salts, and especially Saltpeter, can produce
a Coldness in the water they are dissolved in, I thought it might not be
impertient to our enquiry into Heat and Cold, and might perhaps also contribute
somewhat to the discovery of the Structure of Metals, and the salts that
corrode them, if Solutions were made of some Saliform'd bodies, as Chemists
call them, that are made up of metalline and saline parts, and do so abound
with the latter, that the whole Concretions are on their account dissoluble in
common water.

Other Experiments of this sort belonging less to this place than to another, I
shall here only for example sake take notice of one that we made upon
Quicksilver, which is esteemed the coldest of Metals. For having by distilling
from it four times its weight of Oil of Vitriol, reduced it to a powder, which
on the account of the adhering Salts of the Menstruum that it detained, was
white and glistering, we put this powder into a wide-mouthed Glass of water,
wherein a sealed Weather-glass had been left before it began manifestly to heat
the water, as appeared by the quick and considerable ascent of the tincted
Spirit of Wine, that continued to rise upon putting in more of the Magistery;
which warm event is the more remarkable, because of the observation of Helmont,
that the Salt adhering to the Mercury, corroded in good quantity by Oil of
Vitriol, if it be washed off and coagulated, becomes a kind of Alom.

The event of the former Trial deserves the more notice, because having after
the same manner and with the same Weather-glass made an Experiment with common
water, and the powder of Vitriolum Martis, made with Oil of Vitriol and the
Filings of Steel, the tincted Spirit of Wine was not at all impelled up as
before, but rather, after a while, began to subside, and fell, though very
slowly, about a quarter of an inch. The like Experiment being tried with
powdered Sublimate in common water, the liquor in the Thermoscope was scarce at
all sensibly either raised or deprest, which argued the alteration as to Heat
or Cold, to have been either none or very inconsiderable.

Having given warning at the beginning of this Section, that in it I aimed
rather at offering various than numerous Experiments about the Production of
Heat, I think what has been already delivered may allow me to take leave of
this Subject without mentioning diverse Instances that I could easily add, but
think it fitter at present to omit. For those afforded me by Trials about
Antiperistasis belong to a Paper on that Subject. Those that might be offered
about Potential Heat in humane bodies, would perchance be thought but
unnecessary after what has been said of Potential Coldness; from which an
attentive Considerer may easily gather, what according to our Doctrine is to be
said of the contrary Quality. And diverse Phenomenon, which would have been of
the most considerable I could have mentioned of the Production of Heat, since
in them that Quality is the most exalted, I reserve for the Title of
Combustibleness and Incombustibility, having already suffered this Collection
(or rather Chaos) of Particulars about the Production of Heat to swell to too
great a bulk.

FINIS.
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF TASTES. By
the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF TASTES.
TO make out the Mechanical Origin or Production of Sapors, as far as is
necessary for my present purpose, 'twill be expedient to premise in general,
that, according to our notion of Tastes, they may depend upon the bigness,
figure and motion of the saporifick corpuscles, considered separately, and as
the affections of single and very minute particles of matter; or else in a
state of conjunction, as two or more of these affections, and the particles
they belong to, may be combined or associated, either among themselves, or with
other particles, that were not saporous before. And as these Coalitions and
other Associations come to be diversified; so the Tastes, resulting from them,
will be altered or destroyed.

But, to handle these distinctly and fully, were a task not only too difficult
and long, but improper in this place, where I pretend to deliver not
Speculations, but matters of Fact: in setting down whereof nevertheless, to
avoid too much confusion, I am content, where I can do it readily and
conveniently, in some of my Trials, to couch such references as may best point
at those Heads, whence the Mechanical explications may be derived, and
consequently our Doctrine confirmed.

By Taste considered as belonging to the Object, (under which Notion I here
treat of it,) I mean that quality, or whatever else it be, which enables a body
by its operation, to produce in us that sensation, which we feel or perceive
when we say we taste.

That this something, whether you will call it a quality, or whatever else it
be that makes or denominates an object saporous, or rather (if I may be allowed
a barbarous term) saporifick, may so depend upon the shape, size, motion, and
other Mechanical affections of the small parts of the tasted body, and result
from the association of two or more of them, not excluding their congruity or
incongruity to the organs of Tasting, may be made probable by the following
Instances.

EXPER. I.
To divide a Body, almost insipid, into two Bodies of very strong and very
differing Tastes.
IT IS observed, that Saltpeter refined, and by that purification freed from
the Sea Salt that is wont to be mingled with it, does rather cool the tongue,
than make any great saporifick impressions on it. And though I will not say,
that it is, as some have thought, an insipid body; yet the bitterishness, which
seems to be its proper taste, is but very faint and languid. And yet this almost
insipid body, being distilled by the way of Inflammation, (which I elsewhere
teach,) or even by the help of an additament of such clay as is it self a
tastless body, will afford a Nitrous spirit, that is extremely sharp or
corrosive upon the tongue, and will dissolve several Metals themselves, and a
fixed salt, that is likewise very strongly tasted, but of a taste altogether
different from that of the Spirit, that is extremely sharp or corrosive upon
the tongue; and accordingly, this salt will dissolve diverse compact bodies that
the other will not work on, and will precipitate diverse metals and other
concretes out of those solutions, that have been made of them by the Spirit.

EXPER. II.
Of two Bodies, the one highly Acid and corrosive, and the other Alkalizat and
fiery, to produce a Body almost insipid.
THis may be performed by the way I have elsewhere mentioned of composing
Saltpeter. For if upon a liquour of fixed Nitre, made per Deliquium, you warily
drop good Spirit of Nitre, till it be just enough to satiate the Alkaly, (for
if there be too much or too little, the Experiment may miscarry,) we may by a
gentle evaporation, and sometimes without it, and that in a few minutes, obtain
Crystals, which, being dried after they have been, if it be needful, freed
from any adhering particles, (not of their own nature,) will have upon the
tongue neither a sharp nor an alkalizate taste, but that faint and scarce
sensible bitterness that belongs to Saltpeter, if it be pure Saltpeter; for
the impure may perhaps strongly relish of the common Salt that is usually
contained in it.

The like production of Saltpeter we have sometimes made in far less time, and
sometimes indeed in a trice, by substituting, in stead of the fixed Salt of
Nitre, the saline parts of good Pot ashes, carefully freed by solution and
filtration from the earthy and feculent ones.

I have sometimes considered, whether the Phenomenon of these two Experiments
may not be explicated by supposing them to arise from the new magnitudes and
figures of the particles, which the fire, by breaking them, or forcibly rubbing
them one against the other, or also against the Corpuscles of the additament,
may be presumed to give them; as if, for example, since we find the larger and
best formed Crystals of Nitre to be of a prismatical shape with six sides, we
should suppose the corpuscles of Nitre to be little prisms, whose angles and
ends are too obtuse or blunt to make vigorous and deep impressions on the
tongue; and yet, if these little prisms be by a violent heat split, or
otherwise broken, or forcibly made as it were to grind one another, they may
come to have parts so much smaller than before, and endowed with such sharp
sides and angles, that, being dissolved and agitated by the spittle that
usually moistens the tongue, their smalness may give them great access to the
pores of that organ, and the sharpness of their sides and points may fit them
to stab and cut, and perhaps sear the nervous and membranous parts of the organ
of Taste, and that variously, according to the grand diversities, as to shape
and bulk, of the saporifick particles themselves. And this being granted, it
seemed further conceivable, that when the Alkalizate and Acid particles come to
be put together in the fluid mixture, wherein they swam, many of them might,
after a multitude of various justlings and occursions, meet with one another so
luckily and opportunely, as to recompose little prisms, or convene into other
bodies, almost like those that made up the Crystals of Nitre, before 'twas
exposed to the fire. To illustrate which, we may conceive, that, though a prism
of iron may be so shaped, that it will be wholly unfit to pierce the skin; yet
it may be so cut by transverse planes reaching to the opposite bases or ends,
as to afford wedges, which, by the sharpness of their edges, may be fit both to
cleave wood, and cut the skin; and these wedges, being again put together after
a requisite manner, may recompose a prism, whose extremes shall be too blunt to
be fit for the former use. This may be also illustrated by the breaking of a
dry stick circularly cut off at the ends, which though it is unapt, whilst
entire and of that bulk, to prick the hand; yet if it be violently broken, the
ragged ends of it and the splinters may prove stiff, slender, and sharp enough
to pierce and run into the hand: To which diverse other such Mechanical
Illustrations might be added. But, since I fear you think, as well as I, the
main conjecture may not be worthy any farther prosecution, I shall not insist
any longer on it. And because the historical part of these Experiments was for
the main delivered by me already in the Essay about the Analysis and
Redintegration of Nitre, I shall now proceed to other Trials.

EXPER. III.
Of two Bodies, the one extremely bitter, and the other exceeding salt, to make
an insipid mixture.
TO make this Experiment, we must very warily pour upon Crystals made of
Silver, dissolved in good Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre, strong brine made of
common salt and water. For the mixture of these two being dried, and afterward
brought to fusion in a Crucible, and kept a competent while in that state, will
afford a tough mass, the Chemists call Luna Cornea, which you may lick diverse
times, and scarce judge it other than insipid; nor will it easily be brought to
dissolve in much more piercing Menstruums than our spittle, as I have elsewhere
shown.

EXPER. IV.
Of two Bodies, the one extremely sweet, and the other salter than the
strongest Brine, to make an insipid mixture.
THE doing of this requires some skill and much wariness in the Experimenter,
who, to perform it well, must take a strong solution of Minium, made with an
appropriated Menstruum, as good Spirit of Vinegar, or else Saccharum Saturni it
self, dissolved in a convenient Vehicle; and then must have great care and
caution to put to it, by degrees, a just proportion of strong Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, or the like Urinous Spirit, till the whole be precipitated; and if
the two former tastes are not sufficiently destroyed in the mixture, it may be
dried and fluxed, as was above directed about Luna Cornea.

EXPER. V.
Of an insipid Body and a sour one, to make a Substance more bitter than Gall
or Aloes.
THis is easily performed by dissolving in strong Spirit of Nitre or good Aqua
fortis as much pure Silver as the Menstruum will take up; for, this solution
being filtrated, has been often esteemed more bitter than so much Gall or
Wormwood, or any other of those simples that have been famous for that quality:
And if the superfluous moisture be abstracted, you may by coagulation obtain
Crystals of Luna, that have been judged more strongly bitter than the solution
it self. And that the corpuscles of these Crystals should leave a far more
lasting taste of themselves, than the abovementioned bitter bodies are wont to
do, will not seem so mavelous, as I remember some that tried have
complained; if we take notice, how deep the particles of these Crystals may
pierce into the spungy organs of Taste, since, if one does but touch the pulp or
nail of ones finger, (first a little wetted with spittle or otherwise,) with
the powder of these Crystals, they will so penetrate the skin or nail, and
stick so fast there, that you cannot in a reasonable time wash the stain off of
the skin, and much less off of the nail, but it will continue to appear many
hours on the former, and many days on the other.

EXPER. VI.
Of an insipid Body and a highly corrosive one, to make a Substance as sweet as
Sugar.
THis is easily done, by putting upon good Minium purified Aqua fortis or
Spirit of Nitre, and letting them work upon one another in a gentle heat, till
the liquour have dissolved its full proportion of the metal. For then, if the
ingredients were good, and the operation rightly performed, the Menstruum would
have a sweetness like that of ordinary Saccharum Saturni. But 'twas not for
nothing that I intimated, the ingredients should be also pure and good in their
kind; for, if the Minium be adulterated, as often it is, or the Spirit of Nitre
or Aqua fortis be mingled, as it is usual before it be purged with Spirit of
common Salt or other unfit ingredients, the operation may be successless, as I
have more than once observed.

EXPER. VII.
Of obtaining without addition from the sweetest Bodies, Liquours corrosive
enough to dissolve Metals.
IF Sugar be put into a sufficiently capacious Retort, and warily distilled,
(for otherwise it will be apt to break the Vessel) it will afford, among other
things, a copious red Spirit, which, being slowly rectified, will lose its
color, and come over clear. The Caput Mortuum of the Sugar, which I have more
than once had of an odd Contexture, may be found either almost or altogether
insipid. And though the Spirit will be of a very penetrant taste, yet it will be
very far from any kind of sweetness; and though that liquour be thought to be
homogeneous, and to be one of the Principles of the analized Sugar, yet (as I
have elsewhere shown) I found it to be a mixture of two Spirits; with the one
of which, besides bodies of a less close Texture, I dissolved (even in the
cold) crude Copper, as was easy to be seen by the deep and lovely color of
the solution. And to these sour Spirits, afforded by Sugar it self, we have
restored a kind of Saccharine sweetness, by compounding them with the particles
of so insipid a body as Minium; part of which they will in digestion dissolve.
A like Spirit to that distilled from Sugar may be obtained from Honey; but in
regard of its aptness to swell exceedingly, Chemists are not wont to distill it
without Sand, Brick, or some other additament.

EXPER. VIII.
To divide a Body, bitter in the highest degree, into two Substances, the one
extremely sour, and the other perfectly insipid.
THis is easily done by putting some fine Crystals of Luna into a good Retort,
and then distilling them in a Sand-furnace, capable of giving them so strong a
fire, as to drive away all the spirits from the Silver. For, this remaining
behind, according to its metalline nature, will be insipid, and the spirits,
that are driven away from it, will unite in the Receiver into an acid and
corrosive Menstruum.

EXPER. IX.
To produce variety of Tastes in one insipid Body, by associating it with diverse
Menstruums.
AS this operation may, upon the account I elsewhere mention, be serviceable to
investigate the figures of the particles of dissolved metals and other bodies;
so it is very fit to manifest, what we would here have it show, how much Taste
may be diversified by, and consequently depend upon, Texture; since a body that
has no taste, may, in conjunction with sapid bodies, give them strong tastes all
differing from one another, and each of them from that which the saporous
bodies had before. I could propose diverse ways of bringing this to trial, there
being several insipid bodies, which I have found this way diversifiable. But
because I remember not, that I have met with any mineral, that is dissoluble by
near so many saline Menstruums, as Zinke, I look on that as the most fertile
Subject to afford Instances to our present purpose. For I have found, that it
will be dissolved not only by Aqua fortis, Aqua Regis, Oil of Vetriol, Spirit
of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, and other mineral Menstruums, but also by Vegetable
Spirits, as distilled Vinegar, and by Animal ones too, as Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac; though the one be Acid, and the other Urinous. And if the several
Solutions, which may be made of this mineral, by so many differing liquours, be
compared, the number of their differing tastes will suffice to make good the
Title of the Experiment.

EXPER. X.
To produce variety of Tastes with one Menstruum, by associating it with insipid
Bodies.
THis Proposition a Mathematician would go near to call the Converse of the
foregoing; and as it may serve as well as that to discover the structure of the
minute parts of diverse metalline and mineral bodies; so it may not only as
well, but better than that, serve us to illustrate the Corpuscularian Doctrine
of Tastes, by showing us, that a single, and, as far as Chemistry teaches us, a
simple body, endowed with a peculiar taste, may, by being compounded with
others, each of them insipid of it self, produce a considerable number of
differing tastes. There may be more Instruments than one made use of in this
Trial; but of those that are known, and we may easily obtain, the most proper
are Spirit of Nitre, and good Aqua fortis: For that, with refined Silver, will
make a Solution bitter as Galls; with Lead, 'twill be of a Saccharine
sweetness; with that part of Tin, which it will keep dissolved, (for the
greatest it is wont but to corrode and praecipitate) it produces a taste very
distant from both the former, but not odious; with Copper, it affords an
abominable taste; with Mercury and Iron, it affords other kinds of bad Tastes.
Nor are Metals the only mineral bodies it will work upon: For, 'twill dissolve
Tin-glass, Antimony, Brass; to which I could add Emery, Zinke, and other bodies
whereon I have tried it. All which together will make up no despicable number
of differing Tastes.

EXPER. XI.
Of two Liquours, the one highly corrosive, and the other very pungent and not
pleasant, to compose a Body of a pleasant and Aromatic Taste.
THis Experiment, which I elsewhere mention to other purposes, does in some
regards better suit our present design, than most of the foregoing; since here
the Corrosive Menstruum is neither mortified by fixed nor urinous Salts,
supposed to be of a contrary nature to it; nor yet, as 'twere, tired out nor
disarmed by corroding of metals or other solid bodies. The Experiment being
somewhat dangerous to make at first in great, it may suffice for our present
turn, to make it in the less quantity, as follows.

Take one ounce of strong Spirit of Nitre, or of very good Aqua fortis it self,
and put to it by little and little, (which caution if you neglect, you may soon
repent it,) and another ounce of such rectified Spirit of Wine, as, being
kindled in a Spoon, will flame all away: When these two liquours are well mixed,
and grown cold again, you may, after some digestion, or, if have require,
without it, distill them totally over together, to unite them exquisitly into
one liquour, in which, if the operation have been well performed, the corrosive
particles of the Salts will not only loose all their cutting acidity,
wherewith they wounded the palate; but by their new composition with the Vinous
Spirits, the liquour acquires a Vinous taste, that is not only not acid or
offensive, but very pleasing, as if it belonged to some new or unknown Spice.

EXPER. XII.
To imitate by Art, and sometimes even in Minerals, the peculiar Tastes of
natural Bodies, and even Vegetables.
THis is not a fit place to declare, in what sense I do or do not admit of
Souls in Vegetables, nor what I allow or deny to the Seminal or Plastic
principle ascribed to Plants: But perhaps it will not be erroneous to conceive,
that, whatever be the Agent in reference to those Tastes, that are said to be
specific to this or that Plant, that, on whose immediate account it is or
becomes of this or that nature, is a complication of Mechanical Affections, as
shape, size, etc. in the particles of that matter which is said to be endowed
with such a specific taste.

To illustrate this, I thought it expedient, to endeavor to imitate the taste
of some Natural bodies by Artificial Compositions or Preparations, but found it
not easy, beforehand to be assured of the success of such Trials: And
therefore I shall content my self here to mention three or four Instances,
that, except the first, are rather Observations than such Experiments as we are
speaking of.

I remember then, that, making some Trials to alter the sensible Qualities of
Smell, Taste, etc. of Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine, I obtained from them,
among other things that suited with my design, a certain Liquour, which, though
at first pleasant, would, at a certain nick of time, make one that had it in
his mouth think it had been imbued with Garlic.

And this brings into my mind, that a skilful person, famous for making good
Sider, coming one day to advise with me, what he should do to heighten the
taste of it, and make it keep the longer, complained to me, that having, among
other trials, put into a good Vessel full of juice of Apples a certain
proportion of Mustard Seed, with hopes it would make the Sider more spirituous
and pickant, he found, to his wonder and loss, that, when he came to draw it,
it stank of Garlic so rank, that every body rejected it.

I remember also, that, by fermenting a certain proportion (for that we found
requisite) of semen Dauci with Beer of Ale, the Liquour had a very pleasant
Relish of Limon-pills.

But that seems much more considerable, which I shall now add; That, with an
insipid Metal and a very corrosive Menstruum, one may compound a taste, that I
have several times observed to be so like a Vegetable, that I presume it may
deceive many. This may be done by dissolving Gold, without any gross Salt, in
the mixture of Aqua fortis and the Spirit of Salt, or even in common Aqua
Regis, made by dissolving Sal Ammoniac in Aqua fortis. For if the Experiment be
happily made, one may obtain either a Solution or a Salt, whose austere taste
will very much resemble that of Sloes, or of unripe Bullace. And this taste,
with some little variety, I found in Gold dissolved without any distilled
Liquour at all; and also, if I much forget not, in Gold that by a peculiar
Menstruum I had volatilized.

The last Instance I shall give of the imitation of Tastes, I found to have
been, for the main, known to some ingenious Ladies. But to make the Experiment
succeed very well, a due proportion is the principal Circumstance, which is
wont to be neglected. I cannot readily call to mind that which I found to
succeed best; but the Trial may be indifferently well made after such a manner
as this:

Take a pint or a pound of Malaga or Canary Sack, (for though French and the
like Wines may serve the turn, yet they are not so proper;) and put into it a
dram or two of good odoriferous Orrice Roots, cut into thin slices, and let
them infuse in the Liquour a convenient time, 'till you perceive that they have
given it a desired taste and smell; then keep the thus perfumed Wine exactly
stopped in a cool place: According to which way, I remember, that (when I hit
on the right proportion of Ingredients, and kept them a due time in infusion) I
had many years ago a Wine, which, being colored with Cocheneele, or some such
tingeing ingredient, was taken for good Rasberry-Wine, not only by ordinary
persons, but, among others, by a couple of eminent Physicians, one of whom
pretended to an extraordinary criticalness of palate on such occasions; both of
them wondering, how at such an unlikely time of the year, as I chose to present
them that Liquour among others, I could have such excellent Rasberry-Wine: Some
of which (to add that by the by) I found to preserve the specific taste two or
three years after it was made.

A Short EXCURSION About some Changes made OF TASTES BY MATURATION.
IT will not perhaps be thought impertinent, but rather necessary, to add a
word or two on this occasion for their sakes, that think the Maturation of
Fruits, and the changes of Tastes, by which it is usually known, must needs be
the effect of the Vegetable Soul of the Plant. For, after the Fruit is
gathered, and so, by being no longer a part of the Tree, does, according to the
most common opinion, cease to be a part of the living Plant, as a Hand or a
Foot cut off is no more reckoned among the Lims of the man it belonged to; yet
it is very possible that some Fruits may receive maturation, after they have
been severed from the Plants that bore them. For, not to mention, that Apples,
gathered somewhat before the time, by lying in heaps, do usually obtain a
mellowness, which seems to be a kind or degree of Maturation; or that Medlars,
gathered whilst they are hard and harsh, do become afterward in process of
time soft and better tasted; in which state though some say they are rotten,
yet others think that supposed rottenness is the proper Maturity of that kind
of Fruit: Not to mention these, I say, or the like Instances, it is a famous
Assertion of several Writers of the Indian affairs, that the Fruit they call
Bananas is usually gathered green, and hung up in bunches or clusters in the
house, where they ripen by degrees, and have an advantageous change made both
of their color and of their taste. And this an ancient acquaintance of mine, a
literate and observing person, of whom I inquired about it, assured me, he had
himself lately tried and found to be true in America. And indeed I see not, why
a convenient degree of warmth, whether external from the Sun and fire, or
internal from some degree of fermentation or analogous intestine Commotion, may
not (whether the Fruit be united to the Plant or no) put the sporifick
Corpuscles into motion, and make them, by various and insensible transcursions,
rub against each other, and thereby make the little bodies more slender or
thin, and less rigid, or cutting and harsh, than they were before, and by
various motions bring the Fruit they compose to a state wherein it is more soft
in point of consistence, and abound in Corpuscles less harsh and more pliable,
than they were before, and more congruous to the pores of the organ of Taste:
And, in a word, make such a change in the constitution of the Fruit, as men are
wont to express by the name of Maturity. And that such Mechanical changes of
Texture may much alter the Qualities, and among them the Taste of a Fruit, is
obvious in bruised Cherries and Apples, which in the bruised parts soon come to
look and taste otherwise than they did before. This possibility of this is also
obvious by Wardens, when slowly roasted in embers with so gentle a fire, as not
to burn off the paper they are wont to be wrapped in, to be kept clean from the
ashes. And I have seen, in the bordering Country betwixt France and Savoy, a
sort of Pears, (whose name I now remember not,) which being kept for some hours
in a moderate heat, in a Vessel exactly closed, with embers and ashes above and
beneath them, will be reduced to a juicy Substance of a lovely red color, and
very sweet and lushious to the taste. Many other sorts of Fruit in other
Countries, if they were handled after the same way, or otherwise skilfully
wrought on by a moderate heat, would admit as great alterations in point of
taste. Neither is that sort of Pear to be here omitted, which by mere
Compression, duly ordered, without external heat, will in a few minutes be
brought to exchange its former hardness and harshness for so yielding a
Contexture and pleasant a taste, as I could not but think very remarkable. And
that even more solid and stubborn Salts than those of Vegetables, may have the
sharpness and piercingness of their tastes very much taken off by the bare
internal action of one part upon the other, without the addition of any
sweetning body, I have been induced to think by having found, upon trial, that,
by the help of insipid Water, we may, without any violence of Fire, reduce
Sea Salt into a Brine of so mild and peculiar (I had almost said) pleasant a
taste, that one would scarce suspect what it had been, or believe that so great
a change of a Mineral body could be effected by so slight an intestine
Commotion as indeed produced it; especially, since the alteration of tastes was
not the most considerable that was produced by this Operation.

As to Liquours that come from Vegetables, the emerging of new Sapors upon the
intestine Commotion of the saporifick parts, as Consequences of such
Commotions, is more obvious than is commonly considered in the juice of Grapes,
which, from a sweet and spiritless Liquour, do by that internal motion we call
Fermentation, acquire that pleasing pungency and briskness of taste that belongs
to Wine, and afterward degenerates into that acid and cutting taste that is
proper to Vinegar; and all this, by a change of Constitution made by the action
of the parts themselves on one another, without the help of any external
additament.

FINIS.
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF ODOURS. By
the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, ^rinted by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF ODOURS.
SInce Tastes and Odours (perhaps by reason of the nearness of the Organs they
affect) are wont, by Physical Writers, to be treated of next to one another, I
also shall imitate them in handling those two Qualities, not only for the
intimated Reason, but because, what I have premised in general, and some other
things that I have said already under the Title of Tastes, being applicable to
Odours also, 'twill not be necessary, and therefore 'twould be tedious, to
repeat them here.

EXPER. I.
With two Bodies, neither of them odorous, to produce immediately a strong
Vrinous smell.
TAke good Quicklime and Sal Ammoniac, and rub or grind them well together,
and holding your Nose to the mixture, you will be saluted with an Urinous smell
produced by the particles of the volatile Salt, united by this operation, which
will also invade your Eyes, and make them to water.

EXPER. II.
By the bare addition of common Water, to produce immediately a very strong
smell in a Body that had no such smell before.
THis is one of the Phenomenon of an Experiment made with Camphire and Oil of
Vitriol, which I have elsewhere mentioned to another purpose. For, if in that
corrosive Menstruum you dissolve a good proportion, but not too much, of the
strongly sented Gum, the odor of the Camphire will be quite concealed in the
mixture; but if you pour this mixture into a good quantity of fair Water, the
dissolved Gum will immediately recover out of the Menstruum, and smell as
strong as before, if not (by reason of the warmth produced in the Operation)
more strongly.

EXPER. III.
Of producing some Odours, each of them quite differing from that of any of the
Ingredients.
HAving taken two ounces (or parts) of clear Oil of Turpentine, and mixed it
with one ounce (or part) of Oil of Vitriol, (which must be done by degrees, for
otherwise the Vessel will be endangered,) the clear Liquour that came over,
upon the distillation of the mixture in a Sand-furnace, in stead of the odor
of Turpentine, (for the Oil of Vitriol alone is wont to be inodorous,) smelt
very strong of Sulphur; insomuch that once, when I showed this Experiment,
approaching my Nose very boldly and hastily to the Receiver newly severed from
the Retort, the sulphurous stink proved so strong, that it had almost (to
speak with the vulgar) taken away my breath. And to illustrate yet farther the
possible emergency of such odours upon the mixture of Ingredients, as neither
of them was apart endowed with, we caused the substance that remained behind in
the Retort (in the form of a thin extract) after one of the newly mentioned
Distillations to be farther pressed by a stronger fire, which forced most of it
over, partly in the form of a thick Oil, and partly in that of Butter; both
which we keep together in the same Vial, because their odor is neither that of
Oil of Turpentine, nor that of Brimstone, but they smell exceedingly like the
distilled Oil of Beeswax.

EXPER. IV.
About the production of some Odours by Local motion.
I Shall not now examine, whether the Local motion of an external Agent may
not, without materially concurring to the operation, produce, by agitating and
shuffling the parts, odorous corpuscles: But that the celerity and other
modifications of the Local motion of the effluvia of Bodies may not only serve
to diversifie their odours, but so far produce them, as to make them
perceptible by the sense, which otherwise would not be so, may be gathered from
some observations, which, being obvious, are not so proper for this place.
Wherefore I shall rather take notice, that I know several Bodies that are not
only inodorous when cold, but when considerably hot, and are fixed in the fire,
and yet, by having their parts put into a peculiar kind of agitation, will
presently grow plainly odorous. On this occasion I shall add, that, as there
are some very hard Woods, that acquire a strong smell by the motion they may be
exposed to in a Turner's Lath, (as I have observed by trialls particularly made
with the hard and ponderous Lignum Vitae,) so some afford, whilst the operation
lasts, an unexpected odor. And having inquired about this matter of two
eminent Artists, (whom I often employ,) concerning the odor of Beech-wood
whilst it is turning, they both agreed, that it would emit well-sented
effluviums. And one of them affirmed to me farther, that, having bought a great
block of that Wood, to make diverse pieces of workmanship with it, when he came
to turn it, there would issue out not only a copious odor, but of such a
peculiar fragrancy, that one that knew not whence it proceeded would have
concluded he was smelling Roses.

EXPER. V.
By mixing a good proportion of a very strongly sented Body with an almost
inodorous one, to deprive it speedily of all its smell.
TAke Salt of Tartar, and drop upon it either Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis
not too much dephlegmed, till all the effervescence cease, and the Liquour will
no longer work upon the Alkali. These, by a slow Evaporation of the superfluous
moisture, may be made to shoot into Crystalls like those of Nitre, which, after
you have (if need be) by rubbing them with a dried cloth, freed them from
loose adhering Corpuscles, will emulate Saltpeter, as in other Qualities, so
in its not being odorous; though, if you distill them, or burn them on kindled
coals, their fumes will quickly make you sensible, that they abounded with the
stinking Spirits, that make Aqua fortis so offensive to the smell.

EXPER. VI.
By putting a very strongly stinking Body to another of a not sweet smell, to
produce a mixture of a pleasant and strongly Aromatic odor.
WHat is here proposed is performed at the same time that the Eleventh of the
foregoing Experiments of Tastes is made. For the Liquour thereby produced, if it
be well prepared, has not only a spicy taste, but also a kind of Aromatic and
pleasant smell; and I have some now by me, that, though kept not
over-carefully, does, after some years, retain much of its former odor, though
not so much as of its taste.

EXPER. VII.
By digesting two Bodies, neither of them well sented, to produce Bodies of a
very subtle and strongly fragrant odor.
WE took a pound (for instance) of Spanish Wine, and put to it some ounces of
Oil of Vitriol; then, keeping them for a reasonable time in digestion, we
obtained, as we expected, a mixture odoriferous enough. But this Trial you
will find improved by that which insues.

EXPER. VIII.
By the bare addition of a Body almost inodorous, and not well sented, to give
a pleasant and Aromatic smell to Spirit of Wine.
THis we have several times done, by the ways elsewhere related for another
scope, the sum of which, as far as it needs be mentioned in this place, is
this.

We took good Oil of blew Vitriol (that was brought from Dantzick,) though the
very common will serve well, and having put to it, by degrees, an equal weight
of Spirit of Wine totally inflammable, we digested them together, for two,
three, or four weeks, (sometimes much longer, and then with better success;)
from which, when we came to distill the mixture, we had a very fragrant Spirit,
which was sometimes so subtle, that, though distilled in a tall Glass with a
gentle Heat, it would (in spite of our care to secure the closeness of the
Vessels at the junctures) pierce through, and fill the Laboratory with a
perfume, which, though men could not guess what body afforded it, yet they
could not but wonder at it. Whence we may learn, both how much those spirituous
and inflammable particles, the Chemists call the vegetable Sulphur of Wine, may
work on and ennoble a mineral Sulphur; (for, that such an one there is in Oil
of Vitriol, I have elsewhere proved by experience;) and how much the new
Commistions and Contextures made by digestion may alter the odours of Bodies,
whether Vegetable or Mineral. That also another Constitution of the same
matter, without any manifest addition or recess of particles, may proceed to
exhibit a very differing smell, will appear by the following Trial.

EXPER. IX.
To make the forementioned fragrant Body, without addition or fire, degenerate
into the rank smell of Garlic.
TO make out this, I need only relate, that I have more than once put the
above mentioned fragrant Liquour in stopped Glasses, whereof the one, and not the
other, stood in a warm place, till in process of time I found that odoriferous
Liquour so to degenerate in point of sent, that one would have thought it to
have been strongly infected with Garlic. And the like unpleasant Smell I
observed in a certain Oil made of Vegetable and Mineral Substances distilled
together.

And on this occasion I will add, (though not as an Argument,) this
Observation, which though I shall not undertake it will always succeed, I think
may not impertinently be set down in this place, partly because of the likeness
of the odor produced, to that which was the effect of the last named Trial;
and partly (or rather chiefly) because it may show us, that a Body, which it
self is not only inodorous, but very fixed, may yet, in some cases, have a
great stroke in the Phenomenon of Odours; whether by being wrought on by, and
sometimes mingled with, the parts of the odorous body, and thereby giving it a
new modification, I shall not now stay to enquire.

We took then good Salt of Tartar, and put to it several times its weight of
the expressed juice of Onions; we kept them in a light digestion for a day or
two, and then unstopping the Vial, we found the former smell of the Onions
quite degenerated into a rank smell of Garlic, as was judged, even when fresh
juice of Garlic was procured to compare them. To vary this Experiment, we made
with fixed Salts, and some other strongly sented Juices, Trialls, whose events
'twould perhaps be tedious here to relate.

EXPER. X.
With an inodorous Body, and another not well-sented, to produce a muskie smell.
THis we have sometimes done by casting into Spirit (not Oil) of Vitriol a
large proportion of small Pearls unbroken. For the action of the acid Menstruum
upon these being moderated, partly by the weakness of the Menstruum, and partly
by the intireness of the Pearls, the dissolution would sometimes last many
hours. Holding from time to time my nose to the open orifice of the Glass,
'twas easy to perceive a pleasant muskie smell, which also others, to whom I
mentioned it, took notice of as well as I. And, if I misremember not, I took
notice of the like smell, upon Pearls not only dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar,
but in another Liquour that had but a bad sent of its own. The foregoing
Experiment calls to my mind that which follows.

EXPER. XI.
With fixed Metals, and Bodies either inodorous or stinking, to produce strong
and pleasant smells, like those of some Vegetables and Minerals.
THat Gold is too fixed a body to emit any odor, and that Aqua Regis has an
odor that is very strong and offensive, I think will be easily granted. But
yet Aurum fulminans being made (as it is known) by precipitating with the
inodorous Oil of Tartar the Solution made of the former in the latter, and this
Precipitate being to be farther proceeded with in order to another Experiment;
we fulminated it per se in a Silver Vessel like that, but better contrived,
that is (if I misremember not) somewhere described by Glauberus. And among
other Phenomenon of this operation, that belong not to this place, we observed
with pleasure, that, when the fulmination was recently made, the steams, which
were afforded by the metal that had been fired, were endowed with a delightful
smell, not unlike that of musk. From which Experiment and the foregoing we may
learn, that Art, by lucky Contextures, may imitate the odours that are presumed
to be natural and specific; and that Mineral and Vegetable Substances may
compound a smell that is thought to be peculiar to Animals.

And as Art sometimes imitates Nature in the production of Odours, as may be
confirmed by what is above related concerning counterfeit Rasberry-Wine,
wherein those that drank it believed they did not only taste, See in the Paper
of Tastes, Exper. XII.
but smell the Rasberry; so sometimes Nature seems to imitate her self, in
giving like odours to bodies extremely differing. For, not yet to dismiss the
smell of Musk, there is a certain Seed, which, for the affinity of its odor to
that perfume, they call the Musk-seed; and indeed, having some of it presented
me by a Gentleman, that had newly brought it from the West Indies, I found it,
whilst 'twas fresh, to have a fragrancy suitable to the name that was given it.
There is also a sort of Rats in Muscovy, whose skins, whereof I have seen
several, have a smell that has procured them the name of Musk-Rats. To which I
know not, whether we may not add the mention of a certain sort of Ducks, which
some call Musk-Ducks, because at a certain season of the year, if they be
chafed by violent motion, they will under the wing emit a musky in stead of a
sweaty sent; which upon trial I perceived to be true. On the other side, I have
known a certain Wood growing in the Indies, which, especially when the sent is
excited by rubbing, stinks so rankly and so like Paracelsus's Zibetum
Occidentale, (stercus Humanum,) that one would swear it were held under his
Nose. And since I have been speaking of good sents produced by unlikely means,
I shall not pretermit this Observation, that, though generally the fire
impresses a strong offensive smell, which Chemists therefore call
Empyreumatical, upon the odorous bodies that it works strongly on; yet the
constitution of a body may be such, that the new Contexture that is made of its
parts, even by the violence of the fire, shall be fit to afford Effluviums
rather agreeable to the organs of smelling, than any way offensive. For I
remember, that, having for a certain purpose distilled Saccharum Saturni in a
Retort with a strong fire, I then obtained, (for I dare not undertake for the
like success to every Experimenter,) besides a piercing and Empyreumatical
Liquour that was driven over into the Receiver, a good Lump of a Caput Mortuum
of a grayish color, which, notwithstanding the strong impression it had
received from the fire, was so far from having any Empyreumatical sent, that it
had a pleasing one, and when 'twas broken, smelt almost like a fine Cake new
baked, and broken whilst yet warm. And as the fire, notwithstanding the
Empyreuma it is wont to give to almost all the bodies it burns, may yet be
reduced to confer a good smell on some of them, if they be fitted upon such a
contexture of their parts to emit steams of such a nature, (whatever were the
efficient cause of such a contexture;) so we observe in the Musk animal, that
Nature in that Cat, or rather Deer, (though it properly belong to neither
kind,) produces Musk by such a change, as is wont in other Animals to produce a
putrefactive stink. So that, provided a due constitution of parts be introduced
into a portion of matter, it may on that account be endowed with noble and
desirable Sents, or other Qualities, though that Constitution were introduced
by such unlikely means, as Combustion and Putrefaction themselves. In
Confirmation of which, I shall subjoyn in the ensuing account a notable, though
casual, Phenomenon, that occurred to a couple of Virtuosi of my Acquaintance.

An eminent Professor of Mathematics affirmed to me, that, chancing one day in
the heat of Summer with another Mathematician (who I remember was present when
this was told) to pass by a large Dunghill that was then in Lincolns-Inn-fields,
when they came to a certain distance from it, they were both of them surprised
to meet with a very strong smell of Musk, (occasioned, probably, by a certain
degree or a peculiar kind of Putrefaction,) which each was for a while shy of
taking notice of, for fear his Companion should have laughed at him for it;
but, when they came much nearer the Dunghill, that pleasing smell was succeeded
by a stink proper to such a heap of Excrements. This puts me in mind of adding,
that, though the excrements of Animals, and particularly their sweat, are
usually foetid; yet, that it is not the nature of an excrement, but the
constitutions, that usually belong to them, make them so, has seemed probable
to me upon some Observations. For, not to mention, what is related of Alexander
the Great, I knew a Gentleman of a very happy Temperature of body, whose sweat,
upon a critical examination, wherein I made use also of a surprise, I found to
be fragrant; which was confirmed also by some Learned men of my acquaintance,
and particularly a Physician that lay with him.

Though Civet usually passes for a Perfume, and as such is wont to be bought at
a great rate; yet it seems to be but a clammy excrement of the Animal that
affords it, which is secreted into Bags provided by Nature to receive it. And I
the rather mention Civet, because it usually affords a Phenomenon that agrees
very well with the Mechanical Doctrine concerning Odours, though it do not
demonstrate it. For, when I have had the curiosity to visit diverse of those
Civet-Cats, (as they call them) though they have heads liker Foxes than Cats; I
observed, that a certain degree of Laxity (if I may so style it) of the odorous
Atmosphere was requisite to make the smell fragrant. For, when I was near the
Cages, where many of them were kept together, or any great Vessel full of
Civet, the smell (probably by the plenty, and perhaps the over-brisk motion of
the effluvia,) was rather rank and offensive than agreeable; whereas, when I
removed into the next room, or to some other convenient distance, the steams
(being less crowded, and farther from their fountain,) presented themselves to
my Nostrills under the notion of a Perfume.

And, not to dismiss this our Eleventh Experiment without touching once more
upon Musk, I shall add, that an Ingenious Lady, to whom I am nearly related,
showed me an odd Monkey, that had been presented her as a rarity by the then
Admiral of England, and told me, among other things, that she had observed in
it, that, being sick, he would seek for Spiders as his proper remedies, for
some of which he then seemed to be looking, and thereby gave her occasion to
tell me this; which when he had eaten, the alteration it made in him would
sometimes fill the room with a musky sent: But he had not the good luck to
light on any whilst my visit lasted.

EXPER. XII.
To heighten good smells by Composition.
IT IS well known to Perfumers, and is easy to be observed, that Ambergris
alone, though esteemed the best and richest perfume that is yet known in the
world, has but a very faint and scarce a pleasant sent. And I remember, that I
have seen some hundreds of ounces together newly brought from the East Indies;
but if I had not been before acquainted with the smell of Ambergris alone,
and had had only the vulgar conceit of it, that it is the best and strongest of
perfumes, my Nostrills would scarce have made me suspect those lumps to have
been any thing akin to Ambergris. But if a due proportion of Musk, or even
Civet, be dexterously mixed with Amber, the latent fragrancy, though it be
thereby somewhat compounded, will quickly be called forth, and exceedingly
heightened. And indeed it is not, as it is commonly presumed, the plenty of the
richest Ingredients, as Ambergris and Musk, but the just proportion and
skilful mixture of them, that makes the noblest and most lasting perfume, of
which I have had sufficient experience; so that with a far less quantity of
Musk and Amber, than not only ordinary persons, but Perfumers themselves are
wont to employ, we have had several Perfumes, that for fragrancy were much
preferred to those where Musk and Ambergris are so plentifully employed. The
proportions and ways of mixture we best approved of, would be too long, and are
not necessary, to be here set down; but you will not much err in making use of
such a proportion as this, viz. eight parts of Ambergris, two of Musk, and
one of Civet: which quantities of Ingredients if they be skilfully and exactly
mingled, you will not miss of a good Composition, with which you may innoble
other materials, as Benzoin, Storax, sweet Flowers, etc. fit to make Pastills,
Ointments for Leather, Pomander, etc. And we may here add, that, upon the score
of the new Texture acquired by Composition, some things, that are not fragrant
themselves, may yet much heighten the fragrancy of Odoriferous bodies. And of
liquid perfumes I remember, 'twas the secret of some Court-Ladies, noted for
Curiosity about perfumes, to mingle always a due proportion of Wine-vinegar
with the odoriferous Ingredients. And on this occasion, to show the power of
mixtures in improving Odours, I shall add something about a Liquour of mine,
that has had the good fortune to be very favorably spoken of by persons of
Quality accustomed to choice Perfumes. This Liquour; though thought an
elaborate preparation, as well for another reason, as to recommend it to some,
whose Critical palates can taste the very titles of things, I called it Essence
of Musk, is indeed a very plain simple preparation, which I thus make.

I take an arbitrary Quantity of choice Musk without finely powdering it, and
pour upon it about a finger's breadth of pure Spirit of Wine; these in a Glass
closely stopped I set in a quiet place to digest, without the help of any
Furnace, and after some days, or a few weeks, (according as Circumstances
determined,) the Spirit, which is somewhat odd, will in the cold have made a
solution of the finest parts of the Musk, and will be thereby much tinged, but
not of a red color. This Liquour being decanted, I keep by it self as the
richest of all; and pour a like quantity of Spirit on the remaining Musk, which
usually will in the cold, though more slowly, draw a tincture, but fainter than
the former, which being poured off, the remaining Musk may be employed for
inferior uses. Now that which made me mention this Preparation as pertinent to
our present Subject, is this Phenomenon of it, that the first essence, or
rather tincture, being smelt to by it self, has but a faint, and not very
pleasing, odor of Musk, so that every body would not discover that there was
Musk in it; but if a single drop, or two drops at most, were mixed with a pint,
or perhaps a quart, of good Sack, the whole body of the Wine would presently
acquire a considerably musky sent, and be so richly perfumed both as to taste
and smell, as seemed strange enough to those that knew the vast disproportion
of the Ingredients.

FINIS.
OF THE IMPERFECTION OF THE Chymist's DOCTRINE OF QUALITIES. By the Honorable
ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

OF THE IMPERFCTION OF The Chymist's Doctrine OF QUALITIES.
CHAP. I.
SInce a great part of those Learned Men, especially Physicians, who have
discerned the defects of the vulgar Philosophy, but are not yet come to
understand and relish the Corpuscularian, have slid into the Doctrine of the
Chemists; and since the Spagyrists are wont to pretend to make out all the
Qualities of bodies from the Predominancy of some one of their three
Hypostatical Principles, I suppose it may both keep my opinion from appearing
too presumptuous, and (which is far more considerable) may make way for the
fairer Reception of the Mechanical Hypothesis about Qualities, if I here
intimate (though but briefly and in general) some of those defects, that I have
observed in Chemists Explications of Qualities.

And I might begin with taking notice of the Obscurity of those Principles,
which is no small defect in Notions whose proper office it should be to conduce
to the illustration of others. For, how can that facilitate the understanding
of an obscure Quality or Phenomenon which is it self scarcely intelligible, or
at least needs almost as much explanation as the thing it is designed and
pretended to explicate? Now a man need not be very conversant in the writings
of Chemists to observe, in how Laxe, Indefinite, and almost Arbitrary Senses
they employ the Terms of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; of which I could never find
that they were agreed upon any certain Definitions or settled Notions; not only
differing Authors, but not unfrequently one and the same, and perhaps in the
same Brook, employing them in very differing senses. But I will not give the
Chemists any rise to pretend, that the chief fault that I find with their
Hypothesis is but verbal; though that it self may not a little blemish any
Hypothesis, one of the first of whose Requisites ought to be Clearness; and
therefore I shall now advance and take notice of defects that are manifestly of
another kind.

And first the Doctrine that all their Theory is grounded on, seems to me
Inevident and undemonstrated, not to say precarious. It is somewhat strange to
me, that neither the Spagyrists themselves, nor yet their Adversaries, should
have taken notice, that Chemists have rather supposed than evinced, that the
Analysis of bodies by fire, or even that at least some Analysis is the only
instrument of investigating what Ingredients mixed bodies are made up of, since
in diverse cases That may be discovered by Composition as well as by Resolution;
as it may appear, that Vitriol consists of metalline parts (whether Martial, or
Venereal, or both) associated by Coagulation with acid ones, one may, I say,
discover this as well by making true Vitriol with Spirit (improperly called
Oil) of Sulphur, or that of Salt, as by distilling or Resolving Vitriol by the
fire.

But I will not here enlarge on this subject, nor yet will I trouble you with
what I have largely discoursed in the Skeptical Chemist, to call in question
the grounds on which Chemists assert, that all mixed bodies are compounded of
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. For it may suffice me now to tell you, that,
whatsoever they may be able to obtain from other bodies, it does not appear by
Experience, which is the grand, if not the only, Argument they rely on, that
all mixed bodies that have Qualities, consist of their tria prima, since they
have not been able, that we know, truly, and without new Compositions, to
resolve into those three, either Gold, or Silver, or Crystal, or Venetian
Talck, or some other bodies, that I elsewhere name; and yet these bodies are
endowed with diverse Qualities, as the two former with Fusibleness and
Malleability, and all of them with Weight and Fixity; so that in these and the
like bodies, whence Chemists have not made it yet appear, that their Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury, can be truly and adequately separated, 'twill scarce be
other than precarious, to derive the malleableness, color, and other Qualities
of such bodies from those Principles.

Under this Head I consider also, that a great part of the Chemical Doctrine of
Qualities is bottomed on, or supposes, besides their newly questioned Analysis
by fire, some other things, which, as far as I know, have not yet been well
proved, and I question whether they ever will be.

One of their main Suppositions is, that this or that Quality must have its
(...), as Sennertus, the Learned Champion of this opinion, calls it, or some
particular material Principle, to the participation of which, as of the primary
native and genuine subject, all other bodies must owe it: But upon this point
having purposely discoursed elsewhere, I shall now only observe, that, not to
mention Local motion and Figure, I think 'twill be hard to show, what is the
(...) of Gravity, Volatility, Heat, Sonorousness, Transparency and Opacity,
which are Qualities to be indifferently met with in bodies whether simple or
mixed.

And whereas the Spagyrists are wont to argue, that, because this or that
Quality is not to be derived truly from this or that particular Principle, as
Salt, for instance, and Mercury; therefore it must needs be derivable from the
third, as Sulphur. This way of arguing involves a farther Supposition than that
newly examined. For it implies, that every Quality in a compounded body must
arise from some one of the tria prima, whereas experience assures us, that
bodies may, by Composition, obtain Qualities, that were not to be found in any
of the separate Ingredients. As we see in painting, that though blew and yellow
be neither of them green, yet their mixture will be so. And though no single
Sound will make an octave or diapason; yet two sounds, whose proportion is
double, will have an eighth. And Tinn and Copper melted and mingled together in
a due proportion, will make a bell-metal far more sonorous than either of them
was before. It Is obvious enough for Chemists themselves to observe, that,
though Lead be an insipid body, and Spirit of Vinegar a very sharp one, yet
Saccharum Saturni, that is compounded out of these two, has a sweetness that
makes it not ill deserve its name.

But this ill-grounded Supposition of the Chemists, is extended farther in an
usual Topic of theirs, according to which they conclude, That I know not how
many Qualities, as well manifest as occult, must be explicated by their tria
prima, because they are not explicable by the four elements of the
Peripateticks. To make which argumentation valid, it must be proved, (which I
fear it will never be) that there are no other ways, by which those Qualities
may be explicated, but by a determinate number of Material Principles, whether
four or three: Besides that, till they have shown that such Qualities may be
intelligibly explicated by their Principles, the objection will lie as strong
for the Aristotelians against them, as for them against the Aristotelians.

CHAP. II.
NExt I consider, that there are diverse Qualities even in mixed bodies, wherein
it does not appear, that the use of the Chemical Doctrine is Necessary. As, for
instance, when pure Gold is by Heat only brought to fusion, and consequently
to the state of fluidity, and upon the remission of that heat, grows a solid
and consistent body again, what addition or expulsion or change of any of the
tria prima does appear to be the cause of this change of consistence? Which is
easy to be accounted for according to the Mechanical way, by the vehement
agitation that the fire makes of the minute parts of the Gold to bring it to
fusion; and the cohesion of those parts, by virtue of their gravity and fitness
to adhere to one another, when that agitation ceases. When Venice Glass is
merely by being beaten to powder deprived of its Transparency and turned into a
body opacous and white, what need or use of the tria prima have we in the
explication of this Phenomenon? Or of that other which occurs, when by barely
melting down this white and opacous body it is deprived of its opacity and
color, and becomes diaphanous? And of this sort of Instances you will meet
with diverse in the following Notes about particular Qualities; for which reason
I shall forbear the mention of them here.

CHAP. III.
I Observe too, that the Spagyrical Doctrine of Qualities is Insufficient and
too narrow to reach to all the Phenomenon or even to all the notable ones, that
ought to be explicable by them. And this Insufficiency I find to be twofold;
for, first, there are diverse Qualities, of which Chemists will not so much as
attempt to give us explications, and of other particular Qualities the
explications, such as they are that they give us, are often very deficient and
unsatisfactory; and do not sometimes so much as take notice of diverse
considerable Phenomenon that belong to the Qualities whereof they pretend to
give an account; of which you will meet with diverse Instances in the ensuing
Notes. And therefore I shall only, (to declare my meaning the better,) invite
you to observe with me, that though Gold be the body they affect to be most
conversant with; yet it will be very hard to show, how the specific weight of
Gold can be deduced from any or all of the three Principles, since Mercury it
self, that is of bodies, known to us, the heaviest next to Gold, is so much
lighter than Gold, that, whereas I have usually found Mercury to be to an equal
weight of water, somewhat, though little, less than fourteen to one, I find
pure Gold to be about nineteen times as heavy as so much water. Which will make
it very difficult, not to say impossible for them to explain, how Gold should
barely by participating of Mercury, which is a body much lighter than it self,
obtain that great specific gravity we find it to have; for the two other
Hypostatical Principles, we know, are far lighter than Mercury. And I think it
would much puzzle the Chemists, to give us any examples of a compounded body,
that is specifically heavier than the heaviest of the Ingredients that it is
made up of. And this is the first kind of Insufficiency I was taking notice of
in the Chemical Doctrine of Qualities.

The other is, That there are several bodies which the most Learned among
themselves confess not to consist of their tria prima, and yet are endowed with
Qualities, which consequently are not in those subjects to be explicated by the
tria prima which are granted not to be found in them. Thus elementary Water,
though never so pure, (as distilled Rainwater,) has fluidity and coldness and
humidity and transparency and volatility, without having any of the tria prima.
And the purest Earth, as Ashes carefully freed from the fixed salt, has gravity
and consistence and dryness and color and fixity, without owing them either to
Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury; not to mention, that there are Celestial bodies
which do not appear, nor are wont to be pretended, to consist of the tria
prima, that yet are endowed with Qualities. As the Sun has Light, and as many
Philosophers think, Heat, and Color; and the Moon has a determinate
consistence and figuration, (as appears by her mountains) and Astronomers
observe, that the higher Planets and even the Fixed stars appear to be
differingly colored. But I shall not multiply Instances of this kind, because
what I have said, may not only serve for my present purpose, but bring a great
Confirmation to what I lately said, when I noted, that the Chemical Principles
were in many cases not necessary to explicate Qualities: For since in Earth,
Water, etc. such diffused Qualities, as gravity, fixtness, color, transparency
and fluidity, must be acknowledged not to be derived from the tria prima; it is
plain, that portions of matter may be endowed with such Qualities by other
causes and agents than Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. And then why should we deny,
that also in compounded bodies those Qualities may be (sometimes at least)
produced by the same or the like Causes? As we see, that the reduction of a
diaphanous Solid to powder, produces whiteness, whether the comminution happens
to Rock-crystal or to Venice glass, or to Ice: The first of which is
acknowledged to be a natural and perfectly mixed body; the second a factitious
and not only mixed but decompounded body; and the last, for ought appears, an
elementary body, or at most very slightly and imperfectly mixed. And so by
mingling Air in small portions with a diaphanous Liquor, as we do when we beat
such a Liquor into foam, a whiteness is produced, as well in pure Water, which
is acknowledged to be a simple body, as in white Wine, which is reckoned among
perfectly mixed bodies.

CHAP. IV.
I Further observe, that the Chemists Explications do not reach deep and far
enough. For first, most of them are not sufficiently distinct and full, so as
to come home to the particular Phenomenon, nor often times so much as to all
the grand ones, that belong to the History of the Qualities they pretend to
explicate* You will readily believe, that a Chemist will not easily make out by
his Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, why a Loadstone capp'd with steel may be made
to take up a great deal more Iron, sometimes more than eight or ten times as
much, than if it be immediately applied to the iron; or why, if one end of the
Magnetic Needle is disposed to be attracted by the Northpole, for instance, of
the Lodestone, the other Pole of the Lodestone will not attract it but drive
it away: or, why a bar or rod of iron, being heated red-hot and cooled
perpendicularly, will with its lower end drive away the flower de Luce, or the
North-end of a Mariners Needle, which the upper end of the same bar or rod
will not repel but draw to it. In short, of above threescore Properties or
notable Phenomenon of Magnetic Bodies, that some Writers have reckoned up, I do
not remember that any three have been by Chemists so much as attempted to be
solved by their three Principles. And even in those Qualities, in whose
explications these Principles may more probably than elsewhere pretend to have
a place, the Spagyrists accounts are wont to fall so short of being distinct
and particular enough, that they use to leave diverse considerable Phenomenon
untouched, and do but very lamely or slightly explicate the more obvious or
familiar. And I have so good an opinion of diverse of the embracers of the
Spagyrical Theory of Qualities (among whom I have met with very Learned and
worthy men) that I think, that if a Quality being posed to them, they were at
the same time presented with a good Catalogue of the Phenomenon, that they may
take, in the History of it, as it were with one view, they would plainly
perceive that there are more particulars to be accounted for, than at first
they were aware of; and diverse of them such, as may quite discourage
considering men from taking upon them to explain them all by the Tria prima,
and oblige them to have recourse to more Catholic and comprehensive Principles.
I know not, whether I may not add on this occasion, that, methinks, a Chemist,
who by the help of his Tria Prima, takes upon him to interpret that Book of
Nature of which the Qualities of bodies make a great part, acts at but a little
better rate than he, that seeing a great book written in a Cipher, whereof he
were acquainted but with three Letters, should undertake to decypher the whole
piece. For though it is like, he would in many words find one of the Letters of
his short key, and in diverse words two of them, and perhaps in some all three;
yet, besides that in most of the words wherein the known Letter or Letters may
be met with, they may be so blended with other unknown Letters as to keep him
from decyphering a good part of those very words, it is more than probable, that
a great part of the book would consist of words wherein none of his three
Letters were to be found.

CHAP. V.
AND this is the first account, on which I observe that the Chemical Theory of
Qualities does not reach far enough: But there is another branch of its
deficiency. For even, when the explications seem to come home to the
Phenomenon, they are not primary, and, if I may so speak, Fontal enough. To
make this appear, I shall at present employ but these two Considerations. The
first is, that those substances themselves, that Chemists call their
Principles, are each of them endowed with several Qualities. Thus Salt is a
consistent, not a fluid, body; it has its weight, it is dissoluble in water, is
either diaphanous or opacous, fixed or volatile, sapid or insipid; (I speak thus
disjunctively, because Chemists are not all agreed about these things; and it
concerns not my Argument, which of the disputable Qualities be resolved upon.)
And Sulphur, according to them, is a body fusible, inflammable, etc. and,
according to Experience, is consistent, heavy, etc. So that it is by the help of
more primary and general Principles, that we must explicate some of those
Qualities, which being found in bodies, supposed to be perfectly similar or
homogeneous, cannot be pretended to be derived in one of them from the other.
And to say, that it is the nature of a Principle to have this or that Quality,
as, for instance, of Sulphur to be susible, and therefore we are not to exact a
Reason why it is so; though I could say much by way of answer, I shall now only
observe, that this Argument is grounded but upon a supposition, and will be of
no force, if from the primary affections of bodies one may deduce any good
Mechanical Explication of Fusibility in the general, without necessarily
supposing such a Primigeneal Sulphur, as the Chemists fancy, or deriving it
from thence in other bodies. And indeed, since not only Saltpeter, Sea salt,
Vitriol and Alum, but Salt of Tartar, and the Volatile Salt of Urine are all
of them fusible; I do not well see, how Chemists can derive the fusibleness
even of Salts obtained by their own analysis (such as Salt of Tartar and of
Urine) from the participation of the Sulphurous Ingredient; especially since,
if such an attempt should be made, it would overthrow the Hypothesis of three
Simple bodies, whereof they will have all mixed ones to be compounded; and still
'twould remain to be explicated, upon what account the Principle, that is said
to endow the other with such a Quality, comes to be endowed therewith it self.
For it is plain, that a mass of Sulphur is not an Atomical or Adamantine body;
but consists of a multitude of Corpuscles of determinate Figures, and connected
after a determinate manner: so that it may be reasonably demanded, why such a
Convention of particles, rather than many another that does not, constitutes a
fusible body.

CHAP. VI.
AND this leads me to a further Consideration, which makes me look upon the
Chemists explications as not deep and radical enough; and it is this, that,
when they tell us, for instance, that the fusibleness of bodies proceeds from
Sulphur, in case they say true, they do but tell us what material Ingredient
it is that being mingled with and dispersed through the other parts of a body,
makes it apt to melt: But this does not intelligibly declare, what it is that
makes a portion of matter fusible, and how the sulphurous Ingredient
introduces that disposition into the rest of the mass, wherewith it is commixt
or united. And yet it is such explications as these, that an inquisitive
Naturalist chiefly looks after, and which I therefore call Philosophical. And
to show, that there may be more Fontal explications, I shall only observe,
that, not to wander from our present instance, Sulphur it self is fusible. And
therefore, as I lately intimated, Fusibility, which is not the Quality of one
Atome, or Particle, but of an Aggregate of Particles, ought it self to be
accounted for in that Principle, before the Fusibleness of all other bodies be
derived from it. And 'twill in the following notes appear, that in Sulphur it
self that Quality may be probably deduced from the convention of Corpuscles of
determinate shapes and sizes, contexed or connected after a convenient manner.
And if either nature, or art, or chance, should bring together particles
endowed with the like Mechanical Affections, and associate them after the like
manner, the resulting body would be fusible, though the component particles had
never been parts of the Chemists primordial sulphur: And such particles so
convening might perhaps have made Sulphur it self, though before there had been
no such body in the world. And what I say to those Chemists, that make the
sulphurous Ingredient the cause of fusibility, may easily, mutatis mutandis,
be applied to their Hypothesis, that rather ascribe that quality to the
Mercurial or the Saline Principle, and consequently cannot give a rational
account of the fusibility of Sulphur. And therefore though I readily allow (as
I shall have afterward occasion to declare) that Sulphur, or an other of the
tria prima, may be met with, and even abound in several bodies endowed with the
quality that is attributed to their participation of that Principle; yet that
this may be no certain sign that the proposed Quality must flow from that
Ingredient, you may perhaps be assisted to discern by this illustration, That
if Tin be duly mixed with Copper or Gold, or, as I have tried, with Silver or
Iron, it will make them very brittle; and it is also an Ingredient of diverse
other bodies that are likewise brittle, as blew, green, white, and otherwise
colored, Amels, which are usually made of calcined Tin (which the Tradesmen
call Puttee,) colliquated with the Ingredients of Crystal-glass and some small
portion of Mineral pigment. But though in all the abovenamed brittle bodies,
Tin be a considerable Ingredient; yet 'twere very unadvised to affirm, that
Brittleness in general proceeds from Tin. For provided the solid parts of
consistent bodies touch one another but according to small portions of their
surfaces, and be not implicated by their contexture, the Metalline or other
Composition may be brittle, though there be no Tin at all in it. And in effect,
the materials of glass being brought to fusion will compose a brittle body, as
well when there is no Puttee colliquated with them, as when there is. Calcined
Lead by the action of the fire may be melted into a brittle mass, and even into
transparent Glass, without the help of Tin or any other additament. And I need
not add, that there are a multitude of other bodies, that cannot be pretended
to owe their brittleness to any participation of Tin, of which they have no
need, if the matter they consist of wants not the requisite Mechanical
Dispositions.

And here I shall venture to add, that the way employed by the Chemists, as
well as the Peripateticks, of accounting for things by the Ingredients, whether
Elements, Principles, or other bodies, that they suppose them to consist of,
will often frustrate the Naturalists expectation of events, which may
frequently prove differing from what he promised himself, upon the
Consideration of the Qualities of each Ingredient. For the ensuing Notes
contain diverse Instances, wherein there emerges a new Quality differing from,
or even contrary to, any that is conspicuous in the Ingredients; as two
transparent bodies may make an opacous mixture, a yellow body and a blew, one
that is green, two malleable bodies, a brittle one, two actually cold bodies, a
hot one, two fluid bodies, a consistent one, etc. And as this way of judging by
material Principles hinders the foreknowledg of Events from being certain; so
it much more hinders the assignation of Causes from being satisfactory; so that
perhaps some would not think it very rash to say, that those who judge of all
mixed bodies as Apothecaries do of Medicines, barely by the Qualities and
Proportions of the Ingredients (such as among the Aristotelians are the four
Elements, and among the Chemists the tria prima,) do, as if one should pretend
to give an account of the Phenomenon and operations of Clocks and Watches, and
their Diversities by this, That some are made of brass wheels, some of iron,
some have plain ungilt wheels, others of wheels overlaid with Gold, some
furnished with gutstrings, others with little chains, etc. and that therefore
the Qualities and Predominancies of these metalls that make parts of the Watch,
ought to have ascribed to them, what indeed flows from their Coordination and
Contrivance.

CHAP. VII.
THE last defect I observe in the Chemical Doctrine of Qualities, is, that in
many cases it agrees not well with the Phenomenon of Nature, and that by one or
both of these ways. First, there are diverse changes of Qualities, wherein one
may well expect, that a Chemical Principle should have a great stroke, and yet
it does not at all appear to have so. He that considers, what great operations
diverse of the Hermeticks ascribe to this or that Hypostatical Principle, and
how many Qualities according to them must from it be derived, can scarce do
other than expect, that a great change as to those Qualities happening in a
mixed body, should at least be accompanied with some notable action of, or
alteration in the Principle. And yet I have met with many instances, wherein
Qualities are produced, or abolished, or very much altered, without any
manifest introduction, expulsion, or considerable change of the Principle,
whereon that Quality is said to depend, or perhaps of either of the two others:
As when a piece of fine silver, that having been neald in the fire, and
suffered to cool leisurely, is very flexible, is made stiff and hard to bend,
barely by a few strokes of a hammer. And a string of a Lute acquires or loses a
sympathy, as they call it, with another string of the same or another
Instrument, barely by being either stretched so as to make an Unison with it,
or screwed up or let down beyond or beneath that degree of Tension.

To multiply instances of this kind would be to anticipate those, you will
hereafter meet with in their due places. And therefore I shall pass on from the
first sort of Phenomenon, that favor not the Chemical Hypothesis about
Qualities, to the other which consists of those, wherein either that does not
happen which according to their Hypothesis ought to happen, or the contrary
happens to what according to their Hypothesis may justly be expected. Of this
you will meet with instances hereafter; I shall now trouble you but with one,
the better to declare my meaning. It Is not unknown to those Chemists, that work
much in Silver and in Copper, that the former will endure Ignition and become
red-hot in the fire, before it will be brought to fusion; and the latter is yet
far more difficult to be melted down than the other; yet if you separately
dissolve those two metalls in Aqua fortis, and by evaporation reduce them to
Crystalls, these will be brought to fusion in a very little time, and with a
very moderate Heat, without breaking the glasses that contain them. If you ask
a vulgar Chemist the cause of this facility of fusion, he will probably tell
you without scruple, that it is from the saline parts of the Aqua fortis, which,
being imbodied in the metals and of a very fusible nature, impart that easiness
of fusion to the metals they are mixed with. According to which plausible
explication one might well expect, that, if the saline Corpuscles were
exquisitly mingled with Tin, they would make it far more fusible than of it
self it is. And yet, as I have elsewhere noted, when I put Tin into a
convenient quantity of Aqua fortis, the metal being corroded, subsided, as is
usual, in the form of whites of eggs, which being well dried, the Tinn was so
far from being grown more fusible by the addition of the saline particles of
the Menstruum, that, whereas it is known that simple Tin will melt long before
it come to be red-hot, this prepared Tin would endure for a good while not only
a through ignition, but the blast of a pair of double bellows, (which we usually
employed to melt Silver and Copper it self,) without being at all brought to
fusion. And as for those Spagyrists that admit, as most of them are granted to
do, that all kinds of metals may be turned into Gold by a very small proportion
of what they call the Philosophers Elixir, one may I think show them from their
own concessions, that diverse Qualities may be changed even in such constant
bodies as Metals, without the addition of any considerable proportion of the
simple Ingredients, to which they are wont to ascribe those Qualities; provided
the Agent, (as an efficient rather than as a material Cause,) be able to make a
great change in the Mechanical affections of the parts whereof the metal it
acts on is made up. Thus if we suppose a pound of Silver, a pound of Lead, and
a pound of Iron to be transmuted into Gold, each by a grain of the powder of
projection, this tinging powder, as a material Cause is inconsiderable, by
reason of the smallness of its bulk, and as an efficient cause it works
differing and even contrary effects, according to the disposition, wherein it
finds the metal to be transmuted, and the changes it produces in the
constituent Texture of it. Thus it brings Quicksilver to be fixed, which it was
not before, and deprives it of the Fluidity which it had before; it brings
Silver to be indissolvable in Aqua fortis, which readily dissolved it before,
and dissoluble in Aqua Regis, which before would not touch it; and which is
very considerable to our present purpose, whereas it makes Iron much more
fusible than Mars, it makes Lead much less fusible than whilst it retained its
pristine form, since Saturn melts ere it come to ignition, which Gold requires
to bring it to fusion. But this is proposed only as an Argument ad hominem,
till the Truth of the transmutation of metals into Gold, by way of projection,
be sufficiently proved, and the circumstances and phenomenon of it particularly
declared.

I must not forget to take notice, that some learned modern Chemists would be
thought to explicate diverse of the Changes that happen to Bodies in point of
Odours, Colors, etc. by saying that in such alterations the Sulphur or other
Hypostatical Principle is intraverted or extraverted, or, as others speak,
inverted. But I confess, to me these seem to be rather new terms then real
explications. For, to omit diverse of the Arguments mentioned in this present
Treatise, that may be applied to this way of solving the Phenomenon of
Qualities, one may justly object, that the supposed Extraversion or
Intraversion of Sulphur can by no means reach to give an account of so great a
variety of Odours, Colors, and other Qualities as may be found in the changed
portions of matter we are speaking of. And which is more, what they call by
these and the like names, cannot be done without Local motion transposing the
particles of the matter, and consequently producing in it a change of Texture,
which is the very thing we would infer, and which being supposed, we may grant
Sulphur to be oftentimes actually present in the altered Bodies, without
allowing it to be always necessary to produce the alterations in them, since
Corpuscles so conditioned and contex'd would perform such Effects, whether
Sulphur, as such, did, or did not, make up the subject matter of the Change.

And now I shall conclude, and partly recapitulate what has been delivered in
this and the two foregoing Chapters, with this summary consideration, That the
Chymist's Salt, Sulphur and Mercury themselves are not the first and most
simple Principles of Bodies, but rather primary Concretions of Corpuscles or
Particles more simple than they, as being endowed only with the first, or most
radical (if I may so speak) and most Catholic Affections of simple Bodies,
namely Bulk, Shape, and Motion, or Rest; by the different Conventions or
Coalitions of which minutest portions of matter are made those differing
Concretions that Chemists name Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. And to this Doctrine
it will be consonant, that several Effects of this or that Spagyrical Principle
need not be derived from Salt, for instance, or Sulphur as such, but may be
explained by the help of some of those Corpuscles that I have lately called
more Simple and Radical; and such Explications being more simple and
Mechanical, may be thought upon that score more fundamental and satisfactory.

CHAP. VIII.
I Know it may be objected in favor of the Chemists, that as their
Hypostatical Principles, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, are but three, so the
Corpuscularian Principles are but very few; and the chief of them Bulk, Size,
and Motion, are but three neither; so that it appears not why the Chemical
Principles should be more barren than the Mechanical. To which allegation I
answer, that, besides that these last named Principles are more numerous, as
taking in the Posture, Order, and Situation, the Rest, and, above all, the
almost infinitely diversifiable Contextures of the small parts, and the thence
resulting structures of particular bodies, and fabric of the world: Besides
this, I say, each of the three Mechanical Principles, specified in the
objection, though but one in name, is equivalent to many in effect; as Figure,
for instance, comprehends not only Triangles, Squares, Rhombusses, Rhomboids,
Trapezions, and a multitude of Polygons, whether ordinate or irregular; but,
besides Cubes, Prismes, Cones, Spheres, Cylinders, Pyramids, and other Solids
of known Denominations, a scarce numerable multitude of hooked, branched,
Eel-like, screw-like, and other irregular bodies; whereof though these, and
some others, have distinct appellations, yet the greatest part are nameless; so
that it need be no wonder, that I should make the Mechanical Principles so much
more fertile, that is, applicable to the production and explication of a far
greater number of Phenomenon, than the Chemical; which, whilst they are
considered but as similar bodies, that are Ingredients of mixed and compounded
ones, are chiefly variable but by the greater or lesser quantity that is
employed by Nature or Art to make up the mixed body. And Painters observe, that
Black and White, though mixed in differing Proportions, will still make but
lighter and darker grays. And if it be said, that these Ingredients, by the
Texture resulting from their mixtures, may acquire Qualities that neither of
them had before; I shall answer, that, to allege this, is in effect to
confess, that they must take in the Mechanical Principles, (for to them belongs
the Texture or Structure of bodies) to assist the Chemical ones. And on this
occasion, to borrow an illustration from our unpublished Dialogue of the
Requisites of a good Hypothesis, I shall add, that a Chemist that should
pretend, that because his three Principles are as many as those of the
Corpuscularians, they are as sufficient as these to give an account of the Book
of Nature, methinks, I say, he would do like a man that should pretend, that
with four and twenty words he would make up a language as well as others can
with the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet, because he had as many words
already formed, as they had of bare Letters; not considering that instead of
the small number of variations that can be made of his words by Prepositions
and Terminations, the Letters of the Alphabet being variously combined, placed
and reiterated, can be easily made to compose not only his four and twenty
words, with their variations, but as many others as a whole language contains.

CHAP. IX.
NOtwithstanding all that I have been obliged to say to the Disadvantage of the
Chemical Principles, in reference to the Explication of Qualities, I would not
be thought to grant, that the Peripateticks have reason to triumph, as if their
four Elements afforded a better Theory of Qualities. For, if I had, together
with leisure enough to perform such a Task, any obligation to undertake it, I
presume, it would not be difficult to show, that the Aristotelian Doctrine
about particular Qualities is liable to some of the same Objections with the
Chemical, and to some others no less considerable; and that, to derive all the
Phenomenon their Doctrine ought to solve from Substantial Forms and real
Qualities Elementary, is to impose on us a Theory more barren and precarious
than that of the Spagyrists.

That to derive the particular Qualities of bodies from those Substantial
Forms, whence the Schools would have them to flow, is but an insufficient and
unfit way of accounting for them, may appear by this, that Substantial Forms
themselves are things, whose existence many Learned Philosophers deny, whose
Theory many of them think Incomprehensible, and the most Candid and Judicious
of the Peripateticks themselves confess it to be very abstruse; so that from
such doubtful and obscure Principles we can hardly expect clear Explications of
the nature and Phenomenon of Qualities; not to urge, that the Aristotelian
Definitions, both of Qualities in general, and of diverse of the more familiar
Qualities in particular, as Heat, Cold, Moisture, Diaphaneity, etc. are far
enough from being clear and well framed, as we elsewhere have occasion to show.

Another thing, which makes the Scholastic Doctrine of Qualities
unsatisfactory, is, that it seldom so much as attempts to teach the Manner how
the Qualities themselves and their Effects or Operations are produced. Of this
you may elsewhere find an Instance given in the Quality that is wont to be
first in the list, viz that of Heat, which though it may intelligibly and
probably be explicated by the Corpuscular Hypothesis, yet in the Peripatetic
account that is given of it, is both too questionable and too superficial to
give much Content to a Rational Inquirer. And indeed to say, that a Substantial
Form (as that of the Fire) acts by a Quality (called Heat) whose Nature it is to
produce such an effect (as to soften Wax or harden Clay) seems to be no other
in substance, than to say, that it produces such an effect by some power it has
to produce it. But what that power is, and how it operates, is that, which,
though we most desire to know, we are left to seek. But to prosecute the
Imperfections of the Peripatetick Hypothesis, were to entrench upon another
discourse, where they are more fully laid open. And therefore I shall now but
lightly glance upon a couple of imperfections, that more particularly relate to
the Doctrine of Qualities.

And first I do not think it a Convincing Argument that is wont to be employed
by the Aristotelians for their Elements, as well as by the Chemists for their
Principles, that, because this or that Quality, which they ascribe to an
Element or a Principle, is found in this or that body, which they call mixed,
therefore it must owe that Quality to the participation of that Principle or
Element. For, the same Texture of parts or other modification of matter may
produce the like Quality in the more simple and the more compounded body, and
they may both separately derive it from the same Cause, and not one from the
Participation of the other. So Water and Earth and Metals and Stones, etc. are
heavy upon the account of the common Cause of Gravity, and not because the rest
partake of the Earth; as may appear in Elementary water, which is as simple a
body as it, and yet is heavy: So water and oil, and exactly deflegm'd Spirit of
Wine, and Mercury, and also Metals and Glass of Antimony, and Minium or
calcined Lead, whilst these three are in fusion are fluid, being made so by
the variously determined motions of their minute parts and other Causes of
Fluidity, and not by the participation of water, since the arid Calces of Lead
and Antimony are not like to have retained in the fire so volatile a liquor as
water, and since Fluidity is a Quality that Mercury enjoys in a more durable
manner than Water it self: For that metalline liquor, as also Spirit of Wine
well Rectified, will not be brought to freeze with the highest degree of Cold
of our sharpest winters, though a far less degree of Cold would make water
cease to be fluid and turn it into Ice.

To this I shall only add (in the second place,) that it is not unpleasant to
see, how arbitrarily the Peripateticks derive the Qualities of bodies from
their four Elements, as if, to give an instance in the lately named Quality,
Liquidity, you show them exactly deflegmed Spirit of Wine, and ask them, whence
it has its great Fluidness, they will tell you from water, which yet is far
less fluid than it, and this spirit of wine it self is much less so than the
flame into which the spirit of wine is easily resoluble. But if you ask, whence
it becomes totally inflammable, they must tell you, from the fire; and yet the
whole body, at least as far as sense can discover, is fluid, and the whole body
becomes flame, (and then is most fluid of all;) so that fire and water as
contrary as they make them, must both be by vast odds predominant in the same
body. This spirit of wine also, being a liquor whose least parts that are
sensible are actually heavy, and compose a Liquor which is seven or eight
hundred times as heavy as Air of the same bulk, which yet experience shows not
to be devoid of weight, must be supposed to abound with Earthy particles, and
yet this spirituous liquor may in a trice become Flame, which they would have
to be the lightest body in the world.

But, to enlarge on this subject, would be to forget, that the design of this
Tract engages me to deal not with the Peripatetic School, but the Spagyrical.
To which I shall therefore return, and give you this advertisement about it,
that what I have hitherto objected is meant against the more common and
received Doctrine about the Material Principles of bodies reputed mixed, as it is
wont by vulgar Chemists to be applied to the rendering an account of the
Qualities of substances Corporeal; and therefore I pretend not, that the past
objections should conclude against other Chemical Theories than that which I
was concerned to question. And if adept Philosophers, (supposing there be such)
or any other more than ordinarily Intelligent Spagyrists, shall propose any
particular Hypotheses, differing from those that I have questioned, as their
Doctrine and Reasons are not yet known to me; so I pretend not that the past
Arguments should conclude against them, and am willing to think, that Persons
advantaged with such peculiar opportunities to dive into the Mysteries of
Nature, will be able to give us, if they shall please, a far better account of
the Qualities of bodies than what is wont to be proposed by the generality of
Chemists.

Thus, dear Pyrophilus, I have laid before you some of the chief Imperfections
I have observed in the vulgar Chemists Doctrine of Qualities, and consequently
I have given you some of the chief Reasons that hinder me from acquiescing in
it. And as my objections are not taken from the Scholastical subtleties nor the
doubtful speculations of the Peripateticks or other Adversaries of the
Hermetick Philosophy, but from the nature of things and from Chemical
experiments themselves; so I hope, if any of your Spagyrical friends have a
mind to convince me, he will attempt to do it by the most proper way, which
is, by actually giving us clear and particular explications, at least of the
grand Phenomenon of Qualities; which, if he shall do, he will find me very
ready to acquiesce in a Truth that comes ushered in, and endeared by so
acceptable and useful a thing, as a Philosophical Theory of Qualities.

FINIS.
REFLECTIONS UPON THE Hypothesis OF ALCALI and ACIDUM. By the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

THough the following Discourse was at first written by way of Appendix to the
Treatise of the Imperfection of the Chemical Doctrine of Qualities; yet the
bulk of it, swelling beyond what was foreseen, made it seem expedient to
publish it as a Tract by it self.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Hypothesis OF Alcali and Acidum.
CHAP. I.
I Presume, it will not be difficult to discern, that much of what has been
said about the Imperfection of the vulgar Chemical Doctrine concerning
Qualities, may with easy variations be applied to some other Hypotheses that
are of kin to that Doctrine, and particularly to their Theory, that would
derive both the Qualities of Bodies and the rest of the Phenomenon of Nature
from what they call Acidum and Alcali. For though these two differences may be
met with in a great number and variety of bodies, and consequently the
Consideratin of them may frequently enough be of good use, (especially to
Spagyrists, and Physicians, when they are conversant about the secondary and
(if I may so call them) Chemical Causes and Operations of diverse mixed bodies;)
yet I confess I cannot acquiesce in this Hypothesis of Alkeli and Acidum, in
the latitude, wherein I find it urged and applied by the Admirers of it, as if
it could be usefully substituted in the place of Matter and Motion.

The Hypothesis, being in a sort subordinate to that of the tria prima, in
ascribing to two contrary saline Principles what vulgar Chemists do to their
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; most of the objections we have made against the
vulgar Chemical Doctrine, may, as I lately intimated, be applied, by a little
variation, to this, and therefore I shall need but to touch upon the main
things that keep me from acquiescing in this Hypothesis.

CHAP. II.
AND first, it seems precarious to affirm, that in all bodies, or even in all
the sensible parts of mixts, Acid and Alcalizate parts are found; there not
having been, that I know, any Experimental Induction made of particulars any
thing near numerous enough to make out so great an assertion, and in diverse
bodies, wherein Experience is vouched for the inexistence of these Principles,
that Inexistence is indeed proved not by direct and clear experience, but upon
a supposition, that such and such effects flow from the operations of the
assumed Principles.

Some Spagyrists, when they see Aqua fortis dissolve Filings of Copper,
conclude from thence, that the Acid spirits of the Menstruum meet in the metal
with an Alcali upon which they work; which is but an unsafe way of arguing,
since good Spirit of Urin, which they take to be a volatile Alcali, and which
will make a great Conflict with Aqua fortis, will, as I have elsewhere noted,
dissolve filings of Copper both readily enough and more genuinly than the Acid
liquor is wont to do. So when they see the Magistery of Pearl or Coral, made by
dropping oil of Tartar into the solutions of those bodies made with spirit of
Vinegar, they ascribe the Precipitation to the fixed Alcali of the Tartar, that
mortifies the Acidity of the spirit of Vinegar; whereas the Precipitation would
no less ensue, if, instead of Alcalizat oil of Tartar, we employ that highly
acid liquor which they call Oleum Sulphuris per Campanam.

I think also it may be doubted, whether those, I reason with, are so certain
as they suppose, that at least when they can manifestly discover an Acid, for
instance, in a body, the operation of that body upon another, which they judge
to abound with an Alcali, must be the effect of a Conflict between those two
jarring Principles, or, if I may so call them, Duellists. For an Acid body may
do many things, not simply as an acid, but on the score of a Texture or
modification, which endows it with other Qualities as well as Acidity, whose
being associated with those other Qualities in some cases may be but accidental
to the effect to be produced; since by one or more of these other Qualities the
body may act in cases, where Prejudice may make a Chemist consider nothing but
Acidity. Thus when some Chemists see an acid Menstruum, as Aqua fortis, spirit
of Salt, oil of Vitriol, etc. dissolve Iron, they presently ascribe the effect
to an Acidity of the liquors, whereas well dephlegmed Urinous Spirits, which
they hold to have a great Antipathy to Acids, will, as I have tried in some of
them, readily enough dissolve crude Iron even in the Cold. And on the other
side, Mercury will not work on the filings of Iron, though this be so open a
metal that even weak liquors will do it; and yet if one should urge, that
Quicksilver readily dissolves Gold in Amalgamation, he may expect to be told,
according to their Doctrine, that Mercury has in it an occult acid, by which it
performs the solution; whereas it seems much more probable, that Mercury has
Corpuscles of such a shape and size as fit them to insinuate themselves into
the Commensurate Pores they meet with in Gold, but make them unfit to enter
readily the Pores of Iron, to which Nature has not made them congruous; as on
the other side the saline Corpuscles of Aqua fortis will easily find admission
into the Pores of Iron, but not into those of Gold, to which they do not
correspond as they do to the others. And when a knife, whose blade is touched
with a Lodestone, cuts bread and takes up filings of Iron, it does neither of
them upon the score of Alcali and Acidum, but the one upon the visible shape
and the stiffness of the blade, and the other upon the latent Contrivance or
change of Texture produced by the operation of the Lodestone in the particles
that compose the Steel.

This may perhaps be farther illustrated by adding, that when blew Vitriol,
being beaten and finely searced, makes a white powder, that whiteness is a
quality which the powder has not as being of a Vitriolate Nature. For
Rock-Crystal or Venice-glass being finely beaten will have the same operation
on the Eye, but it proceeds from the transparency of the body and the
minuteness, multitude and confused situation of the Corpuscles that make up
the Powder. And therefore, if other bodies be brought by Comminution into parts
endowed with such Mechanical affections, as we have named; these aggregates
will act upon the organs of Sight as white bodies.

CHAP. III.
AND this leads me to another Exception against the Hypothesis of the
Duellists, which is, that the Framers of it seem arbitrarily to have assigned
Provinces or Offices to each of their two Principles, as the Chemists do to
each of their tria prima, and the Peripateticks to each of their Four Elements.
For it is not enough to Say, that an Acid, for instance, as such, performs these
things, and an Alkali so many others, that they divide the Operations and
Phenomenon of nature, or at least (as some, more cautious, are content to say)
of mixed bodies between them; since Assertions of such great moment ought not to
be advanced or received without sufficient Proof. And perhaps the very
distribution of Salts into Acids and Alcalies has somewhat of arbitrary in it,
since others may, without assuming much more, take the freedom to distribute
them otherwise, there being not only several things wherein Acids and Alcalies
agree, but also several things wherein Salts of the same denomination widely
differ. As, for Instance, some Alkalies, according to those I reason with, are,
like salt of Tartar, fixed, and will endure the violence of the fire; others,
like salt of Urin or Hartshorn, are exceedingly fugitive, and will be driven
up with a scarce sensible degree of Heat; some, as salt of Tartar, will
precipitate the solution of Sublimate into an Orange-tawny; others, as spirit
of Blood and Hartshorn, precipitate such a solution into a milky substance.
Oil of Tartar will very slowly operate upon filings of Copper, which Spirit of
Urin and Hartshorn will readily dissolve in the Fire.

And among Acids themselves the difference is no less if not much greater. Some
of them will dissolve bodies that others will not, as Aqua fortis will dissolve
Silver and Mercury, but leave Gold untouched; or as Aqua Regis, though made
without Sal Ammoniac that dissolves Gold readily, will dissolve Mercury but
scurvily, and Silver not at all. And this may happen, when the Menstruum that
will not dissolve the body is reputed much stronger than that which does; as
dephlegm'd spirit of Vinegar will dissolve Lead, reduced to minute parts in the
cold; which is an effect that Chemists are not wont to expect from Spirit of
Salt. Nay, which is more, one Acid will precipitate what another has dissolved,
and contrarily; as spirit of Salt will precipitate Silver out of spirit of
Nitre. And I found oil of Vitriol to precipitate bodies of diverse kinds,
Minerals and others, out of some acid Menstruums, particularly spirit of
Vinegar.

To this might be added the Properties, peculiar to some particular Acids, as
that Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis will dissolve Camphire into an Oil, and
coagulate common oil into a consistent and brittle substance like Tallow; and,
though it will both corrode Silver, Copper, Lead, and Mercury, and keep them
dissolved, it will quickly let fall almost the whole body of Tin, very soon
after it has corroded as much as it can of it. By all which, and some other
like Instances, I am induced to question, whether the Acidum and Alkali, we are
speaking of, have the simplicity that Philosophy requires in Principles; and
shall be kept from wondering, if others shall think it as free for them to
constitute other Principles, as it is for the Learned men I reason with, to
pitch upon Acidum and Alkali.

And some perhaps will be bold to say, that, since the former of those
Principles comprehend such a number of bodies, that are, many of them, very
differing, and some of them directly contrary in their operations, it seems a
slight and not Philosophical Account of their Nature, to define an Acid by its
Hostility to an Alcali, which (they will say) is almost as if one should define
a Man by saying, that he is an Animal that is at enmity with the Serpent; or a
Lion, that he is a fourfooted beast that flies from a Crowing Cock.

CHAP. IV.
BUT although one of the chiefest Conditions that Philosophers may justly
require in Principles, is, that, being to explain other things, they should be
very clear themselves; yet I do not much wonder, that the Definitions given us
of Acidum and Alcali should be but unaccurate and superficial, since I find
not, that they have themselves any clear and determinate Notion or sure marks,
whereby to know them distinctly, without which Chemists will scarce be able to
form clear and settled Notions of them. For to infer, as is usual, that, because
a body dissolves another, which is dissoluble by this or that known acid, the
Solvent must also be acid; or to conclude, that, if a body precipitates a
dissolved metal out of a confessedly acid Menstruum, the Precipitant must be an
Alcali, to argue thus, I say, it is unsecure; since, not to repeat what I said
lately of Copper, I found, that filings of Spelter will be dissolved as well by
some Alcalies, (as spirit of Sal Ammoniac) as by Acids. And bodies may be
precipitated out of acid Menstruums, both by other Acids, and by liquors, where
there appears not the least Alcali: As I have found, that a solution of
Tinglass, made in Aqua fortis, would be precipitated both by Spirit of Salt and
by common or rain water. And as for the other grand way that Chemists employ,
to distinguish Acids and Alcalies, namely by the Heat, Commotion, and bubbles
that are excited, upon their being put together, that may be no such certain
sign as they presume, they having indeed a dependence upon particular
Contextures and other Mechanical affections, that Chemists are not wont to take
any notice of. For almost any thing that is fitted variously and vehemently to
agitate the minute parts of a body, will produce Heat in it; and so, though
water be neither an Acid nor an Alcalizate liquor, yet it would quickly grow
very hot, not only with the highly acid Oil of Vitriol, but (as I have more
than once purposely tried and found) with the fiery Alcalizat Salt of Tartar.
And it is to be noted, that neither in the one nor the other of these
Incalescent mixtures, there is produced any such visible or audible conflict,
as, according to the Doctrine of the Chemists I reason with, one would expect.
And as for the production of bubbles, especially if accompanied with a hissing
noise, neither is that such a certain sign as Chemists imagine: For the
production of bubbles is not a necessary effect or concomitant of Heat excited
by Conflicts, but depends very much upon the peculiar Disposition of Bodies put
together to extricate, produce, or intercept particles of Air, (or Steams, for
the time equivalent to them;) and therefore as Oil of Vitriol, mixed in a due
proportion with fair water, may be brought to make the water too hot to be held
in ones hand, without exciting bubbles; so I have found by trials purposely
made, that Alcalizat Spirit of Urine drawn from some kinds of Quicklime, being
mixed with Oil of Vitriol moderately strong, would produce an intense Heat,
whilst it produced either no manifest bubbles at all, or scarce any, though
the Urinous Spirit was strong, and in other Trials operated like an Alcali; and
although also with Spirit of Urin, made per se the common way, the oil of
Vitriol will produce a great hissing and a multitude of conspicuous bubbles. On
the other side I have sometimes, though not so constantly, found, that some
Acid Spirits, especially that of Verdigrease made per se, would, when poured
upon Salt of Tartar, make a Conflict with it, and produce a copious froth,
though we observed it not to be accompanied with any manifest Heat. And I
elsewhere mention two bodies, upon whose putting together numerous bubbles
would, for a long time, and not without noise, be generated, and succeed one
another, though I could perceive no Heat at all to accompany this Tumult.

As for the Taste, which by many is made a great Touchstone, whereby to know
Acids and Alcalies, I consider that there is a multitude of mixed bodies,
wherein we can so little discern by the Taste, which of the Principles is
Predominant, that this Sense would not oblige one to suspect, much less to
conclude, there were one grain of either of them to be found there; such bodies
are Diamonds and Rubies, and most Gems, besides many ignobler Stones, and Gold
and Silver and Mercury, and I know not how many other bodies. On the other
side, there are bodies that abound with Acid or Alcalizat Salts, which either
have no Taste, or a quite differing one from that of the Chemical Principle. As
though Venice-glass be in great part composed of a fixed Alcali; yet to the
Tongue it is insipid, and Crystalls of Lune and of Lead made with Aqua fortis,
and containing great store of the Acid particles of the Menstruum, have nothing
of Acidity in the mouth, the latter having a saccharine sweetness, and the
former an extreme bitterness. And even in Vegetable substances that have a
manifest Taste, it is not so easy to know by that, whether it be the Acid or the
Alcalizat Principle that is predominant in them; as in the Essential oils of
Spices and other Vegetables. And in the gross Empereumatical Oils of Woods, and
even in high Rectified Spirit of Wine, which therefore some will have to be an
Alcalizat liquor, and others list it among Acids, though I did not find it
neither to be destroyed or much altered by being put upon Coral or salt of
Tartar, as would happen to an acid Menstruum, nor yet by being digested with
and distilled from sea Salt, as might be probably expected from an Alcalizat
one: Aand among those very bodies which their Tastes persuade Chemists to reckon
amongst Acids, one may (according to what I formerly noted) observe so great a
difference and variety of relishes, that, perhaps without being too severe, I
may say, that if I were to allow Acids to be One Principle, it should be only
in some such Metaphysical sense, as that wherein Air is said to be One Body,
though it consist of the associated effluviums of a multitude of Corpuscles of
very differing Natures, that agree in very little save in their being minute
enough to concur to the Composition of a fluid aggregate, consisting of flying
parts. But having dwelt longer than I intended on One Objection, it is time that
I proceed to those that remain.

CHAP. V.
ANother particular, I am unsatisfied with in the Hypothesis of Alcali and
Acidum, is, that it is in diverse cases either needless or useless to explain the
Phenomenon of Qualities, there being several of these produced, destroyed, or
altered, where there does not appear any accession, recess, or change of either
of those two Principles; as when fluid water by hard beating is turned into
consistent froth, and when transparent red Coral is, barely by being beaten and
sifted finely, changed into a white and opacous powder; and as when a very
flexible piece of fine silver being hammered is brought to have a brisk spring,
and after a while will, instead of continuing malleable, crack or cleave under
the hammer; and as when (to dispatch and omit other instances) a sufficiently
thin leaf of Gold, held between the Light and the Eye, appears green.

Another thing (of kin to the former,) that I like not in the Doctrine of
Acidum and Alcali, is, that though the Patrons of it, whilst they would seem
to constitute but two Principles, are fain (as I lately intimated) to make I
know not how many differing sorts of Acids, besides some variety of Alcalies;
yet their Principles are too few and narrow to afford any satisfactory
explication of the Phenomenon. For I fear, 'twill be very difficult for them to
give a Rational Account of Gravity, Springiness, Light, and Emphatical Colors,
Sounds, and some other Qualities that are wont to be called manifest; and much
more of several that are confessed to be occult, as Electricity, and Magnetism;
in which last I see not, how the affirming that there is in the Magnet an Acid
and an Alcali, and that these two are of contrary Natures, will help to
explain, how a Lodestone does, as they speak, attract the same end of a poised
needle with one of its Poles, which 'twill drive away with the other, and
determine that needle when freely placed, to point North and South, and enable
it to communicate by its bare touch the same Properties, and abundance of other
strange ones, to another piece of Steel. But I forbear to allege particular
Examples referrable to the several Qualities abovementioned, whether manifest
or hidden, because that in great part is already done in our Notes about
particular Qualities, in which 'twill appear how little able the employing of
Alcali and Acidum will be to afford us an account of many things. And though I
enlarge not here on this objection, yet I take it to be of that importance,
that, though there were no other, this were enough to show that the Hypothesis
that is liable to it, is Insufficient for the explication of Qualities; and
therefore 'twill not I presume be thought strange that I add, that, as for
those that would extend this narrow Chemical Doctrine to the whole object of
Natural Philosophy, they must do more than I expect they will be able before
they can make me their Proselyte, there being a multitude of Phenomenon in
nature (diverse whereof I elsewhere take notice of in reference to the Chemists
Philosophy) in which what Acidum and Alcali have to do, I confess I do not
understand.

CHAP. VI.
THE last thing (which comprizes several others) that seems to me a defect in
the Doctrine of Alcali and Acidum, is, that diverse if not most of those very
things that are pretended to be explicated by them, are not satisfactorily
explicated, some things being taken into the explications that are either not
fundamental enough or not clearly intelligible, or are chargeable with both
those Imperfections.

And first I am dissatisfied with the very fundamental Notion of this Doctrine,
namely a supposed Hostility between the tribe of Acids and that of Alkalies,
accompanied, if you will have it so, with a friendship or sympathy with bodies
belonging to the same tribe or Family. For I look upon Amity and Enmity as
Affections of Intelligent Beings, and I have not yet found it explained by any,
how those Appetites can be placed in Bodies Inanimate and devoid of knowledge,
or of so much as Sense. And I elsewhere endeavor to show, that what is called
Sympathy and Antipathy between such bodies does in great part depend upon the
actings of our own Intellect, which, supposing in every body an innate appetite
to preserve it self both in a defensive and an offensive way, inclines us to
conclude, that that body, which, though designlesly destroys or impairs the
state or texture of another body, has an Enmity to it, though perhaps a slight
Mechanical change may make bodies, that seem extremely hostile, seem to agree
very well and cooperate to the production of the same effects. As if the acid
spirit of Salt and the volatile Alkali (as they will have it) that is commonly
called Spirit of Urine be put together, they will, after a short though fierce
conflict, upon a new contexture unite together into a Salt, little, if at all,
differing from Sal Ammoniac, in which the two reconciled Principles will
amicably join in cooling of water, dissolving some metalline bodies, and
producing diverse other effects. And so, if upon a strong solution of Salt of
Potashes or of Salt of Tartar, good Spirit of Nitre be dropped in a due
proportion, after the Heat and Tumult and Ebullition are over, the Acid and the
Alkalizat Salts will convene into such a Concretion as Saltpeter, which is
taken to be a natural body, either homogeneous, or at least consisting of parts
that agree very friendly together, and conspire to constitute the particular
kind of Salt that Chemists call Nitre.

But the Sympathy and Antipathy that is said to be betwixt Inanimate bodies, I
elsewhere more particularly consider, and therefore I shall now add in the
second place, That the Explications made of Phenomenon according to the
Doctrine of Alcali and Acidum do not, in my apprehension, perform what may be
justly expected from Philosophical Explications. It Is said indeed, that the
Acidum working on the Alcali, or this upon that, produces the effect proposed;
but that is only to tell us, what is the Agent that operates, and not the
Manner of the operation, or the means and process whereby it produces the
effect proposed, and it is this modus that Inquisitive Naturalists chiefly
desire to learn. And if it be said, that it is by the mutual hostility of the
Principles that the effect is produced, it may be answered, that besides, that
that hostility it self is not, as we have just now observed, a thing clear, if
so much as Intelligible; this is so general and indeterminate a way of
explicating things, as can afford little or no satisfaction to a searching and
cautious Naturalist, that considers how very numerous and very various the
Phenomenon of Qualities are.

CHAP. VII.
TO clear up and to countenance what I have been now saying, I shall only take
notice of some few obvious Phenomenon of one of the most familiar Operations
wherein Acidum and Alcali are supposed to be the grand Agents. It Is known to
the very Boys of Chemists, that Aqua Regis will dissolve Gold, Copper, and
Mercury, and that with these metals, especially with the second, it will
produce an intense degree of heat. If now the Cause of this Heat be demanded,
it may be expected, that the Patrons of the Duellists will answer, that it is
from the action of the Acid salts of the Menstruum upon the Alcali they meet
with in the Metalls. But not to mention how many things are here presumed, not
proved; nor that I know some Acid Menstruums, and some much more evidently
Alcalizate Bodies than these Metals are, which yet do not upon their mixtures
produce any sensible heat; not, I say, to mention these, it is easy to
discern, that this answer names indeed two supposed efficients of Heat, but
does not explicate or declare how these Agents produce that Quality, which
depends upon a certain vehement and various agitation of the singly insensible
parts of Bodies, whether the Duellists, or any other, though very differing,
Causes put them into a motion so modified. And therefore Gold and Copper by
bare Concussion may be brought to an intense degree of heat without the
accession of any acid parts to work upon them. But then further, when we are
told, that Aqua Regis by its Acidity working on the Metalline Alcali makes a
dissolution of the Metal; I am told indeed what they think to be the Agent in
this change, but not at all satisfied how this Agent effects it; for, Copper
being a very hard metal, and Gold generally esteemed by Chemists the closest
and compactest Body in nature, I would gladly know, by what power and way such
weak and probably either brittle or flexible bodies as acid Salts, are enabled
with that force to disjoin such solid and closely coherent Corpuscles as make
up the visible masses of Copper and Gold, nay, and scatter them with that
violence as perhaps to toss up multitudes of them into the air. And since in
the dissolution of these Metals there is another Phenomenon to be accounted
for, as well as the forcing of the parts asunder, namely the sustentation of
the Metal in the Menstruum, the Chemists would have much informed me, if they
had well explained, how their Acidum and Alcali is able to sustain and give
fluidity to the Corpuscles of the dissolved Metal, which though it be but
Copper, is nine times as heavy as a bulk of water equal to it, and if it be
Gold, is nineteen times heavier than the Liquor that must keep it from sinking;
and at least diverse times heavier in specie than the Salts, that are mingled
with the aqueous parts, can make the Menstruum composed of them both. Whereas
Trial has assured me, that, if a piece of Wax or any other such matter be made
by less than the hundredth part heavier than an equal bulk of Water, it will,
when thoroughly immersed, fall to the bottom and rest there. I might also ask a
further Question about these Dissolutions, as why, whereas Aqua Regis dissolves
Mercury without being much changed in color by it, Gold retains its own
Citrinity or yellowness in the solvent, and the solution of Copper is of a
color, which being greenishblew is quite differing from that of the metal that
affords it, as well as from that of the solvent? And I might recruit these with
other Queries not impertinent, but that these may suffice (for a sample) on
this Occasion, and allow me to conclude this Chapter, by representing One thing
which I would gladly recommend and inculcate to you, namely, that Those
Hypotheses do not a little hinder the progress of Humane knowledge that
introduce Morals and Politics into the Explications of Corporeal Nature, where
all things are indeed transacted according to Laws Mechanical.

CHAP. VIII.
I Might easily have been more copious in the Instances annexed to the foregoing
Animadversions, but that, being desirous to be short as well as clear, I
purposely declined to make use of diverse others, that seemed proper to be
employed, and indeed might safely enough have been so, because those I have
mentioned, and especially those, (which make a great part of them) that are
Mechanical, are not liable to the same exceptions, that I foresaw might be made
to elude the force of the Examples I passed by. And though I think I could very
well make those foreseen Objections appear groundless or unsatisfactory; yet
that could scarce be done without engaging in Controversies that would prove
more tedious than I judged them necessary.

And yet, although what I have said in this Excursion be but a part of what I
could say, I would not be thought to have forgot what I intimated at the
beginning of it. For though the Reasons I alleged keep me from acquiescing in
the Doctrine of Alcali and Acidum, as it is proposed under the notion of a
Philosophical Hypothesis, such as the Cartesian or Epicurean, which are each of
them alleged by their embracers to be Mechanical, and of a very Catholic
extent; yet I deny not, that the Consideration of the Duellists (or the two
jarring Principles of Alcali and Acidum) may be of good use to Spagyrists and
Physicians, as I elsewhere further declare. Nor do I pretend by the past
discourse that questions one Doctrine of the Chemists, to beget a general
contempt of their Notions, and much less of their Experiments. For the
operations of Chemistry may be misapplied by the erroneous Reasonings of the
Artists without ceasing to be themselves things of great use, as being
applicable as well to the Discovery or Confirmation of solid Theories, as the
production of new Phenomenon, and beneficial effects. And though I think, that
many Notions of Paracelsus and Helmont and some other Eminent Spagyrists are
unsolid, and not worthy the veneration that their Admirers cherish for them;
yet diverse of the Experiments, which either are alleged to favor these
notions, or on other accounts are to be met with among the followers of these
men, deserve the curiosity if not the esteem of the Industrious Inquirers into
Natures Mysteries. And looking upon Chemistry in gross as a Discipline
subordinate to Physiques, even Mechanical Philosophers may justly, in my
opinion, think favorably of it, since, whatever Imperfections, or, if they
please, Extravagancies there may be in the Principles and Explications of
Paracelsus or other Leading Artists, these faults of the Theorical part may be
sufficiently compensated by the Utilities that may be derived from the
Practical part. And this I am the rather induced to say, because the
Experiments, that Chemistry furnishes, may much assist a Naturalist to rectify
the Erroneous Theories that oftentimes accompany Them, and even those
(Mistakes) that are endeavored to be evinced by them.

And (to conclude) Chemistry seems to deal with men in reference to Notions, as
it does in reference to Metals, assisting wary men to detect the Errors, unto
which it may have misled the unwary: For the same Art that has taught some to
impose on others, (and perhaps themselves first) by blanching Copper, imitating
Gold, etc. does also supply Say-masters and Refiners, with the Means, by the
Cupel, Cements, Aqua fortis, etc. to examine, whether Coins be true or false,
and discover Adulterate Gold and Silver to be Counterfeit.

FINIS.
EXPERIMENTS, AND NOTES, About The Mechanical Origin AND PRODUCTION OF
VOLATILITY. By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

ADVERTISEMENTS About the EXPERIMENTS AND NOTES Relating to CHEMICAL Qualities.
WHen, after I had gone through the common Operations of Chemistry, I began to
make some serious Reflections on them, I thought 'twas pity, that Instruments
that might prove so serviceable to the advancement of Natural Philosophy,
should not be more studiously and skilfully made use of to so good a purpose. I
saw indeed, that diverse of the Chemists had by a diligent and laudable
employment of their pains and industry, obtained diverse Productions, and
lighted on several Phenomenon considerable in their kind, and indeed more
numerous, than, the narrowness and sterility of their Principles considered,
could well be expected. But I observed too, that the generality of those that
busy themselves about Chemical Operations; some because they practice Physic;
and others because they either much wanted, or greedily coveted money, aimed in
their Trials but at the Preparation of good Medicines for the humane body, or
to discover the ways of curing the Diseases or Imperfections of Metals, without
referring their Trials to the advancement of Natural Philosophy in general; of
which most of the Alchymists seem to have been so incurious, that not only
they did not institute Experiments for that purpose, but overlookt and despised
those undesign'd ones that occurred to them whilst they were prosecuting a
preparation of a Medicine, or a Transmutation of Metals. The sense I had of
this too general omission of the Chemists, tempted me sometimes to try, whether
I could do any thing toward the repairing of it by handling Chemistry, not as
a Physician, or an Alchymist, but as a mere Naturalist, and so by applying
Chemical Operations to Philosophical purposes. And in pursuance of these
thoughts, I remember I drew up a Scheme of what I ventured to call a Chymia
Philosophica, not out of any affectation of a splendid Title, but to intimate,
that the Chemical Operations, there treated of, were not directed to the usual
scopes of Physicians, or Transmuters of Metals, but partly to illustrate or
confirm some Philosophical Theories by such Operations; and partly to explicate
those Operations by the help of such Theories.

But before I had made any great progress in the pursuit of this design, the
fatal Pestilence that raged in London, and in many other parts of England, in
the years 1664 and 65, obliging me among the rest to make several removes;
which put me upon taking new measures, and engaging me in other employments of
my time, made me so long neglect the Papers I had drawn up, that at last I knew
not where to find them, (though I hope they are not yet mislaid beyond
recovery,) which I was the less troubled at, because the great difficulties, to
be met with in such an undertaking, did not a little discourage me, such a Task
requiring as well as deserving a Person better furnished, than I had reason to
think my self, with Abilities, Leisure, Chemical Experiments, and Conveniences,
to try as many more as should appear needful. But yet to break the Ice for any
that may hereafter think fit to set upon such a Work, or to shorten my own
Labor, if I should see cause to resume it my self, I was content to throw in
among my Notes about other Particular Qualities, some Experiments and
Observations about some of those, that I have elsewhere called Chemical
Qualities, because it is chiesly by the Operations of Chemists, that men have
been induced to take special notice of them. Of these Notes I have assigned to
some Qualities more, and to some fewer, as either the nature or importance of
the Subject seemed to require, or my Leisure and other Circumstances would
permit. And though I have not here handled the Subjects they belonged to, as if
I intended such a Chymia Philosophica as I lately mentioned, because my design
did not make it necessary, but did perhaps make it impertinent for me to do so,
yet in some of the larger Notes about Volatility and Fixtness, and especially
about Precipitation, I have given some little Specimens of the Theorical part
of a Philosophical Account of those Qualities or Operations, that I hope will
not be wholly useless. I know, it may be objected, that I should have employed
for Instances some more considerable Experiments, if not Arcana; but though
possibly I am not altogether unfurnished with such, yet aiming rather to
promote Philosophy, than appear a Possessor of elaborate Processes, I declined
several Experiments that required either more skill, or more time, or more
expense than could be well expected from most Readers, and chose rather to
employ such Experiments as may be more easily or cheaply tried, and, which is
mainly to be considered, being more simple, are more clearly intelligible, and
more fit to have Notions and Theories built upon them; especially considering,
that the Doctrine of Qualities being it self conversant about some of the
Rudimental parts, if I may so call them, of Natural Philosophy, it seemed unfit
to employ intricate Experiments, and whose Causes were liable to many disputes,
to settle a Theory of them. In short, my design being to hold a Taper not so
much to Chemists as to the Naturalists, 'twas fit I should be less solicitous
to gratify the former than to inform the later.

FINIS.
EXPERIMENTS, AND NOTES, About The Mechanical Origin AND PRODUCTION OF
VOLATILITY.
CHAP. I.
AS far as I have yet observed, the Qualifications or Attributes, on whose
account a portion of matter is found to be Volatile, are chiefly four; whereof
the three former most regard the single Corpuscles as such; and the last, the
manner of their Union in the aggregate or body they make up.

But before I enter upon particulars, give me leave to advertise you here once
for all, That in the following Notes about Volatility and Fixtness, when I
speak of the Corpuscles or minute parts of a body, I do not mean strictly
either the Elementary parts, such as Earth and Water, or the Hypostatical
Principles, such as Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury; for these things come not here
into consideration: But only such Corpuscles, whether of a simple, compounded
or decompounded Nature, as have the particles they consist of so firmly united,
that they will not be totally disjoined or dissipated by that degree of Fire or
Heat, wherein the matter is said to be volatile or to be fixed. But these
combined particles will in their aggregate either ascend, or continue unraised
per modum Vnius (as they speak) or as one entire Corpuscle. As in a Corpuscle
of Sal Ammoniac, whether it be a natural or factitious thing, or whether it be
perfectly similar, or compounded of differing parts, I look upon the entire
Corpuscle as a volatile portion of matter; and so I do on a Corpuscle of
Sulphur, though experience shows when it is kindled, that it has great store of
acid Salt in it, but which is not extricated by bare sublimation: And so
Colcothar of Vitriol falls under our consideration as a fixed body, without
inquiring what cupreous or other mineral and not totally fixed parts may be
united with the Earthly ones; since the fires, we expose it to, do not separate
them.

And this being premised in the general, I now proceed to some particulars. And
first to make a volatile body, the parts should be very small. For, caeteris
paribus, those that are so, are more easily put into motion by the action of
the fire and other Agents, and consequently more apt to be elevated, when, by
the determination of the movent, the situation of the neighboring bodies, or
other Mechanical Circumstances, the agitated Corpuscles can continue their
motion with less resistance upwards than any other way, (as either downwards or
horizontally.) And if, as it is highly probable, that which in light bodies, or
at least in most of them, is wont to pass for positive Levity, be but a less
degree of gravity than that of those contiguous bodies that raise them; it will
happen, that in very many cases, (for I say not in all) the great proportion of
the surface of a Corpuscle to its bulk, (which is usually greater in the lesser
particles) by making it more apt to be wrought on, either by the air agitated
by the fire, or by the effluvia of kindled fuel, or by the impulse of the
shaken Corpuscles of the body it self, will much facilitate the elevation of
such a minute particle, by exposing a greater portion of it to the action of
the agent, as it will oftentimes also facilitate the renewed sustentation of
such a small body in the air, which resists more the descent of particles whose
surfaces are large, than of others of the same gravity and bulk: As a leaf of
paper displayed will much longer hover in the Air, than if it were reduced into
a ball or pellet. That this minuteness of particles may dispose them to be
carried upwards, by the impulse of other bodies and that of the agitated Air,
is very obvious to be observed: As we see, that Horses in a highway, though
they be not able with the strokes of their feet to make stones, or gravel, or
clods of Earth fly up, yet they will easily raise clouds of dust oftentimes
mingled with the smaller grains of sand. And where Timber is sawing, the same
wind that will not in the least move the beams, and scarce at all move the
chips, will easily carry up the Saw-dust into the Air. And we see in our
Chimneys, that the smoke readily ascends, whilst even small clods of soot,
which is but an aggregate of the particles of smoke, fall headlong down.

CHAP. II.
THE next qualification requisite in the corpuscles of Volatile bodies is, that
they be not too solid or heavy. For if they be so, though their bulk be very
small, yet, unless other Circumstances do much compensate their weight, 'twill
be very difficult to elevate them, because of the great disproportion of their
specific gravity to that of the Air, (which contributes to sustain and even
raise many sorts of volatile parts) and to the strength of the igneous effluvia
or other agents that would carry them up. Thus we see, that filings of Lead or
Iron, and even Minium (which is the calx of Lead) though the grains they
consist of be very small, will not easily be blown up like common dust, or
meal, or other powders made of less ponderous materials.

A third Qualification to be desired in the corpuscles that should make up a
Volatile body is, that they be conveniently shaped for motion. For if they be
of branched, hooked, or other very irregular or inconvenient figures, they will
be apt to be stopped and detained by other bodies, or entangled among themselves,
and consequently very difficult to be carried upwards, in regard that, whilst
they are thus fastened either to one another, or to any stable body, each
single Corpuscle is not only to be considered, as having its own peculiar
bulk, since its cohesion with the other corpuscle or body that detains it,
makes them fit to be looked upon per modum Vnius; that degree of heat they are
exposed to being presumed incapable of disjoyning them. And this may be one
Reason, why Water, though it be specifically heavier than Oil, yet is much more
easily brought to exhale in the form of vapors than is Oil, whose corpuscles
by the lasting stains they leave on cloth, wood, wool, etc. (which water will
but transiently moisten, not stain) seems to be of very intangling figures.

The fourth and last qualification requisite in a Volatile body is, that the
parts do loosely adhere, or at least be united in such a manner, as does not
much indispose them to be separated by the fire in the form of fumes or vapors.

For he that considers the matter, will easily grant, that, if the contexture
of the corpuscles, whereof a body consists, be intricate, or their cohesion
strong, their mutual implication, or their adherence to each other, will make
one part hinder another from flying separately away, and their conjunction will
make them too heavy or unweildy to be elevated together, as entire though
compounded parts. Thus we see, that in Spring, or the beginning of Summer, a
wind, though not faint, is unable to carry off the lightest leaves of trees,
because they stick fast to the bows and twigs on which they grow, but in
Autumn, when that adhesion ceases, and the leaves sit but loosely on, a wind no
stronger than that they resisted before, will with ease blow them off, and
perhaps carry them up a good way into the Air. But here note, that it was not
without some cause, that I added above, that in a fluid body, the parts should
at least be united in such a manner, as does not much indispose them to be
separated. For it is not impossible, that the parts of a body may, by the
figures and smoothness of the surfaces, be sufficiently apt to be put into
motion, and yet be indisposed to admit such a motion as would totally separate
them and make them fly up into the Air. As, if you take two pieces of very flat
and well-polished marble or glass, and lay them one upon the other, you easily
make them slide along each others surfaces, but not easily pull up one of them,
whilst the other continues its station. And when Glass is in the state of
fusion, the parts of it will easily slide along each other, (as is usual in
those of other fluids) and consequently change places, and yet the continuity
of the whole is not entirely broken, but every corpuscle does somewhere touch
some other corpuscle, and thereby maintain the cohesion that indisposes it for
that entire separation accompanied with a motion upwards that we call
avolation. And so, when Saltpeter alone, is in a Crucible exposed to the fire,
though a very moderate degree of it will suffice to bring the Salt to a state
of fusion, and consequently to put the corpuscles that compose it into a
restless motion; yet a greater degree of heat, than is necessary to melt it,
will not extricate so much as the Spirits, and make them fly away.

CHAP. III.
THE foregoing Doctrine of the Volatility of bodies may be as well illustrated
as applied, if we proceed to deduce from it the general ways of Volatilization
of bodies, or of introducing volatility into an assigned portion of matter. For
these ways seem not inconveniently reducible to five, which I shall severally
mention, though Nature and Art do usually employ two or more of them in
conjunction. For which Reason I would not, when I speak of one of these ways,
be understood as if, excluding the rest, I meant that no other concurred with
it.

The first of the five ways or means of Volatilizing a body is, to reduce it
into minute parts, and, caeteris paribus, the more minute they are the better.

That the bringing a body into very minute parts may much conduce to the
volatilizing of it, may be gathered from the vulgar practice of the Chemists,
who when they would sublime or distill Antimony, Sal Ammoniac, Sea Salt, Nitre,
etc. are wont to beat them to powders to facilitate their receiving a further
comminution by the action of the fire. And here I observe, that in some bodies
this comminution ought not to be made only at first, but to be continued
afterward. For Chemists find by experience, though perhaps without considering
the reason of it, that Sea Salt and Nitre, will very hardly afford their
Spirits in Distillations, without they be mingled with powdered clay or bole,
or some such other additament, which usually twice or thrice exceeds the weight
of the Salt it self: Although these additaments, being themselves fixed, seem
unlikely to promote the volatilization of the bodies mixed with them, yet by
hindering the small grains of Salt to melt together into one lump or mass, and
consequently by keeping them in the state of Comminution, they much conduce to
the driving up of the Spirits or the finer parts of the Salts by the operation
of the fire.

But to prosecute a little what I was saying of the Conduciveness of bringing a
body into small parts to the volatilization of it, I shall add, that in some
cases the Comminution may be much promoted by employing Physical, after
Mechanical, ways; and that, when the parts are brought to such a pitch of
exiguity, they may be elevated much better than before. Thus, if you take
filings of Mars, and mix them with Sal Armoniack, some few parts may be
sublimed; but if, as I have done, you dissolve those filings in good Spirit of
Salt instead of Oil of Vitriol, and having coagulated the solution, you calcine
the greenish Crystalls or vitriolum Martis that will be afforded, you may with
ease, and in no long time, obtain a Crocus Martis of very fine parts; so that I
remember, when we exquisitely mingled this very fixed powder with a convenient
proportion of Sal Ammoniac, and gradually pressed it with a competent fire, we
were able to elevate at the first Sublimation a considerable part of it; and
adding a like, or somewhat inferior, proportion of fresh Sal Ammoniac to the
Caput Mortuum, we could raise so considerable a part of that also, and in it of
the Crocus, that we thought, if we had had Convenience to pursue the operation,
we should, by not many repeated Sublimations, have elevated the whole Crocus,
which (to hint that upon the by,) afforded a Sublimat of so very astringent a
Taste, as may make the trial of it in stanching of blood, stopping of fluxes,
and other cases, where potent astriction is desired, worthy of a Physicians
Curiosity.

CHAP. IV.
THE second means to volatilize bodies is, to rub, grind, or otherwise reduce
their corpuscles to be either smooth, or otherwise fitly shaped to clear
themselves, or be disintangled from each other.

By reason of the minuteness of the corpuscles, which keeps them from being
separately discernible by the Eye, it is not to be expected, that immediate and
ocular Instances should be given on this occasion; but that such a change is to
be admitted in the small parts of many bodies, brought to be volatile, seems
highly probable from the account formerly given of the requisites or conditions
of Volatility, whose introduction into a portion of matter will scarce be
explicated without the intervention of such a change. To this second Instrument
of Volatilization, in concurrence with the first, may probably be referred the
following Phenomenon: In the two first of which there is employed no additional
volatile Ingredient; and in the fourth, a fixed body is disposed to volatility
by the operation of a Liquour, though this be carefully abstracted from it.

1. If Urine freshly made be put to distill, the Phlegm will first ascend, and
the Volatile salt will not rise 'till that be almost totally driven away, and
then requires a not inconsiderable degree of fire to elevate it. But, if you
putrefie or digest Urine, though in a well-closed Glass-Vessel, for seven or
eight weeks, that gentle warmth will make the small parts so rub against, or
otherwise act upon, one another, that the finer ones of the Salt will perhaps
be made more slender and light, and however will be made to extricate
themselves so far as to become volatile, and, ascending in a very gentle heat,
leave the greatest part of the phlegm behind them.

2. So, if Must, or the sweet juice of Grapes, be distilled before it have been
fermented, it is observed by Chemists, and we have tried the like in artificial
Wine made of Raisins, that the phlegm, but no ardent Spirit, will ascend. But
when this Liquour is reduced to Wine by fermentation, which is accompanied with
a great and intestine commotion of the justling parts, hitting and rubbing
against one another, whereby some probably come to be broken, others to be
variously ground and subtilized, the more subtle parts of the Liquour being
extricated, or some of the parts being, by these operations, brought to be
subtle, they are qualified to be raised by a very gentle heat before the
phlegm, and convene into that fugitive Liquour, that Chemists, for its
activity, call Spirit of Wine. Nor is it only in the slighter Instances
afforded by Animals and Vegetables, that Volatility may be effected by the
means lately mentioned: For experience has assured me, that it is possible, by
an artificial and long digestion, wherein the parts have leisure for frequent
justlings and attritions, so to subtilize and dispose the corpuscles even of
common Salt for Volatility, that we could make them ascend in a moderate fire
of Sand without the help of Bole, Oil of Vitriol, or any Volatilizing
additament; and, which is more considerable, the Spirit would in rising precede
the Phlegm, and leave the greatest part thereof behind it.

This intestine commotion of parts capable of producing Volatility in the more
disposed portions of a body, though it be much more easy to be found in
Liquours, or in moist and soft bodies, yet I have sometimes, though rarely, met
with it in dry ones. And particularly I remember, that some years ago having,
for trial sake, taken Mustard Seed, which is a body pregnant with subtle
parts, and caused it to be distilled per se in a Retort, I had, as I hoped,
(without any more ado,) a great many grains of a clear and figured Volatile
salt at the very first distillation: which Experiment having, for the greater
security, made a second time with the like success, I mentioned it to some
Lovers of Chemistry, as what I justly supposed they had not heard of. I leave
it to farther Inquiry, whether, in a body so full of Spirits as Mustard Seed,
the action and re-action of the parts among themselves, perhaps promoted by
just degrees of fire, might not suffice to make in them a change equivalent in
order to Volatilization, and* the yielding a Volatile Salt, to that which we
have observed Fermentation and Putrefaction to have made in the juice of
Grapes, Urine, and some other bodies. How far the like success may be expected
in other Trialls, I cannot tell; especially not having by me any Notes of the
events of some Attempts which that Inquiry put me upon: Only I remember in
general, that, as some trials, I made with other Seeds, and even with Aromatic
ones, did not afford me any Volatile Salt; so the success of other trials made
me now and then think, that some subjects of the Vegetable kingdom, whence we
are wont to drive over acid Spirits, but no dry Salt, may be distilled with so
luckily regulated a heat, as to afford something, though but little, of
Volatile Salt; and that perhaps more bodies would be found to do so, were they
not too hastily or violently pressed by the fire, whereby such saline schematisms
of the desired parts of the matter are (by being dissipated or confounded)
destroyed or vitiated; as in a slow, dextrous, or fortunate way of management
would come forth, not in a liquid, but a saline form. Of which Observation we
may elsewhere mention some Instances, and shall before the close of this paper
name one, afforded us by crude Tartar.

3. Though Silver be one of the fixedst bodies that we know of, yet that it is
not impossible but that, chiefly by a change of Texture, it may strangely be
disposed to Volatility, I was induced to think by what I remember once happened
to me. A Gentleman of my acquaintance, studious of Chemical Arcana, having
lighted on a strange Menstruum, which he affirmed, and I had some cause to
believe, not to be corrosive, he abstracted it from several metalls, (for the
same Liquour would serve again and again,) and brought me the Remainders, with
a desire that I would endeavor to reduce those of Lead and Silver into the
pristine metals again, which he had in vain attempted to do: whereupon, though
I found the white Calx of Lead reducible, yet when I came to the Calx of
Silver, I was not able to bring it into a body; and having at length melted
some Lead in a gentle fire, to try whether I could make it swallow up the Calx,
in order to a farther operation, I was not a little surprised to find, that
this mild heat made the Calx of Silver presently fly away and sublime in the
form of a farina volatilis, which whitened the neighboring part of the
Chimney, as well as the upper part of the Crucible.

4. From that which Chemists themselves tell us, I think we may draw a good
Argument ad hominem, to prove, that Volatility depends much upon the texture
and other Mechanical affections of a body. For diverse of those Hermetick
Philosophers (as they are called) that write of the Elixir, tell us, that when
their Philosophic Mercury or grand Solvent, being sealed up together with a
third or fourth part of Gold in a glass-Egg, is kept in convenient degrees of
fire, the whole matter, and consequently the Gold, will, by the mutual
operation of the included Substances, be so changed, that not only 'twill
circulate up and down in the glass, but, in case the digestion or decoction
should be broken off at a certain inconvenient time, the Gold would be quite
spoiled, being, by the past and untimely-ended operation, made too Volatile to
be reducible again into Gold: whereas, if the decoction be duly continued unto
the end, not only the Gold, but all the Philosophical Mercury or Menstruum
will be turned into a Sulphur or powder of a wonderfully fixed nature. I know,
there are several Chrysopaeans, that speak much otherwise of this Operation,
and tell us, that the Gold employed about it must be Philosophic Gold: But I
know too, that there are diverse others (and those too none of the least candid
or rational) that speak of it as I have done; and That is sufficient to ground
an Argument on toward all those that embrace Their doctrine. And in this case
it is considerable, that it is not by any superadded additament, that the most
fixed body of Gold is made volatile, but the same massy matter, consisting of
Gold and Philosophic Mercury, is, by the change of texture produced or
occasioned by the various degrees and operations of fire upon it, brought to be
first Volatile, and then extremely fixed. And having said this in reference to
one tribe of the Modern Spagyrists; to another of them, the Helmontians, I
think I can offer a good Argument ad hominem from the Testimony and Experiments
of the Founder of their Sect.

5. The acute Hemont, among other prodigious powers that he ascribes to the
Alkahest, affirms, that, by abstracting it frequently enough, it would so
change all tangible bodies, and consequently stones and metals, that they might
be distilled over into Liquours equiponderant to the respective bodies that
afforded them, and having all the Qualities of Rainwater; which if they have,
I need not tell you that they must be very Volatile. And I see not how those
that admit the Truth of this strange Alkahestical operation, can well deny,
that Volatility depends upon the Mechanical affections of matter, since it
appears not, that the Alkahest does, at least in our case, work upon bodies
otherwise than Mechanically. And it must be confessed, that the same material
parts of a portion of corporeal substance, which, when they were associated and
contexted (whether by an Archeus, seed, form, or what else you please,) after
such a determinate manner, constituted a solid and fixed body, as a Flint or a
lump of Gold; by having their Texture dissolved; and (perhaps after being
subtilized) by being freed from their former implications or firm cohesions,
may become the parts of a fluid body totally Volatile.

CHAP. V.
THE fourth means of making a body Volatile is, by associating the particles to
be raised with such as are more Volatile than themselves, and of a figure fit
to be fastened to them, or are at least apt, by being added to them, to make up
with them corpuscles more disposed than they to Volatility. This being the
grand Instrument of Volatilization, I shall spend somewhat the more time about
it: But I shall first here a little explain the last clause, (that I may not be
obliged to resume it elsewhere,) by intimating, that it is not impossible, that
the particles of an additament, though not more volatile than those of the body
it is mixed with, and perhaps though not volatile at all, will yet conduce to
volatilize the body wherewith it is mingled. For the particles of the additament
may be of such figures, and so associated with those of the body to be
elevated, as in this to enlarge the former pores, or produce new ones, by
intercepting little cavities (for they must not be great ones) between the
particles of a body to be raised, and those of the additament. For, by these
and other such ways of association, the corpuscles, resulting from the
combination or coalition of two or more of these differing particles, may,
without becoming too big and unwieldy, become more conveniently shaped, or more
light in proportion to their bulk, and so more easily buoyed up and sustained
in the air, (as when the Lid of a Copper-box being put on, makes the whole box
emerge and swim in water, because of the intercepted cavity, though neither of
the parts of the box would do so,) or otherwise more fitted for avolation than
the particles themselves were before their being joined to those of the
additament.

By two things chiefly the corpuscles of the additament may contribute to the
elevation of a body. For first, the parts of the former may be much more
disposed for avolation than is necessary to their own Volatility. As when in
the making of Sal Ammoniac, the saline particles of Urine and of Soot are more
fugitive than they need be to be themselves sublimed, and thereby are
advantaged to carry up with them the more sluggish corpuscles whereof Sea Salt
consists. And next, they may be of figures so proper to fasten them well to the
body to be elevated, that the more fugitive will not be driven away or
disjoined from the more fixed by such a degree of Heat as is sufficient to raise
them both together: To which effect the congruity or figuration is as well
required, as the lightness or volatility of the particles of the additament.
And therefore some of the fugitivest bodies that we know, as Spirit of Wine,
Camphire, etc. will not volatilize many bodies which will be elevated by far
less fugitive additaments; because the corpuscles of Spirit of Wine stick not
to those of the body they are mingled with, but, easily flying up themselves,
leave those behind them, which they did rather barely touch than firmly adhere
to: Whereas far less fugacious Liquours, if they be endowed with figures that
fit them for a competently firm cohesion with the body they are mingled with,
will be able to volatilize it. Of which I shall now give you some Instances in
bodies that are very ponderous, or very fixed, or both.

And I shall begin with Colcothar, though it being a vitriolate calx, made by a
lasting and vehement fire, it is (consequently) capable of resisting such a one.
This being exquisitely ground with an equal weight of Sal Ammoniac, which is it
self a Salt but moderately volatile, will be in good part sublimed into those
yellow Flowers, which we have elsewhere more particularly taught to prepare,
under the name of Ens primum Veneris; in which, that many vitriolate corpuscles
of the Colcothar are really elevated, you may easily find by putting a grain or
two of that reddish Substance into a strong infusion of Galls, which will
thereby immediately acquire an inky color.

Steel also, which, to deserve that name, must have endured extraordinary
violences of the fire, and greater than is needful to obtain other metalls
from their Mother Earth; Steel it self, I say, being reduced to filings, and
diligently ground with about an equal weight of Sal Ammoniac, will, if degrees
of fire be skilfully administered, (for it is easy to err in that point,)
without any previous calcination or reduction to a Crocus, suffer so much of
the metal to be carried up, as will give the Sal Ammoniac a notable color,
and an ironish taste.

And here it will be proper to observe, for the sake of practical Chemists,
that the Quantity or Proportion of the Volatile additament is to be regarded;
though not so much as its Nature, yet more than it is wont to be: And diverse
bodies, that are thought either altogether unfit for Sublimation, or at least
incapable to have any considerable portion of them elevated, may be copiously
enough sublimed, if a greater proportion of the additament, than we usually
content our selves with, be skilfully employed. And in the newly-mentioned
Instance of Filings of Steel, if, in stead of an equal weight of Sal Ammoniac,
the treble weight be taken, and the operation be duly managed, a far greater
quantity of the metal may be raised, especially if fresh Sal Ammoniac be
carefully ground with the Caput Mortuum. And Sal Ammoniac may perhaps be
compounded with such other bodies, heavier than it self, as may qualify it,
when it is thus clogged, to elevate some congruous bodies better than it would
of it self alone. And I shall venture to add this farther Advertisement, That
if, besides the plenty of the additament, there be a sufficient fitness of its
particles to lay hold on those of the body to be wrought on, Mineral bodies,
and those ponderous enough, may be employed to volatilize other heavy bodies.
And I am apt to think, that almost, if not more than almost, all Metalls
themselves may by copious additaments and frequent Cohobations be brought to
pass through the neck of the Retort in distillation; and perhaps, if you melt
them not with equal parts, but with many parts of Regulus of Antimony, and then
proceed as the hints now given will direct you, you will not find cause to
despise what I have been saying.

You know what endeavors have been, and are still fruitlessly, employed by
Chemists to elevate so fixed a body as Salt of Tartar by additaments. I shall
not now speak much of the enterprise in general, designing chiefly to tell you
on this occasion, that, whereas frequent experience shows, that Sal Ammoniac
being abstracted from Salt of Tartar, not only the Salt of Tartar is left at
the bottom, but a good part of the Sal Ammoniac is left behind with it; I
suspected the cause might be, that Sal Ammoniac, by the operation of the Alkaly
of Tartar, is reduced into Sea Salt, and Urinous or fuliginous Salt, as 'twas
at first composed of those differing Ingredients; and that by this means the
volatile Salt being loosened or disintangled from the rest, and being of a very
fugacious Nature, flies easily away it self, without staying long enough to
take up any other Salt with it. And therefore, if this Analysis of the Sal
Ammoniac could be prevented, it seemed not impossible to me, that some part of
the Salt of Tartar, as well as of Colcothar and Steel, might be carried up by
it: And accordingly having caused the Ingredients to be exceedingly well dried,
and both nimbly and carefully mixed, and speedily exposed to the fire, I have
sometimes had a portion of Salt of Tartar carried up with the Sal Ammoniac: but
this happened so very rarely, that I suspected some peculiar fitness for this
work in some parcels of Sal Ammoniac, that are scarce but by the effect to be
discerned from others. But however, what has happened to us may argue the
Possibility of the thing, and may serve to show the volatilizing efficacy of
Sal Ammoniac; which is a Compound, that I elsewhere recommend, and do it now
again, as one of the usefullest Productions of vulgar Chemistry.

And since I have mentioned the Volatilization of Salt of Tartar, presuming
your Curiosity will make you desire my Opinion about the Possibility of it, I
shall propose to you a distinction, that perhaps you do not expect, by saying,
that I think there is a great deal of difference between the making a Volatile
Salt of Tartar, and the making Salt of Tartar Volatile. For, though this seem
to be but a Nicety, yet really it is none; and it is very possible, that a man
may from Tartar obtain a Volatile salt, and yet be no wise able to volatilize
that Tartareous Salt, that has been once by the incineration of the Tartar
brought to fixed Alkaly. I have in the Skeptical Chemist summarily delivered a
way, by which both I, and some Spagyrists that learned it of me, obtained from
a mixture of Antimony, Nitre, and crude Tartar, a Volatile salt, which in
probability comes from the last named of those three bodies; but experience
carefully made has assured me, that without any additament, by a distillation
warily and very slowly made, (insomuch that I have spent near a week in
distilling one pound of matter) very clean Tartar, or at least the Crystalls of
Tartar, may, in conveniently shaped Vessels, be brought to afford a Substance
that in Rectification will ascend to the upper part of the Vessel, in the form
of a Volatile Salt, as if it were of Urine or of Harts-horne; of which
(Tartareous) Salt, I keep some by me: But this operation requires not only a
dexterous, but a patient distiller.

But now as to the making a fixed Alkaly of Tartar become Volatile, I take it to
be another, and have found it to be a far more difficult, work; the common
Processes of performing it being wont to promise much more than they can make
good; which I may justly say of some other, that private men have vaunted for
great Arcana, but upon trial have satisfied me so little, that I have diverse
times offered pretenders to make Salt of Tartar Volatile, that without at all
inquiring into their Processes, I would lay good wagers, that they could not
do what they pretended; not only as diverse Philosophical Spagyrists require,
without any visible additament, but by any additament whatever; provided I were
allowed to bring the Salt of Tartar my self, and to examine the Success, not by
what may appear in the Alembic and Receiver, but by the weight of what would
remain in the bottom. For I have convinced some of the more Ingenuous Artists,
that the Salt that sublimed was not indeed the Alkaly of Tartar, but somewhat
that was by the operation produced, or rather extricated out of the
additaments. But yet I would not be thought to affirm, that it is not possible
to elevate the fixed Salt of Tartar. For sometimes I have been able to do it,
even at the first Distillation, by an artificial additament perhaps more fixed
than it self; but, though the operation was very grateful to me, as it showed
the Possibility of the thing, yet the paucity of the Salt sublimed and other
Circumstances, kept me from much valuing it upon any other account. And there
are other ways, whereby Experience has assured me, that Salt of Tartar may be
raised. And if one of them were not so uncertain, that I can never promise
before hand that it will at all succeed, and the other so laborious, difficult
and costly, that few would attempt or be able to practice it, I should think
them very valuable things; since by the former way most part of the Salt of
Tartar was quickly brought over in the form of a Liquor, whose piercing smell
was scarce tolerable; and by the latter way some Salt of Tartar of my own,
being put into a Retort, and urged but with such a fire as could be given in a
portable Sandfurnace, there remained not at the bottom near one half of the
first weight, the additament having carried up the rest, partly in the form of
a Liquor, but chiefly in that of a white Sublimate, which was neither
ill-sented, nor in taste corrosive, or alcalizat, but very mild, and somewhat
sweetish. And I do not much doubt, but that by other ways the fixed Alkaly of
Tartar may be elevated, especially if, before it be exposed to the last
operation of the fire, it be dexterously freed from the most of those Earthy and
Viscous parts, that I think may be justly suspected to clog and bind the truly
saline ones.

But I have too long digrest, and therefore shall intimate only upon the by,
that even the spurious Sal Tartari volatilized that is made with Spirit of
Vinegar, may, if it be well prepared, make amends for its Empyreumatical smell
and taste, and may, notwithstanding them, in diverse cases be of no despicable
use, both as a Medicine, and a Menstruum.

CHAP. VI.
BEfore I draw toward a Conclusion of these Notes about Volatility, perhaps it
will not be amiss, to take notice of a Phenomenon, which may much surprise,
and sometimes disappoint those that deal in Sublimations, unless they be
forewarned of it. For though it be taken for granted, and for the most part may
justly be so, that by carefully mingling what is sublimed with what remains,
and re-subliming the mixture, a greater quantity of the body to be sublimed may
be elevated the second time than was the first, and the third time than the
second, and so onwards; yet I have not found this Rule always to hold, but in
some Bodies, as particularly in some kinds of dulcified Colcothar, the Sal
Ammoniac, would at the first Sublimation carry up more of the fixed powder,
than at the second or third. So that I was by several Trials persuaded, when I
found a very well and highly colored powder elevated, to lay it by for use,
and thereby save my self the labor of a prosecution, that would not only have
proved useless, but prejudicial. And if I misremember not, by often repeated
Cohobations, (if I may so call them) of Sal Ammoniac upon crude or Mineral
Antimony, though the Sublimate that was obtained by the first Operation, was
much of it variously, and in some places richly, colored; yet afterward, the
Salt ascended from time to time paler and paler, leaving the Antimony behind
it. Which way of making some Minerals more fixed and fusible I conceive may be
of great use in some Medicinal Preparations, though I think it not fit to
particularize them in this place: Where my chief intent was, to mention the
Phenomenon it self, and invite you to consider, whether it may be ascribed to
this, that by the reiterated action of the fire, and grinding together of the
body to be raised, either the corpuscles of the Sal Ammoniac, or those of the
other body, may have those little hooked or equivalent particles, whereby they
take hold of one another, broken or worn off; and whether the indisposedness of
the Colcotharine or Antimonial parts to ascend, may not in some cases be
promoted by their having, by frequent attritions, so smoothed their Surfaces
that diverse of them may closely adhere, like pieces of polished Glass, and so
make up Clusters too unweildy to be so raised, as the single corpuscles they
consist of, were. Which change may dispose them to be at once less Volatile and
more Fusible. Which Conjectures I mention to excite you to frame better, or at
least to make amends for my omission of examining these, by trying whether the
Sal Ammoniac grown white again will be as fit as it was at first to carry up
fresh bodies; and also by observing the weight of the unelevated part, and
employing those other ways of examen, which I should have done, if I had not
then made Sublimations for another end, than to clear up the Doctrine of
Volatility.

And here it may be profitable to some Chemists, though not necessary to my
Subject, to intimate, that Sublimations may be useful to make very fine
Comminutions of diverse bodies. That those that are elevated are reduced to a
great fineness of parts, is obvious to be observed in many Examples, whence it
has been anciently, not absurdly, said, that Sublimations are the Chemists
Pestles, since (as in Flowers of Sulphur and Antimony) they do really resolve
the elevated bodies into exceeding fine Flower, and much finer than Pestles and
Mortars are wont to bring them to. But that which I intend in this Paragraph is
not a thing so obvious, since it is to observe, that sometimes even bodies so
fixed as not at all to ascend in Sublimation, may yet be reduced by that
operation into powders extremely fine. For exemplifying of which, I shall put
you in mind, that though Spagyrists complain much of the Difficulty of making a
good Calx of Gold, and of the Imperfection of the few ordinary processes
prescribed to make it, (which would be more complained of, but that Chemical
Physicians seldom attempt to prepare it,) yet we are informed by trial, that
by exactly grinding a thick amalgam of Gold and Mercury with a competent
weight, (at least equal to its own) of finely powdered Sulphur, we may, by
putting the mixture to sublime in a conveniently shaped Glass, by degrees of
fire obtain a Cinaber that will leave behind it a finer Calx of Gold than will
be had by some far more difficult processes.

But it is now time to draw toward a Conclusion of our Notes about Volatility;
which Quality depends so much upon the contexture of the corpuscles that are to
be raised together, that even very ponderous bodies may serve for volatilizing
additaments, if they be disposed to fasten themselves sufficiently to the
bodies they are to carry up along with them. For, though Lead be, save one, the
heaviest solid we know of, and though Quicksilver be the heaviest body in the
world, except Gold; yet trialls have assured us, that Quicksilver it self
being united by Amalgamation with a small proportion of Lead, will by a fire
that is none of the violentest, and in close Vessels, be made to carry over
with it some of the Lead. As we clearly found by the increased weight of the
Quicksilver that passed into the Receiver; which, by the way, may make us
cautious how we conclude Quicksilver to be pure, merely from its having been
distilled over.

There remains but one body more heavy than those I come from naming, and that
is Gold; which, being also of a fixity so great that it is indeed admirable, I
do not wonder that not only the more wary Naturalists, but the more severe
among the Chemists themselves should think it incapable of being volatilized.
But yet, if we consider, how very minute parts Gold may be rationally supposed
to consist of, and to be divisible into, me thinks it should not seem
impossible, that, if men could light on Volatile Salts endowed with figures fit
to stick fast to the corpuscles of the Gold, they would carry up with them
bodies, whose solidity can scarce be more extraordinary than their minuteness
is: And in effect, we have made more than one Menstruum, with which some
particles of Gold may be carried up. But when I employed that which I
recommended to you formerly under the name of Menstruum peracutum (which
consists mainly, and sometimes only, of Spirit of Nitre, several times drawn
from Butter of Antimony,) I was able, without a very violent fire, in a few
hours to elevate so much crude Gold, as, in the neck of the Retort, afforded me
a considerable Quantity of Sublimate, which I have had red as blood, and whose
consisting partly of Gold manifestly appeared by this, that I was able with
ease to reduce that metal out of it.

In reckoning up the Instruments of Volatilization, we must not quite leave out
the mention of the Air, which I have often observed to facilitate the elevation
of some bodies even in close Vessels; wherein, though to fill them too full be
judged by many a Compendious practice, because the streams have a less way to
ascend, yet Experience has several times informed me, that, at least in some
cases, they take wrong measures, and that (to pass by another Cause of their
disappointment) a large proportion of Air, purposely left in the Vessels, may
more than compensate the greater space that is to be ascended by the vapors or
exhalations of the matter that is to be distilled or sublimed. And if, in close
Vessels, the presence of the Air may promote the ascension of bodies, it may
well be expected, that the elevation of diverse of them may be furthered by
being attempted in open Vessels, to which the Air has free access. And if we
may give any credit to the probable Relations of some Chemists, the Air does
much contribute to the volatilization of some bodies that are barely, though
indeed for no short time, exposed to it. But the account on which the Air by
its bare presence or peculiar operations conduces to the Volatilization of some
bodies, is a thing very difficult to be determined, without having recourse to
some Notions about Gravity and Levity, and of the Constitution of the
corpuscles that compose the Air; which I take to be both very numerous and no
less various. And therefore I must not in these occasional Notes lanch out into
such a Subject, though, for fear I should be blamed for too much slighting my
old acquaintance the Air, I durst not quite omit the power it has to dispose
some bodies to Volatility.

A moderate attention may suffice to make it be discerned, that in what has
been hitherto delivered, I have for the most part considered the small portions
of matter, to be elevated in Volatilization, as entire Corpuscles: And
therefore it may be now pertinent, to intimate in a Line or two, that there may
be also Cases, wherein a kind of Volatilization, improperly so called, may be
effected, by making use of such additaments as break off or otherwise divide
the particles of the corpuscles to be elevated, and by adhering to, and so
clogging, one of the particles to which it proves more congruous, enable the
other, which is now brought to be more light or disingaged, to ascend. This may
be illustrated by what happens, when Sal Ammoniac is well ground with Lapis
Calaminaris or with some fixed Alkali, and then committed to distillation: For
the Sea Salt, that enters the Composition of the Sal Ammoniac, being detained
by the stone or the Alkali, there is a divorce made between the common Salt and
the urinous and fuliginous Salts, that were incorporated with it, and being now
disingaged from it, are easily elevated. I elsewhere mention, that I have
observed in Man's Urine a kind of native Sal Ammoniac, much less Volatile than
the fugitive that is sublimed from Man's Blood, Hartshorn, etc. and therefore
supposing, that a separation of parts may be made by an Alkali, as well in this
Salt as in the common factitious Sal Ammoniac, I put to fresh Urine a
convenient proportion (which was a plentiful one) of Salt of Potashes (that
being then at hand) and distilling the Liquor, it yielded, according to
expectation, a Spirit more Volatile than the Phlegm, and of a very piercing
taste; which way of obtaining a Spirit without any violence of fire, and without
either previously abstracting the Phlegm, (as we are fain to do in fresh Urine)
or tediously waiting for the fermentation of stale Urine, I taught some
Chemists, because of the usefulness of Spirit of Urine; which being obtained
this innocent way, would probably be employed with much less suspicion of
corrosiveness, than if in the operation I had made use of Quicklime. Another
Illustration of what I was not long since saying, may be fetched from the
Experiment of making Spirit of Nitre by mixing Saltpeter with Oil of Vitriol,
and distilling them together: For the Oil does so divide or break the
corpuscles of the Nitre, that the now-disposed particles of that Salt, which
amount to a great portion of the whole, will be made easily enough to ascend
even with a moderate fire of Sand, and sometimes without any fire at all, in
the form of Spirits, exceeding unquiet, subtle, and apt to moak a way.

To which Instances of this imperfect kind of Volatilization more might be
added, but that you may well think, I have detained you but too long already
with indigested Notes about one Quality.

CHAP. VII.
THe last means of Volatilizing bodies is, the operation of the Fire or some
other actual Heat: But of this, which is obvious, it would be superfluous to
discourse. Only this I shall intimate, that there may be bodies, which, in
such degrees of fire as are wont to be given in the vulgar operations of
Chemists, will not be elevated, which yet may be forced up by such violent and
lasting fires, as are employed by the Melters of Ores, and Founders of Guns,
and sometimes by Glass-makers. And on this Consideration I shall here observe
to you, since I did not do it at my entrance on these Notes, that Chemists are
wont to speak, and I have accordingly been led to treat, of Volatility and
Fixity in a popular sense of those Terms. For if we would consider the matter
more strictly, I presume we should find that Volatility and Fixity are but
relative Qualities, which are to be estimated, especially the former of them,
by the degree of fire to which the body, whereto we ascribe one or other of
those Qualities, is exposed; and therefore it is much more difficult than men
are aware of, to determine accurately, when a body ought to be accounted
Volatile and when not; since there is no determinate degree of Heat agreed on,
nor indeed easy to be devised, that may be as a standard, whereby to measure
Volatility and Fixtness: And it is obvious, that a body, that remains fixed in
one degree of fire, may be forced up by another. To which may be added,
agreeably to what I lately began to observe, that a body may pass for
absolutely fixed among the generality of Chemists, and yet be unable to
persevere in the fires of Founders and Glass-makers: Which brings into my mind,
that not having observed, that Chemists have examined the Fixity of other
bodies than metalline ones by the Cupel, I had the Curiosity to put dry Salt of
Tartar upon it, and found, as I expected, that in no long time it manifestly
wasted in so vehement a heat, wherein also the Air came freely at it, (though
Quicklime, handled after the same way, lost not of its weight,) and having
well mixed one ounce of good Salt of Tartar with treble its weight of
Tobacco-pipe Clay, we kept them but for two, or at most three hours, in a
strong fire; yet the Crucible being purposely left uncovered, we found the Salt
of Tartar so wasted, that the remaining mixture (which was not flux'd) afforded
us not near a quarter of an ounce of Salt. And indeed I scarce doubt, but that
in strictness diverse of those bodies that pass for absolutely fixed, are but
semi-fixt, or at least but comparatively and relatively fixed, that is, in
reference to such degrees of fire, as they are wont to be exposed to in the
Distillations, Sublimations, etc. of Chemists; not such as are given in the
raging fires of Founders, and Glass-makers. And perhaps even the fires of
Glass-makers and Say-masters themselves are not the most intense that may
possibly be made in a short time, provided there be but small portions of
matter to be wrought on by them. And in effect, I know very few bodies, besides
Gold, that will perserve totally fixed in the vehementest degrees of fire that
Trials have made me acquainted with. And I elsewhere tell you, that, though
Tin, in our Chemical Reverberatories themselves, is wont to be reduced but into
a Calx that is reputed very fixed; yet in those intense fires, that a Virtuoso
of my acquaintance uses in his Tin-Mines, there is not seldom found quantities
of Tin carried up to a notable height in the form of a whitish powder, which,
being in good masses forced off from the places to which it had fastened it
self, does by a skillful reduction yield many a pound weight of good malleable
metal, which seemed to me to be rather more, than less, fine than ordinary Tin.

Postscript,
Relating to Page 15. of this Tract; and here annexed for their sakes, who have
a mind to repeat the Experiment there delivered, that so they may know the
quantities employed in it.
WIth two parts of this Crocus we ground very well three parts of Sal Ammoniac,
and having sublimed them in a strong fire, we took off the high colored
Sublimat, and put in either an equal weight, or a weight exceeding it by half,
to the Caput Mortuum, we found after the second Sublimation, which was also
high colored, that of an ounce of Crocus we had raised six drams, that is,
three quarters of the whole weight.

FINIS.
EXPERIMENTAL NOTES OF The Mechanical Origin OR PRODVCTION OF FIXTNESS.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

OF The Mechanical Origin OR PRODVCTION OF FIXTNESS.
CHAP. I.
FIXITY being the opposite Quality to Volatility, what we have discoursed about
the latter, will make the nature of the former more easily understood, and upon
that account allow me to make somewhat the quicker dispatch of what I have to
say of it.

The Qualifications that conduce most to the Fixity of a portion of matter,
seem to be these.

First, the grossness or the bulk of the corpuscles it consists of. For if
these be too big, they will be too unwieldly and unapt to be carried up into
the Air by the action of such minute particles as those of the Fire, and will
also be unfit to be buoyed up by the weight of the Air; as we see, that
Vapors, whilst they are such, are small enough to swim in the Air, but can no
longer be sustained by it, when they convene into drops of rain or flakes of
snow. But here it is to be observed, that when I speak of the corpuscles that a
fixed body consists of, I mean not either its Elementary or its Hypostatical
Principles, as such, but only those very little masses or clusters of
particles, of what kind soever they be, that stick so firmly to one another, as
not to be divisible and dissipable by that degree of fire in which the body is
said to be fixed; so that each of those little Concretions, though it may it
self be made up of two, three, or more particles of a simpler nature, is
considered here per modum Vnius, or as one entire corpuscle. And this is one
Qualification conducive to the Fixtness of a body.

The next is the ponderousness or solidity of the corpuscles it is made up of.
For if these be very solid, and (which solid and compact bodies usually are) of
a considerable specific gravity, they will be too heavy to be carried up by
the effluvia or the action of the fire, and their ponderousness will make them
as unwieldy, and indisposed to be elevated by such Agents, as the grossness of
their bulk would make bigger corpuscles, but of a proportionably inferior
specific weight. On which account the calces of some metals and minerals, as
Gold, Silver, etc. though, by the operation of Solvents, or of the fire, or of
both, reduced to powders exceedingly subtle, will resist such vehement fires,
as will easily drive up bigger, but less heavy and compact, corpuscles, than
those calces consist of.

The third Qualification that conduces to the Fixity of a body, belongs to its
Integral parts, not barely as they are several parts of it, but as they are
aggregated or contexed into one body. For, the Qualification, I mean, is the
ineptitude of the component corpuscles for avolation, by reason of their
branchedness, irregular figures, crookedness, or other inconvenient shape,
which intangles the particles among one another, and makes them difficult to be
extricated; by which means, if one of them do ascend, others, wherewith it is
complicated, must ascend with it; and, whatever be the account on which diverse
particles stick firmly together, the aggregate will be too heavy or unwieldy to
be raised. Which I therefore take notice of, because that, though usually it is
on the roughness and irregularity of corpuscles, that their cohesion depends;
yet it sometimes happens, that the smoothness and flatness of their surfaces
makes them so stick together, as to resist a total divulsion; as may be
illustrated by what I have said of the cohesion of polished marbles and the
plates of glass, and by the fixity of glass it self in the fire.

From this account of the Causes or Requisites of Fixity, may be deduced the
following means of giving or adding Fixation to a body, that was before either
Volatile, or less fixed. These means may be reduced to two general Heads; First,
the action of the Fire, as the parts of the body, exposed to it, are thereby
made to operate variously on one another. And next, the association of the
particles of a volatile body with those of some proper additament: Which term,
[of proper] I rather employ than that, one would expect, [of fixed;] because
'twill ere long appear, that, in certain cases, some volatile bodies may more
conduce to the fixation of other volatile bodies, than some fixed Ones do. But
these two Instruments of Fixation being but general, I shall propose four or
five more particular ones.

CHAP. II.
AND first, in some cases it may conduce to Fixation, that, either by an
additament, or by the operation of the fire, the parts of a body be brought to
touch each other in large portions of their surfaces. For, that from such a
contact there will follow such a mutual cohesion, as will at least indispose
the touching corpuscles to suffer a total divulsion, may appear probable from
what we lately noted of the cohesion of pieces of marble and glass, and from
some other Phenomenon belonging to the History of Firmness, from which we may
properly enough borrow some instances, as least for illustration, in the
Doctrine of Fixtness, in regard that usually, though not always, the same
things that make a body Firm, give it some degree of Fixity, by keeping it from
being dissipated by the wonted degrees of Heat, and Agitation it meets with in
the Air. But to return to the contact we were speaking of, I think it not
impossible, (though you may perhaps think it strange,) that the bare operation
of the Fire may, in some cases, procure a Cohesion among the particles, (and
consequently make them more Fixed,) as well as in others disjoyn them, and
thereby make them more Volatile. For, as in some bodies, the figures and sizes
of the corpuscles may be such, that the action of the fire may rub or tear off
the little beards or hooks, or other particles that entangle them, and by that
means make it more easy for the corpuscles to be disingaged and fly upwards;
so in other bodies, the size and shape of the corpuscles may be such, that the
agitation, caused by the fire, may rub them one against the other, so as by
mutual attrition to grind, as 'twere, their surfaces, and make them so broad
and smooth, if not also so flat, as that the contact of the corpuscles shall
come to be made according to a large portion of their superficies, from whence
will naturally follow a firm Cohesion. Which I shall illustrate by what we may
observe among those that grind glasses for Telescopes and Microscopes. For,
these Artificers, by long rubbing a piece of glass against a metalline Dish or
concave Vessel, do by this attrition at length bring the two bodies to touch
one another in so many parts of their congruous surfaces, that they will stick
firmly to one another, so as sometimes to oblige the Workman to use violence
to disjoyn them. And this instance (which is not the sole I could allege) may
suffice to show, how a Cohesion of corpuscles may be produced by the mutual
adaptation of their congruous surfaces. And if two grosser corpuscles, or a
greater number of smaller, be thus brought to stick together, you will easily
believe, their Aggregate will prove too heavy or unwieldy for avolation. And to
show, that the fire may effect a laevigation in the surfaces of some
corpuscles, I have sometimes caused Minium, and some other calces, that I
judged convenient, to be melted for a competent time, in a vehement fire
conveniently administered; whereby, according to expectation, that which was
before a dull and incoherent powder, was reduced into much grosser corpuscles,
multitudes of whose grains appeared smooth, glittering, and almost specular,
like those of fine litharge of gold; and the masses that these grains composed,
were usually solid enough and of difficult fusion. And when we make glass of
Lead per se, (which I elsewhere teach you how to do,) it is plain, that the
particles of the Lead are reduced to a great smoothness; since, wheresoever you
break the glass, the surfaces, produced at the crack, will not be jagged, but
smooth, and considerably specular. Nor do I think it impossible, that, even
when the fire does not make any great attrition of the Corpuscles of the body
to be fixed, it may yet occasion their sticking together, because by long
tumbling them up and down in various manners, it may at length, after
multitudes of revolutions and differing occursions, bring those of their
surfaces together, which, by reason of their breadth, smoothness, or congruity
of figure, are fit for mutual cohesion; and when once they come to stick, there
is no necessity, that the same causes, that were able to make them pass by one
another, when their contact was but according to an inconsiderable part of
their surfaces, should have the same effect now, when their contact is full;
though perhaps, if the degree of fire were much increased, a more vehement
agitation would surmount this cohesion, and dissipate again these clusters of
coalescent corpuscles.

These conjectures will perhaps appear less extravagant, if you consider what
happens in the preparation of Quicksilver praecipitated per se. For there,
running Mercury, being put into a conveniently shaped Glass, is exposed to a
moderate fire for a considerable time: (For I have sometimes found six or seven
weeks to be too short a one.) In this degree of fire the parts are variously
tumbled, and made many of them to ascend, till convening into drops on the
sides of the glass, their weight carries them down again; but at length, after
many mutual occursions, if not also attritions, some of the parts begin to
stick together in the form of a red powder, and then more and more Mercurial
particles are fastened to it, till at length all, or by much the greater part
of the Mercury, is reduced into the like Praecipitate, which, by this cohesion
of the parts, being grown more fixed, will not with the same degree of Heat be
made to rise and circulate, as the Mercury would before; and yet, as I
elsewhere note, I have found by trial, that, with a greater and competent
degree of heat, this Praecipitate per se, would, without the help of any
volatilizing additament, be easily reduced into running Mercury again. Chemists
and Physicians, who agree in supposing this Praecipitate to be made without any
additament, will perchance scarce be able to give a more likely account of the
consistency and degree of Fixity that is obtained in the Mercury; in which,
since no body is added to it, there appears not to be wrought any but a
Mechanical change. And though, I confess, I have not been without suspicions,
that in Philosophical strictness this Praecipitate may not be made per se, but
that some penetrating igneous particles, especially saline, may have associated
themselves with the Mercurial Corpuscles; yet even upon this supposition it may
be said, that these particles contribute to the effect that is produced, but by
facilitating or procuring, by their opportune Interposition, the mutual
Cohesion of Corpuscles that would not otherwise stick to one another.

Perhaps it will not be altogether impertinent to add, on this occasion, that,
as for the generality of Chemists, as well others as Helmontians, that assert
the Transmutation of all metalls into Gold by the Philosopher's Stone, me
thinks, they may grant it to be probable, that a new and fit Contexture of the
parts of a volatile body may, especially by procuring a full contact among
them, very much contribute to make it highly fixed. For, to omit what is related
by less credible Authors, it is averred, upon his own trial, by Helmont, who
pretended not to the Elixir, that a grain of the powder, that was given him,
transmuted a pound (if I mis-remember not) of running Mercury; where the
proportion of the Elixir to the Mercury was so inconsiderable, that it cannot
reasonably be supposed, that every Corpuscle of the Quicksilver, that before
was volatile, was made extremely fixed merely by its Coalition with a particle
of the powder, since, to make one grain suffice for this Coalition, the parts
it must be divided into must be scarce conceivably minute, and therefore each
single part not likely to be fixed it self, or at least more likely to be
carried up by the vehemently agitated Mercury, than to restrain that from
avolation; whereas, if we suppose the Elixir to have made such a commotion
among the corpuscles of the Mercury, as (having made them perhaps somewhat
change their figure, and expelled some inconvenient particles,) to bring them
to stick to one another, according to very great portions of their surfaces,
and entangle one another, it will not be disagreeable to the Mechanical
Doctrine of Fixity, that the Mercury should, endure the fire as well as Gold,
on the score of its new Texture, which, supposing the story true, appears to
have been introduced, by the new color, specific gravity, Indissolubleness in
Aqua fortis, and other Qualities wherein Gold differs from Mercury, especially
Malleableness, which, according to our Notes about that Quality, usually
requires that the parts, from whose union it results, be either hooked,
branched, or otherwise adapted and fitted to make them take fast hold of one
another, or stick close to one another. And since, in the whole mass of the
factitious Gold, all save one grain must be materially the same body, which,
before the projection was made, was Quicksilver, we may see how great a
proportion of volatile matter may, by an inconsiderable quantity of fixing
additament, acquire such a new Disposition of its parts, as to become most
fixed. And however, this Instance will agree much better with the Mechanical
Doctrine about Fixity, than with that vulgar Opinion of the Chemists,
(wherewith 'twill not at all comply,) That if, in a mixture, the volatile part
do much exceed the fixed, it will carry up that, or at least a good portion
thereof, with it; and on the contrary. But though this Rule holds in many
cases, where there is no peculiar indisposition to the effect that is aimed at;
yet if the Mechanical affections of the bodies be ill suited to such a purpose,
our Philosophical Experiment manifestly proves, that the Rule will not hold,
since so great a multitude of grains of Mercury, in stead of carrying up with
them one grain of the Elixir, are detained by it in the strongest fire. And
thus much for the first way of fixing Volatile Bodies.

CHAP. III.
THE second way of producing Fixity, is by expelling, breaking, or otherwise
disabling those volatile Corpuscles that are too indisposed to be fixed
themselves, or are fitted to carry up with them such particles as would not,
without their help, ascend. That the Expulsion of such parts is a proper means
to make the aggregate of those that remain more fixed, I presume you will not
put me solicitously to prove; and we have a manifest instance of it in Soot,
where, though many active parts were by the violence of the fire and current of
the air carried up together by the more volatile parts; yet, when Soot is well
distilled in a Retort, a competent time being given for the extricating and
avolation of the other parts, there will at the bottom remain a substance that
will not now fly away, as it formerly did. And here let me observe, that the
recesse of the fugitive corpuscles may contribute to the fixation of a body,
not barely because the remaining matter is freed from so many unfixt, if not
also volatilizing, parts; but, as it may often happen, that upon their recesse
the pores or intervals, they left behind them, are filled up with more solid or
heavy matter, and the body becomes, as more homogeneous, so more close and
compact. And whereas I intimated, that, besides the expulsion of unfit
corpuscles, they may be otherwise disabled from hindering the fixation of the
mass they belong to, I did it, because it seems very possible, that in some
cases they may, by the action of the fire, be so broken, as with their
fragments to fill up the pores or intervals of the body they appertained to; or
may make such coalitions with the particles of a convenient additament, as to
be no impediment to the Fixity of the whole mass, though they remain in it.
Which possibly you will think may well happen, when you shall have perused the
Instances annexed to the fourth way of fixing bodies.

The third means of fixing, or lessening the Volatility of, bodies, is by
preserving that rest among the parts, whose contrary is necessary to their
Volatilization. And this may be done by preventing or checking that Heat, or
other motion, which external Agents strive to introduce into the parts of the
proposed body. But this means tending rather to hinder the actual avolation of
a portion of matter, or, at most, procure a temporary abatement of its
volatility, than to give it a stable fixity, I shall not any longer insist on
it.

The fourth way of producing Fixity in a body, is by putting to it such an
appropriated Additament, whether fixed or volatile, that the Corpuscles of the
body may be put among themselves, or with those of the additament, into a
complicated state, or entangled contexture. This being the usual and principal
way of producing Fixity, we shall dwell somewhat the longer upon it, and give
Instances of several degrees of Fixation. For, though they do not produce that
quality in the strictest acceptance of the word, Fixity; yet it is useful in
our present inquiry, to take notice, by what means that volatility comes to be
gradually abated, since that may facilitate our understanding, how the
Volatility of a body comes to be totally abated, and consequently the body to
be fixed.

CHAP. IV.
AND first we find, that a fixed additament, if its parts be conveniently
shaped, may easily give a degree of fixity to a very volatile body. Thus Spirit
of Nitre, that will of it self easily enough fly away in the Air, having its
saline particles associated with those of fixed Nitre, or salt of Tartar, will
with the Alkaly compose a salt of a Nitrous nature, which will endure to be
melted in a Crucible without being deprived even of its Spirits. And I have
found, that the spirits of Nitre, that abound in Aqua fortis, being
concoagulated with the Silver they corrode, though one would not expect that
such subtle Corpuscles should stick fast to so compact and solid a body as
Silver; yet Crystalls, produced by their Coalition, being put into a Retort,
may be kept a pretty while in fusion, before the metal will let go the Nitrous
spirits. When we poured Oil of Vitriol upon the Calx of Vitriol, though many
Phlegmatic and other Sulphurous particles were driven away by the excited
Heat; yet the saline parts, that combined with the fixed ones of the Colcothar,
stuck fast enough to them, not to be easily driven away. And if Oil of Vitriol
be in a due proportion dropped upon Salt of Tartar, there results a Tartarum
vitriolatum, wherein the acid and alkalizate parts cohere so strongly, that
it is not an ordinary degree of fire will be able to disjoyn them. Insomuch that
diverse Chemists have (though very erroniously) thought this compounded Salt to
be indestructible. But a less heavy liquour than the ponderous Oil of Vitriol
may by an Alkaly be more strongly detained than that Oil it self; experience
having assured me, that Spirit of Salt being dropped to satiety upon a fixed
Alkaly, (I used either that of Nitre or of Tartar,) there would be made so
strict an union, that, having, without additaments, distilled the resulting
salt with a strong and lasting fire, it appeared not at all considerably to be
wrought upon, and was not so much as melted.

But it is not the bare Mixture or Commistion of Volatile particles with Fixed
ones, (yea though the former be predominant in quantity,) that will suffice to
elevate the latter. For, unless the figures of the latter be congruous and
fitted to fasten to the other, the volatile parts will fly away in the Heat,
and leave the rest as fixed as before: as when sand or ashes are wetted or
drenched with water, they quickly part with that water, without parting with
any degree of their Fixity. But on the other side, it is not always necessary,
that the body, which is fitted to destroy, or much abate, the volatility of
another substance, should be it self fixed. For, if there be a skilful or lucky
coaptation of the figures of the particles of both the bodies, these particles
may take such hold of one another, as to compose corpuscles, that will neither
by reason of their strict union be divided by Heat; nor by reason of their
resulting grossness be elevated even by a strong fire, or at least by such a
degree of Heat as would have sufficed to raise more indisposed bodies than
either of the separate Ingredients of the mixture. This observation, if duly
made out, does so much favor our Doctrine about the Mechanical Origin of
Fixation, and may be of such use, not only to Chemists, in some of their
operations, but to Philosophers, in assigning the causes of diverse Phenomenon
of Nature, that it may be worth while to exemplify it by some Instances.

The first whereof I shall take from an usual practice of the Chemists
themselves: which I the rather do, to let you see, that such known Experiments
are too often over-looked by them that make them, but yet may hint or confirm
Theories to those that reflect on them. The Instance, I here speak of, is that
which is afforded by the vulgar Preparation of Bezoardicum Minerale. For,
though the rectified Butter or Oil of Antimony and the Spirit of Nitre, that
are put together to make this white Praecipitate, are both of them distilled
liquours; yet the copious powder, that results from their Union, is, by that
Union of volatile parts, so far fixed, that, after they have edulcorated it with
water, they prescribe the calcining of it in a Crucible for five or six hours:
which operation it could not bear, unless it had attained to a considerable
fixation. This discourse supposes with the generality of Chemists, that the
addition of a due quantity of spirit of Nitre, is necessary to be employed in
making the Bezoardicum Minerale. But if it be a true Observation, which is
attributed to the Learned Guntherus Billichius, (but which I had no Furnace at
hand to examine when I heard of it,) if, I say, it be true, that a Bezoardicum
Minerale may be obtained, without spirit of Nitre, barely by a slow
evaporation, made in a Glasse-dish, of the more fugitive parts of the Oil of
Antimony; this Instance will not indeed be proper in this place, but yet will
belong to the second of the foregoing ways of introducing Fixity. I proceed now
to allege other particulars in favor of the abovementioned Observation.

If you take strong Spirit of Salt, that, when the Glass is unstopt, will smoke
of it self in the cold air, and satiate it with the volatile Spirit of Urine,
the superfluous moisture being abstracted, you will obtain by this preparation
(which, you may remember, I long since communicated to you, and diverse other
Virtuosi,) a compounded Salt, scarce, if at all, distinguishable from Sal
Ammoniac, and which will not, as the Salts it consists of will do, before
their coalition, easily fly up of it self into the air, but will require a not
despicable degree of fire to sublime it.

Of these semivolatile Compositions of Salt I have made, and elsewhere
mentioned, others, which I shall not here repeat, but pass on to other
Instances pertinent to our present design.

I lately mentioned, that the Volatility of the spirits of Nitre may be very
much abated, by bringing them to coagulate into Crystalls with particles of
corroded Silver; but I shall now add, that I guessed, and by trial found, that
these Nitrous spirits may be made much more fixed by the addition of the Spirit
of Salt, which, if it be good, will of it self smoke in the Air. For, having
dissolved a convenient quantity of Crystalls of Silver in distilled water, and
precipitated them, not with a Solution of Salt, but the Spirit of Salt; the
phlegm being abstracted, and some few of the looser saline particles; though
the remaining mass were pressed with a violent fire that kept the Retort red-hot
for a good while; yet the Nitrous and Saline spirits would by no means be
driven away from the Silver, but continued in fusion with it; and when the
mass was taken out, these Spirits did so abound in it, that it had no
appearance of a Metal, but looked rather like a thick piece of Horn.

The next Instance I shall name is afforded us by that kind of Turbith, which
may be made by Oil of Vitriol, in stead of the Aqua fortis employed in the
common Turpethum Minerale. For, though Oil of Vitriol be a distilled liquour,
and Mercury a body volatile enough; yet, when we abstracted four or five parts
of Oil of Vitriol from one of Quicksilver, (especially if the operation were
repeated,) and then washed off as much as we could of the saline particles of
the Oil of Vitriol; yet those that remained adhering to the Mercury made it far
more fixed, than either of the liquours had been before, and enabled it even in
a Crucible to endure such a degree of fire, before it could be driven away, as,
I confess, I somewhat wondered at. The like Turbith may be made with Oil of
Sulphur per Campanam. But this is nothing to what Helmont tells us of the
operation of his Alkahest, where he affirms, that that Menstruum, which is
volatile enough, being abstracted from running Mercury, not only coagulates
it, but leaves it fixed, so that it will endure the brunt of fires acuated by
Bellows, ( omnem follium ignem.) If this be certain, it will not be a slender
proof, that Fixity may be Mechanically produced; and however, the Argument will
be good in reference to the Helmontian Spagyrists. For if, as one would expect,
there do remain some particles of the Menstruum with those of the metal, it
will not be denied, that two volatile substances may perfectly fix one another.
And if, as Helmont seems to think, the Menstruum be totally abstracted, this
supposition will the more favor our Doctrine about Fixity; since, if there be
no material additament left with the Quicksilver, the Fixation cannot so
reasonably be ascribed to any thing, as to some new Mechanical modification,
and particularly to some change of Texture introduced into the Mercury it self.

And that you may think this the less improbable, I will now proceed to some
Instances, whereof the first shall be this; That, having put a mixture made of
a certain proportion of two dry, as well as volatile, bodies, ( viz. Sal
Ammoniac, and Flower or very fine powder of Sulphur,) to half its weight of
common running Mercury, and elevated this mixture three or four times from it,
(in a conveniently shaped, and not over-wide, glass) the Mercury, that lay in
the bottom in the form of a ponderous and somewhat purplish powder, was, by
this operation, so fixed, that it long endured a strong fire, which at length
was made so strong, that it melted the Glass, and kept it melted, without being
strong enough to force up the Mercury: which, by some trials, not so proper to
be here mentioned, seemed to have its salivating and emetick powers
extraordinarily infringed, and sometimes quite suppressed. But this only upon
the bye. In all the other Instances, (wherewith I shall conclude these Notes,)
I shall employ one Menstruum, Oil of Vitriol, and show you the efficacy of it
in fixing some parts of volatile bodies with some parts of it self; by which
examples it may appear, that a Volatile body may not only lessen the
volatility of another body, as in the lately mentioned case of our spirituous
Sal Ammoniac; but that two Substances, that apart were volatile, may compose a
third, that will not only be less volatile, but considerably (if not
altogether) fixed.

We mixed then, by degrees, about equal parts of Oil of Vitriol and Oil of
Turpentine: and though each of them single, especially the latter, will ascend
with a moderate fire in a Sand-furnace; yet, after the Distillation was ended,
we had a considerable quantity, sometimes (if I misremember not) a fifth or
sixth part, of a Caput Mortuum black as a Coal, and whereof a great part was of
a scarce to be expected fixtness in the fire.

To give a higher proof of the disposition, that Oil of Vitriol has to let some
of its parts grow fixed by combination with those of an exceeding, volatile
additament, I mixed this liquour with an equal or double weight of highly
rectified Spirit of Wine, and not only after, but sometimes without, previous
digestion, I found, that the fluid parts of the mixture being totally
abstracted, there would remain a pretty quantity of a black Substance so fixed
as to afford just cause of wonder.

And because Camphire is esteemed the most fugitive of consistent bodies, in
regard that, being but laid in the free air, without any help of the fire, it
will fly all away; I tried, what Oil of Vitriol abstracted from Camphire would
do; and found at the bottom of the Retort a greater quantity than one would
expect of a Substance as black as pitch, and almost as far from the volatility
as from the color of Camphire, though it appeared not, that any of the Gum had
sublimed into the neck of the Retort.

From all which Instances it seems manifestly enough to follow, that in many
cases there needs nothing to make associated particles, whether volatile or
not, become fixed, but either to implicate or entangle them among themselves, or
bring them to touch one another according to large portions of their surfaces,
or by both these ways conjoyntly, or by some others, to procure the firm
Cohaesion of so many particles, that the resulting Corpuscles be too big or
heavy to be, by the degree of fire wherein they are said to be fixed, driven up
into the Air.

FINIS.
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGIN OR PRODUCTION OF
CORROSIVENESS AND CORROSIBILITY. By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of
the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL PRODUCTION OF CORROSIVENESS AND
CORROSIBILITY.
SECT. I. About the Mechanical Origin of Corrosiveness.
I Do not in the following Notes treat of Corrosiveness in their strict sense
of the word, who ascribe this Quality only to Liquors, that are notably acid or
sour, such as Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt; Vinegar* Juice of Lemons, etc. but,
that I may not be obliged to overlook Urinous, Oleous, and diverse other
Solvents, or to coin new names for their differing Solutive Powers, I presume
to employ the word Corrosiveness in a greater latitude, so as to make it almost
equivalent to the Solutive power of Liquors, referring other Menstruums to
those that are Corrosive or fretting, (though not always as to the most proper,
yet) as to the principal and best known species; which I the less scruple here
to do, because I have This refers to an Essay of the Authors about the
Usefulness of Chemistry to, etc.
elsewhere more distinctly enumerated and sorted the Solvents of bodies.

The Attributes that seem the most proper to qualify a Liquor to be Corrosive,
are all of them Mechanical, being such as are these that follow:

First, That the Menstruum consist of, or abound with, Corpuscles not too big
to get in at the Pores or Commissures of the body to be dissolved; nor yet be
so very minute as to pass through them, as the beams of Light do through Glass;
or to be unable by reason of their great slenderness and flexibility to disjoyn
the parts they invade.

Secondly, That these Corpuscles be of a shape fitting them to insinuate
themselves more or less into the Pores or Commissures abovementioned, in order
to the dissociating of the solid parts.

Thirdly, That they have a competent degree of solidity to disjoyn the
Particles of the body to be dissolved; which Solidity of Solvent corpuscles is
somewhat distinct from their bulk, mentioned in the first Qualification; as may
appear by comparing a stalk of Wheat and a metalline Wire of the same Diameter,
or a flexible wand of Osier of the bigness of ones little finger, with a rigid
rod of Iron of the same length and thickness.

Fourthly, That the Corpuscles of the Menstruum be agile and advantaged for
motion, (such as is fit to disjoyn the parts of the invaded body) either by
their shape, or their minuteness, or their fitness to have their action
befriended by adjuvant Causes; such as may be ( first) the pressure of the
Atmosphere, which may impell them into the Pores of bodies not filled with a
Substance so resisting as common Air: As we see, that water will by the
prevalent pressure of the Ambient, whether Air or Water, be raised to the
height of some inches in capillary Glasses, and in the pores of Spunges, whose
consistent parts being of easier cession than the sides of Glass-pipes, those
Pores will be enlarged, and consequently those sides disjoined, as appears by
the dilatation and swelling of the Sponge: And ( secondly) the agitation, that
the intruding Corpuscles may be fitted to receive in those Pores or Commissures
by the transcursion of some subtle ethereal matter; or by the numerous knocks
and other pulses of the swimming or tumbled Corpuscles of the Menstruum it
self, (which being a fluid body, must have its small parts perpetually and
variously moved) whereby the engaged Corpuscles, like so many little Wedges and
Leavers, may be enabled to wrench open, or force asunder the little parts
between which they have insinuated themselves. But I shall not here prosecute
this Theory, (which, to be handled fully, would require a discourse apart)
since these Conjectures are proposed but to make it probable in the general,
That the Corrosiveness of bodies may be deduced from Mechanical Principles: But
whether best from the newly proposed ones, or any other, need not be anxiously
considered in these Notes, where the things mainly intended and relied on, are
the Experiments and Phenomenon themselves.

EXPER. I.
It Is obvious, that, though the recently expressed Juice of Grapes be sweet,
whilst it retains the Texture that belongs to it as it is new, (especially if it
be made of some sorts of Grapes that grow in hot Regions,) yet after
fermentation, 'twill, in tract of time, as 'twere spontaneously, degenerate
into Vinegar. In which Liquor, to a multitude of the more solid Corpuscles of
the Must, their frequent and mutual Attritions may be supposed to have given
edges like those of the blades of swords or knives; and in which, perhaps, the
confused agitation that preceded, extricated, or, as it were, unsheathed some
ac^d particles, that (derived from the sap of the Vine, or, perchance more
originally, from the juice of the Earth) were at first in the Must, but lay
concealed, and as it were sheathed, among the other particles wherewith they
were associated, when they were pressed out of the Grapes. Now this Liquor, that
by the forementioned (or other like) Mechanical Changes is become Vinegar, does
so abound with Corpuscles, which, on the account of their edges, or their
otherwise sharp and penetrative shape, are Acid and Corrosive, that the better
sort of it will, without any preparation, dissolve Coral, Crab's-eyes, and even
some Stones, Lapis stellaris in particular, as also Minium, (or the Calx of
Lead) and even crude Copper, as we have often tried. And not only the
distilled Spirit of it will do those things more powerfully, and perform some
other things that mere Vinegar cannot; but the saline particles, wont to remain
after Distillation, may, by being distilled and cohobated per se, or by being
skilfully united with the foregoing Spirit, be brought to a Menstruum of no
small efficacy in the dissolution* and other preparations of metalline bodies,
too compact for the mere Spirit it self to work upon.

From diverse other sweet things also may Vinegar be made; and even of Honey,
skilfully fermented with a small proportion of common water, may be made a
Vinegar stronger than many of the common Winevinegars; as has been affirmed to
me by a very candid Physician, who had occasion to deal much in Liquors.

EXPER. II.
NOt only several dry Woods, and other Bodies that most of them pass for
insipid, but Honey and Sugar themselves afford by Distillation Acid Spirits
that will dissolve Coral, Pearls, etc. and will also corrode some Metals and
metalline Bodies themselves; as I have often found by Trial. So that the
violent Operation of the fire, that destroys what they call the Form of the
distilled body, and works as a Mechanical Agent by agitating, breaking,
dissipating, and under a new constitution reassembling the parts, procures for
the Distiller an Acid Corrosive Menstruum; which whether it be brought to pass
by making the Corpuscles rub one another into the figure of little sharp
blades, or by splitting some solid parts into sharp or cutting Corpuscles, or
by unsheathing, as it were, some parts, that, during the former Texture of the
body, did not appear to be acid; or whether it be rather effected by some other
Mechanical way, may in due time be further considered.

EXPER. III.
It Is observed by Refiners, Goldsmiths and Chemists, that Aqua Fortis and Aqua
Regia, which are Corrosive Menstruums, dissolve Metals, the former of them
Silver, and the latter Gold, much more speedily and copiously when an external
heat gives their intestine motions a new degree of Vehemence or Velocity, which
is but a mechanical thing; and yet this superadded measure of Agitation is not
only in the abovementioned Instances a powerfully assistant Cause in the
Solutions made by the lately mentioned Corrosive Liquors, but is that without
which some Menstruums are not wont sensibly to corrode some bodies at all, as
we have tried in keeping Quicksilver in three or four times its weight of Oil
of Vitriol; since in this Menstruum I found not the Mercury to be dissolved or
corroded, though I kept it a long time in the Cold: Whereas, when the Oil of
Vitriol was excited by a convenient heat, (which was not faint) it corroded the
Mercury into a fine white Calx or powder, which, by the affusion of fair water,
would be presently turned into a yellowish Calx of the color and nature of a
Turbith. I remember also, that having for trials sake dissolved in a weak
Spirit of Salt, a fourth part of its weight of fine Crystals of Nitre, we
found, that it would not in the cold (at least during a good while that we
waited for its operation) dissolve Leaf-gold; but when the Menstruum was a
little heated at the fire, the Solution proceeded readily enough. And in some
cases, though the external heat be but small, yet there may intervene a brisk
heat, and much cooperate in the dissolution of a Body; as, for instance, of
Quicksilver in Aqua Fortis. For it is no prodigy to find, that when a full
proportion of that fluid Metal has been taken, the Solution, though at first
altogether liquid, and as to sense uniform, comes to have after a while a good
quantity of coagulated or crystalliz'd matter at the bottom, of which the cause
may be, that in the very act of Corrosion there is excited an intense degree of
heat, which conferring a new degree of agitation to the Menstruum, makes it
dissolve a good deal more, than afterward, when the Conflict is over, it is
able to keep up.

EXPER. IV.
WE have observed also, that Agitation does in some cases so much promote the
Dissolutive power of Saline bodies, that though they be not reduced to that
subtilty of parts, to which a strong Distillation brings them; yet they may in
their grosser and cruder form have the power to work on Metals; as I elsewhere
show, that by barely boiling some Solutions of Salts of a convenient structure,
as Nitre, Sal Ammoniac, etc. with foliated Gold, Silver, etc. we have corroded
these Metalas, and can dissolve some others. And by boiling crude Copper (in
Filings) with Sublimate and common water, we were able, in no long time, to
make a Solution of the Metal.

EXPER. V.
SOmetimes also, so languid an Agitation, as that which seems but sufficient to
keep a Liquor in the state of fluidity, may suffice to give some dry bodies a
corroding power, which they could not otherwise exercise; as in the way of
writing ones name (or a Motto) upon the blade of a knife with common Sublimate:
For, if having very thinly overlaid which side you please with Beeswax, you
write with a bodkin or some pointed thing upon it; the Wax being thereby
removed from the strokes made by the sharp body, it is easy to etch with
Sublimate; since you need but strew the powder of it upon the place bared of
the Wax, and wet it well with mere common water; for strong Vinegar is not
necessary. For after a while all the parts of the blade that should not be
fretted, being protected by the Case or Film of Wax, the Sublimate will corrode
only where way has been made for it by the bodkin, and the Letters will be
more or less deeply engraven (or rather etch'd) according to the time the
Sublimate is suffered to lie on. And if you aim only at a legible impression,
a few minutes of an hour (as four or five) may serve the turn.

EXPER. VI.
THis brings into my mind an Observation I have sometimes had occasion to make,
that I found more useful than common, and it is, That diverse Bodies, whether
distilled or not distilled, that are not thought capable of dissolving other
Bodies, because in moderate degrees of heat they will not work on them, may yet
by intense degrees of heat be brought to be fit Solvents for them. To which
purpose I remember, that having a distilled Liquor, which was rather sweet to
the taste, than either acid, lixiviate or urinous, though for that reason it
seemed unfit to work on Pearls, and accordingly did not dissolve them in a
considerable time, wherein they were kept with it in a more than ordinarily
warm digestion; yet the Glass being for many hours (amounting perhaps to some
days) kept in such an heat of sand as made the Liquor boil, we had a
Dissolution of Pearls, that uniting with the Menstruum made it a very valuable
Liquor. And though the Solvents of crude Gold, wont to be employed by Chemists,
are generally distilled Liquors that are acid, and in the lately mentioned
Solvent, made of crude Salts and common water, Acidity seemed to be the
predominant quality (which makes the use of Solutions made in Aqua Regia, etc.
suspected by many Physicians and Chemists;) yet fitly chosen Alcalizate Bodies
themselves, as repugnant as they use to be to Acids, without the help of any
Liquor will be enabled by a melting Fire in no long time to penetrate and tear
asunder the parts even of crude Gold; so that it may afterward be easily taken
up in Liquors that are not acid, or even by water it self.

EXPER. VII.
THe Tract about Saltpeter, that gave occasion to these Annotations, may
furnish us with an eminent Instance of the Production of Solvents. For, though
pure Saltpeter it self, when dissolved in water, is not observed to be a
Menstruum for the Solution of the Metals hereafter to be named, or so much as
of Coral it self; yet, when by a convenient Distillation its parts are split,
if I may so speak, and by Attrition, or other Mechanical ways of working on
them, reduced to the shapes of Acid and Alcalizate Salts, it then affords two
sorts of Menstruums of very differing natures, which betwixt them dissolve or
corrode a great number and variety of Bodies; as the Spirit of Nitre without
addition is a Solvent for most Metals, as Silver, Mercury, Copper, Lead, etc.
and also diverse Mineral Bodies, as-Tin-glass, Spelter, Lapis Calaminaris, etc.
and the fixed Salt of Nitre operates upon Sulphurous Minerals, as common
Sulphur, Antimony, and diverse other Bodies, of which I elsewhere make mention.

EXPER. VIII.
BY the former Trials it has appeared, that the increase of Motion in the more
penetrating Corpuscles of a Liquor, contributes much to its Solutive power; and
I shall now add, that the Shape and Size, which are Mechanical affections, and
sometimes also the Solidity of the same Corpuscles does eminently concur to
qualify a Liquor to dissolve this or that particular body. Of this, even some
of the more familiar practices of Chemists may supply us with Instances. For
there is no account so probable as may be given upon this supposition, why Aqua
Fortis* which will dissolve Silver, without meddling with Gold, should, by the
addition of a fourth part of its weight of Sal Ammoniac, be turned into Aqua
Regia, which, without meddling with Silver, will dissolve Gold. But there is no
necessity of having recourse to so gross and compounded a Body as Sal Ammoniac
to enable Aqua Fortis to dissolve Gold: For, the Spirit of common Salt alone
being mingled in a due proportion, will suffice for that purpose. Which (by the
way) shows, that the Volatile Salt of Urine and Soot, that concur to the making
up of Sal Ammoniac, are not necessary to the dissolution of Gold, for which a
Solvent may be made with Aqua Fortis and crude Sea Salt. I might add, that the
Mechanical affections of a Menstruum may have such an interest in its
dissolutive power, that even Mineral or Metalline Corpuscles may become useful
Ingredients of it, though perhaps it be a distilled Liquor; as might be
illustrated by the Operations of some compounded Solvents, such as is the Oil
of Antimony made by repeated Rectifications of what Chemists call its Butter,
which, whatever some say to the contrary, does much abound in Antimonial
Substance.

EXPER. IX.
BUt I shall return to our Aqua Regia, because the mention I had occasion to
make of that Solvent brought into my mind what I devised, to make it probable,
that a smaller change, than one would lightly imagine, of the bulk, shape, or
solidity of the Corpuscles of a Menstruum may make it fit to dissolve a Body it
would not work on before. And this I the rather attempted, because the warier
sort of Chemists themselves are very shye of the inward use or preparations
made of Gold by the help of Aqua Fortis, because of the odious stink they find,
and the venenosity they suspect in that corrosive Menstruum: Whereas Spirit of
Salt we look upon as a much more innocent Liquor, whereof, if it be but diluted
with fair water or any ordinary drink, a good Dose may be safely given
inwardly, though it have not wrought upon Gold or any other body, to take off
its acrimony. But, whether or no this prove of any great use in Physic,
wherein perhaps, if any quantity of Gold be to be dissolved, a greater
proportion of Spirit of Nitre would be needed; the success will not be unfit to
be mentioned in reference to what we were saying of Solvents. For, whereas we
find not that our Spirit of Salt here in England will at all dissolve crude
Gold, we found, that by putting some Leaf-gold into a convenient quantity of
good Spirit of Salt, when we had dropt-in Spirit of Nitre (shaking the Glass at
each drop,) till we perceived, that the mixture was just able in a moderate
heat to dissolve the Gold, we found, that we had been obliged to employ but
after the rate of twelve drops of the latter Liquor to an ounce of the former;
so that, supposing each of these drops to weigh a grain, the fortieth part of
Spirit of Nitre being added, served to turn the Spirit of Salt into a kind of
Aqua Regia. But to know the proportion otherwise than by ghess, we weighed six
other drops of the same Spirit of Salt, and found them to amount not fully to
three grains and an half: Whence it appeared, that we added but about a
seventieth part of the Nitrous Spirit to that of Salt.

The Experiments that have been hitherto recited, relate chiefly to the
Production of Corrosive Menstruums; and therefore I shall now add an account
of a couple of Trials, that I made manifestly to lessen or quite to destroy
Corrosiveness in Liquors very conspicuous for that quality.

EXPER. X.
WHereas one of the most corrosive Menstruums, that is yet known, is Oil of
Vitriol, which will fret in pieces both diverse Metals and Minerals, and a great
number and variety of animal and vegetable bodies; yet if you digest with it
for a while only an equal weight of highly rectified Spirit of Wine, and
afterward distill the mixture very warily, (for else the Experiment may very
easily miscarry,) you may obtain a pretty deal of Liquor not corrosive at all,
and the remaining substance will be reduced partly into a Liquor, which, though
acid, is not more so than one part of good Oil of Vitriol will make ten times
as much common water, by being well mingled with it; and partly into a dry
substance that has scarce any taste at all, much less a corrosive one.

EXPER. XI.
ANd though good Aqua Fortis be the most generally employed of corrosive
Menstruums, as being capable of dissolving or corroding, not only many
Minerals, as Tin-glass, Antimony, Zinke, etc. but all Metals except Gold, (for,
though it make not a permanent Solution of crude Tin, it quickly frets the
parts asunder, and reduces it to an immalleable substance;) yet to show, how
much the power of corroding may be taken away by changing the Mechanical
Texture of a Menstruum, even without seeming to destroy the fretting Salts, I
practiced (and communicated to diverse Virtuosi) the following Experiment,
elsewhere mentioned to other purposes.

We took equal parts of good Aqua Fortis, and highly dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine,
and having mingled them warily and by degrees, (without which caution the
Operation may prove dangerous,) we united them by two or three Distillations of
the whole mixture; which afterward we found not to have the least fretting
taste, and to be so deprived of its corrosive nature, that it would not work
upon Silver, though by Precipitation or otherwise reduced to very small parts;
nay, it would scarce sensibly work in a good while on Filings of Copper, or
upon other bodies, which mere Vinegar, or perhaps Rhenish wine will corrode.
Nay, I remember, that with another Spirit, (that was not Urinous) and
afterward with Alkool of Wine we showed a more surprising Specimen of the
power of either destroying or debilitating the Corrosiveness of a Menstruum,
and checking its Operation. For, having caused a piece of Copper-plate to be
put into one ounce of Aqua Fortis, when this Liquor was eagerly working upon
the Metal, I caused an ounce of the Alkool of Wine, or the other Spirit to be
poured, (which it should warily be) upon the agitated mixture; whose
effervescence, at the first instant, seemed to be much increased, but presently
after was checked, and the Corrosiveness of the Menstruum being speedily
disabled or corrected, the remaining Copper was left undissolved at the bottom.

Nor are these the only acid Menstruums that I have many years since been able
to correct by such a way: For I applied it to others, as Spirit of Nitre, and
even Aqua Regis it self; but it has not an equal operation upon all, and least
of all (as far as I can remember) upon Spirit of Salt; as on the other side
strong Spirit of Nitre was the Menstruum upon which its effects were the most
satisfactory.

Most of the Chemists pretend, that the Solutions of bodies are performed by a
certain Cognation and Sympathy between the Menstruum and the body it is to work
upon. And it is not to be denied, that in diverse Instances there is, as it
were, a Consanguinity between the Menstruum and the body to be dissolved; as
when Sulphur is dissolved by Oils whether expressed or distilled: But yet, as the
opinion is generally proposed, I cannot acquiesce in it, partly because there
are diverse Solutions and other Phenomenon, where it will not take place, and
partly because even in those instances wherein it is thought most applicable,
the effect seems to depend upon Mechanical Principles.

EXPER. XII.
ANd first, 'twill be difficult to show, what Consanguinity there is between
Sal Gem, and Antimony, and Iron, and Zinke, and Bread, and Camphire, and Lapis
Calaminaris, and flesh of diverse kinds, and Oister-shells, and Hartshorn, and
Chalk, and Quicklime; some of which belong to the Vegetable, some to the
Mineral, and some to the Animal Kingdom; and yet all of them and diverse others
(as I have tried) may, even without the assistance of external Heat, be
dissolved or corroded by one single Mineral Menstruum, Oil of Vitriol. And
which is not to be neglected on this occasion, some of them may be bodies,
supposed by Chemists to have an Antipathy to each other in point of Corrosion
or Dissolution.

EXPER. XIII.
I Observe also, that a Dissolution may be made of the same body by Menstruums,
to which the Chemists attribute (as I just now observed they did to some
Bodies) a mutual Antipathy, and which therefore are not like to have a Sympathy
with the same third body; as I found by trial, that both Aqua Fortis, and
Spirit of Urine, upon whose mixture there insues a conflict with a great
effervescence, will each of them apart readily dissolve crude Zinke, and so
each of them will, the Filings of Copper. Not to mention, that pure Spirit of
Wine and Oil of Vitriol, as great a difference as there is between them, in I
know not how many respects, and as notable a heat as will ensue upon their
Commixture, will each of them dissolve Camphire; to which may be added other
instances of the like nature. As for what is commonly said, that Oils dissolve
Sulphur, and Saline Menstruums Metals, because (as they speak) Simile simili
gaudet: I answer, That where there is any such similitude, it may be very
probably ascribed, not so much, with the Chemists that favor Aristotle, to the
essential forms of the bodies that are to work on each other, nor, with the
mere Chemists, to their Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, as such; but to the
congruity between the pores and figures of the Menstruum, and the body
dissolved by it, and to some other Mechanical Affections of them.

EXPER. XIV.
FOr Silver, for example, not only will be dissolved by Nitre which they
reckon a Salt, but be amalgam'd with, and consequently dissolved by,
Quicksilver, and also by the operation of Brimstone, be easily incorporated
with that Mineral which Chemists are wont to account of so oleaginous a nature,
and insoluble in Aqua Fortis.

EXPER. XV.
ANd as for those Dissolutions that are made with Oily and inflammable
Menstruums, of common Sulphur and other inflammable bodies, the Dissolution
does not make for them so clearly as they imagine. For if such Menstruums
operate, as is alleged, upon the account of their being, as well as the bodies
they work upon, of a sulphurous nature, whence is it that highly rectified
Spirit of Wine, which according to them must be of a most Sulphurous nature,
since being set on fire 'twill flame all away without leaving one drop behind
it, will not (unless perhaps after a tedious while) dissolve even Flowers of
Brimstone, which essential as well as expressed Oils will easily take up; as
Spirit of Wine it self also will do almost in a trice, if (as we shall see
anon) by the help of an Alcali the Texture of the Brimstone be altered, though
the only thing that is added to the Sulphur being an incombustible substance,
is nothing near of so sulphurous a nature as the Flowers, and need have no
Consanguinity upon the score of its Origin with Spirit of Wine, as it is
alleged that Salt of Tartar has; since I have tried, That fixed Nitre, employed
instead of it, will do the same.

EXPER. XVI.
THe mention of Nitre brings into my mind, that the Saltpeter being wont to be
looked upon by Chemists as a very inflammable body, ought, according to them, to
be of a very sulphurous nature; yet we find not that it is in Chemical Oils,
but in water, readily dissolved. And whereas Chemists tell us, that the
Solutions of Alcaly's, such as Salt of Tartar, or of Potashes in common Oils,
proceed from the great cognation between them, I demand, whence it happens,
that Salt of Tartar will by boiling be dissolved in the expressed Oil of Almonds,
or of Olives, and be reduced with it to a soapy body, and that yet with the
essential Oil of Juniper or Aniseeds, etc. where what they call the Sulphur is
made pure and penetrant, being freed from the earthy, aqueous and feculent
parts, which Distillation discovers to be in the expressed Oils, you may boil
Salt of Tartar twenty times as long without making any Soap of them, or perhaps
any sensible Solution of the Alkaly. And Chemists know, how difficult it is,
and how unsuccessfully it is wont to be attempted to dissolve pure Salt of
Tartar in pure Spirit of Wine, by digesting the not peculiarly prepared Salt in
the cognate Menstruum. I will not urge, that, though the most conspicuous mark
of Sulphur be inflammability, and is in an eminent degree to be found in Oil as
well as Sulphur; yet an Alkaly and water which are neither singly, nor united
inflammable, will dissolve common Sulphur.

EXPER. XVII.
BUt to make it probable against the Chemists, (for I propose it but as an
argument ad hominem) that the Solution of Sulphur in expressed Oils depends upon
somewhat else besides the abundance of the second Principle in both the bodies;
I will add to what I said before, an affirmation of diverse Chemical Writers
themselves, who reckon Aqua Regis, which is plainly a Saline Menstruum, and
dissolves Copper, Iron, Coral, etc. like Acid Liquors, among the Solvents of
Sulphur, and by that power among other things distinguish it from Aqua Fortis.
And on the other side if, there be a Congruity betwixt an expressed Oil and
another body, though it be such as, by its easy Dissolubleness in Acid Salts,
Chemists should pronounce to be of a saline nature, an expressed Oil will readily
enough work upon it; as I have tried by digesting even crude Copper in Filings
with Oil of sweet Almonds, which took up so much of the metal as to be deeply
colored thereby, as if it had been a Corrosive Liquor: Nay, I shall add, that
even with Milk, as mild a Liquor as it is, I have found by Trial, that without
the help of fire a kind of Dissolution may, though not in few hours, be made of
crude Copper, as appeared by the greenish blew color the Filings acquired,
when they had been well drenched in the Liquor, and left for a certain time in
the Vessel, where the air had very free access to them.

EXPER. XVIII.
BEsides the Argument ad hominem, newly drawn from Aqua Regia, it may be proper
enough to urge another of the same kind upon the generality of the Helmontians
and Paracelsians, who admit what the Heads of their Sects deliver concerning
the Operations of the Alkahest. For whereas it is affirmed, that this
irresistible Menstruum will dissolve all tangible bodies here below, so as they
may be reduced into insipid water; as on the one side 'twill be very hard to
conceive how a specificated Menstruum that is determined to be either Acid, or
Lixiviate, or Urinous, etc. should be able to dissolve so great a variety of
Bodies of differing and perhaps contrary natures, in some whereof Acids, in
other Lixiviate Salts, and in others Urinous are predominant; so on the other
side, if the Alkahest be not a specificated Menstruum, 'twill very much
disfavour the Opinion of the Chemists, that will have some Bodies dissoluble
only by Acids as such, others by fixed Alkalys, and others again by Volatile
Salts; since a Menstruum, that is neither Acid, Lixiviate, nor Urinous, is able
to dissolve bodies, in some of which one, and in others another of those
Principles is predominant: So that, if a Liquor be conveniently qualified, it
is not necessary that it should be either Acid to dissolve Pearl or Coral, or
Alkalizate to dissolve Sulphur. But upon what Mechanical account an analyzing
Menstruum may operate, is not necessary to be here determined. And I elsewhere
offer some thoughts of mine about it.

EXPER. XIX.
IF we duly reflect upon the known process that Chemists are wont to employ in
making Mercurius dulcis, we shall find it very favorable to our Hypothesis.
For though we have already shown in the V. Experiment, and it is generally
confessed, that common Sublimate made of Mercury is a highly corrosive body; yet,
if it be well ground with near an equal weight of Quicksilver, and be a few
times sublimed, (to mix them the more exactly) it will become so mild, that
'twill not so much as taste sharp upon the tongue; so that Chemists are wont to
call it Mercurius dulcis: And yet this Dulcification seems to be performed in a
Mechanical way. For most part of the Salts, that made the Sublimate so
Corrosive, abide in the Mercurius dulcis; but by being compounded with more
Quicksilver, they are diluted by it, and (which is more considerable) acquire a
new Texture, which renders them unfit to operate, as they did before, when the
fretting Salts were not joined with a sufficient quantity of the Mercury to
inhibit their corrosive activity. It may perhaps somewhat help us to conceive,
how this change may be made, if we imagine, that a company of mere Knife-blades
be first fitted with Hafts, which will in some regard lessen their wounding
power by covering or casing them at that end which is designed for the handle;
(though their insertion into those Hafts, turning them into Knives, makes them
otherwise the fitter to cut and pierce) and that each of them be afterward
sheathed, (which is, as it were, a hafting of the Blades too;) for then they
become unfit to cut or stab, as before, though the Blades be not destroyed: Or
else we may conceive these Blades without Hafts or Sheaths to be tied up in
bundles, or as it were in little faggots with pieces of wood, somewhat longer
than themselves, opportunely placed between them. For neither in this new
Constitution would they be fit to cut and stab as before. And by conceiving the
edges of more or fewer of the Blades to be turned inwards, and those that are
not, to have more or less of their points and edges to be sheathed, or
otherwise covered by interposed bodies, one may be helped to imagine, how the
genuine effects of the Blades may be variously lessened or diversifi'd. But,
whether these or any other like changes of Disposition be fancied, it may by
Mechanical Illustrations become intelligible, how the Corrosive Salts of common
Sublimate may lose their efficacy, when they are united with a sufficient
quantity of Quicksilver in Mercurius dulcis: In which new state the Salts may
indeed in a Chemical phrase be said to be satiated; but this Chemical phrase
does not explicate how this Saturation takes away the Corrosiveness from Salts
that are still actually present in the sweet Mercury. And by Analogy to some
such Explications as the above proposed, a possible Account may be rendered,
why fretting Salts do either quite lose their sharpness, as Alkalies, whilst
they are imbodied with Sand in common Glass; or lose much of their Corrosive
Acidity, as Oil of Vitriol does when with Steel it composes Vitriolum Martis;
or else are transmuted or disguised by conjunction with some corroded bodies of
a peculiar Texture, as when Aqua Fortis does with Silver make an extremely
bitter Salt or Vitriol, and with Lead one that is positively sweet almost like
common Saccharum Saturni.

EXPER. XX.
TO show, how much the Efficacy of a Menstruum may depend even upon such
seemingly slight Mechanical Circumstances as one would not easily suspect any
necessity of, I shall employ an Experiment, which though the unpracticed may
easily fail of making well, yet, when I tried it after the best manner, I did
it with good success. I put then upon Lead a good quantity of well rectified
Aqua Fortis, in which the Metal, as I expected, continued undissolved; though,
if the Chemists say truly that the dissolving power of the Menstruum consists
only in the acid Salts that it abounds with, it seems naturally to follow,
that the more abundance of them there is in a determinate quantity of the
Liquor, it should be the more powerfully able to dissolve Metalline and Mineral
bodies. And in effect we see, that, if Corrosive Menstruums be not sufficiently
dephlegmed* they will not work on diverse of them. But, notwithstanding this
plausible Doctrine of the Chemists, conjecturing that the Saline Particles that
swam in our Aqua Fortis might be more thronged together, than was convenient
for a body of such a Texture of Saline parts, and such intervals between them,
I diluted the Menstruum by adding to it what I thought fit of fair water, and
then found, that the desired Congruity betwixt the Agent and the Patient
emerged, and the Liquor quickly began to fall upon the Metal and dissolve it.
And if you would try an Experiment to the same purpose, that needs much less
circumspection to make it succeed, you may, instead of employing Lead,
reiterate what I elsewhere mention my self to have tried with Silver, which
would not dissolve in too strong Aqua fortis, but would be readily fallen upon
by that Liquor, when I had weakened it with common water.

And this it may suffice to have said at present of the power or faculty that
is found in some bodies of Corroding or Dissolving others. Whereof I have not
found among the Aristotelians, I have met with, so much as an Offer at an
Intelligible account. And I the less expect the vulgar Chemists will from their
Hypostatical Principles afford us a Satisfactory one, when, besides the
Particulars that from the nature of the things and Helmont's Writings have been
lately alleged against their Hypothesis, I consider, how slight accounts they
are wont to give us even of the familiar Phenomenon of Corrosive Liquors. For
if, for example, you ask a vulgar Chemist why Aqua fortis dissolves Silver and
Copper, it is great odds but he will tell you, it is because of the abundance of
fretting Salt that is in it, and has a cognation with the Salts of the Metal.
And if you ask him, why Spirit of Salt dissolves Copper, he will tell you it is
for the same reason; and yet, if you put Spirit of Salt, though very strong, to
Aqua fortis, this Liquor will not dissolve Silver, because upon the mixture,
the Liquors acquire a new Gonstitution as to the Saline Particles, by virtue of
which the mixture will dissolve, instead of Silver, Gold. Whence we may argue
against the Chemists, that the Inability of this compounded Liquor to work on
Silver does not proceed from its being weakened by the Spirit of Salt; as well
because, according to them, Gold is far the more compact metal of the two, and
requires a more potent Menstruum to work upon it, as because this same
compounded Liquor will readily dissolve Copper. And to the same purpose with
this Experiment I should allege diverse others, if I thought this the fittest
place wherein I could propose them.

SECT. II. About the Mechanical Origin of CORROSIBILITY.
COrrosibility being the quality that answers Corrosiveness, he that has taken
notice of the Advertisement I formerly gave about my use of the Term
Corrosiveness in these Notes, See the beginning of the first Section.
may easily judge, in what sense I employ the name of the other Quality; which
(whether you will style it Opposite or Conjugate) for want of a better word, I
call Corrosibility.

This Corrosibility of Bodies is as well as their Corrosiveness a Relative
thing; as we see, that Gold, for instance* will not be dissolved by Aqua
fortis, but will by Aqua Regis; whereas Silver is not soluble by the latter of
these Menstruums, but is by the former. And this relative Affection, on whose
account a Body comes to be corrodible by a Menstruum, seems to consist chiefly
in three things, which all of them depend upon Mechanical Principles.

Of these Qualifications the first is, that the Body to be corroded be
furnished with Pores of such a bigness and figure, that the Corpuscles of the
Solvent may enter them, and yet not be much agitated in them without giving
brisk knocks or shakes to the solid parts that make up the walls, if I may so
call them, of the Pores. And it is for want of this condition, that Glass is
penetrated in a multitude of places, but not dissipated or dissolved by the
incident beams of Light, which permeate its Pores without any considerable
resistance; and though the Pores and Commissures of a Body were less minute,
and capable of letting in some grosser Corpuscles, yet if these were, for want
of solidity or rigidness, too flexible, or were of a figure incongruous to that
of the Pores they should enter, the Dissolution would not ensue; as it happens
when pure Spirit of Wine is in the cold put upon Salt of Tartar, or when Aqua
fortis is put upon powder of Sulphur.

The second Qualification of a Corrodible Body is, that its consistent
Corpuscles be of such a Bulk and Solidity, as does not render them incapable of
being disjoined by the action of the insinuating corpuscles of the Menstruum.
Agreeable to this and the former Observation is the practice of Chemists, who
oftentimes, when they would have a Body to be wrought on by a Menstruum
otherwise too weak for it in its crude estate, dispose it to receive the action
of the Menstruum by previously opening it, (as they speak) that is, by
enlarging the Pores, making a comminution of the Corpuscles, or weakening their
Cohesion. And we see, that diverse Bodies are brought by fit preparations to be
resoluble in Liquors that would not work on them before. Thus, as was lately
noted, Limestone by Calcination becomes (in part) dissoluble in water; and
some Metalline Calces will be so wrought on by Solvents, as they would not be
by the same Agents, if the preparation of the Metalline or other Body had not
given them a new Disposition. Thus, though crude Tartar, especially in lumps,
is very slowly and difficultly dissoluble in cold water, yet when it is burnt it
may be presently dissolved in that Liquor; and thus, though the Filings and the
Calx of Silver will not be at all dissolved by common water or Spirit of Wine;
yet if by the interposition of the Saline Particles of Aqua Fortis, the Lunar
Corpuscles be so disjoined, and suffer such a comminution as they do in
Crystals of Lune, the Metal thus prepared and brought with its Saline
Additament into a new Texture will easily enough dissolve, not only in water,
but, as I have tried, in well rectified Spirit of Wine. And the like Solubility
I have found in the Crystals of Lead made with Spirit of Verdigrease, or good
distilled Vinegar, and in those of Copper made with Aqua Fortis.

The last Disposition to Corrosibility consists in such a cohesion of the
parts, whereof a Body is made up, as is not too strict to be superable by the
action of the Menstruum. This Condition, though of kin to the former, is yet
somewhat differing from it, since a body may consist of parts either bulky or
solid, which yet may touch one another in such small portions of their
Surfaces, as to be much more easily dissociable than the minute or less solid
parts of another Body, whose contact is more full and close, and so their
Cohesion more strict.

By what has been said it may seem probable, that, as I formerly intimated, the
Corrosibility of Bodies is but a Mechanical Relation, resulting from the
Mechanical Affections and Contexture of its parts, as they intercept Pores of
such sizes and figures as make them congruous to those of the Corpuscles of the
Menstruum, that are to pierce between them, and disjoyn them.

That the Quality, that disposes the body it affects to be dissolved by
Corrosive and other Menstruums, does (as has been declared) in many cases
depend upon the Mechanical Texture and Affections of the body in reference to
the Menstruum that is to work upon it, may be made very probable by what we are
in due place to deliver concerning the Pores of Bodies and Figures of
Corpuscles. But yet in compliance with the design of these Notes, and agreeably
to my custom on other Subjects, I shall subjoyn a few Experiments on this
occasion also.

EXPER. I.
IF we put highly rectified Spirit of Wine upon crude Sulphur, or even Flowers
of Sulphur, the Liquor will lie quietly thereon, especially in the cold, for
many hours and days without making any visible Solution of it; and if such
exactly dephlegmed Spirit were put on very dry Salt of Tartar, the Salt would
lie in an undissolved powder at the bottom: and yet, if before any Liquor be
employed, the Sulphur be gently melted, and then the Alkali of Tartar be by
degrees put to it, and incorporated with it; as there will result a new Texture
discoverable to the eye by the new color of the Composition, so there will
emerge a disposition that was not before in either of the Ingredients, to be
dissolved by Spirit of Wine; insomuch, that though the mixture be kept till it
be quite cold, or long after too, provided it be carefully secured from the
access of the air, the Spirit of Wine being put to it, and shaken with it,
will, if you have gone to work aright, acquire a yellow Tincture in a minute of
an hour; and perhaps in less than half a quarter of an hour a red one, being
richly impregnated with sulphurous Particles discoverable by the Smell, Taste,
and diverse Operations.

EXPER. II.
['TIs known to several Chemists, that Spirit of Salt does not dissolve crude
Mercury in the cold; and I remember, I kept them for a considerable time in no
contemptible heat without finding any Solution following. But I suppose, many
of them will be gratified by an Experiment once mentioned to me by an Ingenious
German Gentleman, namely, That if Mercury be precipitated per se, that is,
reduced to a red powder without additament, by the mere operation of the fire,
the Texture will be so changed, that the abovementioned Spirit will readily
dissolve it; for I found it upon Trial to do so; nay, sometimes so readily,
that I scarce remember that I ever saw any Menstruum so nimbly dissolve any
Metalline body whatsoever.]

EXPER. III.
THe former Experiment is the more remarkable, because, that though Oil of
Vitriol will in a good heat corrode Quicksilver, (as we have already related in
the first Section,) yet I remember I kept a Precipitate per se for diverse hours
in a considerable degree of Heat, without finding it to be dissolved or
corroded by the Menstruum. And yet having, for trials sake, put another parcel
of the same Mercurial powder into some Aqua fortis, or Spirit of Nitre, there
insued a speedy Dissolution even in the cold.

And that this Disposition to be dissolved by Spirit of Salt, that Mercury
acquires by being turned into Precipitate per se, that is, by being calcined,
is not merely the effect of the operation of the fire upon it, but of some
change of Texture produced by that Operation; may be probably argued from
hence, that, whereas Spirit of Salt is a very proper Menstruum, as I have often
tried, for the dissolving of Iron or Steel; yet, when that Metal is reduced by
the action of the fire (especially if a kind of Vitrification, and an
irroration with distilled Vinegar have preceded) to Crocus Martis, though it be
thereby brought to a very fine powder, yet I found not, that, as Spirit of Salt
will readily and with heat and noise dissolve Filings of Mars, so it would have
the same or any thing near such an Operation upon the Crocus: but rather, after
a good while, it would leave in the bottom of the Glass a considerable, if not
the greatest, part of it scarce, if at all, sensibly altered. And the Menstruum
seemed rather to have extracted a Tincture, than made an ordinary Solution;
since the color of it was a high yellow or reddish, whereas Mars, dissolved in
Spirit of Salt, affords a green Solution. Whether by repeated Operations with
fresh Menstruum further Dissolutions might in time be made, I had not occasion
to try, and it may suffice for our present purpose, that Mars by the operation
of the fire did evidently acquire, not, as Mercury had done, a manifest
facility, but on the contrary, a great indisposition to be dissolved by Spirit
of Salt.

To second this Experiment, we varied it, by employing, instead of Spirit of
Salt, strong Oil of Vitriol, which being poured on a little Crocus Martis made
per se, did not, as that Menstruum is wont to do upon Filings of crude Mars,
readily and manifestly fall upon the powder with froth and noise, but (on the
contrary) rested for diverse hours calmly upon it, without so much as producing
with it any sensible warmth.

EXPER. IV.
IT agrees very well with our Doctrine about the dependence of the
Corrosibility of Bodies upon their Texture, that from diverse Bodies, whilst
they are in conjunction with others, there result masses, and those homogeneous
as to sense, that are easily dissoluble in Liquors, in which a great part of
the matter, if it were separated from the rest, would not be at all dissolved.
Thus we see, that common Vitriol is easily dissolved in mere water; whereas if
it be skilfully calcined, it will yield sometimes near half its first weight of
insipid Colcothar, which not only is not soluble in water, but which neither
Aqua Fortis nor Aqua Regis, though sometimes they will color themselves upon
it, are able (as far as I have tried) to make Solutions of. We see likewise,
that simple water will, being boiled for a competent time with Hartshorn,
dissolve it and make a Jelly of it: And yet, when we have taken Hartshorn
thoroughly calcined to whiteness, not only we found that common water was no
longer a fit Solvent for it, but we observed, that when we put Oil of Vitriol
it self upon it, a good part of the white powder was even by that Corrosive
Menstruum left undissolved.

EXPER. V.
IN the Fifteenth of the foregoing Experiments I refer to a way of making the
Flower or Powder of common Sulphur become easily dissoluble, which otherwise
it is far from being, in highly rectified Spirit of Wine. Wherefore I shall now
add, that it is quickly performed by gently melting the Sulphur, and
incorporating with it by degrees an equal or a greater weight of finely
powdered Salt of Tartar, or of fixed Nitre. For if the mixture be put warm into
a Mortar that is so too; and as soon as it is reduced to powder, be put into a
Glass, and well shaken with pure Spirit of Wine, it will, (as perhaps I may
have elsewhere observed,) in a few minutes acquire a yellow color, which
afterward will grow deeper, and manifest it self by the smell and effects to
be a real Solution of Sulphur; and yet this Solubleness in Spirit of Wine seems
procured by the change of Texture, resulting from the Commixtion of mere Salt
of Tartar, which Chemists know, to their trouble, to be it self a body almost
as difficult as Sulphur to be dissolved in phlegmless Spirit of Wine, unless
the Constitution of it be first altered by some convenient additament. Which
last words I add, because, though Spirit of Verdigrease be a Menstruum that
uses to come off in Distillation much more entirely than other acid Menstruums
from the bodies it has dissolved; yet it will serve well for an additament to
open (as the Chemists speak) the body of the Salt of Tartar. For this purpose I
employ Spirit of Verdigrease, not made first with Spirit of Vinegar, and then
of Wine, after the long and laborious way prescribed by Basilius and Zwelfer,
but easily and expeditiously by a simple Distillation of crude Verdigrease of
the better sort. For when you have with this Liquor (being, if there be need,
once rectified) dissolved as much good Salt of Tartar, as 'twill take up in the
cold, if you draw off the Menstruum ad siccitatem, the remaining dry Salt will
be manifestly altered in Texture even to the eye, and will readily enough in
high rectified Spirit of Wine afford a Solution, which I have found
considerable in order to diverse uses that concern not our present Discourse.

EXPER. VI.
TO the Consideration of the Followers of Helmont I shall recommend an
Experiment of that famous Chymist's, which seems to suit exceeding well with
the Doctrine proposed in this Section. For he tells us, that, if by a subtle
Menstruum to which he ascribes that power. Quicksilver be divested (or
deprived) of its external Sulphur, as he terms it, all the rest of the fluid
Metal, which he wittily enough styles, the Kernel of Mercury, will be no longer
corrosible by it. So that upon this Supposition, though common Quicksilver be
observed to be so obnoxious to Aqua Fortis, that the same quantity of that
Liquor will dissolve more of it, than of any other Metal; yet, if by the
deprivation of some portion of it the latent Texture of the Metal be altered,
though not (that I remember) the visible appearance of it; the Body that was
before so easily dissolved by Aqua Fortis, ceases to be at all dissoluble by it.

EXPER. VII.
AS for those Chemists of differing Sects, that agree in giving credit to the
strange things that are affirmed of the Operations of the Alkahest, we may in
favor of our Doctrine urge them with what is delivered by Helmont, where he
asserts, that all solid Bodies, as Stones, Minerals, and Metals themselves, by
having this Liquor duly abstracted or distilled off from them, may be changed
into Salt, equiponderant to the respective bodies whereon the Menstruum was
put. So that supposing the Alkahest to be totally abstracted, (as it seems very
probable to be, since the weight of the body whence 'twas drawn off is not
altered;) what other change than of Texture can be reasonably imagined to have
been made in the transmuted bodies? and yet diverse of them, as Flints, Rubies,
Saphyrs, Gold, Silver, etc. that were insoluble before, some of them in any
known Menstruums, and others in any but Corrosive Liquors, come to be capable
of being dissolved in common water.

EXPER. VIII.
It Is a remarkable Phenomenon, that suits very well with our opinion about the
interest of Mechanical Principles in the Corrosive Power of Menstruums, and the
Corrosibility of bodies, that we produced by the following Experiment: This we
purposely made to show, after how differing manners the same body may be
dissolved by two Menstruums, whose minute parts are very differingly
constituted and agitated. For whereas it is known, that if we put large grains
of Sea Salt into common water, they will be dissolved therein calmly and
silently without any appearance of conflict; If we put such grains of Salt into
good Oil of Vitriol, that Liquor will fall furiously upon them, and produce for
a good while a hissing noise with fumes, and a great store of bubbles, as if a
potent Menstruum were corroding some stubborn metal or mineral. And this
Experiment I the rather mention, because it may be of use to us on diverse other
occasions. For else it is not the only, though it be the remarkablest, that I
made to the same purpose.

EXPER. IX.
FOr, whereas Aqua Fortis or Aqua Regis, being poured upon Filings of Copper,
will work upon them with much noise and ebullition, I have tried, that good
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac or Urine, being put upon the like Filings, and left
there without stopping the Glass, will quickly begin to work on them, and
quietly dissolve them almost as water dissolves Sugar. To which may be added,
that even with Oil of Turpentine I have, though but slowly, dissolved crude
Copper; and the Experiment seemed to favor our Conjecture the more, because
having tried it several times, it appeared, that common unrectified Oil would
perform the Solution much quicker than that which was purified and subtiliz'd
by rectification; which though more subtle and penetrant, yet was, it seems, on
that account less fit to dissolve the Metal, than the grosser Oil whose
particles might be more solid or more advantageously shaped, or on some other
Mechanical account better qualified for the purpose.

EXPER. X.
TAke good Silver, and, having dissolved it in Aqua Fortis, precipitate it with
a sufficient quantity of good Spirit of Salt; then having washed the Calx,
which will be very white, with common water, and dried it well, melt it with a
moderate fire into a fusible Mass, which will be very much of the nature of
what Chemists call Cornu Lunae, and which they make by precipitating dissolved
Silver with a bare Solution of common Salt made in common water. And whereas
both Spirit of Salt and Silver dissolved in Aqua Fortis will each of them apart
readily dissolve in simple water, our Luna Cornea not only will not do so, but
is so indisposed to Dissolution, that I remember I have kept it in Digestion,
some in Aqua fortis, and some in Aqua Regia, and that for a good while, and in
no very faint degree of heat, without being able to dissolve it like a Metal,
the Menstruums having indeed tinged themselves upon it, but left the
Composition undissolv'd at the bottom.

With this Instance (of which sort more might be afforded by Chemical
Precipitations) I shall conclude what I designed to offer at present about the
Corrosibility of Bodies, as it may be considered in a more general way. For as
to the Disposition that Particular Bodies have of being dissolved in, or of
re^isting, Determinate Liquors, it were much easier for me to enlarge upon that
Subject, than it was to provide the Instances above recited. And these are not
so few, but that it is hoped they may suffice to make it probable, that in the
Relation betwixt a Solvent and the Body it is to work upon, that which depends
upon the Mechanical affections of one or both, is much to be considered, and
has a great interest in the operations of one of the bodies upon the other.

FINIS.
OF THE MECHANICAL CAUSES OF CHEMICAL PRECIPITATION. By the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

Advertisement.
THough I shall not deny, that, in Grammatical strictness, Precipitation should
be reckoned among Chemical Operations, not Qualities, yet I did not much
scruple to insert the following Discourse among the Notes about Particular
Qualities, because many, if not most, of the Phenomenon, mentioned in the
ensuing Essay, may be considered as depending, some of them, upon a power, that
certain bodies have to cause Precipitation, and some upon such a Disposition to
be struck down by others, as may, if men please, be called Precipitability. And
so these differing Affections may with (at least) tolerable Congruity be
referred to those that we have elsewhere styled Chemical Qualities.

But though I hope, I may in these few Lines have said enough concerning the
name given to these Attributes, yet perhaps it will be found in time, that the
things themselves may deserve a larger Discourse than my little leisure would
allow them. For that is not a causeless Intimation of the Importance of the
subject, wherewith I conclude the following Tract, since besides that many more
Instances might have been particularly referred to the Heads treated of in the
Ensuing Essay, there are improper kinds of Precipitation (besides those
mentioned in the former part of the Discourse) to which one may not
incongruously refer diverse of the Phenomenon of Nature, as well in the greater
as in the lesser world, whereof either no Causes at all, or but improper ones
are wont to be given. And besides the simple Spirits and Salts usually employed
by Chemists, there are many compounded and decompounded bodies not only
factitious but natural, (and some such as one would scarce suspect) that may in
congruous subjects produce such Precipitations, as I speak of. And the
Phenomenon and Consequents of such operations may in diverse cases prove
conducive both to the Discovery of Physical Causes, and the Production of
useful effects; though the particularizing of such Phenomenon do rather belong
to a History of Precipitations, than to such a Discourse as that which follows,
wherein I proposed not so much to deliver the latent Mysteries, as to
investigate the Mechanical Causes of Precipitation.

OF THE MECHANICAL CAUSES OF CHEMICAL PRECIPITATION.
CHAP. I.
BY Precipitation is here meant such an agitation or motion of a heterogeneous
liquor, as in no long time makes the parts of it subside, and that usually in
the form of a powder or other consistent body.

As, on many occasions, Chemists call the substance that is made to fall to the
bottom of the liquor, the Precipitate; so for brevity sake we shall call the
body that is put into the liquor to procure that subsiding, the Precipitant; as
also that which is to be struck down, the Precipitable substance or matter, and
the liquor wherein it swims before the separation, the Menstruum or Solvent.

When a hasty fall of a heterogeneous body is procured by a Precipitant, the
Operation is called Precipitation in the proper or strict sense: But when the
separation is made without any such addition, or the substance, separated from
the fluid part of the liquor, instead of subsiding emerges, then the word is
used in a more comprehensive, but less proper, acceptance.

As for the Causes of Precipitation the very name it self in its Chemical sense
having been scarce heard of in the Peripatetic Schools, it is not to be
expected, that they should have given an account of the Reasons of the thing.
And it is like, that those few Aristotelians, that have, by their converse with
the laboratories or writings of Chemists, taken notice of this Operation,
would, according to their custom on such occasions, have recourse for the
explication of it to some secret sympathy or antipathy between the bodies whose
action and reaction intervenes in this Operation.

But if this be the way proposed, of accounting for it, I shall quickly have
occasion to say somewhat to it in considering the ways proposed by the
Chemists, who were wont to refer Precipitation, either, as is most usual, to a
sympathy betwixt the Precipitating body and the Menstruum which makes the
Solvent run to the embraces of the Precipitant, and so let fall the particles
of the body sustained before; or (with others) to a great antipathy or
contrariety between the acid salt of the Menstruum and the fixed salt of the
Oil, or solution of calcined Tartar, which is the most general and usual
Precipitant they employ.

But I see not, how either of these causes will either reach to all the
Phenomenon that have been exhibited, or give a true account even of some of
those, to which it seems applicable. For first, in Precipitations, wherein what
they call a sympathy between the liquors, is supposed to produce the effect,
this admired sympathy does not (in my apprehension) evince such a mysterious
occult Quality as is presumed, but rather consists in a greater congruity as to
bigness, shape, motion and pores of the minute parts between the Menstruum and
the Precipitant, than between the same Solvent and the body it kept before
dissolved. And though this sympathy rightly explained may be allowed to have an
interest in some such Precipitations as let fall the dissolved body in its
pristine nature and form, and only reduced into minute powder; yet I find not,
that in the generality of Precipitations this Doctrine will hold; For in some
that we have made of Gold and Silver in proper Menstruums, after the subsiding
matter had been well washed and dried, several Precipitates of Gold made, some
with oil of Tartar, which abounds with a fixed salt, and is the usual
Precipitant, and some with an Urinous Spirit, which works by Virtue of a salt
highly fugitive or Volatile, I found the powder to exceed the weight of the
Gold and Silver I had put to dissolve; and the Eye it self sufficiently
discovers such Precipitates not to be mere metalline powders, but Compositions,
whose consisting, not (as has been by some body suspected) of the combined
Salts alone, but of the metalline parts also, may be strongly concluded not
only from the ponderousness of diverse of them in reference to their bulk, but
also manifestly from the reduction of true malleable metals from several of
them.

CHAP. II.
THE other Chemical way of explicating Precipitations may, in a right sense, be
made use of by a Naturalist on some particular occasions. But I think it much
too narrow and defective, as it is in a general way proposed, to be fit to be
acquiesced in. For first it is plain, that it is not only Salt of Tartar and
other fixed Alcalies that precipitate most bodies that are dissolved in acid
Menstruums; as in making of Aurum fulminans, oil of Tartar precipitates the
Gold out of Aqua Regis: But acid liquors themselves do on many occasions no
less powerfully precipitate metals and other bodies out of one another. Thus
spirit of Salt, (as I have often tried) precipitates Silver out of Aqua fortis:
The corrosive Spirit of Nitre copiously precipitates that white powder whereof
they make Bezoardicum Minerale: Spirit or oil of Sulphur made by a glass-bell
precipitates Corals, Pearls, etc. dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar, as is known
to many Chemists, who now use this Oleum Sulphuris per Campanam, to make the
Magistery of Pearls, etc. for which vulgar Chemists employ Oleum Tartari per
deliquium.

I have sometimes made a Menstruum, wherein though there were both Acid and
Alcalizate Salts; yet I did not find, that either acid Spirits or oil of
Tartar, or even Spirit of Urine would precipitate the dissolved substances.

And I have observed, both that Salts of a contrary nature will precipitate
bodies out of the same Menstruum, as not only Salt of Tartar, but Sea Salt
being dissolved, will precipitate each other, and each of them apart will
precipitate Silver out of Aqua fortis; and that even, where there is a
confessed contrariety betwixt two liquors, it may be so ordered, that neither
of them shall precipitate what is dissolved by the other; of which I shall have
occasion to give ere long a remarkable instance.

But it will best appear, that the abovementioned Theories of the Peripateticks
and Chemists are at least insufficient to solve the Phenomenon (many of which
were probably not known to most of them, and perhaps not weighed by any,) if we
proceed to observe the Mechanical ways, by which Precipitations may be
accounted for; whereof I shall at present propose some Number, and say somewhat
of each of them apart; not that I think all of them to be equally important and
comprehensive, or that I absolutely deny, that any one of them may be reduced
to some of the other; but that I think, it may better elucidate the subject, to
treat of them severally, when I shall have premised, that I would not thence
infer, that though, for the most part, Nature does principally effect
Precipitations by one or other of these ways, yet in diverse cases she may not
employ two or more of them about performing the operation.

To precipitate the Corpuscles of a metal out of a Menstruum, wherein being
once thoroughly dissolved it would of it self continue in that state, the two
general ways that the nature of the thing seems to suggest to him that
considers it, are, either to add to the weight or bulk of the dissolved
Corpuscles, and thereby render them unfit to accompany the particles of the
Menstruum in their motions; or to weaken the sustaining power of the Menstruum,
and thereby disable it to keep the metalline particles swimming any longer:
which falling of the deserted parts of the metal or other body, does
oftentimes the more easily ensue, because in many cases, when the sustaining
particles of the Menstruum come to be too much weakened, that proves an occasion
to the metalline Corpuscles, disturbed in the former motion that kept them
separate, to make occursions and coalitions among themselves, and their fall
becomes the effect, though not equally so, of both ways of Precipitation; as on
the other side, there are several occasions on which the same Precipitant, that
brings the swimming particles of the metal to stick to one another, does
likewise, by mortifying or disabling the saline Spirits or other parts of the
solvent, weaken the sustaining power of that liquor.

CHAP. III.
TO descend now to the distinct Considerations about these two ways: The first
of the most genera Causes of Precipitation is such a Cohaesion procured by the
Precipitant in the solution, as makes the compounded corpuscles, or at least
the associated particles of the dissolved body, too heavy to be sustained, or
too bulky to be kept in a state of fluidity by the liquor.

That in many Precipitations there is made a coalition betwixt the small parts
of the Precipitant and those of the dissolved metal, or other body, and
frequently also with the saline spirits of the Menstruum, may be easily shown
by the weight of the Precipitate, which though carefully washed and dried,
often surpasses, and sometimes very considerably, that of your crude metal that
was dissolved; of which we lately gave an instance in Aurum fulminans and
precipitated Silver; and we may yet give a more conspicuous one, in that which
Chemists call Luna Cornea: For, if having dissolved Silver in good Aqua fortis,
you Precipitate it with the solution of Sea Salt in fair water, and from the
very white Precipitate wash the loose adhering salts, the remaining powder,
being dried and slowly melted, will look much less like a metalline body than
like a piece of horn, whence also it takes its name; so considerable is the
additament of the saline to the metalline particles.

And that part of such additaments is, retained, may not only be found by
weighing, but in diverse cases may be argued from what is obvious to the Eye: as
if you dissolve Mercury in Aqua fortis, and into the philtrated solution drop
spirit of Salt, or salt water, or an urinous spirit, as of Sal Ammoniac, you
will have a very white Precipitate; but if instead of any of these, you drop-in
deliquated salt of Tartar, your Precipitate will be of a brick or orange
color. From which experiment and some others I would gladly take a rise to
persuade Chemists and Physicians, that it is not so indifferent, as those seem
to think who look on Precipitation but as a kind of Comminution, by what means
the precipitation is performed. For by reason of the strict adhesion of diverse
saline particles of the precipitant and the solvent, the precipitated body,
notwithstanding all the wonted ablutions, may have its qualities much
diversified by those of the particles of the liquors, when these are fitted to
stick very fast to it. Which last words I add, because, though that sometimes
happens, yet it does not always, there being a geater difference than every
body takes notice of between Precipitations; as you will be induced to think,
if you precipitate the solution of Silver with Copper, with spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, with salt water, with oil of Tartar* with quicksilver, with crude
Tartar and with Zink. And in the lately proposed Example, you will think it
probable, that it is not all one, whether to dissolved Mercury or Silver, you
employ the subtle distilled Spirits of Salt, or the gross body, whether in a
dry form, or barely dissolved in common water. And thus much of the
Conduciveness of weight to the striking down the Corpuscles of a dissolved Body.

That also the Bulk of a body may very much contribute to make it sink or swim
in a liquor, appears by obvious instances. Thus Salt or Sugar, being put into
water either in lumps or even in powder that is but gross, falls at first to
the bottom, and lies there, notwithstanding the Air that may be intercepted
between its parts or externally adhere to it. But when by the insinuating
action of the water it is dissolved into minute particles, these are carried up
and down with those of the liquor and subside not. The like happens, when a
piece of silver is cast into Aqua fortis, and in many other cases.

On the other side I have several times observed, that some bodies that had
long swam in a Menstruum, whilst their minute parts were kept from convening in
it, did afterward by the coalition of many of those particles into bodies of a
visible bulk coagulate and subside, (though sometimes, to hinder the
evaporation of the Menstruum, the vessels were kept stopped.) Of this I elsewhere
mention diverse examples; and particularly in urinous and animal spirits, well
dephlegm'd, I have found, that after all had for a considerable time continued
in the form of a perfect liquor, and as to sense homogeneous, store of solid
corpuscles, convening together, settled at the bottom of the glasses in the form
of saline Crystals. Having also long kept a very red solution of Sulphur first
unlocked, (as they speak) made with highly rectified spirit of urine, I
observed, that at length the Sulphurous particles, making little concretions
between themselves, totally subsided and left the liquor almost devoid of
tincture. By which you may see, that 'twas not impertinent to mention (as I
lately did) among the subordinate causes of Precipitation, the associating of
the particles of a dissolved body with one another. Of which I elsewhere give a
notable Example in the shining powder that I obtained from Gold dissolved in a
peculiar Menstruum, without any Precipitant, by the coalition of the metalline
particles, to which a tract of time gave opportunity to meet and adhere in a
convenient manner.

If in what the Chemists call Precipitate per se, the Mercury be indeed brought
to lose its fluidity, and become a powder without being compounded with any
additional body, (which doubt I elsewhere state and discourse of) it will
afford us a notable instance to prove, that the coalitions of particles into
clusters of the self same matter will render them unfit for the motion
requisite to fluidity. For in this odd precipitation by fire, wherein the same
Menstruum is both the Liquor and the Precipitate, being not all made at once,
the Corpuscles that first disclose themselves by their redness, are rejected by
those of the Mercury that yet remains fluid, as unable to accompany them in the
motions that belong to Mercury as such.

CHAP. IV.
BEfore I dismiss that way of Precipitating, that depends upon the unwieldiness
which the Precipitant gives to the body it is to strike down, it may not be
impertinent, especially in reference to the foregoing part of this Paper, to
consider, that perhaps in diverse cases the Corpuscles of a dissolved body may
be made unfit to be any longer sustained in the Menstruum, though the
Precipitant adds very little to their bulk, or at least much more to their
specific weight than to it. For I have elsewere shown, that in diverse solutions
made of bodies by acid Menstruums, there are either generated or extricated many
small Aerial particles; and it will be easily granted, that these may be small
enough to be detained in the pores of the liquor and be invisible there, if we
consider, what a multitude of aerial and formerly imperceptible bubbles is
afforded by common water in our Pneumatical Receivers, when the incumbent air
that before pressed the liquor, is pumpt out. And if the Corpuscles of the
dissolved body have any little Cavities or pores fit to lodge Aerial particles,
or have asperous surfaces, between whose prominent parts the generated air may
conveniently lie; in such cases, I say, these Invisible bubbles may be looked
upon, as making with the solid Corpuscles they adhered to, little aggregates
much lighter in specie than the Corpuscles themselves would be; and
consequently if the Precipitant consist of particles of such a size and shape
as are fit to expel these little bubbles, and lodge themselves in the cavities
possessed by them before, there will be produced new aggregates composed of the
Corpuscles of the dissolved body and the particles of the Precipitant; which
aggregates though they do take up very little or perhaps not at all more room
(taking that word in a popular sense) than those, whereof the Aerial bubbles
made a part, will yet be Specifically heavier than the former Aggregates were,
and may thereby overcome the sustaining power of the Menstruum.

One thing more may be fit to be taken notice of before we pass on further,
namely, that it is upon the score of the Specific gravity of a body, and not
barely upon the action of the Precipitant, that an aggregate or a Convention of
particles does rather fall to the bottom than rise to the top. For, though the
Agents that procured the Coalition, make the cluster of particles become of a
bulk too unwieldy to continue in the liquor as parts of it; yet if each of them
be lighter in specie than an equal bulk of the Menstruum, or if they so convene
as to intercept a sufficient number of little bubbles or aerial Corpuscles
between them, and so become lighter than as much of the Menstruum as they take
up the room of, they will not be precipitated but emerge; as may be seen in the
Preparation of those Magisteries of Vegetables, I elsewhere mention; where some
deeply colored plants being made to tinge plentifully the Lixivium they are
boiled in, are afterward by the addition of Alum made to curdle, as it were,
into colored Concretions, which being (totally or in part) too big to swim as
they did before they convened, and too light in comparison of the Menstruum to
subside, emerge to the top and float there. An easier and neater Example to the
same purpose I remember I showed by dissolving Camphire in highly rectified
spirit of Wine, 'till the solution was very strong. For though the Camphire,
when put in Lumps into the spirit, sunk to the bottom of it; yet, when good
store of water, (a liquor somewhat heavier in Specie than Camphire,) was poured
upon the solution, the Camphire quickly concreted and returned to its own
nature, and within a while emerged to the top of the mingled liquors and
floated there. These particulars I was willing to mention here, that I might
give an instance or two of those precipitations, that I formerly spoke of as
improperly so called. And here I must not decline taking notice of a
Phenomenon, that sometimes occurs in Precipitations, and at first sight may
seem contrary to our Doctrine about them. For now and then it happens, that
after some drops of the Precipitant have begun a Precipitation at the top or
bottom of the Solvent, one shakes the vessel, that the Precipitant may be the
sooner diffused through the other liquor, but then they are quickly surprised
to find, that instead of hastening the complete Precipitation, the matter
already precipitated disappears, and the solvent returns to be clear, or, as to
sense, as uniform, as it was before the Precipitant was put into it. B^u this
Phenomenon does not at all cross our Theory. For, when this happens, though
that part of the Solvent, to which the Precipitant reaches, is disabled for
Reasons mentioned in this Discourse to support the dissolved body, yet this
quantity of the Precipitant is but small in proportion to the whole bulk of the
solvent. And therefore, when the agitation of the vessel disperses the clusters
of loosly concreted particles through the whole liquor, (which is seldom so
exactly proportioned to the body it was to work on, as to be but just strong
enough to dissolve it) that greater part of the Liquor, to which before the
shaking of the vessel the Precipitant did not reach, may well be looked upon as
a fresh Menstruum, which is able to mortify or overpower the small quantity of
the Precipitant that is mingled with it, and so to destroy its late operation
on the body dissolved, by which means the solution returns, as to sense, to its
former state. Which may be illustrated by a not unpleasant Experiment, I
remember I have long since made by precipitating a brick-coloured powder out of
a strong solution of Sublimate made in fair water. For this subsiding matter,
being laid to dry in the Philter, by which 'twas separated from the water,
would retain a deep but somewhat dirty color; and if then, putting it into the
bottom of a wine glass, I poured upon it, either clear oil of Vitriol, or some
other strong acid Menstruum, the Alcalizat particles being disabled and
swallowed up by some of the acid ones of the Menstruum, the other acid ones
would so readily dissolve the residue of the powder, that in a trice the color
of it would disappear and the whole mixture be reduced into a clear Liquor,
without any sediment at the bottom.

Thus much may suffice at present about the first general way of Precipitating
Bodies out of the Liquors they swam in.

CHAP. V.
THE other of the two principal ways, by which Precipitations may be effected,
is the disabling of the Solvent to sustain the dissolved body.

There may be many instances, wherein this second way of effecting
Precipitations may be associated by Nature with the first way formerly
proposed; but notwithstanding the cases, wherein Nature may (as I formerly
noted) employ both the ways therein, yet in most cases they sufficiently
differ, in regard that in the former way the subsiding of the dissolved body is
chiefly, if not only, caused by the additional weight as well as action of the
external Precipitant; whereas in most of the instances of the later way, the
effect is produced either without salt of Tartar, or any such Precipitant, or
by some other quality of the Precipitant more than by its weight, or at least
besides the weight it adds: Though I forget not, that I lately gave an example
of a shining powder of Gold, that fell to the bottom of a Menstruum without the
help of an External Precipitant: But that was done so slowly, that it may be
disputed, whether it were a true Precipitation; and I alleged it not as such,
but to show, that the increased bulk of Particles may make them unfit to swim
in Menstruums, wherein they swam whilst they were more minute. And the like
answer may be accommodated to the Precipitate per se newly mentioned.

This premised, I proceed now to observe, that the general way, I last
proposed, contains in it several subordinate ways, that are more particular;
of which I shall now mention the chief that occur to me, and though but
briefly, illustrate each of them by examples. And first a Precipitation may be
made, if the saline or other dissolving particles of the Menstruum are
mortified or rendered unfit for their former function, by particles of a
Precipitant that are of a contrary nature.

Thus Gold and some other minerals, being dissolved in Aqua Regis, will be
precipitated with spirit of urine and other such liquors abounding with
volatile and salino-sulphureous Corpuscles, upon whose account it is that they
act; whence these salts themselves, though cast into a Menstruum in a dry form,
will serve to make the like Precipitations. And I the rather on this occasion
mention Urinous spirits than Salt of Tartar, because those volatile particles
add much less of weight to the little Concretions, which compose the
Precipitated powder.

Upon instances of this kind, many of the modern Chemists have built that
Antipathy betwixt the Salts of the solvent and those of the Menstruum, to which
they ascribe almost all Precipitations. But against this I have represented
something already, and shall partly now, and partly in the sequel of this
discourse add some farther reasons of my not being satisfied with this
Doctrine. For, besides that it is insufficient to reach many of the Phenomenon
of Precipitations, (as will ere long be shown,) and besides that it is not easy
to make out, that there is any real antipathy betwixt inanimate bodies; I
consider, 1. That some of those Menstruums, to which this Antipathy is
attributed, do after a short commotion (whereby they are disposed to make
convenient occursions and coalitions) amicably unite into concretions
participating of both the Ingredients; as I have somewhere shown by an Example
purposely devised to make this out; to do which I dropped a clear solution of
fixed Nitre, instead of the usual one of common salt, upon a solution of
silver, in Aquafortis: For the saline particles of the Solvent and those of
the Precipitant, will, as I have elsewhere recirecited, for the most part
friendly unite into such Crystals of Nitre for the main, as they were obtained
from: And though this notion of the Chemists, if well explained, be applicable
to far more instances than the proposers of it seemed to have thought on, and
may be made good use of in Practice; yet I take it to be such as is not true
Universally, and, where it is true, ought to be explicated according to
Mechanical Principles. For, if the particles of the Menstruum and those of the
Precipitant be so framed, that upon the action of the one upon the other, there
will be produced Corpuscles too big and unwieldy to continue in the state of
fludity, there will ensue a Precipitation: But if the constitution of the
corpuscles of the Precipitating and of the Dissolved body be such, that the
Precipitant also it self is fit to be a Menstruum to dissolve that body in;
then, though there be an union of the Salts of the Precipitant and the metal
(or other Solutum) and perhaps of the solvent too, yet a Precipitation will not
necessarily follow, though the saline particles of the two liquors seemed, by
the heat and ebullition excited between them upon their meeting, to exercise a
great and mutual antipathy. To satisfy some Ingenious men about this
particular, I dissolved Zink or Speltar in a certain urinous spirit; (for,
there are more than one that may serve the turn;) and then put to it a
convenient quantity of a proper acid spirit; but though there would be a
manifest conflict thereby occasioned betwixt the two liquors; yet the speltar
remained dissolved in the mixture. And I remember, that for the same purpose I
devised another Experiment, which is somewhat more easy and more clear. I
dissolved Copper calcined per se, or even crude, in strong spirit of salt; (for
unless it be such, it will not be so proper,) and having put to it by degrees a
good quantity of spirit of Sal-Armoniac or fermented Urine, though there would
be a great commotion with hissing and bubbles produced, the Copper would not be
precipitated, because this Urinous spirit will as well as the Salt, (and much
more readily) dissolve the same metal, and it would be kept dissolved
notwithstanding their operation on one another; the intervening of which, and
their action upon the metalline corpuscles, may be gathered from hence, that
the green solution, made with spirit of salt alone, will by the supervening
urinous spirits be changed either into a bluish green, or, if the proportion
of this spirit be very great, into a rich blew almost like ultramarine. And
from these two Experiments we may probably argue, that when the Precipitation
of a metal etc. insues, it is not barely or the account of the supposed
Antipathy betwixt the Salts, but because the causes of that seeming Antipathy
do likewise upon a Mechanical account dispose the Corpuscles of the confounded
liquors so to cohere, as to be too unwieldy for the fluid part.

CHAP. VI.
ANother way, whereby the dissolving particles of a Menstruum may be rendered
unfit to sustain the dissolved body, is to present them another that they can
more easily work on.

A notable Experiment of this you have in the common practice of Refiners, who,
to recover the Silver out of Lace and other such mixtures wherein it abounds,
use to dissolve it in Aqua fortis, and then in the solution leave Copper plates
for a whole night (or many hours.) But if you have a mind to see the Experiment
without waiting so long, you may employ the way, whereby I have often quickly
dispatched it. As soon then as I have dissolved a convenient quantity, which
needs not be a great one, of Silver in cleansed Aqua fortis, I add twenty or
twenty five times as much of either distilled water or rain water; (for though
common water will sometimes do well, yet it seldom does so well;) and then
into the clear solution I hang by a string a clean piece of Copper, which will
be presently covered with little shining plates almost like scales of fish,
which one may easily shake off and make room for more. And this may illustrate
what we formerly mentioned about the subsiding of metalline corpuscles, when
they convene in liquors, wherein, whilst they were dispersed in very minute
parts, they swam freely. For in this operation the little scales of Silver
seemed to be purely metalline, and there is no saline Precipitant, as Salt of
Tartar or of Urine, employed to make them subside. Upon the same ground, Gold
and Silver dissolved in their proper Menstruums may be precipitated with
running Mercury; and if a Solution of blew Vitriol (such as the Roman,
East-Indian, or other of the like colors) be made in water, a clean plate of
Steel or Iron being immersed in it, will presently be overlaid with a very thin
case of Copper-which after a while will grow thick, er; but does not adhere to
the iron so loosely as to be shaken off, as the Precipitated silver newly
mentioned may be from the Copper Plates whereto it adheres. And that in these
operations the saline particles may really quit the dissolved body, and work
upon the Precipitant, may appear by the lately mentioned practice of Refiners,
where the Aquafortis, that forsakes the particles of the silver, falls a
working upon the copper plates employed about the Precipitation, and dissolves
so much of them as to acquire the greenish blew color of a good solution of
that metal. And the Copper we can easily again without salts obtain by
Precipitation out of that liquor with iron, and that too, remaining dissolved
in its place, we can precipitate with the tastless powder of another Mineral.

Besides these two ways of weakening the Menstruum, namely, by mortifying its
saline particles or seducing them to work on other bodies, and to forsake those
they first dissolved, there are some other ways of weakening the Menstruum.

A Third way of effecting this, is by lessening or disturbing the agitation of
the solvent. And indeed since we find by experience, that some liquors when
they are heated, will either dissolve some bodies they would not dissolve at
all when they were cold, or dissolve them more powerfully or copiously when hot
than cold; it is not unreasonable to suppose, that what considerably lessens
that agitation of the parts of the Menstruum that is necessary to the keeping
the dissolved body in the state of fluidity, should occasion the falling of it
again to the bottom. In slow operations I could give diverse examples of the
precipitating power of Cold; there being diverse solutions and particularly that
of Ambergris, that I had kept fluid all the Summer, which in the Winter
would subside. And the like may be sometimes observed in far less time in the
solutions of Brimstone made in certain oleaginous Menstruums; and I have now
and then had some solutions, and particularly one of Benzoin made in spirit of
wine, that would surprise me with the turbidness (which begins the state of
Precipitation) it would acquire upon a sudden change of the weather toward
Cold, though it were not in the winter season.

Another way of weakening the Menstruum and so causing the Precipitation of a
body dissolved in it, is the diluting or lessening the tenacity of it, whether
that tenacity proceed from viscosity or the competent number and constipation
of the parts.

Of this we have an instance in the Magisteries (as many Chemists are pleased
to call them) of Jalap, Benzoin, and of diverse others, Resinous and Gummous
bodies dissolved in spirit of wine. For by the affusion of common water, the
Menstruum being too much diluted is not able to keep those particles in the
state of fluidity, but must suffer them to subside, (as they usually do in the
form of white powder,) or, (as it may happen sometimes,) make some parts
emerge. Examples also of this kind are afforded us by the common preparations
of Mercurius Vitae. For though in oil of Autimony, made by the Rectification of
the butter, the saline particles are so numerous and keep so close to one
another, that they are able to sustain the Antimonial Corpuscles they carried
over with them in Distillation, and keep them together with themselves in the
form of a liquor; yet when by the copious affusion of the water, those
sustaining particles are separated and removed to a distance from each other,
the Antimonial Corpuscles and the Mercurial (if any such there were,) being of
a ponderous nature, will easily subside into that Emetic powder, which, (when
well washed) the Chemists flatteringly enough call Mercurius Vitae.

But here I must interpose an advertisement, which will help to show us, how
much Precipitations depend upon the Mechanical contextures of bodies. For,
though not only in the newly recited examples, but in diverse others, the
affusion of water, by diluting the salts and weakenning the Menstruum, makes
the metal or other dissolved body fall precipitately to the bottom; yet if the
saline particles of the solvent, and those of the body be fitted for so strict
an union, that the Corpuscles resulting from their Coalitions will not so
easily be separated by the particles of water, as suffer themselves to be
carried up and down with them, whether because of the minuteness of these
compounded Corpuscles, or because of some congruity betwixt them and those of
the water; they will not be precipitated out of the weakened solution, but
still continue a part of it; as I have tried partly with some solution of
Silver and Gold, made in acid Menstruums, but much more satisfactorily in
solutions of Copper, made in the urinous spirit of Sal Ammoniac. For, though
that blew solution were diluted with many thousand times as much distilled
water as the dissolved metal weighed; yet its swimming Corpuscles did by their
color manifestly appear to be dispersed through the whole liquor.

CHAP. VII.
BUT, to prosecute our former discourse, which we broke off after the mention
of Mercurius Vitae, 'twill now be seasonable to add, that we have made diverse
other Precipitations, by the bare affusion of water, out of solutions, and
sometimes out of distilled liquors; which, for brevity sake, I here omit, that
I may hasten to the last way I shall now stay to mention.

Another way then, whereby Precipitations of bodies may be produced by
debilitating the Menstruum they swim in, is by lessening the proportion of the
Solvent to the Solutum, without any evaporation of the liquor. These last words
I add, because that, when there is an obstruction or any other expulsion of the
Menstruum by heat, if it be total, it is called Exsiccation, as when dry salt of
Tartar is obtained from the filtrated Lixivium of the calcined Tartar; and
though the evaporation be not total, yet the effects of it are not wont to be
reckoned amongst Precipitations. And although the way, I am about to propose,
if it be attentively considered, has much affinity with the foregoing, and the
Phenomenon may perhaps in some sort be reduced to them; yet the instances that
I shall name, having not, I know, been thought of by others, and being such as
every one would not deduce from what I have been mentioning, I shall add a word
of the inducements I had to make the trials, as well as of the success of them.

Considering then, that Water will not dissolve Salts indefinitely, but when it
has received its due proportion, 'twill then dissolve no more, but, if they be
put into it, let them fall to the ground and continue undissolved; and that if
when water is satiated, any of the liquor be evaporated or otherwise wasted, it
will in proportion let fall the salt it had already taken up; I concluded, that
if I could mingle with water any liquor, with which its particles would more
readily associate than with those of Salt, the depriving the solution of so
many of its aqueous particles would be equivalent to the evaporation of as much
water or thereabouts, as they, by being united, could compose. Wherefore making
a lixivium of distilled water or clean rainwater, and of Salt of Tartar so
strong, that if a grain more were cast in it, it would lie undissolved at the
bottom; I put a quantity of this fiery Lixivium into a slender cylindrical
vessel, till it had therein reached such a height as I thought fit; then taking
as much as I thought sufficient of strong spirit of wine, that would burn every
drop away, that so it might have no phlegm nor water of its own, I poured this
upon the saline solution, and shaking the liquors pretty well together to bring
them to mix as well as I could, I laid the tube in a quiet place, and
afterward found, as I expected, that there was a pretty quantity of white salt
of Tartar fallen to the bottom of the vessel, which salt had been merely
forsaken by the aqueous particles that sustained it before, but forsook it to
pass into the spirit of wine, wherewith they were more disposed to associate
themselves; which I concluded, because having, before I poured on this last
named liquor, made a mark on the glass to show how far the lixivium reached, I
found (what I looked for) that after the Precipitation, the Lixivium, that
remained yet strong enough to continue unmixed with the incumbent spirit, had
its surface not where the mark showed it had been before, but a considerable
distance beneath it, the spirit of wine having gained in extent what it lost in
strength by receiving so many aqueous particles into it. I chose to make this
trial rather with a Lixivium of Salt of Tartar than with oil of Tartar per
Deliquium, because in this last named liquor the aqueous and saline particles
are more closely combined and therefore more difficult to be separated than I
thought they would be in a Lixivium hastily made, though very strong. And
though by much agitation I have sometimes obtained some salt of Tartar from the
abovementioned oil; yet the experiment succeeded nothing near so well with that
liquor as with a Lixivium.

I made also the like trial with exceedingly dephlegmed spirit of wine, and as
strong a Brine as I could make of common salt dissolved without heat in common
water; and I thereby obtained no despicable proportion of finely figured salt,
that was let fall to the bottom. But this experiment, to be succesful, requires
greater care in him that makes it, than the former needs.

To confirm, and somewhat to vary this way of Precipitation, I shall add, that
having made a clear solution of choice Gum Arabic in common water, and poured
upon it a little high rectified spirit of wine, on this occasion there was also
made, and that in a trice, a copious precipitation of a light and purely white
substance not unpleasant to behold. And for further Confirmation I dissolved a
full proportion of Myrrh in fair water, and into the filtrated solution, which
was transparent, but of a high brown color, I dropped a large proportion (which
Circumstance is not to be omitted) of carefully dephlegm'd spirit of wine,
which according to expectation made a copious Precipitate of the Gum. And these
instances I the rather set down in this place, because they seem to show, that
simple water is a real Menstruum, which may have its dissolving and sustaining
virtue weakened by the accession of Liquors, that are not doubted to be much
stronger than it.

By specifying the hitherto mentioned ways, whereby Precipitations may be
Mechanically performed and accounted for, I would by no means be thought to
deny, that there may be some omitted here, which either others that shall
consider the matter with more attention, or I my self, if I shall have leisure
to do it, may think on. For I propose these but as the chief that occurr to my
present thoughts; and I forbear to add more instances to exemplify them,
because I would not injure some of my other papers, that have a greater right
to those Instances. Only this I shall note in general, that the Doctrine and
History of Precipitations, if well delivered, will be a thing of more extent
and moment than seems hitherto to have been imagined; since not only several of
the changes in the blood and other liquors and juices of the humane body may
thereby be the better understood; and they prevented, or their ill consequences
remedied; but in the practical part of Mineralogy diverse useful things may
probably be performed by the assistance of such a Doctrine and History. To keep
which conjecture from seeming extravagant, I shall only here intimate, that
it is not alone in bodies that are naturally or permanently liquid, but in those
solid and ponderous bodies, that are for a short time made so by the violence
of the fire, that many of the things suggested by this Doctrine may have place.
For whilst diverse of those Bodies are in fusion, they may be treated as
liquors; and metalls, and perhaps other heterogeneous bodies may be obtained
from them by fit though dry Precipitants, as in some other writings I partly
did, and may elsewhere yet further, declare.

FINIS.
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL PRODUCTION OF Magnetism. By the
Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1676.

ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the following NOTES About OCCULT QUALITIES.
THE following Papers (about Magnetism and Electricity) would appear with less
disadvantage, if the Author's willingness and Promise, that this Tome should be
furnished with notes about some Occult Qualities, as well as about diverse sorts
of those that are presumed to be Manifest, did not prevail with him to let the
ensuing Notes appear without those about the Pores of Bodies and Figures of
Corpuscles, that should have preceded them, and some others that should have
accompanied them. But the Author chose rather to venture these Papers abroad in
the Condition, such as it is, they now appear in, than make those already
printed about manifest Qualities stay longer for Accessions, which some
troublesome Accidents will not suffer him to hasten to the press; and without
which, he now fears this Tome may swell to a more than competent Bulk.

Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE Mechanical Production OF MAGNETICAL QUALITIES.
THough the virtues of the Loadstone be none of the least famous of Occult
Qualities, and are perhaps the most justly admired; yet I shall venture to
offer something to make it probable, that some, even of these, may be
introduced into bodies by the production of Mechanical changes in them.

To make way for what I am to deliver to this purpose, it will be expedient to
remove that general and settled prejudice, that has kept men from so much as
thinking of any Mechanical account of Magnetisms, which is a belief, that these
Qualities do immediately flow from the Substantial Form of the Loadstone, whose
abstruse nature is disproportionate to our understandings. duly applied, were
vigorous enough: Of which sort I remember I have seen one (and made some trials
with it) that yielded an income to the owner, who received money from
Navigators and others for suffering them to touch their needles, swords, knives
etc. at his excellent Magnet. Now, in a piece of steel or iron thus excited,
it is plain, that the Magnetic operations may be regularly performed for whole
years by a body, to which the form of a Loadstone does not belong, since, as it
had its own form before, so it retains the same still, continuing as malleable,
fusible etc. as an ordinary piece of the same metal unexcited: so that, if
there be introduced a fit disposition into the internal parts of the metal by
the action of the Loadstone, the metal, continuing of the same Species it was
before, will need nothing save the continuance of that acquired disposition to
be capable of performing Magnetical Operations; and if this disposition or
internal constitution of the excited iron be destroyed, though the form of the
metal be not at all injured, yet the former power of Attraction shall be
abolished,

And here give me leave to take notice of what I have elsewhere related to
another purpose, Substantial Form, and the Loadstone thus spoiled may,
notwithst^^d^^^ this Form, have its (...) at pleasure like a piece of Iron; as
I have elsewhere particularly declared.

And I will confirm what I have been saying with an experiment that you do not
perhaps expect; namely, that though it be generally taken for granted (without
being contradicted that I know of by any man) that, in a sound Loadstone, that
has never been injured by the fire, not only the attractive Power, but the
particular Virtue that it has to point constantly, when left to it self, with
one of its determinate extremes to one determinate pole, flows immediately
from the substantial or at least essential Form; yet this Form remaining
undestroyed by Fire, the Poles may be changed, and that with ease and speed.
For among my notes about Magnetical Experiments, whence I borrow some passages
of this paper, I find the following Account.

EXPER. IV.
TO show that the virtue that a Loadstone has by this determinate Pole or
Extreme to attract, for example, the South-end of a poised needle, and with the
opposite extreme or Pole the North-end of the same needle, I made among other
trials the following Experiment.

Taking a very small fragment of a Loadstone, I found, agreeably to my
conjecture, that by applying sometimes one Pole, sometimes the other, to that
pole of (a small but) a very vigorous Loadstone that was fit for my purpose, I
could at pleasure, in a few minutes, change the Poles of the little fragment,
as I tried by its operations upon a needle freely poised; though by applying a
fragment a pretty deal bigger, (for in it self it appeared very small,) I was
not able in far more hours than I employed minutes before, to make any sensible
change of the Poles.

This short Memorial being added to the preceding part of this discourse, will,
I hope, satisfy you, that how unanimously so ever men have deduced all
magnetic operations from the form of the Loadstone; yet some internal change
of pores or some other Mechanical alterations or inward disposition, either of
the excited Iron or of the Loadstone it self, may suffice to make a body
capable or incapable of exercising some determinate magnetical operations;
which may invite you to cast a more unprejudiced eye upon those few
particulars, I shall now subjoin to make it probable, that even Magnetical
Qualities may be Mechanically produced or altered.

EXPER. V.
I Have often observed in the shops of Artificers, as Smiths, Turners of metals
etc. that, when hardened and well tempered tools are well heated by Attrition,
if whilst they are thus warmed you apply them to filings or chips, as they
call them, or thin fragments of Steel or Iron, they will take them up, as if
the instruments were touched with a Loadstone: but as they will not do so,
unless they be thus excited by rubbing till they be warmed, by which means a
greater commotion is made in the inner parts of he Steel so neither would they
retain so vigorous a Magnetism as to support the little fragments of Steel that
stuck to them after they were grown cold again. Which may be confirmed by what,
if I much misremember not, I showed some Acquaintances of yours; which was,
that, by barely rubbing a conveniently

EXPER. VI.
shaped piece of Steel against the floor till it had gained a sufficient heat,
it would whilst it continued so, discover a manifest, though but faint
attractive power, which vanished together with the adventitious Heat.

EXPER. VII.
WE elsewhere observe, which perhaps you also may have done, that the Iron bars
of windows, by having stood very long in an erected posture, may at length grow
Magnetical, so that, if you apply the North point of a poised and excited
Needle to the bottom of the Bar, it will drive it away, and attract the
Southern; and if you raise the magnetic needle to the upper part of the Bar,
and apply it as before, this will draw the Northern extreme, which the other
end of the bar expelled; probably because, as it is elsewhere declared, the bar
is in tract of time, by the continual action of the Magnetical effuvia of the
Tarraqueous Globe, turned into a kind of Magnet, whose lower end becomes the
North Pole of it, and the other the Southern. Therefore according to the
Magnetical Laws, the former must expel the Northern extreme of the Needle, and
the later draw it.

EXPER. VIII.
I Have found indeed, and I question not but other observers may have done so
too, that, if a bar of Iron, that has not stood long in an erected posture, be
but held perpendicular, the forementioned experiment will succeed, (probably
upon such an account as that I have lately intimated:) But then this virtue,
displayed by the extremes of the bar of Iron, will not be at all permanent, but
so transient, that, if the bar be but inverted and held again upright, that end
which just before was the uppermost, and drew the north-end of the needle, will
now, being lowermost, drive it away, which, as was lately observed, will not
happen to a bar which has been some years or other competent time kept in the
same Position. So that, since length of time is requisite to make the verticity
of a bar of Iron so durable and constant, that the same extreme will have the
same virtues in reference to the Magnetical needle, whether you make it the
upper end or the lower end of the bar, it seems not improbable to me, that by
length of time the whole Magnetic virtue of this Iron may be increased, and
consequently some degree of attraction acquired.

And by this Consideration I shall endeavor to explicate that strange thing,
that is reported by some Moderns to have happened in Italy, where a bar of Iron
is affirmed to have been converted into a Loadstone, whereof a piece was kept
among other rarities in the curious Aldrovandus his Musaeum Metallicum. For
considering the greatness of its Specific Gravity, the malleableness and other
properties, wherein Iron differs from Loadstone, I cannot easily believe, that,
by such a way as is mentioned, a metal should be turned into a stone. And
therefore, having consulted the book it self, whence this Relation was
borrowed, I found the story imperfectly enough delivered: The chiefest and
clearest thing in it being, that at the top of the Church of Arimini a great
iron-bar, that was placed there to support a Cross of an hundred pound weight,
was at length turned into a Loadstone. But whether the reality of this
transmutation was examined, and how it appeared that the fragment of the
Loadstone presented to Aldrovandus was taken from that bar of Iron, I am not
fully satisfied by that Narrative. Therefore, when I remember the great
resemblance I have sometimes seen in color, besides other manifest Qualities,
betwixt some Loadstones and some course or almost rusty Iron, I am tempted to
Conjecture, that those that observed this Iron-bar when broken to have acquired
a strong Magnetical virtue, which they dreamed not that tract of time might
communicate to it, might easily be persuaded, by this virtue and the
resemblance of color, that the Iron was turned into Loadstone: especially they
being prepossessed with that Aristotelian Maxim, whence our Author would
explain this strange Phenomenon, that inter Symbolum habentia facilis est
transmutatio.

But, leaving this as a bare conjecture, we may take notice, that what virtue
an oblong piece of Iron may need a long tract of time to acquire, by the help
only of its position, may be imparted to it in a very short time, by the
intervention of such a nimble agent, as the fire. As may be often, though not
always, observed in Tongs, the Iron, whilst it was yet soft, and had its pores
more lax, and parts more pliable, disposed it, I say, to receive much quicker
impressions from the Magnetical effluvia of the Earth, than it would have done,
if it had still been cold. metal, as far as I have tried, is the usual
ingredient of Loadstones) being spoiled by the violence of the fire, this rude
Agent leaves it in the condition of common Iron, or perhaps of ignited
Iron-ore: whereas the fire does soften the Iron it self (which is a metal not
an Ore) agitating its parts, and making them the more flexible, and by relaxing
its pores, disposes it to be easily and plentifully pervaded by the Magnetical
steams of the Earth, from which it may not improbably be thought to receive the
verticity it acquires; and this the rather, because, as I have often tried, and
elsewhere mentioned, But whatever be the true cause of the disparity of the
fires operation upon a sound Loadstone and a bar of Iron, the effect seems to
strengthen our conjecture, That Magnetical operations may much depend upon
Mechanical Principles. And I hope you will find further probability added to
it, by some Phenomenon recited in another paper, to which I once committed some
promiscuous Experiments and Observations Magnetical.

EXPER. XII.
IF I may be allowed to borrow an Experiment from a little Tract Relating to
the Magnetism of the Earth.
that yet lies by me, and has been seen but by two or three friends, it may be
added to the instances already given about the production of Magnetism. For in
that Experiment I have shown, how having brought a good piece of a certain kind
of English Oker, which yet perhaps was no fitter than other, to a convenient
shape, though, till it was altered by the fire, it discovered no Magnetical
Quality; yet after it had been kept red-hot in the fire and was suffered to
cool in a convenient posture, it was enabled to exercise Magnetical operations
upon a poised Needle.

EXPER. XIII.
AS for the Abolition of the Magnetical virtue in a body endowed with it, it
may be made without destroying the Substantial or the Essential Form of the
body, and without sensibly adding, diminishing, or altering any thing in
reference to the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, which Chemists presume Iron and
Steel, as well as other mixed bodies, to be composed of. For it has been
sometimes observed, that the bare continuance of a Loadstone it self in a
contrary position to that, which, when freely placed, it seems to effect, has
either corrupted or sensibly lessened the virtue of it. What I formerly
observed to this purpose. I elsewhere relate, and since that having a
Loadstone, whose vigor was looked upon by skilfu^ persons as very
extraordinary, and which, whilst it was in an Artificers hand, was therefore
held at a high rate, I was careful, being by some occasions called out of
London, to lock it up, with some other rarities, in a Cabinet, whereof I took
the key along with me, and still kept it in my own Pocket. But my stay abroad
proving much longer than I expected, when, being returned to London, I had
occasion to make use of this Loadstone for an Experiment, I found it indeed
where I left it, but so exceedingly decayed, as to its attractive power, which
I had formerly examined by weight, by having lain almost a year in an
inconvenient posture, that if it had not been for the circumstances newly
related, I should have concluded that some body had purposely got it out in my
absence, and spoiled it by help of the fire, the virtue being so much impaired,
that I cared little to employ it any more about considerable Experiments. other
to the South, it may be a contrary touch of the same Loadstone be deprived of
the faculty it had of directing its determinate extremes to determinate Poles.
Nay, by another touch (or the same, and even without immediate Contact, if the
Magnet be vigorous enough) the Needle may presently have its direction so
changed, that the end, which formerly pointed to the North pole, shall now
regard the South, and the other end shall instead of the Southern, respect the
Northen pole.

EXPER. XV.
AND to make it the more probable, that the change of the Magnetism
communicated to Iron may be produced at least in good part by Mechanical
operations, procuring some change of texture in the Iron; I shall subjoyn a
notable Experiment of the ingenious Doctor Power, which when I heard of, I
tried as well as I could; and though, perhaps for want of convenience, I could
not make it fully answer what it promised, yet the success of the trial was
considerable enough to make it pertinent in this place, and to induce me to
think, it might yet better succeed with him, whose Experiment, as far as it
concerns my present purpose, imports, that if a Puncheon, as Smiths call it, or
a Rod of Iron, be, by being ignited and suffered to cool North and South, and
hammered at the ends, very manifestly endowed with Magnetical virtue, this
virtue will in a trice be destroyed, by two or three smart blows of a strong
hammer upon the middle of the oblong piece of Iron.

But Magnetism is so fertile a Subject, that if I had now the leisure and
convenience to range among Magnetical Writers, I should scarce doubt of
finding, among their many Experiments and Observations, diverse that might be
added to those above delivered, as being easily applicable to my present
Argument. And I hope you will find farther probability added to what has been
said, to show, that Magnetical operations may much depend upon Mechanical
Principles, by some Phenomenon recited in another Paper, to which I once
committed some promiscuous Experiments and Observations Magnetical.

FINIS.
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGIN OR PRODUCTION OF
Electricity. By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.

Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGIN OR PRODUCTION OF
Electricity.
THat it is not necessary to believe Electrical Attraction (which you know is
generally listed among Occult Qualities) to be the effect of a naked and
solitary Quality flowing immediately from a Substantial Form; but that it may
rather be the effect of a Material Effluvium, issuing from, and returning to,
the Electrical Body (and perhaps in some cases assisted in its Operation by the
external air) seems agreeable to diverse things that may be observed in such
Bodies and their manner of acting.

There are differing Hypotheses (and all of them Mechanical, proposed by the
Moderns) to solve the Phenomenon of Electrical Attraction. Of these Opinions
the First is that of the learned Jesuit Cabaeus, who, though a Peripatetick
and Commentator on Aristotle, thinks the drawing of light Bodies by Jet, Amber,
etc. may be accounted for, by supposing, that the steams that issue, or, if I
may so speak, sally, out of Amber, when heated by rubbing, discuss and expel
the neighboring air; which after it has deen driven off a little way, makes as
it were a small whirlwind, because of the resistance it finds from the remoter
air, which has not been wrought on by the Electrical Steams; and that these,
shrinking back swiftly enough to the Amber, do in their returns bring along
with them such light bodies as they meet with in their way. On occasion of
which Hypothesis I shall offer it to be considered, Whether by the gravity of
the Atmospherical Air, surmounting the Specific Gravity of the little and
rarifi'd Atmosphere, made about the Amber by its emissions, and comprising the
light Body fastened on by them, the Attraction may not in diverse cases be
either caused or promoted.

Another Hypothesis is that proposed by that Ingenious Gentleman Sir Kenelm
Digby, and embraced by the very Learned Dr. Brown, (who seems to make our
Gilbert himself to have been of it) and diverse other sagacious men. And
according to this Hypothesis, the Amber, or other Electrick, being chafed or
heated, is made to emit certain Rays or Files of unctuous Steams, which, when
they come to be a little cooled by the external air, are somewhat condensed,
and having lost of their former agitation, shrink back to the body whence they
sallied out, and carry with them those light bodies, that their further ends
happen to adhere to, at the time of their Retraction: As when a drop of Oil or
Syrup hangs from the end of a small stick, if that be dexterously and cautiously
struck, the viscous substance will, by that impulse, be stretched out, and
presently retreating, will bring along with it the dust or other light bodies
that chanced to stick to the remoter parts of it.

And this way of explaining Electrical Attractions is employed also by the
Learned Gassendus, who adds to it, that these Electrical Rays (if they may be
so called) being emitted several ways, and consequently crossing one another,
get into the pores of the Straw, or other light body to be attracted, and by
means of their Decussation take the faster hold of it, and have the greater
force to carry it along with them, when they shrink back to the Amber whence
they were emitted.

A third Hypothesis there is, which was devised by the Acute Cartesius, who
dislikes the Explications of others, chiefly because he thinks them not
applicable to Glass, which he supposes unfit to send forth Effluvia, and which
is yet an Electrical body; and therefore attempts to account for Electrical
Attractions by the intervention of certain particles, shaped almost like small
pieces of Ribbond, which he supposes to be formed of this subtle matter
harbored in the pores or crevises of Glass. But this Hypothesis, though
ingenious in it self, yet depending upon the knowledge of diverse of his
peculiar Principles, I cannot intelligibly propose it in few words, and
therefore shall refer you to himself for an account of it: Princip. part 4.
Art. 184.
which I the less scruple to do, because though it be not unworthy of the
wonted Acuteness of the Author, yet he seems himself to doubt, whether it will
reach all Electrical Bodies; and it seems to me, that the reason why he rejects
the way of explicating Attraction by the Emission of the finer parts of the
attrahent (to which Hypothesis, if it be rightly proposed, I confess my self
very inclinable) is grounded upon a mistake, which, though a Philosopher may,
for want of Experience in that Particular, without disparagement fall into, is
nevertheless a mistake. For whereas our excellent Author says, that Electrical
Effluvia, such as are supposed to be emitted by Amber, Wax, etc. cannot be
imagined to proceed from Glass, I grant the Supposition to be plausible, but
cannot allow it to be true. For as solid a body as Glass is, yet if you but
dexterously rub for two or three minutes a couple of pieces of Glass against one
another, you will find that Glass is not only capable of emitting Effluvia,
but such ones as to be odorous, and sometimes to be rankly stinking.

But it is not necessary, that in this Paper, where I pretend not to write
Discourses but Notes, I should consider all that has been, or I think may be,
said for and against each of the abovementioned Hypotheses; since they all
agree in what is sufficient for my present purpose, namely, that Electrical
Attractions are not the Effects of a mere Quality, but of a Substantial
Emanation from the attracting Body: And it is plain, that they all endeavor to
solve the Phenomenon in a Mechanical way, without recurring to Substantial
Forms, and inexplicable Qualities, or so much as taking notice of the
Hypostatical Principles of the Chemists. Wherefore it may suffice in this
place, that I mention-some Phenomenon that in general make it probable, that
Amber, etc. draws such light Bodies, as pieces of Straw, Hair, and the like, by
virtue of some Mechanical Affections either of the attracting or of the
attracted Bodies, or of both the one and the other.

1. The first and most general Observation is, That Electrical Bodies draw not
unless they be warmed; which Rule though I have now and then found to admit of
an Exception, (whereof I elsewhere offer an account,) yet, as to the generality
of common Electricks, it holds well enough to give much countenance to our
Doctrine, which teaches the effects of Electrical Bodies to be performed by
Corporeal Emanations. For it is known, that Heat, by agitating the parts of a
fit Body, solicites it as it were to send forth its Effluvia, as is obvious in
odoriferous Gums and Perfumes, which, being heated, send forth their fragrant
steams, both further and more copiously than otherwise they would.

2. Next, it has been observed, that Amber, etc. warmed by the fire, does not
attract so vigorously, as if it acquire an equal degree of heat by being chafed
or rubbed: So that the modification of motion in the internal parts, and in the
Emanations of the Amber, may, as well as the degree of it, contribute to the
Attraction. And my particular Observations incline me to add, that the effect
may oftentimes be much promoted, by employing both these ways successively; as
I thought I manifestly found when I first warmed the Amber at the fire, and
presently after chafed it a little upon a piece of cloth. For then a very few
rubbings seemed to excite it more than many more would otherwise have done: As
if the heat of the fire had put the parts into a general, but confused,
agitation; to which 'twas easy for the subsequent Attrition (or Reciprocation
of Pressure) to give a convenient modification in a Body whose Texture disposes
it to become vigorously Electrical.

3. Another Observation that is made about these Bodies, is, That they require
Tersion as well as Attrition; and though I doubt whether the Rule be
infallible, yet I deny not but that weaker Electricks require to be as well
wiped as chafed; and even good ones will have their Operation promoted by the
same means. And this is very agreeable to our Doctrine, since Tersion, besides
that it is, as I have sometimes manifestly known it, a kind or degree of
Attrition, frees the Surface from those adherences that might choke the pores
of the Amber, or at least hinder the emanation of the steams to be so free and
copious as otherwise it would be.

4. It Is likewise observed, That whereas the Magnetical Steams are so subtle,
that they penetrate and perform their Operation through all kind of Mediums
hitherto known to us; Electrical Steams are like those of some odoriferous
Bodies, easily checked in their progress, since it is affirmed by Learned
Writers, who say they speak upon particular Trial, (...) of the finest (...) or
(...) is sufficient to hinder (...) Operation of excited Amber upon a Straw or
Feather placed never so little beyond it.

5. It has been also observed, that the effects of Electrical Attraction are
weakened if the air be thick and cloudy; and especially if the Southwind blows:
And that Electricks display their virtue more faintly by night than by day, and
more vigorously in clear weather, and when the winds are Northerly. All which
the Learned Kircherus asserts himself to have found true by experience;
insomuch that those bodies that are but faintly drawn when the weather is
clear, will not, when it is thick and cloudy, be at all moved.

6. We have also observed, That diverse Concretes, that are notably Electrical,
do abound in an effluviable matter (if I may so call it) which is capable of
being manifestly evaporated by heat and rubbing. Thus we see, that most
Resinous Gums, that draw light bodies, do also, being moderately solicited by
heat, (whether this be excited by the fire, or by Attrition or Contusion) emit
steams. And in pieces of Sulphur conveniently shaped, I found upon due
Attrition a Sulphurous stink. And that piece of Amber which I most employ,
being somewhat large and very well polished, will, being rubbed upon a piece of
woollen cloth, emit steams, which the nostrils themselves may perceive; and
they sometimes seem to me not unlike those that I took notice of, when I kept
in my mouth a drop or two of the diluted Tincture (or Solution of the finer
parts) of Amber made with Spirit of Wine, or of Sal Ammoniac.

7. It agrees very well with what has been said of the corporeal Emanations of
Amber, that its attractive power will continue some time after it has been once
excited. For the Attrition having caused an intestine commotion in the parts of
the Concrete, the heat or warmth that is thereby excited ought not to cease, as
soon as ever the rubbing is over, but to continue capable of emitting Effluvia
for some time afterward, which will be longer or shorter according to the
goodness of the Electric, and the degree of the Antecedent commotion: which
joined together may sometimes make the effect considerable, insomuch that in a
warm day, about noon, I did with a certain body, not much, if at all, bigger
than a Pea, but very vigorously attractive, move to and fro a Steel Needle
freely poysed, about three minutes (or the twentieth part of an hour) after I
had left off rubbing the Attrahent.

8. That it may not seem impossible, that Electrical Effluvia should be able to
insinuate themselves into the pores of many other bodies, I shall add, that I
found them subtle enough to attract not only Spirit of Wine, but that fluid
aggregate of Corpuscles we call Smoke. For having well lighted a Wax-taper,
which I preferred to a common Candle to avoid the stink of the snuff, I blew
out the flame; and, when the smoke ascended in a slender stream, held, at a
convenient distance from it, an excited piece of Amber or a chafed Diamond,
which would manifestly make the ascending smoke deviate from its former line,
and turn aside, to beat, as it were, against the Electric, which, if it were
vigorous, would act at a considerable distance, and seemed to smoke for a
pretty while together.

9. That it is not in any peculiar Sympathy between an Electric and a body
whereon it operates, that Electrical Attraction depends, seems the more
probale, because Amber, for instance, does not attract only one determinate
sort of bodies, as the Loadstone does Iron, and those bodies wherein it
abounds; but as far as I have yet tried, it draws indifferently all bodies
whatsoever, being placed within a due distance from it, (as my choicest piece
of Amber draws not only Sand and Mineral Powders, but Filings of Steel and
Copper, and beaten Gold it self) provided they be minute or light enough,
except perhaps it be fire: I employ the word perhaps, because I am not yet so
clear in this point. For having applied a strong Electric at a convenient
distance to small fragments of ignited matter, they were readily enough
attracted, and shined, whilst they were sticking to the body that had drawn
them: But when I looked attentively upon them, I found the shining sparks to
be, as it were, clothed with light ashes, which, in spite of my diligence, had
been already formed about the attracted Corpuscles, upon the expiring of a good
part of the fire; so that it remained somewhat doubtful to me, whether the
ignited Corpuscles, whilst they were totally such, were attracted; or whether
the immediate objects of the Attraction were not the new formed ashes, which
carried up with them those yet unextinguished parts of fire, that chanced to be
lodged in them. But, as for flame, our Countreyman Gilbert delivers as his
Experiment, That an Electric, though duly excited and applied, will not move
the flame of the slenderest Candle. Which some will think not so easy to be
well tried with common Electricks, as Amber, hard Wax, Sulphur, and the like
unctuous Concretes, that very easily take fire: Therefore I chose to make my
Trial with a rough Diamond extraordinarily attractive, which I could, without
injuring it, hold as near as I pleased to the flame of a Candle or Taper; and
though I was not satisfied that it did either attract the flame, as it visibly
did the smoke, or manifestly agitate it; yet granting that Gilbert's Assertion
will constantly hold true, and so, that flame is to be excepted from the
general Rule, yet this exception may well comport with the Hypothesis hitherto
countenanced, since it may be said, as it is, if I mistake not, by Kirkerus,
that the heat of the flame dissipates the Effluvia, by whose means the
Attraction should be performed. To which I shall add, that possibly the
Celerity of the motion of the Flame upwards, may render it very difficult for
the Electrical Emanations to divert the Flame from its Course.

10. We have found by Experiment, That a vigorous and well excited piece of
Amber will draw, not only the powder of Amber, but less minute fragments of
it. And as in many cases one contrary directs to another, so this Trial
suggested a further, which, in case of good success, would probably argue, that
in Electrical Attraction not only Effluvia are emitted by the Electrical body,
but these Effluvia fasten upon the body to be drawn, and that in such a way,
that the intervening viscous strings, which may be supposed to be made up of
those cohering Effluvia, are, when their agitation ceases, contracted or made
to shrink inwards toward both ends, almost as a highly stretched Lute-string
does when it is permitted to retreat into shorter Dimensions. But the Conjecture
it self was much more easy to be made than the Experiment requisite to examine
it. For we found it no easy matter to suspend an Electric, great and vigorous
enough, in such a manner, that it might, whilst suspended, be excited, and be
so nicely poised, that so faint a force as that wherewith it attracts light
bodies should be able to procure a Local Motion to the whole Body it self. But
after some fruitless attempts with other Electricks, I had recourse to the very
vigorous piece of polished Amber, formerly mentioned, and when we had with the
help of a little Wax suspended it by a silken thread, we chafed very well one
of the blunt edges of it upon a kind of large Pin-cushion covered with a course
and black woollen stuff, and then brought the Electric, as soon as we could, to
settle notwithstanding its hanging freely at the bottom of the string. This
course of rubbing on the edge of the Amber we pitched upon for more than one
reason; for if we had chafed the flat side, the Amber could not have approached
the body it had been rubbed on without making a change of place in the whole
Electric, and, which is worse, without making it move (contrary to the nature
of heavy bodies) somewhat upwards; whereas the Amber having, by reason of its
suspension, its parts counterpoised by one another; to make the excited edge
approach to another body, that edge needed not at all ascend, but only be
moved horizontally, to which way of moving the gravity of the Electric (which
the string kept from moving downwards) could be but little or no hinderance.
And agreeably to this we found, that if, as soon as the suspended and well
rubbed Electric was brought to settle freely, we applied to the chafed edge,
but without touching it, the lately mentioned Cushion, which, by reason of its
rough Superficies and porosity, was fit for the Electrical Effluvia to fasten
upon, the edge would manifestly be drawn aside by the Cushion steadily held,
and if this were slowly removed, would follow it a good way; and when this body
no longer detained it, would return to the posture wherein it had settled
before. And this power of approaching the Cushion by virtue of the operation of
its own steams, was so durable in our vigorous piece of Amber, that by once
chafing it, I was able to make it follow the Cushion no less than ten or eleven
times. Whether from such Experiments one may argue, that it is but, as 'twere,
by accident that Amber attracts another body, and not this the Amber; and
whether these ought to make us question, if Electricks may with so much
propriety, as has been hitherto generally supposed, be said to Attract, are
doubts that my Design does not here oblige me to examine.

Some other Phenomenon might be added of the same Tendency with those already
mentioned, (as the advantage that Electrical Bodies usually get by having well
polished or at least smooth Surfaces,) but the Title of this Paper promising
some Experiments about the Production of Electricity, I must not omit to
recite, how I have been sometimes able to produce or destroy this Quality in
certain bodies, by means of alterations, that appeared not to be other than
Mechanical.

EXPER. I.
ANd first, having with a very mild heat slowly evaporated about a fourth part
of good Turpentine, I found, that the remaining body would not, when cold,
continue a Liquor, but hardened into a transparent Gum almost like Amber,
which, as I looked for, proved Electrical.

EXPER. II.
SEcondly, by mixing two such liquid Bodies as Petroleum and strong Spirit of
Nitre in a certain proportion, and then distilling them till there remained a
dry mass, I obtained a brittle substance as black as Jet; and whose Superficies
(where it was contiguous to the Retort) was glossie like that Mineral when
polished; and as I expected I found it also to resemble Jet, in being endowed
with an Electrical Faculty.

EXPER. III.
THirdly, Having burnt Antimony to ashes, and of those ashes, without any
addition, made a transparent Glass, I found, that, when rubbed, as Electrical
Bodies ought to be to excite them, it answered my expectation, by manifesting a
not inconsiderable Electricity. And this is the worthier of notice, because,
that as a Vitrum Antimonii, that is said to be purer than ordinary, may be made
of the Regulus of the same Mineral, in whose preparation you know a great part
of the Antimonial Sulphur is separated and left among the Scoriae; so Glass of
Antimony made without additament, may easily, as experience has informed us, be
in part reduced to a Regulus, (a Body not reckoned amongst Electrical ones.)
And that you may not think, that it is only some peculiar and fixed part of the
Antimony that is capable of Vitrification, let me assure you, that even with
the other part that is wont to fly away, (namely the Flowers) an Antimonial
Glass may without an addition of other Ingredients be made.

EXPER. IV.
FOurthly, The mention of a Vitrified Body brings into my mind, that I more
than once made some Glass of Lead per se, (which I found no very easy work)
that also was not wholly destitute of an Electrical Virtue, though it had but a
very languid one. And it is not here to be overlooked, that this Glass might
easily be brought to afford again malleable Lead, which was never reckoned,
that I know of, among Electrical Bodies.

EXPER. V.
FIfthly, Having taken some Amber, and warily distilled it, not with Sand or
powdered Brick, or some such additament as Chemists are wont to use, for fear
it should boil over or break their Vessels; but by its self, that I might have
an unmixed Caput mortuum; Having made this Distillation, I say, and continued
it till it had afforded a good proportion of phlegm, Spirit, Volatile Salt, and
Oil, the Retort was warily broken, and the remaining matter was taken out in a
lump, which, though it had quite lost its color being burnt quite black, and
though it were grown strangely brittle in comparison of Amber, so that they who
believe the virtue of attracting light Bodies to flow from the substantial form
of Amber, would not expect it in a Body so changed and deprived of its noblest
parts: Yet this Caput mortuum was so far from having lost its Electrical
Faculty, that it seemed to attract more vigorously than Amber it self is wont
to do before it be committed to Distillation.

And from the foregoing Instances afforded us by the Glass of Antimony, we may
learn, that when the form of a Body seems to be destroyed by a fiery Analysis
that dissipates the parts of it, the remaining substance may yet be endowed
with Electricity, as the Caput mortuum of Amber ^ay acquire it; as in the case
of the Glass of Antimony made of the Calx and of the Flowers. And from the
second Example abovementioned, and from common Glass which is Electrical, we
may also learn, that Bodies that are neither of them apart observed to be
endowed with Electricity, may have that Virtue result in the compounded
substance that they constitute, though it be but a factitious Body.

To the foregoing Experiments, whose Success is wont to be uniform enough, I
shall add the Recital of a surprising Phenomenon, which, though not constant,
may help to make it probable, that Electrical Attractions need not be supposed
still to proceed from the substantial, or even from the essential Form of the
Attrahent; but may be the effects of unheeded, and, as it were, fortuitous
Causes. And however, I dare not suppress so strange an Observation, and
therefore shall relate that which I had the luck to make of an odd sort of
Electrical Attraction (as it seemed,) not taken notice of (that I know of) by
any either Naturalist or other Writer, and it is this.

EXPER. VI.
THat false Locks (as they call them) of some Hair, being by curling or
otherwise brought to a certain degree of dryness, or of stiffness, will be
attracted by the flesh of some persons, or seem to apply themselves to it, as
Hair is wont to do to Amber or Jet excited by rubbing. Of this I had a Proof in
such Locks worn by two very Fair Ladies that you know. For at some times I
observed, that they could not keep their Locks from flying to their Cheeks, and
(though neither of them made any use, or had any need of Painting) from
sticking there. When one of these Beauties first showed me this Experiment, I
turned it into a Complemental Raillery, as suspecting there might be some trick
in it, though I after saw the same thing happen to the others Locks too. But as
she is no ordinary Virtuosa, she very ingeniously removed my suspicions, and
(as I requested) gave me leave to satisfy my self further, by desiring her to
hold her warm hand at a convenient distance from one of those Locks taken off
and held in the air. For as soon as she did this, the lower end of the Lock,
which was free, applied it self presently to her hand: which seemed the more
strange, because so great a multitude of Hair would not have been easily
attracted by an ordinary Electrical Body, that had not been considerably large,
or extraordinarily vigorous. This repeated Observation put me upon inquiring
among some other young Ladies, whether they had observed any such like thing,
but I found little satisfaction to my Question, except from one of them eminent
for being ingenious, who told me, that sometimes she had met with these
troublesome Locks; but that all she could tell me of the Circumstances, which I
would have been informed about, was, that they seemed to her to fly most to
her Cheeks when they had been put into a somewhat stiff Curle, and when the
Weather was frosty. *

Some years after the making the Experiments about the Production of
Electricity, having a desire to try, whether in the Attractions made by Amber,
the motions excited by the air had a considerable Interest, or whether the
Effect were not due rather to the Emission and Retraction of Effluvia, which
being of a viscous nature may consist of Particles either branched or hookt, or
otherwise fit for some kind of Cohesion, and capable of being stretched, and of
shrinking again, as Leather Thongs are: To examine this, I say, I thought the
fittest way, if 'twere practicable, would be, to try, whether Amber would draw
a light Body in a Glass whence the air was pumpt out. And though the Trial of
this seemed very difficult to make, and we were somewhat discouraged by our
first attempt, wherein the weight of the ambient air broke our Receiver, which
chanced to prove too weak, when the internal air had been with extraordinary
diligence pumpt out; yet having a vigorous piece of Amber, which I had caused
to be purposely turned and polished for Electrical Experiments, I afterward
repeated the Trial, and found, that in warm Weather it would retain a manifest
power of attracting for several minutes (for it stirred a poised Needle after
above 1/4 of an hour) after we had done rubbing it. Upon which encouragement we
suspended it, being first well chafed, in a Glass Receiver that was not great,
just over a light Body; and making haste with our Air-Pumb to exhaust the
Glass, when the Air was withdrawn, we did by a Contrivance let down the
suspended Amber till it came very near the Straw or Feather, and perceived, as
we expected, that in some Trials, upon the least Contact it would lift it up;
and in others, for we repeated the Experiment, the Amber would raise it without
touching it, that is, would attract it.

You will probably be the less disposed to believe, That Electrical Attractions
must proceed from the Substantial Forms of the Attrahents, or rom the
Predominancy of this or that Chemical Principle in them, if I acquaint you with
some odd Trials wherein the Attraction of light Bodies seemed to depend upon
very small circumstances. And though forbearing at present, to offer you my
thoughts about the cause of these surprising Phenomenon, I propose it only as
a Problem to your self and your curious Friends, yet the main circumstances
seeming to be of a Mechanical Nature, the recital of my Trials will not be
impertinent to the Design and Subject of this Paper.

EXPER. VII.
I Took then a large and vigorous piece of Amber conveniently shaped for my
purpose, and a downy feather, such as grows upon the Bodies, not Wings or Tails
of a somewhat large Chicken: Then having moderately excited the Electrick, I
held the Amber so near it, that the neighboring part of the feather was drawn
by it and stuck fast to it; but the remoter parts continued in their former
posture. This done, I applied my forefinger to these erected downy feathers,
and immediately, as I expected, they left their preceding posture, and applied
themselves to it as if it had been an Electrical Body. And whether I offered to
them my nail, or the pulpy part of my finger, or held my finger toward the
right hand or the left, or directly over, these downy feathers that were near
the little Quill did nimbly, and, for ought appeared, equally turn themselves
toward it, and fasten themselves to it. And to show that the streams that
issued out of so warm a Body as my finger were not necessary to attract (as men
speak) the abovementioned feathers, instead of my finger, I applied to them,
after the same manner, a little Cylindrical Instrument of Silver, to which they
bowed and fastened themselves as they had done to my finger, though the tip of
this Instrument were presented to them in several postures. The like success I
had with the end of an Iron Key, and the like also with a cold piece of
polished black Marble; and sometimes the feathers did so readily and strongly
fasten themselves to these extraneous and unexcited Bodies, that I have been
able (though not easily) to make one of them draw the feather from the Amber it
self.

But it is diligently to be observed, that this unusual attraction happened
only whilst the electrical operation of the excited Amber continued strong
enough to sustain the feathers. For afterward, neither the approach of my
finger, nor that of the other bodies, would make the downy feathers change
their posture. Yet as soon as ever the Amber was by a light affriction excited
again, the feather would be disposed to apply it self again to the
abovementioned Bodies.

And lest there should be any peculiarity in that particular feather, I made
the Trials with others (provided they were not long enough to exceed the sphere
of activity of the Amber) and found the Experiment to answer my expectation.

I made the Experiment also at differing times, and with some months, if not
rather years, of interval, but with the like success.

And lest you should think these Phenomenon proceed from some peculiarity in
the piece of Amber I employed, I shall add, that I found uniformity enough in
the success, when, in the place of Amber, I substituted another Electrick, and
particularly a smooth mass of melted Brimstone.

These are the Phenomenon I thought fit to mention at present of this unusual
way of drawing light bodies, and with this Experiment I should conclude my
Notes about Electricity, but that I think it will not be amiss before I take
leave of this Subject, to give this Advertisement, That the event of Electrical
Experiments is not always so certain as that of many others, being sometimes
much varied by seemingly slight circumstances, and now and then by some that
are altogether overlooked. This Observation may receive credit from some of
the particulars above recited (especially concerning the interest of the
weather, etc. in Electrical Phenomenon.) But now I shall add, that, not only
there may happen some variations in the success of Trials made with Electrical
Bodies, but that it is not so certain as many think, whether some particular
Bodies be or be not Electrical. For the inquisitive Kircherus reckons Crystal
among those Gems to whom Nature has denied the attractive power we are speaking
of; and yet I remember not, that, among all the trials I have made with native
Crystal, I have found any that was destitute of the power he refuses them.
Also a late most learned Writer reciting the Electricks, reckoned up by our
industrious Countryman Gilbert, and increasing their number by some observed by
himself, (to which I shall now add, besides white Saphyrs, and white English
Amethysts, the almost Diaphanous spar of Lead Ore) denies Electricity to a
couple of transparent Gems, the Cornelion and the Emrald. And I do the less
wonder he should do so to the former, because I have my self in vain tried to
make any attraction with a piece of Cornelion so large and fair, that 'twas
kept for a rarity; and yet with diverse other fine Cornelions I have been able
to attract some light bodies very manifestly, if not briskly; and I usually
wear a Cornelian Ring, that is richly enough endowed with Electricity. But as
for Emralds, as I thought it strange that Nature should have denied them a
Quality she has granted to so many other Diaphanous Gems, and even to Crystal,
so I thought the assertion deserved an Examen, upon which I concluded, that at
least it does not universally and constantly hold true. I had indeed seen in a
Ring a Stone of price and great luster, which, though green, I found to be, (as
I guessed it would prove) vigorously enough Electrical. But this Experiment,
though seemingly conclusive, I did not look upon as a fair trial, because the
Stone was not a true Emrald, but, which is rare, a green Saphir. And I learned
by inquiry of the skillful Jeweller that cut it, that it was so far from having
the softness of an Emrald, that he found it harder than blew Saphyrs
themselves, which yet are Gems of great hardness, and by some reputed second to
none, but Diamonds. Without therefore concluding any thing from this
Experiment, save that, if the assertion I was to examine were true, the want of
an Electrical faculty might be thought a Concomitant rather of the peculiar
Texture of the Emrald than of its green color, I proceeded to make trial with
three or four Emralds, whose being true was not doubted, and found them all
somewhat, though not equally, endowed with Electricity, which I found to be yet
more considerable in an Emrald of my own, whose color was so excellent, that
by skilful persons 'twas looked on as a rarity. And though, by this success of
my inquiry, I perceived I could not, as else I might have done, show the
Curious a new way of judging of true and false Emralds, yet the like way may
be, though not always certain, yet oftentimes of use, in the estimating whether
Diamonds be true or counterfeit, especially, if, being set in Rings, the surest
way of trying them cannot conveniently be employed. For whereas Glass, though
it have some Electricity, seems, as far as I have observed, to have but a faint
one, there are often found Diamonds that have a very vigorous one. And I do not
remember I met with any Electrick of the same bulk, that was more vigorous than
a rough Diamond I have, which is the same that I formerly mentioned to have
moved a Needle above three minutes after I had ceased to chafe it. And this
brings into my mind, that it has been observed, that Diamonds draw better
whilst rough, than they do after they are cut and polished; which seeming to
contradict what has been observed by others and by us also, that Amber, for
instance, attracts more vigorously if the surface be made very smooth than
otherwise, it induces me to conjecture, that, if this Observation about
Diamonds be true, as some of my trials have now and then inclined me to think
it, and if it do not in some cases considerably depend upon the loss of the
(Electrical) Substance of the Stone, by its being cut and ground, the Reason
may possibly be, that the great rapidness with which the Wheels that serve to
cut and polish Diamonds must be moved, does excite a great degree of heat,
(which the sense* may easily discover) in the Stone, and by that and the strong
concussion it makes of its parts, may force it to spend its effluviable matter,
if I may so call it, so plentifully, that the Stone may be impoverished, and
perhaps also, on the account of some little change in its Texture, be rendered
less disposed to emit those effluvia that are Instruments of Electrical
Attraction. But as I willingly leave the matter of Fact to further Trial, so I
do the Cause of it, in case it prove true, to farther Inquiry.

FINIS.

