A Character of POPERY AND Arbitrary Government. With a Timely Caveat and
Advice to all the Freeholders, Citizens and Burgesses, how they may prevent the
same, By choosing Good MEMBERS To Serve in this New Parliament.
Hebr. 12.16. Lest there be any profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of
meat sold his Birthright.
Gentlemen,
THE many and eminent dangers occurring to this Kingdom of late years from its
intestine Treacheries and Baseness, have produced that Consternation, and that
Jealousy in the minds of all good people, as render them diffident both of
their Friends and Fortunes, knowing no more which way to dispose of their
Estates, than their Affections: Terras Astrea reliquit, A Kingdom divided
within it self, can never stand: and this was our condition; when those very
men (the Servants of the Public) who ought to conduct and stand by us in the
day of Battle, have been the Persons in the World most likely to betray us, and
lead us up like Sheep to the Slaughter. Those Danbaean Senators, from whose
Wisdom so much was expected; those Pensionary Tribunes o^ the People, from
whose Integrity so much was hoped, have, instead of securing that Peace and
Tranquillity, that Religion and Property which all good men wished for, not only
disturbed the one, but hazarded ruining the other; Quid non mortalia pectora
cogit, auri sacra fames? our Temple of Janus seems to be already unlocked, and
we have every hour reason to expect the French King should fling open the
doors: And then, if two or three hundred Dutch Mariners could present us with
such Horror and Apprehensions, as we all know they did at their arrival in
Chatham River, how much greater now will our distraction be, when an Army of
fifty or sixty thousand Frenchmen is Landed amongst us! When the Father must
forsake his innocent and pretty Orphans, the Husband his disconsolate and
helpless Widow, leaving them to be murdered by the Papists at home, whilst he
himself by his own death is completing the Tragedy abroad! Are you not yet
sensible of your condition? do you not yet perceive your approaching ruin?
Think how the French King shakes his Fasces over us, when at the same time the
Treacherous Papist renders us naked to his correction! Think how entirely your
happiness depends upon our most gracious Sovereign's Life; and then reflect
upon the many Attempts there have been to rob us of that Blessing! Think how
many good sufficient Housekeepers have no sooner committed themselves and
Families to rest, but by that dreadful noise of Fire, Fire, (occasioned by some
Jesuitical malice) have been wakened from their innocent slumbers, just time
enough to behold their All consumed in a few hours, which they with the sweat
of their brows had been so many years acquiring! Think how your Trading's lost,
and at the same time your Charges increased, by keeping up a standing Militia
in your own defense! Think how your ancient Apostolic Religion, (for the which
your Predecessors have not feared to die) is now upbraided and threatened by the
Idolatrous Superstition of an old Heathenish worship, under new Names, viz.
Popery! Think how your Magistrates are murdered before your eyes, for
supporting that Liberty and Property whereby alone you subsist! That Property
which entitles you to something you may call your own, which having enjoyed
your self, you may bequeath to your Posterity after you: That Property which
satisfies your hunger and thirst with wholesome and substantial food, as good
Beef, Mutton, etc. mears unknown to any in an absolute Monarchy, under the
degree of the Nobility: That Property which gives you wherewithal to protect
your Nakedness from the violence of the several Seasons: That Property which
submits your Taxes and Impositions to the will and discretion of your own
Representatives, who in all such cases have power to say, Hitherto shall you
come, and no farther: Also that Liberty which gives the Subject of England a
fair and equal Trial against his King, the Tenant against his Lord, and the
Servant against his Master; which preserves unviolable the Rights of the
meanest Peasant, even in despite of the highest Prerogative; securing both his
Life and Fortune from all but the most just decree of twelve of his own
Neighbors.

When at the same time, your Neighbors in France, Spain, and other Popish
Governments, have no other security either for their Estates or Beings, save
the grace or favor of their Prince; which renders them and their Posterity
perpetual Vassals to the Crown. When in Sicily you may behold many hundred
Acres of rich Soil lie untilled, by reason of the vast Impositions laid upon
them by the King of Spain. When in France upon any Holy Day you may behold
whole Troops of Farmers, begging the charity of Passengers as they travel along
the Road. When their food and subsistence is, some coarse Bran-bread, a few
Onions, Roots, and Water: or if ever they become so wealthy as to purchase a
small Joint of Meat, then presently so much must be allowed to their Prince for
such a prodigal debauch. When their Farmers have scarce Clothes sufficient to
cover their Nakedness, being contented to go in Wooden Shoes, and all things
else proportionable; so that they are in a much worse condition, than those
Poor to whom we pay Collection. When they can call nothing their own, since you
may often see all that they have, to the very Clothes on their backs, taken
from them by an Edict or Proclamation: and this for no other end, than to
sacrifice them to the luxurious desire of Glory, (or rather destruction of
Mankind) so inseparable from absolute Monarchy. There you may see the poor
Tenant ground to Beggary, betwixt the Tax-gatherers on one hand, and the
griping Landlords on the other. There you may behold the Merchants, Tradesmen
and Artificers, paying excessive Gabels or Excise, almost as much as the
Commodity it self is worth, for every Egg or bit of Bread they put in their
mouths. Their very Labors are not their own; their very Stocks are borrowed of
them (which is but a civil way of Robbing) without any hopes of ever being paid
again either Principal or Interest: their Houses exposed to Free Quarter; and
what not? Nothing is more usual than to see a Nobleman, with a whole Train of
Horse and Attendants, ride over the poor peoples Corn when ready to Reap, and
no man dares ask why they do so. Nothing more frequent than to have loaded
Carts, Wagons, etc. compelled to retire and give way to any giddy-headed
Coxcomb on Horseback, that claims but the Title of Chevalier. These and a
thousand more inconvemences are incident to Absolute Monarchy, and Absolute
Monarchy incident to Popery; which is the only Reason that renders this
Religion so amiable in the eyes of Princes.

Now for you Nobility and Gentry, give me leave to tell you, that in this
Matter you are no less concerned than the Commonalty, since the more you enjoy,
the more you have to lose: And I think you have no reason to question, but that
if once the Government of Parliaments be supplanted by the Sword, you would
soon be resolved into the Body of the Commonalty; for I never observed a
Red-coat in Oliver's standing Army, that ever made any difference between a
Lord's House and the meanest Farmer's; neither do I believe, that if there were
no Parliaments, the privilege of Peerage would long signify any thing. And as
for the Gentry, I know no privilege they could pretend to, why their Estates
should be less obnoxious to Taxes, than those of the meanest Commoner; however,
if they should be more favorably dealt with, it is but the Prince's courtesy,
which he may continue or abrogate at his pleasure. Therefore the Concern is
universal, and he who betrays it, is no less a Traitor to himself in
particular, than to his Country in general.

Having thus therefore exposed those misfortunes which ever attend upon Popery
and Arbitrary Government, give me now leave to recommend to your more serious
consideration some remedy, whereby you may at least hope to assuage the grief,
if not to perfect the cure, of what you so much fear: And this can only be
done, by searching to the bottom of our evils, Radicem petere, by retiring from
the event to the cause, wherein, I fear, we may discover some Members of the
late Long Parliament to have acted a considerable part, being themselves the
accessaries, but those that chose them the principals of all our present evils.

As we now have, so heretofore all other Nations had their Ordines Regni, or
States, though distinguished by different Names; such were the Fathers of
Families, and Princes of Tribes among the Jews; the Ephori among the
Lacedaemonians; the Senate among the Romans; the Forum superbiense amongst the
Arragonians; and now the Diet among the Germans; all which in England,
Scotland, France and Spain, are comprehended under the Name of Parliaments. But
however the original institution of these were for one and the same purpose,
viz. Salus Populi, the preservation of the people, as being all Governments of
the mixed or Gothic Model; yet they have most of them lost both their form and
ends, for the which they were at first designed, being subverted and
degenerated, some into Republics, as part of Italy, others into Tyranny, as
France and Spain; where, by the cunning and address of some of their late
Princes, by the servility and folly of the Nobility and Gentry, by the
suppleness, treachery and fawning of the Clergy; as lastly, by the ignorance
and stupidity of the common people, in those Kingdoms where Popery had so long
prevailed, (in first giving up the power they had of raising Taxes, whereby
their consent to the making of Laws was quickly after thought unnecessary) they
are reduced to that pass, that their Parliaments are only to execute that Law
which the King himself makes, to raise that Tax which the King himself levies,
having a propriety in nothing but their own slavery. So that England at present
seems to be the only place, which retains its primitive method of Rule by
Parliaments, who (according to their first institution) serve as Council for
the King, and Advocates for the People; and this when duly executed, without
any fraud or partiality on either side, may be properly called a mixed or
limited Monarchy, wherein the King has his share in the Government, and
(subordinate under him) the people theirs, being undoubtedly (when each move
regularly within their own Sphere) the best Constitution for the good of both,
that is yet extant in any part of the known World, provided it could always
remain as it now stands, wherein we participate of the good, without any of the
ill of all other Governments. But when either some disaffected Minister with
the Prince, or some factious Subject with the people, shall out of their own
private ends occasion a separation or different interest between them, then the
Game being once begun, if the Court Suit turns up Trump, we hazard running into
a Tyranny and Popery; if the peoples, into a Republic and Presbytery; both
which evils proceed from one and the same venomous humor, only differing as
the Plague and the small Pox; where, in Popery as in the Plague the venom
resorts all into one Bubo the Pope; when in Presbytery, like the small Pox, the
malignancy or virulent matter is more dispersed into several little Pustles or
Elders, which therefore renders it the least dangerous of the two.

I cannot but be sensible, that to commend to English men the present
Government under which we live, and that wise institution of the Great Council,
(as it was anciently) or Parliament, (as it is now called) some may think as
needless, as to praise the usefulness and necessity of the Air we breath; since
as we owe our subsistence to the one, so ought we to attribute all our
happiness and well-being to the other; for that it is this Constitution, this
conjunction of King and People, that has in so many Ages preserved us from
being exposed to the arbitrary will of one single person, who though he may
happen sometimes to be wise, temperate and just, yet that is but casual, since
in most private Families there are seen two descents of rash, prodigal, and
voluptuous Heirs, for one that is sober, prudent, and thrifty. It is this that
hinders the Subject from being given up as a prey, not only to the will of the
Prince, but (which is ten times worse) to the unreasonable passions and lusts
of Favorites, chief Ministers and Women, when instead of a Monarch, (who
governs but in Name, as it often happens) be ruled like the ancient French, by
an insolent Major of the Palace, who will be sure to mind the private interest
of himself and family, ten times more than that of the Prince, or the public
Good; or like the Turkish Empire, under a weak Grand-Seigneur, by the
prevailing Concubine of the Seraglio, who is perhaps her self managed by no
higher dictates than that of her chief Eunuch, or she-Slave. I should not speak
a word in a Subject so evident and perspicuous, did I not observe the impotent
Ambition of some men, who care not (provided they may trample upon, and
domineer over their inferiors) how much their superiors do the like over them,
their souls (like most insolent men's) being mean enough to submit to it; or
else through the ignorance and stupidity of some lazy insignificant Gentlemen,
who care not how things go, provided they may enjoy their Hawks, Hounds, or
Bowling-green Meetings; and for Politics, are governed by their more
impertinent Chaplain, or Parson of their Parish. Did we not (I say) daily see
the designs of some idle, covetous and sycophant Clergymen, who like Ivy,
though it cannot grow without the support of the Oak, and yet will destroy it
at last, do in private Parlours, over a glass of Ale, as well as in their
Pulpits, over their Cushions, set up absolute Monarchy to be Jure divino,
declaiming against the unreasonable stubbornness of any Parliament, that will
not give away the peoples money, and submit themselves to be fleeced, as often
as the chief Minister or Favorite thinks fit. They cry up the Prince like an
Angel, so long as he will be their Executioner, to whip, imprison, or hang, all
that are not of their flock; or refuse to give up their souls, once again to be
managed by an implicit faith, whereby in the meanwhile they might not be
troubled with those uneasy tasks of Studying, Preaching and Catechizing, but
may have nothing else to do only to live at ease, keep their Coach and Horses,
with a Curate to do all the drudgery, whilst they are making their addresses
above, by flattering and informing at some great Nobleman's or Bishop's Table;
or else if their parts reach so high, by some sycophant Pamphlet or Sermon
against the Government established by Law, they teach that men have no property
either in their Lives or Goods, but during the Prince's pleasure. It would be a
tedious business, nor is it the design of this Paper, to repeat or answer all
their silly futilous Arguments upon this Subject; it is sufficient to tell
them, it can be easily proved, that the Institution of the Wittena Gemots or
Great Councils, were more ancient than Christianity it self amongst our Saxon
Ancestors, and consequently that the people had their Representatives in those
Assemblies, before the Bishops or Romish Clergy were so much as heard of in
this Island; and that Tithes (their Diana) were granted by King Ethelwolf, (
Anno 885.) in a general Council of Earls, great men, and an infinite number of
other Liege men of the whole Land: Vid. Spelman's Councils, fol. 348. This is
but ^ taste of those many presidents, which have been collected by learned pens
upon this Subject; therefore I shall say no more to these Gentlemen, but hope,
that if ever their so much desired absolute Monarchy get uppermost, they may
every one of them be obliged to maintain (as William the Conqueror made the
Monks of Ely) upon free Quarter, a Trooper or Red-Coat at least, to fight, as
well as a Curate to preach for them, out of their fat Benefices and Pluralities.

Since therefore at present we live under so happy a Government, where being
securely landed our selves, we behold the shipwreck of our Neighbors; and
since notwithstanding the Goodness of our Gracious Sovereign, (who desires
nothing less than the alteration or subversion of that Government, which as
well by his Coronarion Oath, as by his own Lenity and good Nature, he thinks
himself obliged to preserve) there are yet some, who out of their own private
ends, endeavor to remove our ancient Landmarks, introducing Popery and Slavery
amongst us. Since therefore it is so much the Interest of all true English men
to maintain these privileges, conveyed from their Ancestors through so many
generations inviolable, upon which all our happiness, safety and well-being
depends, I think no man in his senses but must confess, that the right way to
maintain the end is to look to the means, and that is, by taking care what
persons they choose for their Representatives, with whom alone they must trust
their Estates, Lives and Liberties. Now this Government by Parliaments, however
according to its primitive institution it was without exception the best of all
others, yet as well in that as in Christianity, there has been found out ways
of corruption, and that is when either they sit too long, too seldom, or are
too frequently dissolved, for that too frequent dissolutions are no less
dangerous to the Subject than too long sessions, nevertheless, it may be in the
Elector's power to avoid the inconvenience of both, and that by making a good
choice. Whereas if the Country people will sell all that they have for a glass
of Sack, or a pot of Ale, choosing him that will give them most drink to day,
though they knew him to be a person who will sell both their Religion, Lives
and Fortunes to morrow, then such frequent dissolutions must of necessity ruin
us; for that the honest Country-Gentleman, designing no other private
advantage, but the true service of his King and Country, has no reason,
neither is he able, once in half a year to spend 4 or 500 pounds, only to
purchase a place full of charge, trouble and danger, without any profit to
himself, only to serve those who put him to such an unkind expense. Who ever
knew a Coachman or Groom buy his place, unless he designed to rob his Master's
Bin? And the Case is the same; for no man can afford to bid so high, as he that
designs to make money again of his place. The Italians have a Proverb, and it is
a true one, That he who buys Justice, must sell it again. Therefore whoever you
put to charge in your Elections, blame him not if he makes money again of what
he bought, for that you did not lend him your Trust, you sold it him, and what
a man has purchased with his own money, he may lawfully sell again. Now that
man who does wilfully give his Voice for a noted Kaave or Fool, does his
endeavor to ruin both his Country, himself, and his posterity, and to be as
bad or worse than the person he chooses; when if the greater part of the House
be wiser or honester, it is no thanks to him; and for his part, if none else
were concerned with him, it were no matter if he were made a slave to morrow,
especially since he cannot but be sensible how many have already declared, that
they would sell their Country for a morsel of Bread; (for I look upon any
consideration, though it be an Office or Pension of 2000 pounds per an. as no
better in balance with that) so as if a considerable number of such men should
get into the House, (and we know that the children of darkness are wiser in
their generation than the children of light) in what a miserable condition were
this poor Nation in at this juncture of time? The old Lord Treasurer Burleigh
(who is thought to have been the greatest Statesman that ever this Nation
bred) did frequently deliver as a Maxim, or rather as a Prophecy, That England
can hardly be undone, unless it be by her own Parliaments, undoubtedly
foreseeing, that all other oppressions as being wrought by violence, might
perhaps by violence be in time shaken off again: Whereas when in a
Parliamentary way we are undone by a Law, that can never be reverst but by a
downright Rebellion, because the parties advantaged by that Law will never
agree to the repealing of it; and a Rebellion is both so dangerous, and of so
black a character, as men either rich or conscientious will hardly engage in
it; therefore no public mischief is so irrecoverable as that which is grown
into a Law, and that cannot be imposed but by Parliament. Wherefore as we
tender our Religion, Liberties and Estates, we must (as much as in us lies)
choose a good House of Commons, since there never was a time wherein we more
needed men of wisdom, courage and integrity, who will not quit their duty
either for want of consideration, for favor, reward, or fear. The first and
second of these Accomplishments I suspect not, for that in such a numerous
Assembly there cannot want some wise bold men, who will be able to instruct and
animate the rest: Therefore I need only speak to their want of integrity, or
corruption from private Interest, which usually proceeds either from fear of
losing what a man now enjoys, or hope of gaining what he yet has not. For
though men may talk high, and keep a great noise with Conscience, and Love to
their Country, yet when you come to understand Mankind aright, (not as it
should be, but as it is and ever will be) then will you find, that private
Interest is the string in the Bear's Nose; it is that which governs the Beast.
Therefore by this observation we may guess, who are fittest to be chose Members
of Parliament, and who are not.

First, Avoid all such as hold any Office of considerable value during
pleasure, they being subject to be over-awed. For although a man wish well to
his Country, and in the betraying thereof knows that at the long run he
mischieves his posterity, if not himself, yet the narrowness of men's minds is
such, as makes them more tenderly apprehend a small present damage, than a far
greater hereafter. Such men must of necessity be under a great temptation and
distraction, when their Consciences and Interest look different ways,
especially having observed some men turned out of their Employs, after voting
for the Interest of their Country. Therefore since these men know beforehand
the Inconveniences, that attend the Trust of a Member of Parliament faithfully
discharged, it is very suspicious and reflecting upon their honesty, if any such
stand; and I think we are bound in charity, nor can we do them a greater
courtesy, than to answer their Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Not to lead them
into temptation.

Secondly, Suspect all those (men of ill repute) who in their Profession or
near Relations have any dependency upon the Court; for they (unworthily)
guessing at the King by themselves, are apt to vote right or wrong, as they
imagine will most please the prerogative Party. And perhaps this fancy helped
the Earl of Danby to that favor, which hindered him from coming upon his Trial
the last Sessions. It is a hard matter for a Courtier to please that Minister
who supports him, and those whom he represents at the same time; and if he
endeavors to oblige both, he becomes such an uncertain Weathercock, as most
commonly he pleases neither. Wherefore the most prudent and honestest of the
Courtiers are observed to decline being Parliament Men, for this very Reason.

Thirdly, Suspect all such as spend much upon you in Entertainments at their
Elections: for that (as I told you before) he who buys any Office, designs to
make Money of it again. And then consider with your selves, what Loosers you
will be, if to laugh and be merry one day, the Person you choose should give
you and your Children occasion to mourn for ever after! Think how justly the
ancient Heathens may upbraid this baseness of us Christians, when, as they
sacrificed many of their Children, nay and oftentimes their own Lives for the
good of their Country, so on the contrary do we sacrifice both our Religion,
Lives, and Country, for the pleasure of one days debauchery.

Fourthly, Shun all such men as are desperately in Debt: for they needing
Protection from paying of their Debts, are so afraid of being dissolved as
makes them submit to any thing, rather than be left to the unmerciful Rage of
their hungry Creditors, who have so long fasted for their Money. For all such
Persons (though some of them may be looked upon as honest fair-condition'd
Gentlemen, and good Housekeepers) are in danger of being tempted to repair the
decays of their own private Fortunes, by the Ruin of the Public. Moreover,
the choosing of such broken Fortunes, undoes Trade, ruins whole Families, and
I have known it drive many men (contrary to their own inclinations) to wish
never to see Parliaments more in England.

Fifthly, Avoid all such as have been known Favorers of Papists, or Relations
or Friends to any of the Lords in the Tower; nay beware of any that shall be
recommended to you by such as are so, (let them be never so Great men in your
Countries) unless you intend to have their Friends to be their Judges. For when
any Person shall out of a private Interest of his own, Elect or give his Voice
for one who is either a Friend or Relition to Him that stands Impeached by all
the Commons of England of High Treason, he does in such a case, as much as in
him lies, endeavor to destroy the Kingdom, by saving the Life of its Enemy;
for that if all other Electors should do the same, he might live to perfect
that Ruin amongst us, which otherwise he must leave unfinished: An Act no less
unnatural, than for a man to sell a Pardon to him that murdered his own Father!
If this last most wise Parliament thought it reasonable (as they did) to Vote
him a Betrayer of the Rights and Privileges of the Commons of England, who
should dare to plead at Bar in behalf of the Earl of Danby; let not those who
choose his nearest Relations and Friends for his Judges, think themselves less
faulty than he that should have pleaded for him after the aforesaid Vote, since
the design of both is the same, viz. the saving of his Life. Therefore if any
do so, may their shame be their confusion.

Sixthly, Above all others choose not any of those who have been justly pointed
at by the name of Pensioners, as being the worst and basest of Traitors; who
making shipwreck of all Honor, Honesty, and good Conscience, sell their Votes
for Offices, present Gratuities, or constant Pensions. The first notorious
brood of these Vermin, were in the Old Long Parliament called by the name of
Self-seekers; but the late Lord Treasurer's Creatures were in greater numbers,
more voracious, and of more universal obedience, or as the French call it, Sans
Riserve. They by our late excellent House of Commons, are for their Secret
Service branded by the open name of Pensioners, which they will hardly ^^aw
off, notwithstanding the Parliaments dissolution has as yet rescued them from
other punishment. However, that the Populace might not split twice upon the
same Rock, my request is, that before they go to any Election, they would
peruse Sir Stephen Fox's Catalogue both of such Persons and Sums as he
recollected in his memory, without the help of his Books, which upon some
weighty Reasons (above us Vulgar peoples searching into) was denied him. Now
this Pensionary Institution of the Treasurer's, was certainly of great
advantage to himself, and most pernicious to England; for if he did really
distribute such sums as is pretended, then he might in a short time make and
repeal what Laws he pleased; or if he did not distribute them, then to his own
enriching he might by an untrue account, divert a vast Treasure into his own
Purse.

Seventhly and Lastly, As for you Citizens, Burgesses, and Freemen of
Corporations and Cities, I shall say but little to you in particular, more than
what has been said already in general; only, whoever is unfit to be chosen
Knight of the Shire, is likewise unfit to be chosen a Burgess. Neither let the
more specious pretenses of any man, (that shall promise to build you a
Town Hall, or relieve your Poor with Money, or out of his adjacent Woods)
deceive you any longer; for if so, wherein are you better than your Horses,
whom you catch every day, and clap a Bridle into their mouths, only by showing
them a few Oats, which they are never like to eat. Even the very Mice are too
wise to be taken by an old Bait, but will first have the Trap new baited,
before they will meddle; and yet I have known a Corporation, which has been taken
twice by one and the same Bait. But however, suppose these men do really
perform what they promise, what compensation is that, if the men you choose
should lay a good swinging Tax upon your Estates, without any real cause; or
should give up the very Power you have of Taxing your selves, or sending your
Representatives in Parliament, (for one bad Parliament may ruin us) what good
would the Money for your Poor do you in such a case, more than when you were
thereby reduced to Beggary, you might perhaps your selves (the Gentry of the
Country having no reason to relieve you) be forced to come in for a small share
of this their Hypocritical Charity: An excellent reward for Folly. Neither say,
Oh, this is but one man, and can have but one Voice; he will do our Town a
great deal of good, and can do us but little hurt if he would. For that, first,
one or two Voices have sometimes carried a Vote of great importance: and
secondly, you know not the bad example this may give to other Neighboring
Corporations, and if all should do so, in what a miserable case would you be?
since the Voices of the Buroughs make two thirds of the House. Lastly, no man
can tell the influence that one cunning talkative men has over the rest of the
House, especially over those that weigh Words, more than Reason and Sense. But
I shall say no more upon this subject, only desire you to remember Esau, who
sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage, and could never afterward recover
it, though he sought it with Tears: Also, when once you had Elected such a
corrupt Parliament, no Prince (but so just and gracious a Prince as ours) would
suffer you to get rid of 'em in have, or at leastwise till they had done your
business for you.

Having thus therefore showed you what persons you ought not to choose, so now
in the next place, the more clearly to perceive what kind of persons our
present necessity requires to be chosen, consider for what ends they serve; and
they are two: One is, the preservation of our Religion from Popery; The other
is, to preserve inviolable our Liberty and Property, according to the known
Laws of the Land, without any introduction of that absolute and arbitrary rule
in other Countries, which we are neither to imitate or regard.

First, Therefore as near as we can guess, we ought to elect good Protestants
toward God, and just toward Men. But forasmuch as in this corrupt Age wherein
we live, men are not so spiritual as they ought to be, it is not amiss to seek
for those, whose spiritual interest is seconded by a temporal one. Wherefore
the surest Champions for our Religion against the Papacy, are our Abby-landed
men; for notwithstanding the registered Dispensation to Harry the Eighth from
the Pope, for the seizing of those Monasteries and Lands, yet of late they
pretend that the Pope had not power to alien them from the Church; wherefore
the present possessors can never trust or rely upon any new Promises or actual
Grants thereof, especially from him whose everlasting and declared Maxim it is,
never to keep Faith with Heretics. Undoubtedly to make easy his ascent into
the saddle, he will proffer many fair Assurances and Grants; but if these
Abby-landed men, be not the most silly of all others, they will never believe
him; for when he is once firmly settled, then will he with his Canon Law
distinctions, like Fire under Quicksilver, evaporate away all his promises,
and violently resume the Lands, glorifying his own Bounty, if he require not
the mean profits.

Secondly, For our Liberty and Property, men of fair Repute in their Country,
are of all others most likely to prove the stoutest Patriots, especially if in
Possession or Reversion they are men of good Estates; for their Concern is the
greater: And we find by experience of such as travel into foreign Parts, where
themselves have no Estates, Facile habetur paupert as fine damn; and
accordingly when War and Confusion begins to arise, they apprehend it not with
the hundredth part of that anxiety, as they would do if the like should arise
at home, where their whole livelihood is at stake.

Thirdly, and lastly, I conceive it will not be amiss, if for the most part you
choose the same Members again that served you faithfully the last time; since
in so doing, you will both take off that fear of Dissolutions, which is of such
fatal consequence in a Parliament, as also oblige them to serve you more
cheerfully ever after, when you have so highly honored them twice. Which being
all the Advice I can give you in this Matter, I shall conclude with desiring
you not to be weary of well-doing, neither to be alarmed or troubled at
frequent Prorogations or Dissolutions; since if you persist in the same steady
course you have already begun, it will but fall more heavily upon the heads of
those, that are the contrivers of these Misunderstandings between his Gracious
Majesty, and his most faithful Subjects, for whose happy union, as well in
opinion as affection, none can pray more hearly, than

Your most humble Servant, and Fellow-Subject, PHILOLAUS.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat I have here written, I do declare before Almighty God, proceeded merely
from the earnest zeal and desire I had of serving my King and Country; hoping
by this timely caution to the Vulgar, to procure such Senators, as might add to
the Luster of our best of Kings and Governments, such as might keep the
Balance even, and prevent our running either into Tyranny and Popery on the
one hand, or into a Republic and Fanaticism on the other: Such as might divert
that Storm which threatens us, giving us that Peace and that Tranquillity, which
all men, who have either Estates or Families (like my self) are bound to pray
for; such as might render to Caesar the things that are Cesar's, to God the
things that are God's, and to the People the things that are the Peoples. For
as I am governed by no private Faction or Interest, but purely by the dictates
of my own Conscience and Reason; so there is no Government but our English
Monarchy, nor no Religion but what is prescribed in the Church of England, that
I hope ever to see prevail amongst us. We have an old Proverb, and it is true as
to our condition, Over Shoes, over Boots; so that now we have proceeded thus
far in opposing Popery, we cannot be safe but in doing more; for that 'twill be
too late to repent, when a never-forgiving Popish Successor shall come amongst
us, with that Text in his mouth of St. Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which
would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before
me. -- Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi -- Wherefore to prevent all
this ruin and misery, we cannot too often and too sincerely pray for the Life,
Happiness, and Prosperity of our most Gracious Prince and Sovereign, Charles
the Second, whom God preserve both in this World, and the next.

FINIS.

