THE IVDGEMENT OF MARTIN BUCER, CONCERNING DIVORCE.

Writt'n to Edward the sixth, in his second Book of the Kingdom of Christ.

And now Englisht.

Wherein a late Book restoring the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, is here
confirmed and justified by the authority of MARTIN BUCER.

To the Parliament of England.

JOHN 3. 10. Art thou a teacher of Israel, and know not these things?

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1644.

Testimonies of the high approbation which learned men have given of Martin
Bucer.
Simon Grynaeus, 1533.
AMong all the Germans, I give the palm to Bucer for excellence in the
Scriptures, Melanchton in human learning is wondrous fluent; but greater
knowledge in the Scripture I attribute to Bucer, and speak it unfainedly.

John Calvin, 1539.
Martin Bucer a most faithful Doctor of the Church of Christ, besides his rare
learning and copious knowledge of many things, besides his cleernes of wit,
much reading, and other many and various virtues, wherein he is almost by none
now living excelled, has few equals, and excells most, has this praise
peculiar to himself, that none in this age ha^h used exacter diligence in the
exposition of Scripture.

And a little beneath.
Bucer is more large then to be read by over-busied men, and too high to be
easily understood by unattentive men, and of a low capacity.

Sir John Cheek, Tutor to K. Edw. the sixth. 1551.
We have lost our Master, then whom the world scarce held a greater, whether
we consider his knowledge of true Religion, or his integrity and innocence of
life, or his incessant study of holy things, or his matchless labor of
promoting piety, or his authority and amplitude of teaching, or whatever else
was praiseworthy and glorious in him. Script. Anglicana, page 864.

John Sturmius of Strasborrow.
No man can be ignorant what a great and constant opinion and estimation of
Bucer there is in Italy, France, and England. Whence the saying of Quintilian
has often come to my mind, that he has well profited in Eloquence whom Cicero
pleases. The same ^ay I of Bucer, that he has made no small progress in
Divinity, whom Bucer pleases; for in his Volumes, which he wrote very many,
there is the plain impression to be discerned of many great virtues, of
diligence, of charity, of truth, of acutenes, of judgment, of learning. Wherein
he has a certain prop^r kind of writing, whereby he does not only teach the
Reader, but affects him with the sweetness of his sentences, and with the
manner of his arguing, which is so teaching, and so logical, that it may be
perceived how learnedly he separates probable reasons from necessary, how
forcibly he confirms what he has to prove, how suttly he refutes, not with
sharpnes, but with truth.

Theodore Beza on the portraiture of M. Bucer.
This is that countnance of Bucer, the mirror of mildnes, tempered with
gravitie; to whom the C^tie of Strasburgh owes the reformation of her Church.
Whose singular learning, and eminent zeal, joined with excellent wisdom, both
his learned books, and public disputations in the general diets of the Empire,
shall witness to all ages. Him the German persecution drove into England; where
honorably entertained by Edward the sixth, he was for two years chief professor
of Divinity in Cambridge, with greatest frequency and applause of all learned
and pious men until his death. 1551. Bezae Icones.

Mr Fox book of Martyrs, Vol. 3. p. 763.
Bucer what by writing, but chiefly by reading and preaching openly, wherein
being painful in the Word of GOD, he never spared himself, nor regarded his
health, brought all men into such an admiration of him, that neither his
friends could sufficiently praise him, nor his enemies in any point find fault
with his singular life, and sincere doctrine. A most certain tok'n whereof may
be his sumptuous burial at Cambridge, solemniz d with so great an assistance of
all the Universitie, that it was not possible to devise more to the setting out
and amplifying of the same.

Dr Pern the Popish Vicechancelour of Cambridge his adversary.
Cardinal Pool about the fourth year of Queen Mary, intending to reduce the
Universitie of Cambridge to Popery again, thought no way so effectual, as to
cause the bones of Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius, which had been four years
in the grave, to be taken up and burnt openly with their Books, as knowing that
those two worthy men had bin of greatest moment to the reformation of that
place from Popery, and had left such powerful seeds of their doctrine behind
them, as would never die, unless the men themselves were diggd up, and openly
condemned for heretics by the Universitie it self. This was put in execution,
and Doctor Pern Vicechancelor appointed to preach against Bucer. Who among
other things laid to his charge the opinions which he held of the marriage of
Priests, of divorcement, and of usury. But immediately after his Sermon, or
somewhat before, as the Book of Martyrs sor a truth relates, Vol. 3. p. 770. The
said Doctor Pern smiting himself on the breast, and in manner weeping, wished
with all his heart, that God would grant his soul might then presently depart,
and remain with Bucers; for he knew his life was such, that if any man's soul
were worthy of heaven, he thought Bucers in special, to be most worthy, Histor.
de Combust. Buceri, and Fagii.

Acworth the University Orator.
Soon after, that Queen Elizabeth came to the crown, this condemnation of Bucer
and Fagius by the Cardinal and his Doctors, was solemnly repealed by the
Universitie; and the memory of those two famous men celebrated in an Oration by
Acworth the Universitie Orator, which is yet extant in the Book of Mattyrs,
Vol. 3. p. 773. and in Latin. Scripta Anglic. p. 936.

Nicolas Carre, a learned man, Walter Haddon Master of the Requests to Queen
Elizabeth, Matthew Parker, afterward Primate of England, with other eminent
men, in their funeral Orations and Sermons express abundantly how great a man
Martin Bucer was, what an incredible loss England sustained in his death; and
that with him died the hope of a perfet reformation for that age. Ibid.

Iacobus Verheiden of Grave, in his Elogies of famous Divines.
Though the name of Martin Luther be famous, yet thou Martin Bucer, for piety,
learning, labor, care, vigilance, and writing, art not to be held inferior to
Luther. Bucer was a singular instrument of God, so was Luther. By the death of
this most learned and most faithful man, the Church of Christ sustaind a heavy
loss; as Calvin witnesteth; and they who are studious of Calvin, are not
ignorant how much he ascribes to Bucer; for thus he writes in a Letter to
Viretus: What a manifold loss be^ell the Church of God in the death o^ Bucer,
as often as I call to mind, I feel my heart almost rent asunder.

Peter Martyr Epist. to Conradus Hubertus.
He is dead, who has overcome in many battles of the Lord. God lent us for a
time this our Father, and our Teacher, never enough praised. Death has divided
me from a most unanimous friend, one truly according to mine own heart. My
mind is overprest with grief, in so much that I have not power to write more.
I bid thee in Christ farewell, and wish thou may be able to bear the loss
of Bucer, better then I can bear it.

Testimonies given by learned men to Paulus Fagius, who held the same opinion
with Martin Bucer concerning Divorce.
Paulus Fagius born in the Palatinate, became most Bezae Icones.
skillful in the Hebrew tongue. Being called to the Ministry at Isna, he
published many ancient and profitable Hebrew Books, being aided in the expenses
by a Senator of that City, as Origin sometime was by a certain rich man called
Ambrosius. At length invited to Strasburgh, he there famously discharged the
office of a Teacher; until the same persecution drove him and Bucer into
England, where he was preferred to a Professors place in Cambridge, and soon
after died.

Melchior Adamus writes his life among the famous German Divines.

Sleidan and Thuanus mention him with honor in their History. And Verheiden in
his Elogies.

To the PARLIAMENT.
THE Book which among other great and high points of reformation, contains as a
principal part thereof, this treatise here presented, Supreme Court of
Parliament, was by the famous Author Martin Bucer, dedicated to Edward the sixth:
whose incomparable youth doubtless bad brought forth to the Church of England
such a glorious manbood, bad his life reached it, as would have left in the
affairs of religion, nothing without an excellent pattern for us now to follow.
But since the secret purpose of divine appointment has reserved no less
perhaps then the just half of such a sacred work to be accomplished in this age,
and principally, as we trust, by your succesful wisdom and authority, religious
Lords and Commons, what wonder if I seek no other, to whose exactest judgment,
and revieu I may commend these last and worthiest labors of this renowned
teacher: whom living, all the pious nobility of those reforming times, your
truest and best imitated ancestors, reverenc't and admired. Nor was be wanting
to a recompense as great as was himself; when both at many times before, and
especially among his last sighs and prayers testifying his dear and fatherly
affection to the Church and Realm of England, he sincerely wished in the hearing
of many devout men, that what he had in this his last book * Nicol. de obit Bri.
written to King Edward concerning discipline, might have place in this Kingdom.
His hope was then that no calamity, no confusion, or deformity would happen to
the Commonwealth; but otherwise he feared, lest in the midst of all this
ardency to know God, yet by the neglect of discipline, our good endeavors
would not succeed. These remarkable words of so godly and so eminent a man at
his death, as they are related by a sufficient and well known witness, who heard
them and inserted by Thuanus into his grave and serious history, so ought they
to be chiesly considered by that nation for whose sake they were uttered, and
more especially by that general Counsel which represents the body of that
nation. If therefore the book, or this part thereof, for necessary causes, be now
revived and recommended to the use of this undisciplined age, it hence appears
that these reasons have not erred in the choyee of a fit patronage, for a
discourse of such importance. But why the whole tractat is not beer brought
entire, but this matter of divorcement selected in particular, to prevent the
full speed of some mis-interpreter, I hasten to disclose. First, it will be
soon manifest to them who know what wise men should know, that the constitution
and reformation of a commonwealth, if Ezra and Nehemiah did not mis-reform,
is, like a building, to begin ord^rly from the foundation thereof, which is
marriage and the family, to set right first what ever is amiss therein. How can
there else grow up a race of warrantable men, while the house and home that
breeds them, is troubled and disquieted under a bondage not of Gods
constraining with a natureles conste^int (if his most righte^us judgments may
be our rule) but laid upon us impe^iously in the worst and weakest ages of
knowledge, by a canonical tyranny of stupid and malicious Monks: who having
rashly vowed themselves to a single life, which they could not undergo,
invented new fetters to throw on matrimony, that the world thereby waxing more
dissolute, they also in a general loosnes might sin with more favor. Next,
there being yet among many, such a strange iniquity and perverseness against all
necessary divorce, while they will needs expound the words of our Savior not
duly by comparing other places, as they must do in the resolving of a hundred
other Scriptures, but by persisting deafely in the abrupt and Papistical way^
of a literal apprehension against the direct analogy of sense, reason, law and
Gospel, it therefore may well seem more then time to apply the sound and holy
persuasions of this Apostolic man, to that part in us, which is not yet fully
dispossessed of an error as absurd, as most that we deplove in our blindest
adversaries; and to let his authority and unanswerable reasons be vulgarly
known, that either his name, or the force of his doctrine may work a wholesome
effect. Lastly, I find it clear to be the authors intention that this point of
divorcement should be ^eld and received as a most necessary and prime part of
discipline in every Christian government. And therefore having reduced his model
of reformation to 14. heads, he bestows almost as much time about this one
point of divorce, as about all the rest; which also was the judgment of his
heirs and learned friends in Germany, best acquainted with his meaning; who
first publishing this his book by Oporinus at Basil (a City for learning and
constancy in the the true faith, honorable among the first) added a special
note in the title, that there the reader should find the doctrine of Divorce
handled so solidly, and so fully, as scars the like in any Writer of that age:
and with this particular commendation they doubted not to dedicate the book, as
a most profitable and exquisit discourse, to Christian the 3d, a worthy and
pious King of Denmark, as the author himself had done before to our Edward the
sixth. Yet did not Bucer in that volume only declare what his constant opinion
was herein, but also in his comment upon Matthew, written at Strasburgh diverse
years before, he treats distinctly and copiously the same argument in three
several places; touches it also upon the 7. to the Romans, and promises the
same solution more largely upon the 1. to the Corintbians, omitting no occasion
to weed out this last and deepest mischief of the Canon law sown into the
opinions of modern men against the laws and practice both of Gods chosen
people, and the best primitive times. Wheri^ his faithfulness and powerful
evidence prevailed so far with all the Church of Strasburgh, that they
published this doctrine of divorce, as an article of their confession, after
they had taught so eight and twenty years, through all those times, when that
City flourisht, and excelled most, both in religion, lerning, and good
government, under those first restorers of the Gospel there, Zellius, Hedio,
Capito, Fagius, and those who incomparably then governed the Commonwealth,
Farrerus and Sturmius. If therefore God in the former age found out a servant,
and by whom he had converted and reformed many a city, by him thought good to
restore the most needful doctrine of divorce from rigorous and harmfull
mistakes on the right hand, it can be no strange thing if in this age be stir
up by whatsoever means whom it pleases him, to take in hand and maintain the
same assertion. Certainly if it be in man's discerning to sever providence from
chance, I could allege many instances, wherein there would appear cause to
esteem of me no other then a passive instrument under some power and counsel
higher and better then can be human, working to a general good in the whole
course of this matter. For that I ow no light, or leading received from anyman
in the discovery of this truth, what time I first undertook it in the doctrine
and discipline of divorce, and had only the infallible grounds of Scripture to
be my guide, he who tries the inmost heart, and saw with what severe industry
and examination of my self, I set down ever^ period, will be my witness, When I
had almost finished the first edition, I chanced to read in the notes of H^go
Grotius upon the 5. o^ Matthew. whom I strait understood inclining to reasonable
terms in this controversy: and something be whispered rather then disputed
about the law of charity, and the true end of wedlock, Glad therefore of such an
able assistant, how ever at much distance, I resolved at length to put off into
this wild and calumnious world. For God, it seems, intended to prove me,
whether I durst alone take up a rightful cause against a world of disesteem,
and found I durst. My name I did not publish, as not willing it should sway the
reader either for me or against me. But when I was told, that the style, which
what it ailes to be so soon distinguishable, I cannot tell, was known by most
men, and that some of the Clergy began to inveigh and exclaim on what I was
credibly informed they had not read, I took it then for my proper season both
to show them a name that could easily contemn such as indiscreet kind of
censure, and to reinforce the question with a more accurat diligence: that if
any of them would be so good as to leav railing, and to let us hear so much of
his lerning and Christian wisdom, as will be strictly demanded of him in his
answering to this probl^me, care was had he should not spend his prep^rations
against (...) pamphlet. By this time I had l^rnt that Paulus Fagius, one of the
chief Divines in Germany, sent for by Frederic the Pa^tine, to reform his
dominion; and after that invited hither in King Edwards days to be Professor
of Divinity in Cambridge, was of the same opinion touching divorce, which these
men so lavishly traduc't in me. What I found, I inserted where fittest place
was, thinking sure they would respect so g^ave an author, at lest to the
moderating of their odious inferences. And having now perfected a second
edition, I referred the judging thereof to your high and impartial sentence,
honored Lords and Commons. For I was confident, if any thing generous, any
thing noble, and above the multitude, were left yet in the spirit of England,
it could be no where sooner found, and no where sooner understood, then in that
house of justice and true liberty where ye sit in c^unsel. Nor does the event
hitherto, for some reasons which I shall not ^eer deliver, fail me of what I
conceived so highly. Nevertheless being far otherwise dealt with by some, of
whose profession and supposed knowledge I had better hope, and esteemed the
deviser of a new and pernicious paradox, I felt no difference within me from
that peace and firmnes of mind, which is of nearest kin to patience and
contentment: both for that I knew I had divulged a truth linkt inseparably with
the most fundamental rules of Christianity, to stand or fall together, and was
not un-inform'd that diverse learned and judicious men testified their d^ily
approbation of the book. Yet at length it has pleased God, who had already
given me satisfaction in my self, to afford me now a means whereby I may be
fully justified also in the eyes of men. When the book had bin now the second
time set forth wel-nigh three months, as I best remember, I then first came to
hear that Martin Bucer had writt'n much concerning divorce: whom earnestly
turning over, I soon p^rceav'd, but not without amazement, in the same opinion,
confirmed with the same reasons which in that published book without the help or
imitation of any precedent Writer, I had labored out, and laid together. Not
but that there is some difference in the handling, in the order, and the number
of arguments, but still agreeing in the same conclusion. So as I may justly
gra^ulat mine own mind, with due acknowledgement of assistance from above,
which led me, not as a lerner, but as a collateral teacher, to a sympathy of
judgment with no less am in then Martin Bucer. And he, if our things here
below arrive him where he is, does not rep^nt him to see that point of
knowledge which he first, and with an unche^t freedom preached to those more
knowing times of England, now found so necessary, though what he admonisht were
lost out of our memory, yet that God does now again create the same doctrine in
another un^ table, and raises it up immediately out of his pure oracle to the
convincement of (...) p^rvers age, eager in the reformation of names and
ceremonies, but i^ real^ies as traditional and as ignorant as their
forefathers. I would ask now the foremost of my profound accusers, whether they
dare affirm that to be lic^ntious, new and dangerous, which Martin Bucer so
often, and so urgently avoucht to be most lawful, most necessary, and most
Christian, without the lest blemish to his good name, among all the worthy men
of that age, and since, who testify so highly of him? If they dare, they must
then set up an arrogance of their own against all those Churches and Saints who
honored him without this exception: If they dare not, how can they now make
that licentious doctrine in another, which was never blamed, or confuted in
Bucer, or in Fagius? The truth is, there will be due to them for this their
unadvised rashness, the best donative that can be given them, I mean, a round
reproof; now that where they thought to be most Magisterial, they have
displayed their own want, both of reading, and of judgment. First, to be so
unacquainted in the writings of Bucer, which are so obvious and so useful in
their own faculty; next, to be so caught in a prejudicating weakness, as to
condemn that for lewd, which (whether they knew or not) these elect servants of
Christ commended for lawful; and for new, that which was taught by these
almost the first and greatest authors of reformation, who were never taxt for
so teaching; and dedicated without scruple to a royal pair of the first
reforming Kings in Christendom, and confessed in the public confession of a most
orthodoxall Church and state in Germany. This is also another fault which I
must tell them; that they have stood now almost this whole year clamouring a
far off, while the book has bin twice printed, twice bought up, and never
once vouchs^ a friendly conference with the author, who would be glad and
thankful to be sh^wn an error, either by private dispute, or public answer, and
could retract, as well as wise men before him; might also be worth the gaining,
as one who heertofore, has done good service to the Church by their own
confession. Or if he be obstinat, their confutation would have rendered him
without excuse, and reclam'd others of no mean parts who incline to his
opinion. But now their work is more then doubled; and how they will hold up
their heads against the sudden aspect of these two great and reverend S^ints
whom they have desam'd, how they will make good the censuring of that for a
novelty of license, which Bucer constantly taught to be a pure and holy law of
Christ's kingdom, let them advise. For against these my adversaries, who before
the examining of a propounded truth in a fit time of reformation, have had the
conscience to oppose ^ght (...) but their blind reproaches and surmises, that a
single innocence might not be oppr^st and overborn by a c^ow of mouths for the
restoring of a law and doctrine falsely and unlernedly reputed new and
scandalous, God, that I may ever magnify and record this his goodness, has
unexpectedly raised up as it were from the dead, more then one famous light of
the first reformation to bear witne^ with me, and to d^e me honor in that very
thing, wherein these men thought to have blotted me: And has given them the
proof of a capacity which they despised, running equal, and authentic with some
of their chiefest masters unthought of, and in a point of sagest moment.
However, if we know at all, when to ascribe the occurrences of this life to the
work of a special providence, as nothing is more usual in the talk of good men,
what can be more like to a special providence of God, then in the first
reformation of England, that this question of divorce, as a main thing to be
restored to just freedom, was writt'n, and seriously c^mmended to Edward the
sixth, by a man called from another Country to be the instructor of our nation,
and now in this present renewing of the Church and Commonwealth, which we pray
may be more lasting, that the same question should be again treated and
presented to this Parliament, by one enabled to use the same reasons without the
lest sight or knowledge of what was done before. It were no trespass, Lords and
Commons, though something of less note were attributed to the ordering of a
heavenly power; this question therefore of such prime concernment both to
Christian and civil welfare, in such an extraordinary manner, not recovered,
but plainly twice born to these latter ages, as from a divine hand I tender to
your acceptance, and most considerate thoughts. Think not that God raised up in
vain a man of greatest a^ority in the Church to tell a trivial and licentious
tale in the ears of that good Prince, and to bequeath it as his last will and
testament, nay rather as the testamont and royal law of Christ to this Nation,
or that it should of it self after so many years, as it were in a new field
where it was never sow'n, grow up again as a vicious plant in the mind of
another, who had spoke honestest things to the Nation; though he knew not that
what his youth then reasoned without a pattern, had bin heard already, and well
allowed from the gravity and worth of Martin Bucer: till meeting with the envy
of men ignorant in their own undertak'n calling, God directed him to the
forgott'n Writings of this faithful Evangelist, to be his defense and warrant
against the gross imputation of broaching license. Ye are now in the glorious
way to high virtue, and matchless deeds, trusted with a most inestimable trust,
the asserting of our just liberties. Ye have a nation that expects now, and
from mighty sufferings aspires to be the example of all Christendom to a
perfetest reforming. Dare to be as great, as ample, and as eminent in the fair
progress of your noble designs, as the full and goodly stature of truth and
excellence it self: as unlimited by petty presidents and copies, as your
unquestionable calling from heaven giv^ ye power to be. What are all our public
immunities and privileges worth, and how shall it be judged that we sight for
them with minds worthy to enjoy them, if we suffer our selves in the mean while
not to understand the most important freedom that God and Nature has givn us
in the family; which no wise Nation ever wanted, till the Popery and
superstition of some former ages attempted to remove and alter divine and most
prudent Laws for human and most imprudent Canons; whereby good men in the best
portion of t^ir lives, and in that ordinance of God which entitles them from
the beginning to most just and requisite contentments, are compelled to civil
indignities, which by the law of Moses bad men were not compelled to. Be not
bound about, and straitn'd in the spacious wisdom of your free Spirits, by the
scanty and unadequat and inconsistent principles of such as condemn others for
adhering to traditions, and are themselves the prostrate worshippers of Custom;
and of such a tradition as they can deduce from no antiquity, but from the
rud^st, and thick^st barbarism of Antichristian times. But why do I anticipate
the more acceptable, and prevailing voice of learned Bucer himself, the pastor
of Nations? And O that I could set him living before ye in that doctoral chair,
where once the lernedest of England thought it no disparagement to sit at his
feet* He would be such a pilot, and such a father to ye, as ye would soon find
the difference of his hand and skill upon the helm of reformation. Nor do I
forget that faithful associate of his labors, Paulus Fagius; for these their
great names and merits, how precious so ever, God has now joined with me
necessarily, in the good or evil report of this doctrine which I leav with you.
It was writt'n to a religious King of this land; writt'n earnestly, as a main
matter where in this kingdom needed a reform, if it purposed to be the kingdom
of Christ: Writt'n by him who if any since the d^ies of Luther, merits to be
counted the Apostle of our Church; whose unw^aried pains and watching for our
sakes, as they spent him quickly here among us, so did they, during the
shortness of his life, incredibly promote the Gospel throughout this Realm. The
authority, the lerning, the godliness of this man consulted with, is able to
out-ballance all that the lightness of a vulgar opposition can being to
counterpoise. I leav him also as my complete surety and testimonial, if Truth
be not the best witness to it self, that what I formerly presented to your
reading on this subject, was good, and just, and honest, not licentious. Not
that I have now more confidence by the addition of these great Authors to my
party; for what I wrote was not my opinion, but my knowledge; evn then when I
could trace no footstep in the way I went: nor that I think to win upon your
apprehensions with numbers and with names, rather then wi^h reasons, yet
certainly the worst of my d^tracters will not except against so good a bail of
my integrity and judgment, as now appears for me. They must else put in the
fame of Bucer and of Fagins, as my accomplices and confederats into the same
endightment; they must dig up the good name of these prime worthies (if their
names could be ever buried) they must dig them up and brand them as the Papists
did their bodies; and those their pure unblamable spirits, which live not only in
heaven, but in their writings, they must attaint with new attaintures which no
Protestant ever before aspers't them with. Or if perhaps we may obtain to get
our appeachment new drawn a Writ of Error, not of Libertinism, that those two
principal leaders of reformation may not come now to be su'd in a bill of
license, to the scandal of, our Church, the brief result will be, that for the
error, if their own works be not thought sufficient to defend them, there livs
yet who will be ready, in a fair and christianly discussive way, to debate and
sift this matter to the utmost ounce of lerning and religion, in him that shall
lay it as an error, either upon Martin Bueer, or any other of his opinion. If
this be not anough to qualify my traducers, and that they think it more for
the wisdom of their virulence, not to recant the injuries they have bespoke me,
I shall not for much more disturbance then they can bring me, intermitt the
prosecution of those thoughts which may render me best serviceable, either to
this age, or if it so happ'n, to posterity; following the fair path which your
illustrious exploits, Honored Lords and Commons, against the breast of tyrany
have opened; and depending so on your happy successes in the hopes that I have
conceived either of my self, or of the Nation, as must needs conclude me one
who most affectionately wishes and awaits the prosperous issue of your noble
and valorous counsels.

JOHN MILTON.

THE JUDGMENT OF MARTIN BUCER TOUCHING DIVORCE.
Taken out of the second Book entitled Of the kingdom of Christ writt'n by
Martin Bucer to Edward the 6th K. of England.
CHAPTER XV.
The 7th Law of the sanctifying and ordering of marriage.

BEsides these things, Christ our King, and his Churches That the ^dering of
^riage belo^ to the civi^ power.
require from your sacred Majesty, that you would take upon you the just care
of marriages. For it is unspeakable, how many good consciences are heerby
entangl'd, af^licted, and in danger, because there are no just laws, no speedy
way constituted, according to Gods Word, touching this holy society and
fountain of mankind. For seeing matrimony is a civil thing, men, that they may
rightly contract, inviolably keep, and not without extreme necessity dissolv
marriage, are not only to be taught by the doctrine and discipline of the
Church, but also are to be acquitted, aided, and compelled by laws and
judicature of the Commonwealth. Which thing pious Emperors acknowledgeing,
and therein framing themselves to the law of Nations, gave laws both of
contracting and preserving, and also where an unhappy need required, of
divorcing marriages. As may be seen in the Code of Justinian the 5 Book, from
the beginning through 24 titles. And in the Authentic of Justinian the 22, and
some others.

But the Antichrists of Rome, to get the imperial power into their The Popes
have invaded by fraud and force the ordering of ma^iage.
own hands, first by fraud^lent persuasion, afterward by force drew to
themselves the whole authority of determining and judging as well in mat^imonial
causes, as in most other matters. Therefore it has bin long believed, that the
care and government thereof does not belong to the civil Magistrate. Yet where
the Gospel of Christ is received, the laws of Antichrist should be rejected. If
therefore Kings and Governors take not this care, by the power of law and
justice to provide that marriages be piously contracted, religiously kept, and
lawfully dissolved, if need require, who sees not what confusion and trouble is
brought upon this holy society; and what a rack is prepared, evn for many of
the best consciences, while they have no certain laws to follow, no justice to
implore, if any intolerable thing happen. And how much it concerns the honor
and safety of the Commonwealth, that marriages, according to the will of
Christ, be made, maintained, and not without just cause dissolved, who
understands not? for unless that first and holi^st society of man and woman be
purely constituted, that household discipline may be upheld by them according to
Gods law, how can we expect a race of good men. Let your Majesty therefore know
that this is your duty, and in the first place, to reassume to your self the
just ordering of matrimony, and by firm laws to establish and defend the
religion of this first and divine society among men, as all wise lawgivers of
old, and Christian Emperors have carefully don.

The two next Chapters because they chiefly treat about the degrees of
Consanguinity and affinity I omit; only setting down a passage or two
concerning the judicial laws of Moses, how fit they be for Christians to
imitate rather then any other.

CHAP. XVII. toward the end.
I Confess that we being free in Christ are not bound to the civil Laws of
Moses in every circumstance, yet seeing no laws can be more honest, just, and
wholesome, then those which God himself gave, who is eternal wisdom and goodness,
I see not why Christians, in things which no less appertain to them, ought not
to follow the laws of God, rather then of any men. We are not to use
circumcision, sacrifice, and those bodily washings prescribed to the Jews; yet
by these things we may rightly learn, with what purity and devotion both
Baptism and the Lords Supper should be administerd and receay'd. How much more
is it our duty to observe diligently what the Lord has commanded, and taught by
the examples of his people concerning marriage; whereof we have the use no less
then they.

And because this same worthy Author has another passage to this purpose in
his Comment upon Matthew, Chap. 5. 19. I here insert it from p. 46.

Since we have need of civil laws and the power of punishing, it will be
wisest not to contemn those given by Moses; but seriously rather to consider
what the meaning of God was in them, what he chiefly required, and how much it
might be to the good of every Nation, if they would borrow thence their manner
of governing the Commonwealth; yet freely all things and with the Spirit of
Christ. For what Solon, or Plato, or Aristotle, what Lawyers or Caesar's could
make better laws then God? And it is no light argument, that many Magistrates
at this day do not anough acknowledge the kingdom of Christ, though they would
seem most Christian, in that they govern their States by laws so diverse from
those of Moses.

The 18 Chap. I only mention as determining a thing not here in question, that
marriage without consent of parents ought not to be held good; yet with this
qualification fit to be known.

That if parents admit not the honest desires of their children, but shall
persist to abuse the power they have over them, they are to be mollifi'd by
admonitions, entreaties, and persuasions, first of their friends and kindred,
next of the Church Elders. Whom if still the hard parents refuse to hear, then
ought the Magistrate to interpose his power: left any by the evil mind of their
parents be detained from marriage longer then is meet, or fore't to an unworthy
match: in which case the Roman laws also provided. G^de nupt. l. 11. 13. 26.

CHAP. XIX.
Whether it may be permitted to revoke the promise of marriage.

Here arises another question concerning Contracts, when they ought to be
unchangeable; for religious Emperors decre^'d that the contract was not
indissoluble, until the spouse were brought home, and the solemnities
performed. They thought it a thing unworthy of divine and human equity, and
the due consideration of man's infirmity in deliberating and determining, when
space is given to renounce other contracts of much less moment, which are not
yet confirmed before the Magistrate, to deny that to the most weighty contract
of marriage, which requires the greatest care and consultation. Yet left such a
covenant should be brok'n for no just cause, and to the injury of that person
to whom marriage was promised, they decreed a fine, that he who denied marriage
to whom he had promised, and for some cause not approved by the Judges, should
pay the double of that pledge which was given at making sure, or as much as the
Judge should pronounce might satisfy the damage or the hinderance of either
parsie. It being most certain that ofttimes after contract, just and honest
causes of departing from promise, come to be known and found out, it cannot be
other then the duty of pious Princes, to give men the some liberty of
unpromising in these cases, as pious Emperors granted: especially where there
is only a promise, and not carnal knowledge. And as there is no true marriage
between them, who agree not in true consent of mind, so it will be the part of
godly Magistrates to procure that no matrimony be among their Subjects, but what
is knit with love and consent. And though your Majesty be not bound to th
imperial laws, yet it is the duty of a Christian King to embrace and follow
what ever he knows to be any where piously and justly constituted, and to be
honest, just and well-pleasing to his people. But why in Gods law and the
examples of his Saints nothing heerof is read, no marvel, seeing his ancient
people had power, yea a precept, that who so could not bend hismind to the true
love of his wife, should give her a bill of divorce, and send her from him,
though after carnal knowledge and long dwelling together. This is anough to
authorize ag^dly Prince in that indulgence which he gives to the changing of a
Contract; b^th because it is certainly the inv^ntion of Antichrist, that the
pro^rise of marriage de praesenti as they call it, should be indissoluble, and
because it should be a Princes care that matrimony be so joined, as God
ordained; which is, that every one should love his wife with such a love as
Adam expressed to Eve: So, as we may hope that they who marry may become one
sl^sh, and one also in the Lord.

CHAP. XX.
Concerns only the celebration of marriage.

CHAP. XXI.
The means of preserving marriage holy and pure.

NOw since there ought not to be less care that marriage be religiously kept,
then that it be piously and deliberately contracted, it will be meet that to
every Church be ordan'd certain grave and godly men, who may have this care
upon them, to observe whether the husband bear himself wisely toward the wife,
loving, and inciting her to all piety and the other duties of this life; and
whether the wife be subject to her husband, and study to be truly a meet help
to him, as first to all godliness, so to every other use of life. And if they
shall find each to other failing of their duty, or the one long absent from the
other without just and urgent cause, or giving suspicion of irreligious and
impure life, or of living in manifest wickedness, let it be admonisht them in
time. And if their authority be contemned, let the names of such contemners be
brought to the Magistrate, who may use punishment to compel such violaters of
marriage, to their duty, that they may abstain from all probable suspicion of
transgressing; and if they admit of suspected company; the Magistrate is to
forbid them; whom they not therein oboying, are to be punished as adulterers,
according to the law of Justinian, Authont 117. For if holy wedlock the
Fountain and Seminary of good subjects, be not vigilantly preserved from all
blots and disturbances, what can be hoped, as I said before, of the springing
up of good men, and a right reformation of the Commonwealth. We know it is not
anough for Christians to abstain from foul deeds, but from the appearance and
suspicion thereof.

CHAP. XXII.
Of full divorce* what the ancient Churches have thought.

Now we shall speak about that dissolving of mutrimony which may be approved,
in the sight of God, if any greevous necessity requite. In which thing the
Roman Antichrists have knit many a pernicious entanglement to distrissed
consuiences; for that they might here also exalt themselves above God, as if
they would be wiser and chaster then God himself is, for no cause, honest, or
necessary, will they permit final divorce, in the (...) while whordoms and
adulteries, and wor^ things then these, not duly tolerating in themselves and
others, but therishing, and throwing then headlong into these evils. For
although, they also dis-joyn married persons from board and bed, that is, from
all conjugall society and communion, and this not only for adultery, but for
ill usage, and matrimonial duties denied, yet they forbid thos^ thus parted to
join in wedlock with others, but, as I said before, any dishonest associating
they permit. And they pronounce the bond of that (...) to remain between those
whom they have thus separat. As if the bond of marriage, God so teaching and
pronouncing, were not such a league as bindee the married couple to all society
of life, and communion in divine and humane things; and so associated keeps
them. Something indeed out of the latter Fathers they may pretend for this their
tyranny, especially out of Austine and some others, who were much taken with a
preposterous admiration of sing'e life; yet though the^, Fathers, from the
words of Christ not rightly understood, taught that it was unlawful to marry
again, while the former wife lived, whatever cause there had bin either of
desertion or divorce, yet if we mark the custom of the Church, and the common
judgment which ^oth in their times and afterward prevailed, we shall perceave
that neither these Fathers did ever cast out of the Church any one for marying
after a divorce, approved by the Imperial laws.

Nor only the first Christian Emperors, but the lator also, ov'n to Justinian,
and after him, did grant for certain causes approved by Judges, to make a true
divorse; which made and confirmed by law, it might be lawful to marry again:
which if it could not have bin done without disple sing Christ and his Church,
surely it would not have been granted by Christian Emperors, nor had the
Fathers then winkt at those doings in the Emperors. Hence ye may see that
Jerome also, though zealous of single life more then anough, and such a
condemner of second marriage though after the death of either party, yet forced
by plain equity, desended. Fabiola, a noble Matron of Rome, who having refused
her husband for just causes, was married to another. For that the sending of a
divorce to her husband was not blameworthy, he affirms, because the man was
hainously vicious, and that if an adulterous wife may be discarded, an
adulterous husband is not to be kept. But that she married again, while yet her
husband was alive, he defends in that the Apostle has said, It is better to
mary then to burn, and that young widows should mary, for such was Fabiola, and
could not remain in widowhood.

But some one will object that Jerome there adds, Neither did she know the
vigor of the Gospel, wherein all cause of marying i^ debarred from women, while
thi^ husbands live, and again, while she avoided many wounds of Satan, she
received one ere she was aware. Put let the equal Reader mind also what went
before; Because, says he soon after the beginning, there is a rock and storm
of slanderers opposed against her, I will not praise her converted, unless I
first absolve her guilty. For why does he call them slanderers who accused
Fabiola of marying again, if he did not judge it a matter of Christian equity
and charity, to pass by and pardon that fact, though in his own opinion he
held it a fault. And what can this mean? I will not praise her, unless I first
absolv her. For how could he absolv her but by proving that Fabiola neither in
rejecting her vicious husband, nor in marying another, had committed such a
sin, as could be justly condemned. Nay, he proves both by evident reason, and
clear testimonies of Scripture, that she avoided sin.

This also is hence understood, that Jerome by the vigor of the Gospel, meant
that height and perfection of our Saviors precept, which might be remitted to
those that burn; for he adds, But if she be accused in that she remained not
unmarried, I shall confess the fault, so I may relate the necessity. If then
he acknowledged a necessity, as he did, because she was young, and could not
live in Widowhood, certainly he could not impute her second marriage to her much
blame: but when he excuses her out of the word of God, does he not openly
declare his thoughts, that the second marriage of Fabiola was permitted her by
the holy Ghost himself for the necessity which she suffered, and to shun the
danger of fornication, though she went somewhat aside from the vigor of the
Gospel. But if any urge that Fabiola did public penance for her second marriage,
which was not imposed but for great faults. It Is answered, she was not enjoined
to this penance. but did it of her own accord, and not till after her second
husbands death. As in the time of Cyprian we read that many were wont to do
voluntary penance for small faults, which were not liable to excommunication.

CHAP. XXIII.
That Marriage was granted by the ancient Fathers, even after the vow of single
life.

I omit his testimonies out of Cyprian, Gelasius, Epiphanius, contented only to
relate what he thence collects to the present purpose.
SOme will say perhaps, whersore all this concerning marriage after vow of
single life, when as the question was of marriage after divorse? For this
reason, that they whom it so much moves, because some of the Fathers thought
marriage after any kind of divorce, to be condemned of our Savior, may see that
this conclusion follows not. The Fathers thought all marriage after divorce to
be forbidd'n of our Savior, therefore they thought such marriage was not to be
tolerated in a Christian. For the same Fathers judged it forbidd'n to marry
after vow; yet such marriages they neither dissolved nor excommunicated. For
these words of our Savior, and of the holy Ghost, stood in their way; All
cannot receav this saying, but they to whom it is given. Every one has his
proper gifs from God, one after this manner, another after that. It is better
to marry then to burn. I will that younger Widows marry, and the like.

So there are many Canons, and Laws extant, whereby Priests, if they married,
were removed from their office, yet is it not read that their marriage was
dissolved, as the Papists now-a-dayes do, or that they were excommunicated,
nay expressly they might communicate as Lay men. If the consideration of human
infirmity, and those testimonies of divine Scripture which grant marriage to
every one that wants it, persuaded those Fathers to bear themselves so humanly
toward them who had married with breach of vow to God, as they believed, and
with divorce of that marriage wherein they were in a manner joined to God; who
doubts, but that the same Fathers held the like humanity was to be afforded to
those who after divorce and faith broken with men, as they thought, entered
into second marriage: for among suchare also found no less weak, and no less
burning.

CHAP. XXIV.
Who of the ancient Fathers have granted marriage after divorce.

THis is clear both by what has bin said, and by that which Origin relates of
certain Bishops in his time, Homil. 7. in Matthew. I know some, says he, which
are over Churches, who without Scripture have permitted the wife to mary while
her former husband lived. And did this against Scripture which says, The wife
is bound to her husband so long as he lives, and she shall be called an
adulteress, if, her husband living, she take another man, yet did they not
permit this without cause, perhaps for the infirmity of such as had not
continence, they permitted evil to avoid worse. Ye see Origin and the Doctors
of his age, not without all cause, permitted women after divorce to marry,
though their former husbands were living: yet writes that they permitted
against Scripture. But what cause could they have to do so, unless they
thought our Savior in his precepts of divorce, had so forbid'n, as willing to
remit such perfection to his weaker ones, cast into danger of worse faults.

The same thought Leo, Bishop of Rome, Ep. 85. to the African Bishops of
Mauritania Caesariensis, wherein co^plaining of a certain Priest, who divorcing
his wife, or being divorc't by her, as other copies have it, had married
another, neither dissolvs the matrimony, nor excommunicates him, only unpreists
him. The fathers therefore as we see, did not simple and wholly condemn marriage
after divorce.

But as t^ me, this remi^ting of our Saviors precepts, which these ancients
allow to the (...) in marrying after vow and divorce, I can in no ways admit;
for what so ever plunly consents not with the commandment, cannot, I am
certain, be permitted, or suffered in any Christian: for heaven and earth shall
p^sse away, but not a ^le from the commands of God among them who expect ^e
eternal. Let us therefore consi^er, and weigh the words of our Lord concerning
marriage, and divorce, which he pronounced both by himself, and by his Apostle,
and let us compare them with other Cracles of God; for whatsoever is contrary
to these, I shall not persuade the least tolerating thereof. But if it can be
taught to agree with the Word of God, yea to be commanded that most men may
have permission given them to divorce and marry again, I must prefer the
au^rity of Gods Word before the opinion of Fathers and Doctors, as they
themselves teach.

CHAP. XXV.
The words of our Lord, and of the holy Ghost by the Apostle Paul concerning
Divorce are explained.

But the words of our Lord and of the holy Ghost, out of which Austin, and some
others of the Fathers think it concluded that our Savior forbids ma^iage after
any divorce are these, Mat. 5. 31, 32. I^ has bin said etc. And Mat. 19. 7.
They say unto him, why did Moses then command, etc. And Mark the 10th, and Luke
the 16. Romans 7. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. H^nce therefore they conclude that
all marriage after divorce is called adultery; which to commit being no ways to
be tolerated in any Christian, they think it follows that second ^ariage is in
no case to be permitted either to the divorcer or to the divorsed.

But that it may be more fully and plainly perceav'd, what force is in this
kind of reasoning, it will be the best course to lay down certain The 1. axion^
that Christ could not' condemn of adultery that which he once commanded.
grounds where of no Christian can doubt the truth. First it is a wickedness to
suspect that our Savior branded that for adultery, which himself in his own
Law, which he came to fulfill, and not to dissolv, did not only permit, but
also command; for by him the only Mediator was the wh^le law of God given. But
that by this law of God marriage was permitted after any divorce is certain by
Deuteronomy. 24. 1.

CHAP. XXVI.
That God in his law did not only grant, but also command divorce to certain
men.

DEul. 24. 1. When a man has taken a wife, etc. But in Mala. 2. 15, 16. is
read the Lords command to put her away whom a man hates, in these words. Take
heed to your spirit, and let none deal injuriously against the wife of his
youth. If he hate, let him put away, says the Lord God of Israel. And he shall
hide thy violence with his garment, that mary's her divorc't by thee, says the
Lord of hosts; But take heed to your spirit, and do no injury. By these
testimonies of the divine law, we see that the Lord did not only permit, but
also expressly and earnestly commanded his people, by whom he would that all
holiness and faith of marriage convant should be observed, that he who could not
induce his mind to love his wife with a true conjugal love, might dismiss her
that she might marry to another.

CHAP. XXVII.
That what the Lord permitted and commanded to his ancient people concerning
divorce, belongs also to Christians.

NOw what the Lord permitted to his firstborn people, that certainly he could
not forbid to his own among the Gentiles, whom he made coheires and into one
body with his people, nor could he ever permit, much less command ought that
was not good for them, at least so used, as he commanded. For being God, he is
not changed as man. Which thing who seriously considers, how can he imagine
that God would make that wicked to them that believe, and serve him under grace,
which he granted and commanded to them that served him under the Law. When as
the same causes require the same permission. And who that knows but humane
matters, and loves the truth, will deny that many mariage^ hang as ill together
now, as ever they did among the Jews? So that such marriages are liker to
torments then true marriages. As therefore the Lord does always fuctour and help
the oppressed, so he would ever have it provided for injured husbands and
wives, that under pretense of the mariage-bond, they be not sold to perpetual
vexations, instead of the loving and comfortable mariage-duties. And lastly, as
God does always d^te (...), and fraud, so neither does he approvo, that (...)
his (...), that should be counted marriage, wherein none of those duties remain
whereby the league of wedlock is chiefly preserved. What inconsiderat neglect
then of Gods law is this, that I may not call it worse, to hold that Christ our
Lord would not grant the same remedies both of divorce and second marriage to
the weak, or to the evil, if they will needs have it so, but especially to the
innocent and wronged, when as the same urgent causes remain, as before, when
the discipline of the church and Magistrate has tried what may be tried.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That our Lord Christ intended not to make new Laws of marriage and divorce, or
of any civil matters.

IT is agreed by all who determine of the Kingdom, and offices of The second
Axiom.
Christ by the holy Scriptures, as all godly men ought to do, that our Savior
upon earth took not on him either to give new laws in civil affairs, or to
change the old. But it is certain that matrimony and divorce are civil things.
Which the Christian Emperors knowing, gave conjugal laws; and reserved the
administration of them to their own Courts; which no true ancient Bishop ever
condemned.

Our Savor came to preach repentance, and remission; seeing therefore those who
put away their wives without any just cause, were not touched with conscience of
the sin, through misunderstanding of the law, he recalled them to a right
interpretation, and taught that the woman in the beginning was so joined to the
man, that there should be a perpetual union both in body and spirit: where this
is not, the matrimony is already broke, before there be yet any divorce made or
second marriage.

CHAP. XXIX.
That it is wicked to strain the words of Christ beyond their purpose.

This is his third Axiom, whereof there needs no explication here.

CHAP. XXX.
That all places of Scripture about the same thing are to be Axiom 4.
joined, and compared, to avoid Contradictions.

This be demonstrates at large out of sundry places in the Gospel; and
principally by that precept against swearing, which compared with many places
of Mat. 5. 34.
the Law and Prophets, is a flat contradiction of them all, if we follow
superstitiously the letter. Then having repeated briefly his fo^re Axioms, he
thus proceeds.

These things thus preadmonisht, let us enquire what the undoubted meaning is
of our Saviors words; and enquire according to the rule which is observed by
all learned and good men in their expositions; that praying first to God, who
is the only opener of our hearts, we may first with fear and reverence
consider well the words of our Savior touching this question. Next, that we
may compare them with all other places of Scripture, treating of this matter,
to see how they consent with our Saviors words, and those of his Apostle.

CHAP. XXXI.
This Chapter disputes against Austin and the Papists, who deny second marriage,
even to them who divorce in case of adultery, which because it is not
controverted among true Protestants, but that the innocent person is easily
allowed to marry, I spare the translating.

CHAP. XXXII.
That a manifest adulteress ought to be divorc't, and cannot lawfully be
retained in marriage by any true Christian.

This though be prove sufficiently, yet I let pass, because this question was
not hindl'd in the Doctrine and discipline of divorce; to which book I bring so
much of this Treatise as runs parallel.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
That adultery is to be punished by death.

This Chapter also I omit for the reason last alleged.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That it is lawful for a wife to leav an adulterer, and to marry another
husband.

This is generally granted, and therefore excuses me the writing out.

CHAP. XXXV.
Places in the Writings of the Apostle Paul touching divorce explained.

LEt us consider the answers of the Lord given by the Apostle severally.
Concerning the first which is Romans 7. 1. Know yet not brethren, for I speak to
them that know the law, etc. Ver. 2. The woman is bound by the law to her
husband so long as he lives. Here it is certain that the holy Ghost had no
purpose to determine ought of marriage, or divorce, but only to bring an example
from the common and ordinary law of wedlock, to show that as no covenant holds
either party being dead, so now that we are not bound to the law, but to
Christ our Lord, seeing that through him we are dead to sin, and to the law;
and so joined to Christ that we may bring forth fruit in him from a willing
godliness, and not by the compulsion of law, whereby our sins are more excited,
and become more violent. What therefore the holy Spirit here speaks of
matrimony, cannot be extended beyond the general rule.

Besides it is manifest, that the Apostle did allege the law of wedlock, as it
was delivered to the Jews; for, says he, I speak to them that know the law.
They knew no law of God but that by Moses, which plainly grants divorce for
several reasons. It cannot therefore be said that the Apostle cited this
general example out of the law, to abolish the several exceptions of that law,
which God himself granted by giving authority to divorce.

Next when the Apostle brings an example out of Gods law concerning man and
wife, it must be necessary that we understand such for man and wife, as are so
indeed according to the same law of God; that is, who are so disposed as that
they are both willing and able to perform the necessary duties of marriage; not
those who under a false title of marriage, keep themselves mutually bound to
injuries and disgraces; for such twain are nothing less then lawful man and
wife.

The like answer is to be given to all the other places both of the Gospel and
the Apostle, that what ever exception may be proved out of Gods law, be not
excluded from those places. For the Spirit of God does not condemn things
formerly granted, and allowed, where there is like cause and reason. Hence
Ambrose upon that place, 1 Cor. 7. 15. A brother or a sister is not under
bondage in such cases; thus expounds; The reverence of marriage is not due to
him who abhors the author of marriage; nor is that marriage ratified which is
without devotion to God: he sins not therefore who is put away for Gods cause,
though be join himself to another. For the dishonor of the Creator dissolves
the right of matrimonl to him who is deserted, that he be not accused, though
marrying to another. The faith of wedlock is not to be kept with him who
departs, that he might not hear the God of Christians to be the author of
wedlock. For if Ezra caused the mis-beleeving wives and husbands to be
divorc't, that God might be appeased, and not effended, though they took others
of their own faith, how much more shall it be free, if the mis-beleever depart
to marry one of our own Religion. For this is not to be counted matrimony which
is against the law of God.

Two things are here to be observed toward the following discourse, which truth
it self, and the force of Gods word has drawn from this holy man. For those
words are very large, Matrimony is not ratified without devotion to God. And
the dishonor of the Creator dissolvs the right of matrimony. For devotion is
far off, and dishonor is done to God by all who persist in any wickedness and
heinous crime.

CHAP. XXXVI.
That although it seem in the Gospel, as if our Savior granted divorce only
for adultery, yet in very deed he granted it for other causes also.

NOw is to be dealt with this question, Whether it be lawful to divorce and
marry again for other causes besides adultery, since our Savior expressed that
only. To this question, if we retain our principles already laid, and must
acknowledge it to be a cursed blasphemy, if we say that the words of God do
contradict one another, of necessity we must confess that our Lord did grant
divorce, and marriage after that for other causes besides adultery,
notwithstanding what he said in Matthew. For first, they who consider but only
that place, 1 Cor. 7. which treats of believers and misbeleevers matched
together, must of force confess, that our Lord granted just divorce, and
second marriage in the cause of desertion, which is other then the cause of
fornication. And if there be one other cause found lawful, then is it most
true that divorce was granted not only for fornication.

Next, it cannot be doubted, as I showed before, by them to whom it is given to
know God and his judgments out of his own word, but that, what means of peace
and safety God ever granted and ordained to his elected people, the same he
grants and ordains to men of all ages who have equally need of the same
remedies. And who, that is but a knowing man, dares say there be not husbands
and wives now to be found in such a hardness of heart, that they will not
perform either conjugal affection, or any requis^t duty thereof, though it be
most deserved at their hands.

Neither can any one defer to confess, but that God whose property it is to
judge the cause of them that suffer injury, has provided for innocent and
honest persons wedded, how they might free themselves by lawful means of
divorce, from the bondage and iniquity of those who are falsely termed their
husbands or their wives. This is clear out of Deuteronomy, 24. 1. Malach. 2. Matthew. 19.
1 Cor. 7. and out of those principles which the Scripture every where teaches,
That God changes not his mind, dissents not from himself, is no accepter of
persons; but allows the same remedies to all men oppressed with the same
necessities and infirmities; yea, requires that we should use them. This he
will easily perceave, who considers these things in the Spirit of the Lord.

Lastly, it is most certain, that the Lord has commanded us to obey the civil
laws every one of his own Commonwealth, if they be not against the laws of God.

CHAP. XXXVII.
For what causes divorce is permitted by the civil Law ex 1. consensu Codic. de
repudiis.

IT is also manifest that the law of Theodosius and Valentinian, which begins
Consensu, etc. touching divorce, and many other decrees of pious Emperors
agreeing heerwith, are not contrary to the word of God. And therefore may be
recalled into use by any Christian Prince or Commonwealth, nay ought to be
with due respect had to every nation. For whatsoever is equal and just, that
in every thing is to be sought and used by Christians. Hence it is plain that
divorce is granted by divine approbation, both to husbands and to wives, if
either party can convict the other of these following offenses before the
Magistrate.

If the husband can prove the wife to be an adulteress, a witch, a murdresse,
to have bought or sold to slavery any one free born, to have violated
sepulchers, committed sacrilege, favored thieves and robbers, desitous of
feasting with strangers, the husband not knowing, or not willing, if she lodge
forth without a just and probable cause, or frequant theaters and sights, he
forbidding, if she be privy with those that plot against the State, or if she
deal^ falsely, or offer blows. And if the wife can prove her husband guilty of
any those forenamed crimes, and frequent the company of lewd women in her
sight; or if he beat her, she had the like liberty to quit herself, with this
difference, that the man after divorce might forthwith marry again; the woman
not till a year after, lest she might chance to have conceav'd.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
An exposition of those places wherein God declares the nature of holy wedlock:

NOw to the end it may be seen that this agrees with the divine law, the first
institution of marriage is to be considered, and those texts in which God
established the joining of male and famale, and described the duties of them
both. When God had determined to make woman, and give her as a wife to man, he
spoke thus, Genesis 2. 18. It is not good for man to be alone, I will make him a
help meet for him. And Adam said, but in the Spirit of God, v. 23. 24. This is
now bone of my bone, and slesh of my slesh. Therefore shall a man leav his
father and mother, and shall cl^av to his wise, and th y shall be one slesh.

To this first institution did Christ recall his own; when answering the
Pharisees, he condemned the license of unlawful divorce. He taught therefore by
his example, that we, according to this first institution, and what God has
spok'n thereof, ought to determine what kind of covenant marriage is, how to be
kept, and how far; and lastly, for what cau^s to be dislolv'd. To which
decrees of God these also are to be joined, which the holy Ghost has taught by
his Apostle, that neither the husband nor the wife has power of their own
body, but mutually each of eithers. That the husband shall love the wife as his
own body, yea as Christ loves his Church, and that the wife ought to be subject
to her husband, as the Church is to Christ.

By these things the nature of holy wedlock is certainly known; whereof if only
one be wanting in both or either party, and that either by obstinate
malev^lence, or too deep inbred weak^es of mind, or lastly, through incurable
impotence of body, it cannot then be said that the covenant of matrimony holds
good between such; if we mean that covenant which God instituted and called
Marriage, and that whereof only it must be understood that our Savior said,
Those whom God has joined, let no man separate.

And hence is concluded, that matrimonv requires continual cohabitation and
living together, unless the calling of God be otherwise evident; which union
if the parties themselves dis-joyn either by mutual consent, or one against
the others will depart, the marriage is then brok'n. Wherein the Papists, as in
other things oppose themselves against God; while they ^rate for many causes
from bed and board, and yet will have the bond of matrimony remain, as if this
covenant could be other then the conjunction and communion not only of bed and
board, but of all other loving and helpful duties. This we may see in these
words; I will make him a help meet for him; bone of his bones, and flesh of his
slesh; for this cause shall he leav father and mother, and cleav to his wife,
and they twain shall be one flesh. By which words who discerns not, that God
requires of them both so to live together, and to be united not only in body
but in mind also, with such an affection as none may be dearer and more ardent
among all the relations of mankind, nor of more efficacy to the mutual offices
of love, and loyalty. They must communicate and consent in all things both
divine and human, which have any moment to well and happy living. The wife must
honor and obey her husband, as the Church honors and obeys Christ her head.
The husband must love and cherish his wife, as Christ his Church. Thus they
must be to each other, if they will be true man and wife in the sight of God,
whom certainly the Churches ought to follow in their judgment. Now the proper
and ultimate end of marriage is not copulation, or children, for then there was
not true matrimony between Joseph and Mary the mother of Christ, nor between
many holy persons more; but the full and proper and main end of marriage, is the
communicating of all duties, both divine and humane, each to other, with utmost
benevolence and affection.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The properties of a true and Christian marriage, more distinctly repeated.

BY which definition we may know that God esteems and reckons upon these four
necessary properties to be in every true marriage. 1. That they should live
together, unless the calling of God require otherwise for a time. 2. That they
should love one another to the height of dearnes, and that in the Lord, and in
the communion of true Religion. 3. That the husband bear himself as the head
and preserver of his wife, instructing her to all godliness and integrity of
life; that the wife also be to her husband a help, according to her place,
especially furdering him in the true worship of God, and next in all the
occasions of civil life. And 4. That they defraud not each other of conjugal
benevolence, as the Apostle commands, 1 Cor. 7. Hence it follows according to
the sentence of God, which all Christians ought to be ruled by, that between
those who either through obstinacy, or helples inabilitie, cannot or will not
perform these repeated duties, between those there can be no true matrimony,
nor ought they to b^ counted man and wife.

CHAP. XL.
Whether those crimes recited Chap. 37. out of the civil law dissolv matrimony
in Gods account.

NOw if a husband or wife be found guilty of any those crimes, which by the law
consensu are made causes of divorce, it is manifest that such a man cannot be the
head, and preserver of his wife, nor such a woman be a meet help to her
husband, as the divine law in true wedlock requires; for these faults are
punished either by death, or deportation, or extreme infamy, which are directly
opposite to the covenant of marriage. If they deserve death, as adultery and the
like, doubtless God would not that any should live in wedlock with them whom he
would not have to live at all. Or if it be not death, but the incurring of
notorious infamy, certain it is neither just, nor expedient, nor meet, that an
honest man should be coupl'd with an infamous woman, nor an honest matron with
an infamous man. The wise Roman Princes had so great regard to the equal honor
of either wedded person, that they counted those marriages of no force which
were made between the one of good repute, and the other of evil note. How much
more will all honest regard of Christian expedience and comlines beseem and
concern those who are set free and dignified in Christ, then it could the Roman
Senate, or their sons, for who^ that law was provided.

And this all godly men will soon apprehend, that he who ought to be the head
and preserver not only of his wife, but also of his children and family, as
Christ is of his Church, had need be one of honest name: so likewise the wife
which is to be the meet help of an honest and good man, the mother of an honest
offspring and family, the glory of the man, even as the man is the glory of
Christ, should not be tainted with ignominy; as neither of them can avoid to
be, having bin justly appeacht of those forenamed crimes; and therefore cannot
be worthy to hold their place in a Christian family: yea they themselves turn out
themselves and dissolv that holy covenant. And they who are true brethren and
sisters in the Lord, are no more in bondage to such violaters of marriage.

But here the Patrons of wickedness and dissolvers of Christian discipline will
object, that it is the part of man and wife to bear one another cross,
whether in calamit^e, or infamy, that they might gain each other, if not to a
good name, yet to repentance and amendment. But they who thus object, seek the
impunity of wickedness, and the favor of wicked men, not the duties of true
charity; which preferrs public honesty before private interest; and had rather
the remedies of wholesome punishment appointed by God should be in use, then that
by remisness the license of evil doing should increase. For if they who by
committing such offenses, have made void the holy knott of marriage, be capable
of repentance, they will be sooner moved when due punishment is executed on
them; then when it is remitted.

We must ever beware, lest, in contriving what will be best for the souls
health of delinquents, we make our selves wiser and discreeter then God. He
that religiously waighs his oracles concerning marriage, cannot doubt that they
who have committed the foresaid transgressions, have lost the right of
matrimony, and are unworthy to hold their dignity in an honest and Christian
family.

But if any husband or wife^see such sigues of repentance in their transgressor,
as that they doubt not to regain them by continuing with them, and partaking of
their miseries and attaintures, they may be left to their own hopes, and their own
mind, saving ever the right of Church and Commonwealth, that it receav no
scandal by the neglect of due severity, and their children no harm by this
invitation to license, and want of good education.

From all these considerations, if they be thought on, as in the presence of
God, and out of his Word, any one may perceav, who desires to determine of
these things by the Scripture, that those causes of lawful divorce, which the
most religious Emperors Tbeodosius and Valentinian set forth in the forecited
place, are according to the law of God, and the prime institution of marriage.
And were still more and more straitn'd, as the Church and State of the Empire
still more and more corrupted and degenerated. Therefore pious Princes and
Commonwealths both may and ought establish them again, if they have a mind to
restore the honor, sanctity, and religion of holy wedlock to their people, and
dis-intangle many consciences from a miserable and perilous condition, to a
chaste and honest life.

To those recited causes wherefore a wife might send a divorce to her husband,
Justinian added four more, Constit, 117. And four more, for which a man might
put away his wife. Three other causes were added in the Code derepudiis l.
Jubemus. All which causes are so clearly contrary to the first intent of
marriage, that they plainly dissolv it. I set them not down being easy to be
found in the body of the civil Law.

It was permitted also by Christian Emperors, that they who would divorce by
mutual conscnt, might without impediment. Or if there were any difficulty at
all in it, the law expresses the reason, that it was only in favor of the
children, so that if there were none, the law of those godly Emperors made no
other difficulty of a divorce by consent. Or if any were minded without consent
of the other to divorce, and without those causes which have bin named, the
Christian Emperors laid no other punishment upon them, then that the husband
wrongfully divorcing his wife should give back her dowry, and the use of that
which was called Don^tio propter nuptias; or if there were no dowry nor no
donation, that he should then give her the fourth part of his goods. The like
penalty was inflicted on the wife departing without just cause. But that they
who were once married should be compe^l'd to remain so ever against their wills,
was not exacted. Wherein those pious Princes followed the law of God in Deuteronomy.
24. 1. and his express charge by the Profet Malachy to dismiss from him the
wife whom he hates. For God never meant in marriage to give to man a perpetual
torm^, instead of a meet help. Neither can God approve that to the violation of
this holy league (which is violated as soon as true affection ceases and is
lost,) should be added murder, which is already committed by either of them who
res^lvedly hates the other, as I showed out of 1 John 15. Who so hates his
brother is a murderer.

CHAP. XLI.
Whether the husband or wife deserted may marry to another.

THe wives desertion of her husband the Christian Emperors plainly decreed to
be a just cause of divorce, when as they granted him the right thereof, if she
had but lain out one night against his will without pr^ble ^use. But of the man
deserting his wife they did not so determine: Yet if we look into the Word of
God, we shall find, that he who though but for a year without just cause
forsakes his wife, and neither provides for her maintenance, nor signifies his
purpose of returning, and good will toward her, when as he may, has forfe^ted
hi^ (...) in ^er s^ for^ak'n. For the Spirit of God speaks plainly, that both
man and wife has such power over one another person as that they cannot
deprive each other of ^iving together, but by (...) and for a time.

H^ may b^ added that the holy Spirit grants desertion to be a cause of
divorce, in those answers given to the Corin^hians concerning ab^ there o^
sister d^d by a ^is-beleever. If he depart, let him depart, a brother (...)
siste^ (...) not under bondage in such cases. In which words, who sees^ of that
the holy Ghost openly pronoune't, that the party without c^e deserted, is not
bound for another wilful defe^ion, to abstain from marriage, if he have need
thereof.

But some will say, that this is spok'n of a mis-beleever departing. But I
beseech ye, does not he reject the faith of Christ in his deeds, who rashly
breaks the holy covenant of wedlock instituted by God? And besides this, the
holy Spirit does not make the mis-beleeving of him who departs, but the
departing of him who mis-beleevs to be the just cause of freedom to the brother
or sister.

Since therefore it will be agreed among Christians, that they who depart from
wedlock without just cause, do not only deny the faith of matrimony, but of
Christ also, what ever they profess with their mouths, it is but reason to
conclude, that the party deserted is not bound in case of causlesse desertion,
but that he may lawfully seek another consort, if it be needful to him toward
a pure and blameles conversation.

CHAP. XLII.
That impotence of body, leprosy, madness, etc. are just causes of divorce.

OF this, because it was not disputed in the doctline and discipline of
divorce, him that would know further I commend to the Latin original.

CHAP. XLIII.
That to grant divorce for all the causes which have bin hitherto brought,
disagrees not from the words of Christ naming only the cause of adultery.

NOw we must see how these things can stand with the words of our Savior, who
seems directly to forbid all divorce excepti be for adultery. To the
understanding whereof, we must ever remember this: That in the words of our
Savior there can be no contrariety. That his words and answers are not to be
stretched beyond the question proposed. That our Savior did not there purpose
to treat of all the causes for which it might be lawful to divor^ and marry
again; for then that in the Co^hiaus of marrying again with (...) guilt of
adultery could not be added. That it is not good for that man to be alone who
has not the special gift from above. That it is good for every such one to be
married, (...) he may she fornication.

With regard to these principle let us see what our Lord answered to the
tempting Pharisees about divorce, and second ma^iage, and how ^rre his answer
does extend

First, No man who is not very contentious, will deny that the Pharisees asked
our Lord whether it were lawful to put away such a wife, as was truly, and
according to Gods law, to be counted a wife; that is, such a one as would dwell
with her husband, and both would and could perform the necessary duties of
wedlock tolerably. But she who will not dwell with her husband, is not put
away by him, but goes of her self: and sh^e who denies to be a meet help, or to
be so, has made her self unsit by open misd^meanours, or through incurable
impotencies cannot be able, is not by the law of God to be esteemed a wife; as
has bin shown both from the first institution, and other places of Scripture.
Neither certainly would the Pharisees propound a question concerning such an
unconjugall wife; for their depravation of the law had brought them to that
pass, as to think a man bad right to put away his wife for any cause, though
never so slight. Since therefore it is manifest that Christ answered the
Pharisees concerning a sit and meet wife according to the law of God, whom he
forbid to divorce for any cause but fornication. Who sees not that it is a
wickedness so to wrest and extend that answer of his, as if it forbad to divorce
her who has already forsak'n, or has lost the place and dignity of a wife by
deserved infamy, or has undertak'n to be that which she has not natural
ability to be.

This truth is so powerful that it has moved the Papists to grant their kind
of divorce for other causes besides adultery, as for ill usage, and the not
performing of conjugal duty; and to separate from b^d and board for these
causes, which is as much divorce, as they grant for adultery.

But some perhaps will object, that though it be yielded, that our Lord granted
divorce not only for adultery, yet it is not certain that he permitted marriage
after divorce, unless for that only cause. I answer, first, that the sentence
of divorce, and second marriage, is one and the same. So that when the right of
divorce is evinc't to belong not only to the cause of fornication, the power of
second marriage is also proved to be not limited to that cause only; and that
most evidently, when as the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 7. so frees the deserted party
from bondage, as that he may not only send a just divorce in case of desertion,
but may seek another marriage.

Lastly, Seeing God will not that any should live in danger of fornication and
utter ruin for the default of another, and has commanded the husband to send
away with a bill of divorce her whom he could not love, it is impossible that
the charge of adultery should belong to him who for lawful causes divorces and
marries, or to her who marries after she has bin unjustly rejected, or to him
who receavs her without all fraud to the former wedlock. For this were a horrid
blasphemy against God, so to interpret his words, as to make him dissent from
himself; for who sees not a flat contradiction in this, to enthrall blameles
men and women to mis^ries and injuries, under a false and soothing title of
marriage, and yet to declare by his Apostie that a brother or sister is not
under bondage in such cases. No less do these two things conflict with
themselves, to enforce the innocent and faultles to endure the pain and misery
(...) nothers perverseness, or else to live in unavoidable temptation; and to
affirm elsewhere that he lays on no man the burden of another man's sin, nor does
constrain any man to the endangering of his soul.

CHAP. XLIV.
That to those also who are justly divorc't, second marriage ought to be
permitted.

This although ^t be well proved, yet because it concerns only the offender, I
leav him to search out his own charter himself in the Author.

CHAP. XLV.
That some persons are so ordained to marriage, as that they cannot obtain the
gift of continence, no not by earnest prayer, and that therein every one is to
be left to his own judgment, and conscience, and not to have a burden laid
upon him by any other.

CHAP. XLVI.
The words of the Apostle concerning the praise of single life unfolded.

THese two Chapters not so immediately debating the right of divorce, I chose
rather not to insert.

CHAP. XLVII.
The Conclusion of this Treatise.

THese things, most renowned King, I have brought together, both to explain for
what causes the unhappy, but sometimes most necessary help of divorce ought to
be granted, according to Gods Word, by Princes and Rulers: as also to explain
how the words of Christ d^e consent with such a grant. I have bin large indeed
both in handling those Oracles of God, and in laying down those certain
principles, which he who will know what the mind of God is in this matter, must
ever think on, and remember. But if we consider what mist and obscurity has
bin powrd out by Antichrist upon this question, and how deep this pernicious
contempt of wedlock, and admiration of single life, even in those who are not
called thereto, has sunk into many men's persuasions, I fear lest all that has
bin said, be hardly anough to persuade such that they would cease at length to
make themselves wiser and holier then God himself, in being so severe to grant
lawful marriage, and so easy to connive at all, not only whordoms, but
deflowrings, and adulteries. When as among the people of God, no whordom was to
be tolerated.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who came to destroy the works of Satan, send down his
Spiritupon all Christians, and principally upon Christian Governors both in
Church and Commonwealth (for of the clear judgment of your royal Majesty I
nothing doubt, revolving the Scripture so often as ye do) that they may
acknowledge how much they provoke the anger of God against us, when as all kind
of unchastity is tolerated, fornications and adulteries winkt at: But holy and
honorable wedlock is often withheld by the mere persuasion of Antichrist, from
such as without this remedy, cannot preserve themselves from damnation! For
none who has but a spark of honesty will deny that Princes and States ought to
use diligence toward the maintaining of pure and honest life among all men,
without which all justice, all fear of God, and true religion decays.

And who knows not that chastity and pureness of life, can never be restored, or
continued in the Commonwealth, unless it be first established in private
houses, from whence the whole breed of men is to come forth. To effect this, no
wise man can doubt that it is necessary for Princes and Magistrates first with
severity to punish whordom and adultery; next to see that marriages be lawfully
contracted, and in the Lord, then that they be faithfully kept; and lastly,
when that unhappines urges, that they be lawfully dissolved, and other marriage
granted, according as the law of God, and of nature, and the Constitutions of
pious Princes have decreed; as I have shown both by evident autorities of
Scripture, together with the writings of the ancient Fathers, and other
testimonies. Only the Lord grant that we may learn to prefer his ever just
and saving Word, before the Comments of Antichrist, too deeply rooted in many,
and the false and blasphemous exposition of our Saviors words.

Amen.
The end
A POSTSCRIPT.
THus far Martin Bucer; Whom where I might without injury to either part of
the cause, I deny not to have epitomized: in the rest observing a
well-warranted rule, not to give an Inventory of so many words, but to weigh
their force. I could have added that eloquent and right Christian discourse,
writt'n by Erasmus on this Argument, not disagreeing in effect from Bucer. But
this, I hope, will be anough to excuse me with the mere Englishman, to be no
forger of new and loose opinions. Others may read him in his own phrase on the
first to the Corinthians, and ease me who never could delight in long
citations, much less in whole traductions; Whether it be natural disposition
or education in me, or that my mother bore me a speaker of what God made mine
own, and not a translator. There be others also whom I could reck'n up, of no
mean account in the Church (and Peter Martyr among the first) who are more then
half our own in this controversy. But this is a providence not to be slighted,
that as Bucer wrote this tractat of divorce in England and for England, so
Erasmus professes he begun here among us the same subject, especially out of
compassion, for the need he saw this Nation had of some charitable redress
heerin; and seriously exhorts others to use their best industry in the clearing
of this point, wherein custom has a greater sway then verity. That therefore
which came into the mind of these two admired strangers to do for England,
and in a touch of highest prudence which they took to be not yet recovered from
monastic superstition, if I a native am found to have don for mine own Country,
altogether sutably and conformly to their so large and clear understanding, yet
without the lest help of theirs, I suppose that hence-forward among
conscionable and ju^icious persons, it will no more be thought to my discredit,
or at all to this Nations dishonor. And if these their books, the one shall be
printed often, with best allowance in most religious Cities, the other with
express authority of Leo the tenth a Pope, shall for the propagating of truth be
published and republisht, though against the received opinion of that Church,
and mine containing but the same thing, shall in a time of reformation, a time
of free speaking, free writing, not find a permission to the Press, I refer
me to wisest men, whether truth be suffered to be truth, or liberty to be
liberty now among us, and be not again in danger of new fetters and captivity
after all our hopes and labors lost: and whether learning be not (which our
enemies too profetically feared) in the way to be trodd'n down again by
ignorance. Whereof while time is, out of the faith owing to God and my Country,
I bid this Kingdom beware: and doubt not but God, who has dignified this
Parliament already to so many glorious degrees, will also give them (which is a
singular blessing) to inform themselves rightly in the midst of an unprincipl'd
age; and to prevent this working mystery of ignorance and ecclestastical
thraldom, which under new shapes and disguises begins afresh to grow upon us.

The end.

