Ward Mayor.
Curia specialis tent' in Festo S. Michaelis Archang. Anno Regni Regis Caroli
II, Angliae, etc. xxxiii.
THis COURT does desire Doctor Burnet to print his Sermon, preached this
morning at St. Lawrence Church, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens
of this City.

Wagstaffe.

An Exhortation to Peace and Union.

A SERMON Preached at St. Lawrence-Jury, AT THE ELECTION OF THE LORD MAYOR of
London, On the 29th of September, 1681.

By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXI.

MAT. 12. 25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every Kingdom
divided against it self is brought to desolation; and every City or House
divided against it self, shall not stand.


THere are some Truths so clear in their own Evidence, that tho they give us
light to prove other things, yet they themselves admit of no Proof, but are to
be reckoned amongst those Notices that the Mind naturally has, which she can
neither shake off, nor dispute. Among those this in my Text is to be numbered;
for Union and Peace in Society, as it is the chief End and Design of all those
Combinations of Men that run together; so it is the main Support of every
State. And tho Governments have differed in almost all other Maxims; some being
founded on Virtue, others on Vice; some intended to carry on Justice, and
others set up on Robbery and Piracy; yet all agree in this, that they must have
Peace at home: And tho many have differed in the Premises, how to compass it;
yet all agree in the Conclusion, that it must be purchased at any rate. A
Government that admits of Hostility at home, must soon turn Felo de se; for
this is as a Disease that consumes the Vitals, and when they are wasted, the
exhausted Carcass will be exposed to every Beast of Prey that seeks to devour
it. A Man inwardly sound can resist many Accidents, and live after many Wounds,
and a great Loss of Blood and Spirits; whereas he that is vitiated within, is
feeble in every thing that he undertakes, and easily overthrown by any
Impression made upon him: So the mightiest States, when broken within
themselves, are too weak for a much less Power that is entire.

These things are so plain, that it were a loss of Time and Words to dwell upon
them. And so our Savior refers to them, being to answer the most malicious and
unreasonable Cavil that ever was, by which the Pharisees endeavored to take
off the Conviction which his Miracles had left on all that saw them,
representing him an Impostor, and in confederacy with the Prince of Darkness,
so that these mavelous Effects followed upon that Agreement. This they at
this time only whispered amongst themselves, perhaps they only thought it; but
Christ, to give them a further discovery of that Divine Power that dwelt in
him, showed that he had another of God's Attributes communicated to him, his
Omniscience, as well as his Omnipotence, for he knew their thoughts. And being
to confute this, so as it should not be possible to reply upon him, he begins
with the Words in my Text, as a Maxim so certain, that all Constitutions, good
or bad, must agree in it, All that are associated into any Body must take care
not to destroy themselves. And therefore since his whole Doctrine tended to the
advancement of the Glory of God, to the bearing down of all Vice, Immorality,
and Mischief, which are the Strongholds of Satan, and of that ridiculous and
impious Way of Worship, and Idolatry, which was set up by the Devil's means,
the Inference was as certain, as any Proposition in Euclid is, that therefore
there was no secret Compact between them.

I shall say no more on the Occasion that led our Savior to speak these Words,
but shall come to consider them in themselves; I shall not enter into a
Panegyric of Unity, or a Declamation aganst Discord, a Man may as well praise
Light, or commend Health, or show his Eloquence in disparaging the Gout or
Stone; these things are such, that every Hearer is before hand convinced of
them. I shall therefore handle this Subject wholly with respect to Religion,
that so it may become this Place and Occasion, and shall speak to these Heads.

I. There is nothing that defeats the Ends of Religion more, and does more
naturally lead to all manner of Sin and Impiety, which must end in Temporal as
well as Eternal Ruin, than intestine Heats and Divisions about it. 2. The
Beginnings of Heats are often very inconsiderable, but by a confluence of
unhappy Circumstances they soon grow to be almost incurable; A Division will
end in Destruction. And therefore the first Motions toward them ought to be
watched over, and stopped, otherwise these Bodies so divided cannot long stand.
3. I shall show the Weakness of all those Pretenses that are used to justify
Factions and Divisions. 4. I shall propose to you the Remedies, to which the
Gospel directs us, for the preventing and curing this Mischief. And, 5. I shall
plainly apply all to our present Circumstances, and the Business of this Day.
To return,
1. There is nothing that defeats the Ends of Religion more, and does more
naturally lead to all manner of Sin, Immorality, and Vice, which must bring on
Ruin in Conclusion, than intestine Heats and Divisions. If we have a right
Notion of Religion, we will not consider it only as a Systeme of Opinions, or a
Circle of some Forms, much less as an Engine to raise the Credit and Interest
of a Sort of Men that dispense it; but as an internal Principle and Discipline,
which tames and governs the Mind, and all its Motions and Appetites, and
directs the Course of ones Life. Now the irregular Propensities that are in
every one, some being of one sort, and some of another, are so violent and
sudden, that the first performance of Religion is to qualify and break these.
This cannot be done without much thought, and great recollection; and in order
to that a serene and calm Temper is the best Disposition possible; of which the
Philosophers were so aware, that they began their Instructions at those
purgative Doctrines, before they carried on their Auditors to their sublimer
Speculations. And the Quiet of a Society is not more necessary to the Happiness
and Advancement of it, than quiet Thoughts are to make a Man wise or good.
Therefore every thing that raises Disturbances within is to be guarded against,
as that which not only produces the Mischiefs that visibly attend it, but
really puts a Man quite out of order, slackens the Watch he ought to have over
himself, and sets him on to, or at least very gently excuses him to himself, in
many unjust and violent things, which seem often almost necessary to the
support of an Interest or Party.

These Heats are bad enough, if grounded upon Civil Matters; but in those there
is still some Check from the Thoughts of Religion, or the Return of a
Sacrament-Day, which will in some measure bring a Man into Tune, and will at
least let him see he is out of the way. But if they are grounded on Differences
of Religion, the Evil is less curable, Mat. 6. 23.
If the Light that is in us be Darkness, how great is that Darkness! That which
will moderate our other Quarrels, increases this, when we imagine we are doing
God good Service; and so the more strict we are, we become the more hot and
peevish; in which we will not only be applauding our selves, but instead of
being reproved for it by those, who would perhaps chide us for Animosities in
other things, we will be cherished and encouraged by them, as Persons zealous
in their Matters, or as many call them, in the Concerns of Religion. In this we
will by degrees become so corrupted, that one of the worst Vices will carry the
Name of one of the best Virtues, our Wrath and Malice will be called Zeal. The
ill Effects that this will have on our selves will be, that as this Temper
grows upon us, all our inward Seriousness will in a great measure abate, and
turn merely to a Form; and with that many other Sins will creep in upon us;
yea, we will perhaps grow to that degree, that we will imagine, that by our
Rage and Heat we offer up some acceptable Sacrifice to God, to compensate for
our other Disorders. We will bear with many ill things in others, because they
are of our Party, whom otherwise we would detest for their ill Lives; and by
conversing much with them, we will contract at least a Familiarity with their
Vices. And it is very likely the Contagion will not stop at that, there will
follow a Train of the most unjust and malicious Things possible; such as the
making and spreading Lies and Calumnies, and the supporting them by Oaths and
Villainies. And if this Humor goes on, it will carry those that are corrupted
with it to Persecution, if they have Power, and to Rebellion if they have not.
And Oppression will make a wise Man mad, but much more one that is weak and
misled.

And thus a Man suffers mightily in the Peace and Purity of his Mind, by
admitting those sour and ill-natured Passions into it. And Societies suffer no
less: The private Affections of Relations, the Kindness of Neighbour-hoods, the
Order of Corporations, and the Strength of a Nation, are dissolved by nothing
so much, as by those peevish and ill-temper'd Humors: So that the Public
Peace, and the Security of the Whole, is sacrificed to those domestic Heats,
whilst every Party is more concerned to ruin the other, than even to preserve
themselves by a common Defense. And those Heats once kindled, burn longer, and
deeper, and are apt to break out after they seem to be quenched, when ever a
new Opportunity blows upon them.

That this Temper is certainly followed with those Effects, will easily appear
to every one that has seriously observed the Advances it has made upon himself,
if at any time he has given way to it. And those who have looked into the
Histories of past Times, see almost in every Age the Ruins that it has made; as
Rocks are known by the Wrecks that float about them.

Shall I tell you what havoc this made among the Jews? what a desperate and
mad sort of Robbers and Murderers their Zealots became? The Humor was far
advanced when St. Paul was one of them; for he going under the authority of
that Character, made havoc of the Church, and went from City to City, to
imprison and bind all that called on the Name of Christ. This grew afterward
to a pitch of Madness that is scarce credible, if we had not so good a Voucher
for it as Josephus, who was an Eyewitness. When the Power of the Roman Empire,
under which the whole World did bend, came against them, so that it was
necessary for them, either to prevent their Ruin by an early Submission, or to
defend themselves from it with an united Strength; the Rage that was among the
several Parties so distracted their Councels, and disordered their Designs,
that they could neither prudently submit, nor generously resist, but they
languished away in Famine, or destroyed one another in those unnatural Broils
within their Walls. When God blessed his Church with Peace and Protection, and
after a long Trial, during three Ages and ten Persecutions, raised up a
Nursing-Father to it; soon after that two Contests arose. One was about a
personal thing in Cecilian, Bishop of Carthage, Whether he, or his Ordainers,
had denied the Faith, and delivered up the Sacred Writings, in the former
Persecution? The other was concerning a speculative and mysterious Point of the
Eternal Generation of the Word, in which it is probable the Difference at first
was only in the manner of expression. One of these distracted the best Portion
of Christendom, I mean the African Churches; and the other, with those
Questions that arose out of it, made such havoc in the Christian World, for
above two Ages, that it not only stopped the Progress of that holy Religion,
and gave the Heathens the greatest Advantages they could possibly have wished;
but brought in a Subtilty, and Warmth concerning Speculative Points, that has
in a great measure driven out of the World the plain Simplicity of the Gospel.

When the Orthodox Party had Peace and Protection under Theodosius, and were
delivered from the Cruelty of the Arrian Princes, then arose a new Debate,
Whether those that had complied, and submitted in that time, and were ordained
by the Arrians, should be continued in their Sees, Libell. Pre. Marcell. and
^au^^
or not? The Luciferians that opposed this, were so persecuted by Damasus,.
and his Party at Rome, that at one time they broke into their Meeting House,
and killed about seven or eight Score of them. God witnessed his Displeasure
and Severity against those Violences; and the Church, both in the East, and in
the West, was given up to be scourged by vast Swarms of cruel and barbarous
Nations, Joel 1. 4.
who as the Palmer-Worm, the Locust, the Canker-Worm, and the Caterpillar, are
set down figuratively by the Prophet, succeeding one another, every one
consuming what the other had left: So these wasted Christendom to such a
degree, that it was visible those astonishing Judgments were not the
Punishments of ordinary Sins. And all the Evils that were among the Christians
flowing in a great measure from those Heats about Opinions, which raised bitter
Zeal and Strife, that brought on Confusion, and every evil Work, I may lay the
procuring Cause of those Plagues and Desolations, in a high degree, to the
charge of their Divisions.

When our Ancestors, the Saxons, received first the Christian Religion, tho as
it was not of so pure an Alloy as formerly, but much embased in that Age; so
into what Heats did they fall with the old Britains, concerning the Observation
of Easter, in which we now certainly know, that neither Side understood the
Point they debated about. But they were more set on that, and other
Superstitious Conceits, than on a real Conversion of the Nation. And how was
this Island plagued after that, by the Incursions and Depredations which the
Danes made for near two Ages? The Contests between the Greek and Latin Church
ended in the Ruin of the Eastern Empire; and the Triumphs of the Crescent over
the Cross, were in a great measure to be ascribed unto that most unhappy Breach.

I shall pursue this no more; the thing is plain to common Observation, and
needs not to be fortified with much Proof.

It is as certain as any humane thing can possibly be, that when any Body of
men are engaged against a Common Enemy, and yet divided among themselves and
jealous of one another, they will rather let the Enemy prevail than assist
their brethren, even in the wisest and best things, if they think the honor of
such actions will raise the credit of their Rivals. And thus if their strength
were ever so much superior to the Enemies; yet when his force is united, and
theirs disjointed, they must become a prey to him: but this will hold more
certainly if the Common Enemy is really stronger than they are, though united.
In such a case their heats among themselves are so unaccountable, that though
the World is naturally foolish enough, yet it is not to be supposed that mere
folly could carry such a madness so far; there is more reason to ascribe it to
the secret practices of corrupted and perfidious men, who are employed, and may
be hired, to be Incendiaries perhaps on both sides. For a wise and watchful
Enemy, when one Plot fails, will soon set up another; and will think it an
extraordinary happiness, if without the infamy of an Assassination of a
Gunpowder Plot, which they would not choose but upon extremities, they can
make their adversaries so spend their strength one against another, that they
shall either deliver themselves up to them, or be able to make a very faint
resistance to a vigorous impression: And there is no design so certain as the
inflaming of divisions among their adversaries; and that both in Church and
State: which when they are once brought to that pass, that both sides have
vowed revenge, either party will be so intent on their little designs, that the
whole must perish: And some will perhaps come to think it safer to trust
themselves to the mercy of their adversary, than to the resentments of enraged
Countrymen. And thus will they bite and devour one another, till they are
either consumed one of another, or made an easy conquest to those that both
see and improve all their advantage. And so much I have adventur^^ to say upon
the First head. I come now to the Secon^*

2. The beginnings of those heats are often very inconsiderable; but by a
confluence of unhappy Circumstances, they soon grow to be almost incurable. It
is but a division at first, but that will end in ruin. All our evils flow from
our own ill humors; and whatever excites or provokes these, be it how
inconsiderable soever in its own nature, yet its effects will grow great and
remarkable. In Civil matters it is so. What a trifling thing was it among the
Romans to be of the faction of the Veneti or Prasini, that betted for matches
in the Cirque, which were distinguished by a Livery? yet this produced great
Convulsions in the Imperial City; and when the Emperor happened to be of either
side, that party of which he was, thought they had an authority to exercise
great Cruelties on all the other faction. But this is much more dangerous, if
the ground of the difference is any point of Religion, though ever so
indifferent in it self: What heats arose concerning the day on which Easter was
to be observed? How little did it concern Religion, what Cecilian, or his
Ordainers were, especially in the age after they were dead? And yet not only a
separation and violent rage, but a great effusion of blood, with the other
dismal consequences of that blind fury, followed upon this, and the Africans
continued quarrelling about it, till the Vandals came and destroyed both the
one and the other. And surely many of the contests about mysteries, began at
some unwary expressions, in which the one side fastened ill senses on the words
spoken by the other; and the other, rather than yield so far for peace sake, as
to explain themselves, choosed rather to justify their words in any sense,
than to retract or mollify them: And can we think without astonishment that
such matters as giving the Sacrament in leavened, or unleavened bread; or an
explication of the procession of the Holy Ghost, whether it was from the Father
and the Son, or from the Father by the Son, could have rent the Greek and
Latin Churches so violently one from another, that the Latins rather than
assist the other, looked on, till they were destroyed by the Othoman Family,
which has ever since been so terrible a Neighbor to the rest of Europe!
Oft-times one contest beeds another; and that which perhaps began at a
speculative point ends in a practical one; and that which begins in some Rite
or Ceremony, grows at last to a breach in matters of Faith.

The contests whether Christ had one or two wills, being determined by the
sixth General Council against the Monothelites, they by their interest at
Court, got that Assembly to be decried; so that a Picture of the Fathers that
sat there being hung up in a great Church, was removed, and those that removed
it said to excuse themselves, that no Pictures or Images ought to be in
Churches. Upon this those of the other party did violently contend, that Images
ought not only to be set up, but Worshipped; and this produced great disorders
in the East, under two or three revolutions of the Court: and in conclusion,
Italy shook off the Emperors Authority by the Popes instigation, because he
brake the Images. And this gave the rise to another question, whether the
Sacrament was only the Image of Christ as the one party asserted, or was the
very substance of his body. Both had Councils, which in those Ages past for
General ones, of their side. To what has the different explications of the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament made by Luther and Zuinglius, risen, though
it lies merely in speculation? It has raised such an alienation, that in many
places the Lutherans are no less, and in some they are more fierce, against the
Calvinists; than against Papists. Like a strange sort of people among our
selves, that are not ashamed to own a greater aversion to any sort of
Dissenters, than to the Church of Rome.

But to come nearer home; To what has a contest that began at first about Hoods
and Surplices risen amongst us? Those points upon which it began, have been
long ago yielded up as indifferent; but new matter will soon be found out by
those who have a mind to search for it. In the last age the heats about Divine
Decrees, and the Morality of the Lords day, almost destroyed us. Now as there
is no difference at all remaining about the one, Divines agreeing, as much to
press the observation of it, as the greater part of the Nation does in
profaning it; so in the other, the mysteriousness of those points being so very
much enquired into, there have been such moderate methods used in handling them
of both sides, that there are now no more heats concerning them: But alas,
though some things fall off, I do not know how it comes that this Monster
shoots out always new heads, and there grow up new Subjects for debate and
anger; and though at present there are no considerable Contests among us about
any Doctrinal points, yet we are not a whit the nearer an agreement: the reason
is, the alienation of our minds stands or rather grows still, and this is of
late blown up to such a degree by some venomous Libels and Pamphlets, that in
the midst of Peace and plenty we seem to be in a posture of War. And what will
the end of these things be? if this fermentation goes on, it will burst out at
last, and upon the first unlucky Crisis it must produce dismal effects.

It is not so much to be considered what are the grounds of contests in matters
of Religion, as what is the temper with which they are managed. Things of great
moment may be managed by men of prudent and calm tempers in so soft a manner,
that none of their differences shall be able to divide them: and the
inconsiderablest things possible, may by the ill natured sophistry of angry
men, be raised up to seem matters of the greatest moment. For it is but the
fastening an ill name, or an ill consequence to any opinion, that will do it;
and then since a consequence if rightly inferred, is really involved in that
upon which it follows, it is given out as the sense of a whole party, which
detests the consequence, and would forsake the opinion if they could but be
persuaded that it really belonged to it. It is in strife as in the letting out
of waters, a vent to the least measure does dilute and spread. Therefore the
Wise man advises us to leave off contention before it be meddled with. It may
seem a contradiction to leave it off before it is meddled with; but we are so
early to retire from all contention, that as soon as it appears, and before we
have engaged in it, we must break it off. For if we are once engaged, humor,
honor and other peevish or designing men will hold us to it: it is best to
break it off in time, otherwise we shall have reason to cry out often with St.
James, Behold how great a matter a little fire has kindled.

3. I now go on to the Third particular, which is to show how vain and
unreasonable all those pretenses are, that are made use of to support this hot
and bitter temper. I shall reduce them to these Four. First, Zeal for truth.
Secondly, A care to preserve our selves. Thirdly, Authorities from the Old
Testament. Fourthly, Authorities from the New. For the first,

It is true we ought to be zealously affected in a good thing; we ought indeed
to be much concerned in every thing that relates to our eternal happiness
hereafter, and to those means that dispose and lead us to it here. But there is
also a bitter zeal, which is reckoned among the works of the flesh, and a zeal
without knowledge. That zeal which is acceptable to God, must be suitable to
his nature, full of goodness, mercy and compassion. If it makes us hate, defame
or persecute our brother, we are sure this is not that zeal which will commend
us to God. In a word, true zeal is, when out of an inward sense of the goodness
of God, and of the excellency of Religion, we have an earnest concern in our
minds, that other men may honor and serve him, and participate in those joys
which we feel in Religion. A little reflection on our selves and our secret
thoughts will soon resolve the point, whether it is malice and revenge for some
injury supposed or real, whether it is some secret design and private end that
we disguise with the name of zeal, or a sincere affection to Religion and the
souls of our brethren, that governs us. We ought also to be well assured both
of the truth and importance of those things on which we employ our zeal, and
not let it run out impetuously on every trifle, and we are still to watch over
our tempers, lest our heat carry us too far. And we must never forget that we
ought to be zealous for peace as well as truth. Can it be supposed that those
who live in all sorts of debaucheries and impieties, are either zealous for the
Church on the one hand, or for the Protestant Religion, as they pretend, on the
other? If these things will scarce pass with wise men, much less will they pass
with that God, who sees the heart. It is certain, Zeal must never exclude
Charity; for the love of God, and our Neighbor is the foundation of it.
Whatever has not this at bottom is but the dreg of Education, the sowrness of a
party, and a thin disguise for black designs.

The second pretense is Safety. I am not to meddle with the public security of
government, that is a subject above me: I speak with relation to private
persons and their deportment. All Zealots apprehend themselves in some danger
from those against whom they are set; if their numbers are small, they fear
that they will become greater; and if they are great, they fear they will
master them: and so they endeavor to conquer them, first in point of
reputation in the battles of the tongue and pen, by defaming them, either
discovering real faults, or forging calumnies to disgrace them; and then in
point of interest insinuating themselves into such as they can have access to,
and endeavoring to work the ruin of those who differ from them. If there were
no other measures to be taken in matters of Religion, but the Maxims of humane
Policy, this might pass for tolerably prudent: But St. James tells us, the
Wisdom of that bitter zeal, is not from above, it is earthly, sensual and
devilish.

The Bonds of a man, and the cords of love are those, by which God uses to draw
us; and in imitation of that, the methods of reason, and the ways of meekness
are both more suitable to the Divine Nature, and more likely to work on the
greater part of men: In following these which God has appointed, we may with
confidence depend upon his protection and blessing; and if the petulancies and
follies of some make it at any time necessary to punish them, it should appear,
that what they suffer is the correction of a Father or Brother, and not the
wound of an enemy, or the lash of a Jailer. Extreme heats if not repressed will
carry to extreme severities. And perhaps no severities are very prudent, except
they be extreme, as are the Inquisitions of Spain; but we may see what the
Church of Rome has gained by their cruelties in the last Age. Violence
alienates those further, whom we ought to gain upon, and likewise increases
their party by the compassions of all good-natured people, who are thereby
first inclined to pity them, then to love them, and perhaps in conclusion to go
over to them: and so the sharpness of rigor instead of being a security, often
proves the ruin of those who depend on it: whereas the ways of love and
meekness will work more universally and effectually, at least to mollify if
not to turn those with whom we deal; and it draws all people who are less
engaged in their affections, to adhere to those who are moderate: The very
appearances of a calm temper have a charm in them, but the effects of them in
concurrence with other prudent methods, are almost irresistible. In sum, it is
better to be overrun and ruined in the ways of meekness, than to conquer all
the World by cruelty; in the one we bear the cross and suffer for righteousness
sake; in the other we triumph in the Garments of Antichrist dyed red with the
blood of those who though in errors, yet may be good men in the main for ought
we know.

The third pretense, is from the severities of the old Testament, and that
spirit of zeal, which was so much commended and set up for a pattern in the
Instances of Phinehas, Elijah, and others. But our Savior answered this when
he was desired to suffer his Apostles to imitate Elijah, and to call for fire
from Heaven; that was because they could not kindle it upon earth, otherwise
they had begun there; but our meek and lowly Savior rebuked them, and told
them, They knew not what Spirit they were of: (...) 9. 55.
And that the son of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. That
people was fierce and untractable, and as they had the Land of Canaan by an
immediate grant from Heaven; so the Civil Government was kept in the hand of
God; and sharp punishments were inflicted on those that broke those Laws by
which they held all their possessions: But the dispensation of the Gospel is
wholly Spiritual upon another bottom, and to be managed in another method.

Fourthly, The last excuse for these heats is from the practice of our Savior,
who severely laid open the hypocrisies of the Pharisees; and the Apostles who
writ warmly against false Teachers, by which a sharpness in speaking and
writing seems well warranted. But if we consider that our Savior certainly
knew the Pharisees were Hypocrites, and did by the show of strictness mislead
the people, so that they were in danger to perish by their false Doctrines, and
that no meekness, no reason, no nor the most wonderful miracles which he
wrought, could work upon them; it was necessary for the good of others to
expose them. So if we manifestly see an Hypocritical sort of people misleading
the World in points that endanger their salvation; and are well assured that
what we say is true, and that fairer means cannot prevail; we not only may but
ought to discover this: But this will not excuse those who believe every story,
and propagate it merely out of hatred to others, and know in their own
Consciences that their chief concern is to disgrace those they hate, and not to
preserve others, out of a principle of charity to them. There must be a great
evidence to make us conclude a man an Hypocrite, even some one ill act will not
amount to it: nothing but some very heinous crime, or an ill course in some
sin, which the common illumination of all Christians discovers to be evil, and
which they disguise with a color of Religion, ought to justify the fastening
this black imputation on any: For God knows in how ill colors many would
appear, if some of their secret actions were made public, which may seem, and
indeed are, heinous; and yet they having truly repented of them, ought not to
be so branded. We ought to judge charitably, and to be ready always to put the
best reasonable construction on other men's actions, that upon a fair
representation they will bear; and make such allowances for the errors and
failings of others, as we know in our own consciences we would desire to be
made for our own, if all the secrets of our lives were known. They are known to
God, and ought to be remembered by our selves; and in those cases, he that shows
no mercy in his censures, is to expect judgment without mercy. But the force
of this whole Objection will be better taken off by the fourth particular that
I proposed,

4. Which is to consider the methods that Christ and his Apostles have
prescribed for bringing us to Love and Unity.

The whole life of our blessed Savior was a continued course of meekness, and
lowliness of mind; and in these he proposes himself chiefly as a pattern for
our imitation; Matthew. 11. 29
and it is scarce possible for men to quarrel much, that are under the
influences of that happy temper: he has made this the cognizance, by which all
the World shall know his Disciples, John 13. 35.
if they love one another: And has not only charged us to love our Friends, but
our Enemies, Matthew. 5. 44.
Persecutors and Slanderers; to bless them, to pray for them, and to do them
all the good that is in our power. So that no excuse of ill usage can give us a
privilege to hate, to rail at, or revenge our selves of others. And we may see
the sense he had of Unity and Peace among his followers, by his intercession
with his Father for it; since in that prayer of his a little before he suffered
for us, he in five several places prays, John 17. 18, 21, 22, 23.
That they might be one, as the Father and he were: That they might be one in
them, and be made perfect in one. And as our Savior delivered this to his
Apostles, so they in every Epistle did repeat the same exhortations with most
vehement and mighty obtestations, as considering, That this was essential to
the very Being and preservation of the Christian Religion.

A Controversy arose then which raised great heats concerning the obligation
which the converted Gentiles lay under to observe the Law of Moses: and there
were some zealous Jews, who though they believed in Christ, as the true
Messiah, yet they adhered so fiercely to the Law, that they not only separated
from the Apostles, but persecuted them, because they were for freeing the
Gentiles from that yoke. This was a question of far greater consequence than
those are about which we contend so earnestly: but in this we shall observe the
gentleness of the Apostles, even toward those that did obstinately dissent
from the determination which they made, though it proceeded from an infallible
Authority. St. Paul writing to the Romans, Romans 9. 3.
as he expresses his love to the Jews in so high a strain, that he was willing
to be accursed, that is, cast out of the Communion of Christians, if that would
have induced them to come into it, (a very high pitch of Charity, which needs
not be raised higher, as some fanciful people have done:) he likewise gives his
sense of their contests in those matters concerning the observation of their
customs in two speculative Maxims; and in two practical rules, which are of
general use, and on which he inlarges copiously. He first tells them, That on
both sides sincere men might so follow their persuasions as to be accepted of
God. ^om. 14. 6.
He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord: And he that regards not a
day, to the Lord he does not regard it: He further says, That Religion lay not
in such trivial things; The Kingdom of God, 17. v.
that is the dispensation of the Gospel, consisted not in meats or drinks,
(that is, in questions about clean or unclean meats) but in righteousness and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: and that he who in these things served
Christ, was acceptable to God and approved of men, whatever he might think of
other matters. Upon these two conclusions he grafts two rules; 5, 21, 22.
the one is, That every one should follow the clearest light he could have, and
be fully persuaded in his own mind, and to do what he did upon an inward
assurance, and without doubting: the other is, That men ought not to judge, or
set at naught their Brethren; 3, 4, 10. v.
that the weaker ought not to judge the stronger, nor the stronger to despise
the weaker; and that all should follow after the things which made for peace,
19. v.
by which they might edify one another. All this is plain and decisive.

When he writ to the Corinthians, he expresses great grief for what he had
heard of their divisions: 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12.
Some were for Paul, that is those of the uncircumcision: Some for Cephas or
Peter, that is, those of the Circumcision: Some were for Apollo, that is, those
of St. John's baptism: And some were for Christ, who perhaps received Christ as
the Messiah and yet rejected the Apostles: Upon which he argues, That by this
it appeared they were carnal and walked as men. 13. v.
And that they might not think he was partial to those that set up for himself,
he particularly sets himself against them. He also by an excellent Simile taken
from the several uses of the members of the natural body, 12. Chapter
exhorts them all, not to despise one another, but that every one in his
station should be useful to the whole body, and to every member in it: and runs
out into one of the greatest raptures that is in the whole Scripture in
commendation of charity, 13. Chapter
which he calls not only, a more excellent thing than all the extraordinary
gifts that were then in the Church; without which, doing miracles, suffering
Martyrdom, or the giving all one had to the poor was nothing; but preferres it
both to faith and hope.

Writing to the Galatians, though he incourages them with more than ordinary
earnestness not to yield to the Judaizers, yet he gives them this necessary
caution, That they should by love serve one another, Gal. 5. 13, 14.
for all the Law was comprehended in this one word, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: 15. v.
And he adds these weighty words, on which we should all reflect much, If ye
bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another. And
giving an enumeration of the fruits of the spirit, he begins with these, 22. v.
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness and goodness. He also exhorts the
Ephesians to this, as that by which they should approve themselves as worthy of
their holy calling, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5.
that They should walk with all lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing
one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace: And the reasons he gives for it are eternally strong and binding:
There is one Lord, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17* 18.
one faith, one Baptism, and one God, and Father of all. In his Epistle to the
Philippians it appears, how exactly he himself followed those rules, which he
gave to others; for he being then a prisoner, some that envied his labors in
the Gospel, and intended to add affliction to his bonds, preached Christ not
sincerely, but in pretense; yet he rejoiced that good was done by any person
whatsoever, and upon what motives soever. And though men that suffer, are apt
to be more touched with insultings and ill usage from their own friends, than
they can be for any thing that their Enemies do to them; yet this did no way
disorder him, nor did he thunder against those Hypocritical and insolent
teachers. Upon this he goes on to recommend that temper to others which
appeared so eminently in himself, and in the most tender strains of a true but
moving Rhetoric he obtests them, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3.
If there was any Consolation in Christ, if any comforts of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, that they would fulfill
his joy, and be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of
one mind: and that nothing should be done through strife and vain glory, but
that in lowliness of mind, every one should esteem others better than
themselves. And in order to this he proposes to them the wonderful pattern of
the humility and love of Christ.

How effectually does he exhort the Colossians to put off all anger, Col. 3. 8,
12, 13, 14, 15.
wrath, malice and Blasphemy, that is, reviling and reproachful words, and to
put on as the elect of God holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness and long-suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another: If any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so also do you; and above all things put on Charity, which is the
bond of perfection; and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which
ye are called in one body. He heard the Thessalonianswere eminent for their
mutual love, 1 These. 4. v. 9, 10, 11.
so that it was needless to exhort them to it, yet he beseeches them to
increase in it more and more; and since much meddling or the running about, are
the chief occasions by which contentions arise, or spread; 5. 13, 14.
he charges them to study to be quiet, and to do their own business: to be at
peace among themselves, to warn them that were unruly, to be patient to all
men, and not to render evil for evil, but ever to follow that which was good. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.
And in his Epistles to Timothyhe gives us the Characters both of false and
true teachers in relation to these things. Of the former he says, They were
proud knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, 2 Timothy
2. 24, 25, 26.
of which came envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, and perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds; but the reverse of this is, the servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient in meekness,
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth. Insinuating, that instruction
given in the spirit of meekness, was the likeliest way to bring this about. He
also exhorts Titus to put the Cretians in mind, Titus 2. 1, 2.
to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready
to every good work, to speak evil of no man, not to be brawlers but gentle,
showing all meekness to all men. The chief scope of his Epistle to Philemon, is
to persuade him to be reconciled to Onesimus, who being his servant had robbed
him, and run away from him. He exhorts the Hebrews to provoke one another to
love and to good works; Heb. 10. 24, 25.
and in order to that, Heb. 12. 14, 15.
not to forsake the assembling themselves together as the manner of some was,
and to follow peace with all men: And to take care that no root of bitterness
might spring up and trouble them, by which many might be defiled. For
Dissensions are the buddings of bitterness in the mind, and do both disturb and
corrupt those in whom they grow up.

Nor was this a style peculiar to St. Paul; though it may be supposed that one
reason, which made him insist so vehemently on it, and repeat this exhortation
so frequently, was, That he reflecting on his own temper, when he was a Jewish
Zealot, knew that it was a venom which might by degrees creep even into a
sincere mind, and leaven and corrupt it under the color of the being active in
the cause of Religion, and so transform a man, and an honest man too, into an
enraged fury, as himself was when under the power of those ill principles;
though what he did, was the effect not of designed wickedness, but of
Ignorance. St. James writes in the same strain against all furious Zealots, who
were apt to boast of their zeal, and to face down the truth with their
impudence, and pretended to great wisdom for the justifying what they did. He
tells them, James 3. 13, 14, etc.
that wisdom was not from above, but was earthly, sensual and Devilish: and
that where bitter zeal and strife was, there was confusion and every evil work;
but the wisdom that was from above, was first pure, then peaceable, gentle and
easy to beintreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and
without Hypocrisy; and that the fruits of righteousness were sown in peace, of
them that made peace. St. Peter keeps in the same path. He had formerly been
under the sudden transports of ill tempered zeal, when he smote with the Sword
those that came to seize on our Savior, which he ought not to have done, since
they were sent out by those who had a lawful authority; but it then appeared in
him, that the rages of indiscreet heat do not agree with that disposition of
mind so indispensably necessary to a Christian, which is a readiness to confess
the truth, though the danger in doing it were ever so apparent: He therefore
exhorts those, to whom he wrote, to lay aside all malice and guile, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
and Hypocrisies, envies and evil speakings; that they would be all of one
mind, having compassion one of another; C 3. v. 8, ^.
that they would love as brethren, be pitiful and courteous, not rendering evil
for evil, nor railing for railing, but contrariwise a blessing; and that above
all things they would have fervent charity among themselves, which would cover
a multitude of sins; 2 S. Pet. 1 ^.
and he exhorts all to add to their godliness, brotherly kindness and charity,
as if godliness could not be complete without these. St. John in all his
Epistles seems to have had nothing more in his thoughts, than to persuade those
to whom he wrote to love one another, which he does with the highest and most
earnest Exhortations to it possible: 1 S Joh. 4. 15.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, Chapter 2. V. 10, 11.
dwells in God, and God in him; he that loves his brother, abides in the
light, and there is no occasion of stumbling; he has a serene and calm mind,
and is not hurried unto violent Transports: Whereas he that hates his brother,
is in darkness, and walks in it, for it has blinded his eyes; it runs him on
blindly to many Precipices, it carries him to excessive Heats, and makes him
act like a mad man: And no wonder if it end in blood and confusion; 1 S. Joh.
3. 15.
for he that hates his brother is a murderer; he murders him in his wishes, and
will not fail to put these in execution upon the first opportunity; and to sum
up all, Ch 3. v. 14.
By this we know, says he, that we have passed from death to life, from the
death of sin to the life of God, Jude v. 19, 16.
if we love the brethren. St. Jude gives a Character of the Incendiaries that
were then in the Church, who did separate themselves, pretending to greater
sanctity and strictness, and yet were sensual, and had not the Spirit, which
appeared in these Instances, They were murmurers, complainers, who spoke great
swelling words, and had men's persons in admiration for advantage; that is, were
given to Canting, and did blindly follow their Leaders. But as he exhorts the
Christians to contend earnestly for the faith, V. 3. v. 22, 23.
so in relation even to those grossly deluded and unruly dividers, he charges
them to have compassion of some, and to endeavor to gain upon them in the
mildest manner; others whose tempers were rougher, were to be rescued by
sharper methods, like the pulling one out of the fire; and these different
methods were to be applied discreetly, as the condition of the person might
require it.

And thus we see the Apostles in all their Epistles repeat these Exhortations
with so much earnestness, that upon the whole matter it must be concluded,
either this is not the Gospel, or those that differ so much from these Rules
are not true Gospellers. I have enlarged on these things the more fully,
because I must conclude, that if the Authority of such words does not prevail,
it is a vain thing to go about to persuade any to these duties by other
Topics. Nor were these only Lessons given to Christians as political Precepts,
in that Infancy and weakness of this Religion, which as their numbers
increased, and their power grew, they might supersede: But we clearly see the
ancient Christians thought they were as much bound by them, after the Emperors
became Christian, as they were before.

When the last Persecution ceased, and the Calm and Protection of Constantine's
Reign succeeded, the Christians, though many of them carried still the marks of
the Cruelty of their Persecutions, in the loss of their Eyes or Limbs, yet
endeavored no Revenge on their Persecutors, no not in Egypt, where so many
thousands of them had suffered; and the Heathens, for above an Age after that,
continued to be in the chief Employments, both Civil and Military. And though
this had made it easier for the Empire again to turn to Heathenism under
Julian, yet upon his death no Cruelties nor Violences were employed; nor did
they think the Disturbance given by Arius, and the small Party he then had, was
to be prosecuted with a higher severity than Banishment. And though the Arians
became cruel Persecutors, when the Court was governed by their Councels, acting
more politically under Constantius, but violently under Valens, yet the
Orthodox, who had complained of those Severities, did not retaliate, when the
Empire fell into the hands of one that was so zealous for them as Theodosius
was: and when Nazianzen saw some too much inclined to it, in the beginnings of
his Reign, how earnestly did he study to moderate their Heats and Resentments?
And though the Donatists were after many renewed Hearings condemned in
Constantine's time, in every one of them, yet the Orthodox Party studied still
to gain upon them, by the ways of love and meekness, till at last they grew
insupportable, and fell upon the others, and robbed and wounded them,
committing such Outrages, that the Bishops in Africa were forced to implore the
Emperor's protection for their own safety; and yet the severity went no higher
than Banishment, or fining of the most outrageous. And as St. Austin was not
easily brought to consent even to so much, so afterward when the Governors
were punishing the Donatists for their Insolences, he was always interposing to
mitigate the sharpness of the Law, and the rigor of their Proceedings. It is
true, there were too great Heats in the Church, even then in the management of
their Debates, yet till Damasus begun that mad prosecution of the Luciferians
at Rome, these were not carried to violent degrees.

But as the purity of the Christian Religion grew corrupted, and iniquity did
abound, then did love wax cold, and rage grew hot, till at last it flamed out
in most terrible Persecutions, set on in the 12th. Century against the
Albigenses at first. And that these might be managed with all the advantages
possible, for the destruction of poor Innocents, new Courts were set up, and
unheard of Methods were found out, for facilitating Processes, making a slight
proof serve, and forcing the Party to accuse himself by an Oath ex Officio;
these Courts did also proceed upon secret Information, without Indictments or
Accusers. In a word: Forms of Procedure were invented, such as even Tyrants had
not used for the Crimes of Treason; and all this to destroy such as could not
submit to every unreasonable Doctrine, or ridiculous piece of Worship then set
up. And they were not only satisfied with the Cruelties then practiced, but
they made Laws and Canons, (then esteemed more binding than Laws) by which all
Princes were for ever bound to extirpate Heretics. And because some might be
better natured than easily to become the Inquisitors Hangmen, they were
declared to have forfeited their Dominions, if they should be guilty of any
lenity, which upon that fell to the disposal of the Pope. And lest some good
natured Bishops might be backward and slow in it, they were likewise bound by
the Oath which they took at their Consecration, to prosecute Heretics to the
utmost of their power. So the Bishops being thus sworn to condemn them, and
Princes threatened with Deposition if their Sentences were not executed, it was
scarce possible for these poor men to escape.

But we have not so learned Christ: We see clearly what Rules the Gospel gives
in this Matter; we ought to love one another as Brethren, and not to suffer our
Zeal to degenerate into Rage or Barbarity, but must study to gain upon those
who differ from us in the spirit of meekness, by which we may in time conquer
their Mistakes, and at least bring them to a greater temper, through the
gentleness of our deportment toward them, and incline them to have better
thoughts of us, and that may prove an effectual mean to make them think the
better of the Truth for our sakes. For the greatest part men's Affections do
insensibly govern their Opinions, since few examine speculative Points as they
lie before them, in the Arguments used about them, but consider them in the
lump, and generally judge of them by some prejudices which incline them to like
or dislike such a sort of men.

One thing is to be said for Moderation, that it is the constant Plea of the
unfortunate: all People when depressed, take Sanctuary in it, as a common
place, upon which it is easy to say many popular things. But alas, how
commonly is it forgotten by the very same Persons when the Wind and Tide turns?
We hear even the Papists, for all their Inquisitions and Burnings, Plead for
gentleness and favor, though in them it is scarce reconcilable to common
Modesty. If there were nothing but opinion in the case, if they had not such a
mixture of cruel Principles, with a blind dependence on a Foreign Power, that
is bound by their own Rules, never to relent till Heresy is extirpated, and
all Heretics destroyed, I should be as earnest to stir up Compassion for them
as for others: and as it is, I am sure we ought to carry so toward them, that
it may appear we do not hate their Persons, and do nothing against them but as
we are compelled to it for self-preservation, and even in the hardest things
that a prudent care of our own quiet and safety may force us to do, all
personal softness and gentleness toward them, is indispensably necessary to
such as would show themselves to be truly Reformed Christians.

Others Plead now for Moderation, though they have forgot it shamefully where
they have Power, as the Congregations do now in New England, and the Presbytery
did in Scotland. The one impose under the pains of Banishment and Death in case
of return; not only the Religion of their State, but many speculative points of
Opinion, and other things that are certainly indifferent. The Presbytery in
Scotland imposed the Covenant under the pains of Excommunication, upon which
followed a Forfeiture of the personal Estate, and a Sequestration of the real
Estate, and this all persons Men and Women were forced to Swear, though few
could understand it; and one particular was not far from an Inquisition, that
every one should discover all Malignants and Enemies to their Cause, 4. Article.
in order to the bringing them to condign punishment, by which every man was
Sworn to be a Spy and an Informer. These are ill Patterns, and as we ought not
to imitate them, so we must govern our selves by very different methods, if we
come under the Discipline of the Gospel.

4. And now I come to the last Particular, to make some Application of all this
to this time, and the occasion you are now met about. We are now brought under
one of the unhappiest Circumstances that a Nation or a City can be in. There
have arisen amongst us such heats, so much bitterness, so violent an Aversion
to one another, that it must needs beget great grief and sad apprehensions in
all that look on, and judge Impartially. Those Animosities, which no wonder if,
at the end of a long War, when our Wounds were bleeding, and our Sores were
tender, did transport, especially the unhappy but worthy Sufferers a little,
and were by a happy revolution, and a Gracious Oblivion, wisely buried and
seemed quite extinguished, are now breaking out again with a violence almost as
great as was during the War it self: and though we are still in Peace, yet such
a temper appearing among us, we have no reason to expect it shall continue
long. Tinder will catch fire from a spark. These heats are kept up by Libels
and defamations, and all the methods that can blow upon them to kindle the fire
the faster, and to make it flame out the more vehemently: and what must the end
of these things be? All that we now feel is but the beginning of sorrows, if we
are not so wise, as in time to know the things which belong to our Peace.

This were an unhappiness much to be lamented at any time: but what shall be
said, when we are as it were called upon from Heaven, by such awak'ning
Providence, to lay down our Contests, and to unite, for the preservation of
our Holy Religion? Sure none believe themselves, when they say, we are not in
danger of Popery: and none can think it but they who desire it, and so
apprehend no danger in it; and if we come under the power of that Religion,
none but Fools can hope that they shall escape the Severities they must fall
under, if they do not intend to change with the Tide, and even such must
resolve still to be suspected. Old Stories will be often remembered. What can
reasonably preserve us from this, or that storm, which a mighty Potentate is
ready to discharge on some of his neighbors, but our joining together in mutual
Unity and Brotherly love? England is a Body so vast and strong, that if it is
united both in Church and State, it cannot only defend it self, but so steadily
hold the balance, as to preserve as well its other Allies, as the Foreign
Churches, some of which are now exposed to the rage of their Persecutors, if we
do not continue dis-joynted at home till, all falls into one Scale.

Upon this occasion I cannot forbear to set before you the deplorable State of
our Persecuted Brethren in France, whom neither the security of Irrevocable
Edicts, nor the great Services done the Crown, and that not only in the last
Age, but during the present King's Reign in the Wars of Paris, nor their
peaceable submission and patience amidst all the oppressions they have groaned
under for several years, which has not provoked them to the least undutiful
behavior, nor their great numbers and industry, can preserve from those
Cruelties they now suffer merely for their Religion; for their carriage has
been such, that their Enemies have not a color for their Proceedings but that
only. And now the last privilege of the miserable, liberty to complain, is
denied them. Thus we see what all Promises, yea and Laws, backed with great
merit, do signify, where that Religion once takes place.

I must acknowledge, that among the many sad Symptoms we are under, this is
one good Sign, I am sorry to say it is almost the only good one, that God has
raised up in us such a Spirit of Compassion for the poor Exiles, that come and
seek shelter here: that the King does so graciously receive and encourage them,
and the People do so bountifully relieve them: And among the other Glories of
this Great City, the largeness of your Charities, and the tenderness of your
Care on this Occasion, will be added to your Honor here on Earth, and to your
Rewards hereafter in Heaven; and I hope what you have already given, is but the
Earnest of what you will do, if the numbers of those that fly hither, continue
to increase.

But though your Charity on this Occasion is a thing that well becomes such a
Reformed Church, yet it is not all the Use that we are to make of so sad a
Calamity. We know not how soon we may be reduced to the like Straits, and be
brought under a Famine of the Word of the Lord, and be exposed to the fury of
that bloody Religion. Let us therefore look up to God, that he may be merciful
to us, and may pour out on us a Spirit of Repentance, to turn to him, and to
forsake all our abominations, by which we have so highly provoked him, and
dishonored our holy Profession; and also a Spirit of Love and Charity, to
unite us one to another. I shall not adventure to offer at any thing toward
this, which belongs to the Government, or is to be the Subject of public
Consultations, but shall only say this to private Persons; If every one will
endeavor to dispossess himself of Heat and Rancor, and will resolve to do all
he can toward an Agreement; and if we all pray earnestly for it, there will be
no such difficulty in it as may be imagined. Hatred stirs up strife, but
Love covers a multitude of sins. If a better temper did possess us, we would
either find out Expedients to accommodate our Differences; or if we could not
agree them, yet we might enjoy our Opinions, and still love one another; and
then there would be no great danger in the continuance of some different
Speculations or Practices.

But if we will still look backwards, and be always reflecting on every thing
that may exasperate more and more, and will not look forwards to that Precipice
of ruin that is so near us, and to the only Mean that can save us from it; I
mean, a Reformation of our Manners, and a Composing of our Heats: If Libelling,
and the defaming one another; if the spreading of Lies and Scandals, with
design to make the breach wider, is still continued and encouraged among us,
what is to be said? This is of the Lord, and is a punishment for our other
sins, and the forerunner of most terrible Judgments, which will come on us like
an Armed man; and then when it is too late for the Public, we will be all of
us ready to accuse our selves, and to condemn one another. God avert this and
make us wise in time.

To conclude, I shall now propose a few things wherein we ought above all
things to study to be united among our selves.

In the first place, Let us join in calling upon God earnestly, and directing
our aims chiesly to his Glory, for the preservation of that Holy Religion,
which by his Grace is settled amongst us. Let us not, by our ill Lives, provoke
him to deprive us of so great a Blessing, and let us all resolve to spend some
portion of our time, at least an hour every Week, in earnest Prayers to him for
the Peace of his Jerusalem amongst us, and for continuing our Religion still
with us. It is his Cause, and we ought chiefly to offer it up to him for his
protection and defense: and if our sins do not defeat the design of our
Prayers, we may hope that a considerable number of such Intercessors will
procure great Blessings to us, especially we having the assistance of the
prayers of those who have taken sanctuary among us; toward whom your bowels
have been so opened, that we know we have many prayers put up by them which are
set to our account.

In the next place let us join together in all dutiful expressions of sincere
loyalty to our King; in an obedience to the Laws, and a reverent submission to
his Government: that our Enemies may not have the least pretense to say, that
the zeal we express for him, and our detestation of their Conspiracies, is only
a disguise to as bad designs: let us go on in the ways of submission and
loyalty, and by these put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Let all
Insolent Libels and reproachful Discourses be held in detestation, and let us
earnestly pray to God, the God of peace and love, to turn the hearts of the
Fathers to the Children, and of the Children to the Fathers, and the
Disobedient to the wisdom of the Just; and that the happy day of an entire
Settlement, and the burying of all Fears and Jealousies may come quickly, that
so one spirit may animate both the King and his Subjects, and the Court and the
Country. Let this be a part of our daily prayers, and let every one do all in
his power toward it, and then we may hope to see again serene and quiet times.

Let us also consider one another as brethren: Let us bear with one another
Infirmities: Let us give some allowances to the weakness of those that are
misled, to the force of Education, and the biass of vulgar prejudices. Let us
study to gain upon one another by gentleness and meekness. Let us have the
danger of Inquisitions, Fires, and foreign Conquest more in our thoughts, and
not contend still about some less essential or important points. Let not every
triffling excuse be sought out to make or keep up divisions. Let not those that
differ from us think, that because of some hard things which they may meet
with, they are excused from all Reverence to their Superiors, or a disposition
to be reconciled to those who may have used them ill in their Opinion. Let us
not aggravate matters beyond measure, but judge of all things with candor and
charity. In a word, let us endeavor if we can to be of one mind, and at least
to have one heart, to love one another, and to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

And in the last place, and in relation to our present Assembling, I humbly
exhort you to proceed to the Election you are now to make, with a spirit of
love and brotherly kindness, without faction or animosity, clamor and
confusion, that so in the Choice of this great Magistrate, the Head of so great
Body under the King, you may agree in a man that fears God, that honors the
King, that may be an Example of a good Life, an Assertor of the true
established Religion, a Maintainer of Justice, and a Promoter of Peace and
Order amongst you. In which let us all pray to God to bless and direct you, and
to make you still carry in your minds these words of our Savior. Every Kingdom
divided against it self is brought into desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self shall not stand.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed by Richard Chiswel.
1. DR. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England. In two
Vol. folio. 2. The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, etc. explained by
diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations
thereupon, by William Cawley Esquire; folio. 3. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane
Reason, Written by Ma. Clifford Esquire; twelves. 4. Mr. Seller's Remarques
relating to the state of the Church of the 3 first Centuries. 5. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons: with his Life, folio. 6. Fowlis his History of Romish
Conspiracies, Treasons and Usurpations, folio. 7. Markham's Perfect Horseman,
octavo. 8. The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication thereof,
against the Author of the Catholic Apology, and others: to which is added a
Parallel betwixt that and the present Plot, quarto. 9. Dr. Parker's
demonstration of the Divine authority of the Law of Nature, and Christian
Religion, quarto. 10. Dr. William Sherlock's Discourse of Religious Assemblies,
octavo. 11. A Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation,
octavo. 12. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of
York, octavo. 13. An Historical Relation of the Island CEYLON, in the
East Indies: Together with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author
and diverse other Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's Miraculous
Escape: Illustrated with 15 Copper Figures, and a Map of the Island. By Robert
Knox, a Captive there near 20 Years.

