A Second Volume OF DISCOURSES, THE CONTENTS of which follow in the next Leaf.

BY HEZEKIAH BURTON, D. D. Late Rector of Barns near London, and Prebendary of
Norwich.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Chriswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

AN ELENCHUS OF THE Several Discourses in this VOLUME
OF Walking Exactly. On Ephesians. 5. 15, 16, 17. Of Redeeming the Time. On Ephesians.
5. 16. Of Understanding the Will of God. On Ephesians. 5. 17. Of the Advantages of
Christianity On Ephesians. 3. 16. Of Loving our Enemies. On Mat. 5. 44. Of calling
no Man Master. On Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10. Of Inordinate Desire or Coveting. On Romans
13. 9. Of Doing our own Business. On 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. Of Studying to be Quiet.
On 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. Of Education. On Prove. 22. 6. Of Hospitality. On Romans 13.
12. Of Doing Good to All Men. On Gal. 6. 10.
ERRATA.
PAge 124. line 3. for (...) read (...). P. 137. line 9. after betwixt a Comma.
P. 184. l. 4. c. quas and caditirim gravit invait and (...) adminibus. P. 190.
l. 3. for (...) read ^e. P. 193. l. 5. for (...). read cursqily P. 217. l. 33.
dele them. P. 224. l. 4. for altogether read all together. P. 256. l. 8. read
(...). P. 362. l. 31. for your read the. P. 426. l. ult. for others read our
selves. P. 434. l. 10. read be blessed. P. 448. l. 27. read on them. P. 468. l.
30. for should read shall. P. 490. l. 4. for certainly read (...). P. 519. l.
10. for Finland, dele (...) read intend. P. 524. l. 30. for that all read that
of all. P. 636. l. 3. read is. P. 558. l. 21. read Men's. P. 556. l. 13. for
driss read dress. P. 574. l. 33. dele inflaming our hea^iness.
Books lately printed for RICHARD CHISWELL.
THE Works of John Lightfoot, D. D. late Master of Katherine-Hall Cambridg, in
2 Vol. with useful Tables to the whole, Fol. The first Volume of Dr. Burton's
Discourses, of Purity and Charity, of Repentance, and of seeking first the
Kingdom of God, 8o. Several Treatises and Sermons of William Falkner, D. D. 4o.
An Explication of the Creed, by Gab. Towerson, D. D. Foli^. Dr. W. Cave's
Sermon before the King, Jan. 18. 1684/5. A Discourse concerning the necessity
of Reformation, with respect to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome, 4o A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service, in an
unknown Tongue, 4o The right Notion of Honor, A Sermon preached before the
King at New market, by Nath. Vincent, D. D. with Annotations, 4o De Legibus
Hebraeorum and earum Rationibus libri tres, Authore Joanne Spencero, S. T. D.
Fol.
A DISCOURSE OF Walking Exactly.
EPHESIANS. 5, 15, 16, 17. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as
Wise, redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil. Wherefore be ye not
unwise, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is.
I Will first give some account of the Words, and then proceed to that which I
intend to make the Argument of my further Discourse.

The Particle (...), which we here render then, and in other Places therefore,
seems to refer us to what went before, and shows that the Text has some
Connection with, or Relation to it. It seems to be a Repetition, and summary
Comprehension, and it may be a farther Enforcement of the foregoing
Exhortations.

See then, or therefore, how ye walk circumspectly, i. e. accurately, or
exactly [(...).]

This exact Walking is here partly explained, and partly commended by the
following Expressions [Not as Fools; but as Wise,] i. e. Not as the Gentiles,
but as those who are enlightened by the heavenly Wisdom of our Savior; not as
Infidels, but as Christians.

The other Expression, which I take to be a particular under, or a means of
this general walking exactly, is redeeming the Time, i. e. Season or
Opportunity, which is time of acting, the best of time.

This is the literal rendering of the Original Words; but probably it does not
altogether reach the Sense of that form of Speech in the Greek, and other
Languages.

In Dars. Chap. 6. Verse. 8. Nebuchadnezzar blaming the Caldeans, that they did
not tell him his Dream, which he had forgot, as well as the Interpretation,
which, they said, was not to be expected from any Man, but only the Gods that
dwell not in Flesh: He would not admit of the Excuse, but tells them, I know
that ye gain time, (...). Which is paraphrased by Grotius, moras quaritis, Ye
delay; agreeably to that Expression in the following. Verse, (...), Till the
Time be gone, or pass away, i. e. you by Delays hope to get advantage, and
conctive something to impose upon me, and to save your selves from the
Punishment, which I have decreed, shall be inflicted on you. In which reply he
refers to the Delay, whereby they hoped to save themselves from Danger.

This seems to be the Sense of this form of Speech in Da^ul. Let us also
consider it in almost a parallel place to my Text* Col. 4. 5. Walk in Wisdom
toward these that (...), redeeming the time, i. (...). as I conceive, by all
lawful and prudent mean avoiding those Evils, and decli^ing those Dangers, with
which the Times threaten you.

And in my Text, the reason which follows, shows that this is much of the Sense
of these Words here: Redeeming the time, because the days are Evil, i. e.
taking all wise and honest Courses, whereby ye may escape the many Dangers of
which your days are full.

Nazi^nzen says of Juli^n, (...), where his buying or redeeming of time is
explained by his cunningly concealing his ill-Disposition under the disguise of
Gentleness.

Thus then; He that by care and contrivance so accommodates himself to the
Times, so manages himself that he may escape the danger and avoid the evils of
the Times; and not only so, but serves himself of them, and turns them to (...)
advantage; He is said to buy or redeem the Time in the largest import of that
Phrase.

According to this, It is a form of Words: that may signify either good or bad,
as the matter is which is joined with it. He that basely and cowardly declines
dangers which he is obliged to encounters Or, He who dexterously strikes in
with the Times, to do any ill things, or to neglect his Duty, may be said (...)
or (...), as was said of Julian the Apostate. When a Man does unhandsomly
comply with the Times, and dishonestly catch at, and lay hold of every
advantage to save himself, tho it be to the betcaying of his Country, or the
renouncing of his Religion, he may be said to redeem the time.

But the Apostle does not use the Phrase in this Sense. (...) for by it he
intends no more than that in all prudent and honest ways, they should decline
all the Inconveniences, and shun the Dangers of which those Times were so full;
whereby they should be hindered, or taken off from doing the good which they
ought: And that they should use all honest Care, and prudent Circumspection, in
closing with those fit seasons they might meet with, of doing that which by
their Religion they were obliged unto.

The following Reason which the Apostle uses, confirms this to be his Sense.
For the Days are Evil. Evil, i. e. in the largest Notion of that Word, as it
denotes Sin, as well as the Misery that is consequent upon it: difficult,
perilous times. Therefore be wise and careful to avoid the Danger, to decline
the Temptations, to shun the Disadvantages, to lay hold on the few
Opportunities which such Evil Days afford.

To this he subjoins the last Clause, which contains the Direction to, and
implies the necessary Cause of all that he had required before. And this is
propounded in form of an Exhortation.

1. Negatively and Generally. Be not unwise or Fools [(...).]

2. More Particularly and Positively. But understanding what the Will of the
Lord is. Understanding [(...)] the Word signifies an exact Knowledge, such as is
got by comparing one thing with another.

For this Cause that ye may walk circumspectly, declining the Disadvantages,
and escaping the unnecessary dangers of the Evil Times in which we live, be not
without understanding; but endeavor after a very perfect Knowledge of what the
Will of the Lord is.

Having given this account of the Words, I shall offer the Sense of them in
this short plain Parephrase.

That ye may behave your selves as becomes Children of Light, and not be
partakers with Insidels in the unfruitful Works of Darkness, etc. Be very
accurate in your Lives, and in all your Actions, as becomes those that are
endued with that divine Wisdom, that certain and excellent Knowledge which with
our Savior came down from Heaven, Live not like those who are uninstructed in,
and u^^cquainted with the excellent Religion of the Blesse^ Jesus. And although
the Times in which you live be full of Evil, tho you meet with Temptations to
Sin, and be environed with danger of Suffering; tho you find many hindrances,
and few helps to do well; yet be wise and dexterous in declining all needless
fruitless Dangers, escaping the Evils, and closing with the Opportunities you
shall have. And that you may be better assisted for, and in the doing all this,
that you may be thus exact in your selves, and prudent in your Carriage in
reference to the Times; inform your selves fully what the Will of God is, get
as certain knowledge as you can of what ever God has commanded, or would have
you do.

The Words contain many Propositions: But I shall only insist upon those for
the matter of my Discourse which seem to be most express, and to take in the
main scope of the Text.

I shall reduce them to these three.

I. All Christians ought to live exactly. II. They ought to make the best of
bad Times when they fall into them. III. They ought to use their best
endeadeavours to understand what the Will of the Lord is.
Of the First Proposition.
(...) Christians ought to see, to take good heed that they live exactly.

In discoursing of which, I shall

First, Show what it is to live Exactly. And Secondly, What Obligations lie on
Christians to live so, and to take heed to it. Thirdly, I shall give some
Directions. And Lastly, Make some Inferences.
First, To walk Exactly, is to use due Care and Caution, Circumspection and
Diligence, that we live according to the best and most perfect Idea of good
Life* (...) seems to signify this. It may refer to to the thing done, and then
it denotes the perfection of that work: Or to the Doing, or Doer; and then it
means his Care and Diligence. It often bears a respect to both, and signifies
the care that is taken in order to the doing any thing as well as it can be
done. So that by this we are at once directed to the End, and to the Way or
Means by which it is to be attained. The End is a perfectly good Life: The Way
to it is by a diligent Care.

Now, as it is commonly said that to live, signifies more than doing some single
Action^, so I must say that it is more than all our Actions. For, as it is
requisite to make the whole, not only that all the parts be there, but they
must be united too: So it is in the matter before us. To make up a good Life,
the Actions must not only be good singly and by themselves, but in that
Relation, Proportion and Order, which they have unto each other.

So that in short, To walk, or live exactly, is to take care that the whole
course of our Life be such as it cannot be better, omitting nothing that is
Good, doing nothing that is Evil; that we do thus universally, at all times, in
all places, whatever we do that respects God, or our Selves, or our Brethren.
That our Actions be in nothing deficient, neither as to Matter or Manner, as to
the Principles, the Reasons and E^ds of them. That in all these respects they
be exactly agreeable to human Nature in general; to our Condition and
Circumstances in particular; that is, that they be as good as such Men as we
are can do.

If any enquire yet more particularly what a perfectly good Life is? I may
answer, that as the Apostle here supposes it, so may I suppose that all Men
know it. All Men have an Idea of Goodness, which upon several Occasions they
take notice of, and refer to; as when they approve and commend, or blame and
condemn several Practices. And whenever they hear such a description of good
Life as they understand, they give an immediate assent to it. But because in
too many this Idea is not so actually observed, as it would be well if it were;
that I may raise those Thoughts, and help to make them more explicit, I will
propound this general Dedescription of it, viz. When a Man's Will and
Affections, and all his Actions, are so guided by a true, and clear, and large
knowledge of God, and himself, and the rest of the World, that he loves God with
all his Heart and bears good, will to other Men, as he does to himself; that he
glorifies God, and promotes his own and his Brethrens best state in all he
does, and the most he can; And does all this knowingly and intentionally, or
with the design of doing it. This in general every one will think a good Life:
I must not go on to Particulars. These are some of the most essential parts of
that Life which the Apostle requires an exactn^ss in, i. e. that Men should aim
at the perfec^ion of it; and in order to this, that they should take great care
and pains, that they should mind it, and give good heed unto it.

Secondly, I proceed to show, why Christians should take such care to live so
very exact lives. There are many things which show this to be good, and fit,
and necessary for Christians; which I shall briefly; propround.

1. We have an excellent Rule of Life made known to us; so that if we will
correspond with it, we must live Exactly. We have the knowledge of those Laws,
which direct and oblige us to the most perfect Life, which reach to our inward
Motions, as well as outward Actions: Some of which are Universal, and to be
observed by us in all we do. Such are the Love of God, and of our Neighbor,
and of our Selves, in subordination to the Love of God. Others are our
Directions in particular Case; and Relations, if we be Superiors or Inferiors,
Masters or Servants, Parents or Children, or Friends; or if we meet with
Enemies, and suffer from the hands of Men unjustly.

We have all this plainly declared to us in express words. We are not then to
live as those who are left to mere Probabilities, and uncertain Conjectures, or
obscure Reasonings of what is good and fit to do in diverse Particulars. God has
indeed, in various ways, showed to all Men in the World what is good; but none
of them have so clear, certain, full a discovery of it as the Christian. And
because we know our Duty better than others, is it not to be expected that we
should do it better and more exactly than they?

2. We have also an Example of the highest perfection; and this challenges our
imitation. The Heathens have had very good Copies set them by virtuous Men
which God raised up amongst them. The Jews had their first Founder Abraham, and
diverse others who walked in the steps of his Faith, to conduct them in the Ways
of Holiness: But, alas! how short are all these of the Son of God, who is our
Example? What a Pattern of Life has he set us?

And when we have such a one going before us, by his Practice directing, and by
his Authority consirming and engaging us, How incongruous is it, that we should
be short and defective, that we should write ill after so fair a Copy, and
wander out of the Way when we have so good a Guide?

3. It appears not only fit, but just and necessary, when we consider that
every Christian has obliged himself to live by this exact Rule, to follow this
most perfect Example.

We have all, by our Baptismal Vow, bound out selves to live exactly. We have
declared, That we will forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. Now then, if
we will be true to our Promise, not break our Vow which we have so solemnly
made unto God, in the Congregation of his People, we must live exactly. By
Baptism we have entered our selves into the Institution of the greatest
Perfection; the Design of which is, to make us perfect.

4. Christians know that they must give a strict account of their Lives before
an Impartial Judge, that they must render a Reason of all their Actions to one
that is inflexibly just. And surely they that know this, ought to be very exact
in their Lives, that they may be so in their Accounts of them.

5. The Christian has such extraordinary assistances above others, that it is a
shame for him not to live better than they. The whole Gospel-Revelation is far
beyond what the rest of Mankind have. The secret, but most powerful Assistances
of the Divine Spirit, which are conveyed to our Minds by being conversant in
the Christian Doctrine, enable us to live far better than other Men: And if we
do not, we are greatly wanting to God's Grace, and to our selves, we receive
his Grace in vain.

6. This is the sure and only way to perfection. If we would ever in God's
established Methods arrive at that, we must strive to be exact, to do as well
as we can, so as we cannot mend it. For Man by doing his best, enlarges his
Power, and so advances still higher, till he has attained to his utmost pitch.

Thus it is with us in other Matters; by Actions we acquire Habits. The more
accurate our Performances are, the more earnest and diligent we are; and the
more we exercise our selves, the farther do we advance our perfection. This
then is the usual, the sure, and I may add, the only way to it. Thus in matters
of Trade, Apprentices and Learners are first instructed what it is they are to
aim at, and then persuaded to industry and diligence; and that whoever fully
comprehends that which is to be done, and diligently intends and pursues it, he
will not fail of arriving at great mastery. So it is in the Business of
Learning: He that has a clear and adequate Idea of what it is, and is diligent
in the Exercises that he is to do toward the attaining it, so as to do his
best, and continues so, he will not fail to be a good Scholar. In like manner,
he that well understands the good, the perfect Way in which he should walk, and
uses his utmost endeavor to act and live according to that knowledge, he will
in due time attain to as great perfection of goodness as is possible for him.

Thus, as many as would be perfect, must walk in this perfect Way, the Way that
leads to Perfection. And let as many as would be happy, be thus minded. For,
Perfection is the greatest and the most essential part of Happiness.

7. For a farther inducement to this, I may add, That as no Man can be perfect,
who is not thus affected; so it is questionable whether he can be truly good or
not, and assure himself of his own sincerity, who is not thus minded, For how
does he love Goodness truly, and as he ought, who does not prefer the greater
Good before the less, who does not strive after more of it, and go on toward
perfection, who does not aim at the best? Upon this account, a late excellent
Author Dr. Henry M^^^ in his Enchirid. Ethic.
of our own, has put it into the very definition of Virtue, constantly to
follow that which it best. According to this, unless we aim at being perfectly
good, we are not truly so.

The sum of what I would say is, That there are in the Gospel such, so great
and plain discoveries of God, of our selves, of the state and condition of Men,
what it is, was, will be; of the true happiness and greatest misery of Man,
of the way to both: that to be in the natural and best use of a Man's self; to
be most affected with, and to have a principal regard to God; to be just and
charitable to all Men, this seems the natural result, and genuine issue and
tendency of such Knowledge: and to do otherwise, would be to act against it,
that is, it would be an unnatural violence to our selves.

From all that our Christianity informs us in, and directs us unto, we come to
understand, that a good Life ought to be every Man's principal Care and
Business; and that both because nothing is so considerable, and of such
importance; so profitable, so necessary, as it is to live well: As also
because this cannot be done without great care and diligence.

There is, first, great care to be taken, and pa^ns to be used, that we may
come to an exact knowledge of what tha^ Good is which we are to do all the
days of our Life. It is not so very easy to be out of all doubt, whether this
or that particular Action be good singly, but much harder to know this, if it
be compared with others, and with relations to them* And yet more difficult
to have a certain knowledge and settled judgment of all the good which ought to
be done through the whole course of Life: To retain and remember it, requires
farther care; and it will cost us still more pains to bring our Wills into
subjection to it: And to keep them thus subject, will be farther work. He
that will do all this, must be very vvatchful over himself, observe all his
Motions, curb and restrain his Appetites, and call all those Motions to
account, which will not stay for the direction of his Reason. He must guard
himself from all Temptations from abroad. In sum, He must be on continual
Exercise, and in the constant use of Understanding, and very intent, who
preserves himself in that due composure of Mind, and temper of Body, which
makes him capable to do good universally. If he be either ignorant, or
mistaken, or doubtful, or unresolved; if he be forgetful, or inconsiderate; if
he be but inadvertent, and incogitant for a Time, or be averse, and uninclined;
which may happen through a natural Temper, an inveterate Custom, a present
Diversion, or many such Causes, he will omit the doing good. And how hard is it
to prevent all these things?

How diligent then must he be, who at all times, in all cases, knows what is
good and fit for him to do, and who wills what he knows, and does what he
wills? He must not only consider himself, but others, nor only Men, but God
also, if he will fully understand and wisely judge what is good; and that not
only in general, but in every Instance. Nor must he only barely suffer himself
to do what he knows to be good, but also actively determine himself from an
inward approbation of what is good. And the Will must be so effectual as to set
the inferior Powers to work. And will all this be done without great Care,
without great Attention and Intention of Mind?

And as this Care and Diligence is necessary, so it is also effectual. As Men
cannot live well without it notwithstanding all the other helps they have; so
if they be indeed watchful and careful how they live, they will not fail to
come to great exactness in Well-doing. Which I thus make out.

All Men in the World are endowed with the knowledge of some Good, some Virtue
or other: And if a Man well and carefully attend to that, it will by that
Cognation which is between all Virtues, by good Consequence, by Parity of
Reason, some way or other lead him to the knowledge of more, and by degrees of
all the great and more illustrious Goods. And the practice of any one Virtue
will afford him such Delight and Satisfaction, that it will naturally dispose
him to repeat the same, and to seek after other Instances wherein he may have
the same Pleasure; and he will be greatly inclined to keep his Mind in the same
State and Exercise, whereby he will be excellently disposed and enabled for the
search after all other things that are good, both to judge truly of them, and to
will and do all that he thinks Good.

I need not say how great the advantage of the Christian is in this matter
above what all other Men can pretend to. For he has those sure Oracles which
instruct him, where Nature and unassisted Reason would have left him ignorant,
or mistaken, or doubtful.

He that lives in the Christian Church, and joins himself to the Assemblies of
Christians, and will but open, his Ears to hear, he cannot but understand in
some sort that it is good for him to do justly, to love Mercy, etc. He cannot but
think it reasonable he should do so always.

And that good Spirit of Truth and Holiness, which moves upon our Minds, and
inspires with Wisdom, and always strikes in with good and hearty Endeavors, is
ever ready to give his assistance to lead us into Truth, To work in us both to
will and to do what is good. This he does certainly and constantly to them who
set themselves seriously on the search after Knowledge, and who are in good
earnest careful to work out their Salvation. Insomuch that no Man who has used
care and diligence in this, has ever been left destitute of the divine
Assistance.

He who is no where wanting to hearty Desires, and careful Endeavors after
Goodness, will not absent himself from his own Institutions; but will make them
effectual for the Ends to which they are ordained.

When we see the great Seize of Socrates, and other Heathens, and what
Heights of Goodness they rose to by the assistance of the divine Spirit, when
yet they had not our inspired Writings, and Records of exemplary Lives, and
brave Deaths; particularly of that holy and wonderful one of the Son of God:
Can we imagine that this good Spirit will not convey strength into our Souls,
when we have those helps, and are in the use of his own Methods?

I conclude this with that which seems a most convincing Argument, both of the
wonderful Efficacy, as well as Necessity of great Care and Caution,
Watchfulness and Diligence to be used by those that would live very well: it is
this, That this without the great advantages which we Christians have, has
raised Men to an higher pitch of Holiness and Goodness, than our most perfect
Institution without that can ever bring us to. There is no Man, who considers,
but will allow the Christian way leads to far greater Perfection than any
method which the Heathens ever had, and that we have abundance of Advantages
under our Dispensation, which they never enjoyed: And yet we cannot but with
shame confess, that several of them have out-stript most of us in the Race of
Virtue. Of which, if we examine the Reason, we shall be able to discover none
but what may be resolved into this, viz. That they were careful how they lived,
and we are not. Socrates and others of them made living well their great Study,
their own Business, whereas we account it our (...), our Diversion. We bestow
little care and pains on that, and this is the true reason why they were better
without the Christian Religion than we are with it.

We may be somewhat more assured of the truth of this Observation, if we will
but take notice of our selves or others: For, we shall always find, that
according as we are more or less intent on, and diligent in the business of
living well, we do make greater or lesser advances in Virtue. And in all our
Observations, have we met with a Man, who has been set upon it to live well,
that in time has not done so? Or have we known one that has made it a
by-business, that ever attained to any considerable perfection of Goodness?

For these Reasons, we may suppose holy David did so consider his Ways, and
resolved that he would take (...) to them, and was so fully set on walking in
the perfect way, and gives this advice to young Man that would cleanse their
way, that they should take heed to it according to the Word of God.

This may suffice concerning the Reasons why Christians should live exactly, i.
e. why they should aim at the best and most excellent Life; and in order to
that, why they should use care and diligence; both which, I think, are employed
in the word, which we render circumspectly.

It is but agreeable to the Religion we profess, to be so circumspect and
careful that we may live well. And this is necessary and serviceable to our
Happiness, and attaining the utmost Ends for which we were made, which we can
never accomplish, till we arrive at the greatest perfection of which we are
capable; and this we can never reach otherwise than by always doing the best we
can do: Which we shall never do unless we use our utmost care and diligence so
to do. Likewise if we be careful to live as well as can be, we shall be so
assisted by the divine Grace, that we shall advance to greater Perfection than
we have at present, according to that of our Savior, To him that has shall
be given. And if we continue thus doing, we shall go forvvard from doing
something well, to do all so; and from lovver degrees of Virtue to higher,
till we have attained to an universal goodness in the highest degrees; that
is, to all that Perfection to which our Natures can be raised; and consequently
to all that Happiness of which we are capable, and to the attaining of all the
Ends for which our good Creator made us.

Thus we see how both necessary and available a means living exactly is to all
the Ends for which we were made.

Thirdly. Supposing now that we are resolved to live thus; for advice what we
are to do in order to it, I offer these four Particulars to be observed.

1. Let it be your serious and constant endeavor, to get a true, certain,
clear, distinct, adequate Idea of the Perfection or exact Goodness, 1. Of an
Action considered both singly and in it self, and also in the Reference it has,
and the Order in which it stands to others; 2. Of a Life, or the whole Complex
and Series of Actions which can be done by you, all the time you live on Earth.
Understand what is that Good, what is the best you can do all the days of your
Life. In which you have the wise Man going before you, Eccles. 2. 3. I sought
in mine Heart to give my self unto Wine (yet acquainting mine Heart with
Wisdom) and to lay hold on Folly, till I might see what was that Good for the
Sons of Men, which they should do under the Heaven, all the days of their life.
And not only Solomon, but as many as have been wife Men, as far as they have
been so, have seriously considered this.

And indeed this is absolutely necessary to an exact Life, that we should have
an exact knowledge of what it is; and it is the first thing that is to be done;
If ye know these things, says our Savior, happy are ye if ye do them. Men's
Practice can rise no higher than their Understandings, which are the first
Springs, the beginnings of all other Motions. We must first know, before we can
will and do. And if the Knowledge be imperfect, the Action that proceeds from it
cannot be perfect. We must follow our Guide; and the perfection of all our
other Actions is limited by our Understanding: Therefore the Apostle prayed,
their Love might abound more and more in Knowledge, etc. This may serve to show
the Reason of this Direction.

Let me also add, That I suppose every Man has some Notion of Perfection, but
it is too often mixed with falsehood, it is uncertain, obscure, confused,
defective and short. My advice is, that we be more explicit, and rid our Minds
from these Defects as much as may be. And for our help; that we begin with an
Action, and consider what is the Goodness, the Perfection of a single Action
absolutely and by it self, and then in relation to others; which when we have
once found, then we may proceed to enquire, What is the good and exact Life?

2. Endeavor that this Knowledge may be ever present with you; let the Idea be
always before you. The Reason of this is, that dormant Knowledge, such as is not
ready for use upon every Occasion, will be of little efficacy, indeed it can do
nothing. It is all one, as ^o the conduct of our Lives, to be wholly ignorant,
as not to have an actual present Knowledge; it is the same thing to have no
Guide, as not to have him with us.

That your Knowledge may be thus ready always; think of it frequently, and take
every occasion to be in the exercise of it; both before you proceed to Action,
and in the very time* thinking what is the best you can do* and set before your
selves the greatest perfection of such an Action as you are doing, or about to
do. After you have done, reflect on it, and compare your Action with its Idea.

3. Be fully persuaded of the surpassing Excellency, the greatest Utility, the
absolute Necessity of living so Exactly.

By a full persuasion, I do not mean only a conviction in the Understanding, so
as it cannot withold its assent, but also a perfect conquest of the Will, so
as it approves and chooses. When a Man's Soul is so fully satisfied that there
is no better Life it can live, that it can do no better than that which the
Idea it has presents it with; so as it has not the least doubt, nor any desire
or inclination to do, to live otherwise; then is he fully persuaded.

Let the Scripture, nay, let our own Sense and Reason inform us, how absolutely
necessary it is not only to do some Actions exactly, but to live so, that we
may be perfect, and attain to a complete happiness: And that we cannot be safe
from Hell, and a miserable State, if we be not continually aiming at, and
reaching after the best Life.

That you may be thus persuaded, consider that this was the great Design of the
coming of the Son of God among us, and of all he did and suffered. He gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify, etc. and
he gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it, washing it with the
Laver of Regeneration, that he might present it, etc.

4. Let us be very careful to will and do all that which we at present think
and know best to be done. By this means,

1. Our Minds will be kept in their truly natural State, and our Faculties will
be compacted and united with, and in a fit subordination to one another.
Whereas if what our Souls think best is not willed by us, or if we do approve
and like, yet we do not do it, there is an unnatural distraction and division
among the Powers of our Natures, there is a disorder in the Soul.

2. Our whole Man will be in Exercise; the Understanding directing, the Will
complying and following the Guidance, and the executive Powers moving in
obedience to the Will as they ought. This maintains an integrity or wholeness
in us.

3. This has a manifest tendency to Perfection. For, this is the way to free
the Soul from Mistakes, if it chance to be under any concerning this Action.
Practice is the surest way to confirm us in the Truth, or to convince us of an
Error.

Again; Whilst the Soul is kept in this State, it is in the best disposition
for farther information. Besides, Experience, as well as Reason, shows, That
the best we know, or can do at present, carries us on to clearer Knowledge, and
greater Power, and more Perfection. It does thus in all other Cases, and must
do so in this.

INFERENCES.
1. If Christians ought to live thus exactly, then this convinces two sorts of
Men.

(1.) Them who censure and vilify others, because they endeavor so to do,
looking upon it as needless, fruitless, foolish, evil for Men to trouble
themselves, to be so strict and exact in their Lives. Such perhaps may mean
well, but they express themselves ill: they may intend no more but this, That
Men are over-cautious and fearful in some Matters, when there is no such danger
as they seem to apprehend; and that they are overexact in some little
indifferent Matters, as the Pharisees might be, tithing Mint and Anise, etc.
which makes it suspicious that they do not take care proportionably about the
greater Matters. But these Men should express themselves more warily: For when
they cry out against living so exactly and strictly, they condemn a Man for
doing his Duty. We ought to be exact; we cannot live too well.

(2.) They also seem to be in a great mistake, who, tho they meddle not with
others, yet, do excuse and acquit themselves from going on to perfection; i. e.
they satisfy themselves that they do that which is good, but never concern
themselves to do better. They think there is no Duty incumbent on them to do
the best they can, to go on to Perfection, to be holy as God is holy, and
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.

2. Hence it appears, that it will be expected and required of all Men, that
they be good, answerably to the Advantages they have of being so. Whosoever is
better born, that is, has a better natural Temper, and Parts, and Education, is
more free from Temptations and Hindrances, has more knowledge, and greater
opportunities of doing well, more will be required at his hands, than at
another who has not received so much from God. The Righteous Lord of all will
call us to account, according to what he has given us. To whom he has given
much, of him he will require more. And hence it follows, that all we Christian*
have a great Account to make. We pity the poor Heathens; we may do well to
consider, whether they will not give a better account of themselves than we can
of ours.

3. A very exactly good Life is agreeable to the Christian Institution: And
they who live best, do most answer the ends of, and live as becomes the Gospel
of Chrst. Some pretend to be better, and more true and orthodox Christians than
others; let them show that they are so by their better and more Christian
Lives. Thou say that thou art a Christian. Does thy Life show it? What do
thou more than Heathens or Infidels? And thou, who would be thought of the
highest form of Christianity, make it appear that thou art so by the surpassing
goodness of thy life. To live Exactly, is a fitting Compliance with, a suitable
behavior under the dispensation of the Gospel under which we are.

To what I have already said upon this Argument, I think fit to add somewhat
more. Thus then: When the Apostle requires us to walk exactly or circumspectly,
he enjoins us to give good heed, that in our whole life, 1. We do nothing we
should not do; Nor, 2. omit what we should, that is, that we do nothing that is
evil, that we neglect nothing that is good, whether we respect the Matter of our
Account, the Thing done, or the Principles, the Reasons and Ends from and for
which we do them, when, and where, and how we do them, that there be no Fault,
no Defect, but in every respect, and on every account, that our Actions be
good, that is, both suitable to, and becoming us that do them, and also
beneficial to us and to all. That our Actions be thus singly and in themselves,
as also in the order and reference they have to each other, and to the whole
Series of them, the course of Life.

For the making of this plain and easy to every Understanding, and fit for use;
I will give one single Instance in a particular Action, viz. Giving an Alms to
some poor Person. The Action in the matter of it is unquestionably good in
general; but then, that which I give must be mine own, if it be not, I must
first restore before I can give. Again, I must give according to my Ability,
that is, I must not by this Gift disable and hinder my self from doing any
thing that is better and more necessary, than my Contribution toward the relief
of one poor Man is; such I account to be the convenient Provision for Wife and
Children. A Man must not make himself or Children Beggars, by relieving
Beggars. Again, all Dues to the public Service, to all public Officers, must
be discharged, before we can set apart any thing for the relief of the Poor;
that is, Justice must take place of Almsgiving. This being supposed, that I
have something of mine own, which I cannot dispose to any better or more
necessary use: I must then, if I would be exact, consider the Party to whom,
the Quantity which, and the Season when I give. And if all this considered, the
Contribution be good, that is, if it bear a proportion to my Abilities, to his
Necessity, if it be done in a fit Season, and proceed from a knowledge of all
this, and with a willing Heart, and for a good Design, I am then exact in this
particular. But if I give that which is not mine, if I give more than can be
spared from necessary Uses; if, by attending this, I be taken off from some
greater Charity, some better Work; if I do it unseasonably, that is, sooner or
later than is behoveful; If I mingle my Charity with Anger and Scorn, and
bestow mine Alms with Contempt or Passion; or if I do this to be seen or talked
of, or merely to save my Credit, or only to rid my self of the trouble of an
importunate Beggar; or do it without knowledge, or never considering, merely out
of custom, or from a natural tenderness and compassion, I do not in this case
walk exactly.

I add no more under this Particular, having already said so much, as perhaps
may discourage some that are looking toward Virtue. They will be ready to say,
Why such Exactness? this is more than needs, nay more than can be used: for if
we should be thus nice in all our Actions, we should be hindered from doing
them; as he that will not do a thing unless he do it well, will probably not do
it at all. We should miserably perplex our Minds, and fill our Souls with
endless anxiety and scrupulosity, and all this to no purpose; for we should
never be exact in what we do. No more than a Mathematician, who has an exact
Idea of a Triangle, or a Circle, can draw such Figures.

To this I reply:

1. That we may, by the Divine Assistance, attain to such exactness, as to do
that which is really Good. Tho it will not be perfectly, yet it is truly so;
nay, and by degrees, we shall be going on toward the greatest Perfection, as
both your selves and every one's Experience testify.

2. There is great necessity of our taking heed to be exact, lest if we be not,
we should do ill. For,

1. Vice does so border upon Virtue, that it is not very easy to discern the
Boundaries. And the Passage from good to bad, is so short and facil, that
without good care and caution it will not be prevented. It is a Matter of some
difficulty to set the Limits to each, in speculation, and in general. And it is
still harder to do this in particular, and a farther work yet to keep within
the bounds we understand, especially when these are variable, and cannot be set
without a respect to very alterable Accidents, and such Circumstances as are
hardly discernible.

E. G. In the Case of Temperance. Who can say, Thus far it goes, and no
farther; thus much a Man may eat or drink, but not a jot more? All will grant,
this is not to be defined in general, nor that the same quantity is to be
allowed to every one; for one will be starved, another drunk. So then, every
one must determine his own proportion, which to do truly and wisely, he must be
able to distinguish betwixt the desires of Nature, and those that arise from
Disease. And he must always understand what is the good state or plight of his
Body in general; and that is, when it is most serviceable to the Soul in all
its Capacities, and in the doing every Work in which that shall employ it; when
it will not only be fit to serve the Soul in some few, but in all the
Businesses which shall be required of it; and is not more helpful in one or
some of the lower, whilst it proves an Encumbrance and Impediment in the higher
and greater Operations, and this not only with respect to the present, but to
the longest time.

Now all this requires both a good presence of Mind, and great exactness of
Thoughts. It supposes observation and remembrance of what is past, and a
diligent calculating and exact weighing, both of the state of his own Body, and
also of his condition in the World. Nor must he only consider himself, but
others, his Wife, and Children, and the Poor. For he that allows himself all
that may conduce to the good plight of his own Body, without consideration of
his Family and Kindred, without regard to the urging necessities of poor
Strangers, he is excessive in his self-gratification.

Indeed, whosoever considers how many things are to be thought of, and
compared, before a Man can wisely determine himself to that which is good and
fit for him to do, not only in this, but in many other Instances, even all that
he is to do in his whole Life, will easily grant that there is need of great
care and exactness, of great caution and circumspection.

On these and such like Accounts, how easy is it for a Man to go beyond the
bounds of any Virtue? nay, how hard is it not to do this? When he intends
Temperance, not to fall into an unreasonable unnatural denial of himself in
those Gratifications, which are not only allowable, but commondable. And lest
he should indulge himself in sensual Excesses, he will obstain from those
Entertainments which are natural and innocent, and if not necessary, yet very
convenient and useful.

Again; How hard is it not to slip out of a just indignation and displeasure at
some miscarriage and offense, into an immoderate over vehement anger, and an
unbecoming fury and rage? How difficult is it to say, Thus far I may, and shall
he angry, and beyond this I will not go; and to keep to this Resolution? On the
other hands whilst a Man is but laying fit restraints on this Passion, how apt
is he to fall into stupidity, and an unactive dullness, which has a semblance of
mildness; and neither be moved in himself, nor yet use that discipline to
others, which Nature and Justice requires?

I might observe the same in all other. Virtues, there is a great vicinity and
nearness betwixt them and Vice. The Heathen Moralists have placed almost all
Virtues in the midst between two Vices. And the difference they have made
betwixt them is, That one is an Excess the others Defect; the one is more, the
other less than should be. So that according to this Explication of it, Virtue
does but differ gradually from Viciocity. And how exact must he be, that will
neither exceed nor be deficient? do more, nor less than what is fit?

He that looks but carelessly, and with a wandering eye on them, will not be able
to distinguish betwixt Virtue and Vice, they are sometimes dressed up so like
each other. So an abjectness of Mind may pass for Humility; And he that does
not narrowly observe them, may be easily deceived, and think himself, or
another, virtuously humble, when indeed he thinks untruly. So Liberality and
Magnificence, and a vain Profuseness, may be mistaken for each other. And
whilst a Man is sacrificing to Vanity, and throwing away his Money out of
ostentation, and a lavish humor, he may think himself liberal, and magnificent,
if he do not exactly observe.

2. I may also persuade the same from the tendency there is in some good Action
to that which is very evil. Insomuch, that if we do not set a very strict watch
over our selves, we shall begin in a very good and commendable Work, but end in
a very ill one: We shall slip from that which is good and fit, to that which is
vicious and deformed.

To give an instance or two. This Man sets out in defense of some important
Truth, (that which either is, or appears such to him). Now this is a very good
and necessary thing in general, and it may be also fit for him to undertake in
particular; that is, he is qualified to defend it, for else he had much better
let it alone. But if he be not careful, this his love of, and Zeal for Truth,
may endanger his falling into abundance of miscarriages. For, whilst he is
engaged in a zealous defense of one Truth, he may heedlesly give up many others
as important as that, or he may suffer himself to be put out of temper, and the
good state or use, of his Mind; he may hereby render himself unfit for, and in
a manner incapable of some other Works, which are not less considerable than
this. He may by too great earnestness, if dispose himself, so as that he shall
not be in (...) fit to receive the Influences of (...), nor to think of, and go
out after God. He may be so far transported, as to leap ouerall the Bounds, not
only of Charity (...), but of Truth and Justice (...). And if so be he can
hope, this will be serviceable to the upholding that which he thinks Truth, he
will not stick to blacken and (...) and uncharitably (...) and falsely to
calumniate his Adversary ^s he call him. Thus a Man may be drawn into manifold
mischief, from so (...) as vindicating Truth is if he be not aware, and careful
to prevent and obviate the Evile, to which this very good thing has some
tendency.

Again, What tendency is there, and how easily do Man pass from true and real
Religion, the pure and spiritual Worship of God, to formality and (...) in
Devotions, to superstious Practices to Idolatry it self, which move the ba^e of
all true Religion?

The same may be observed concerning the Tendencies of all the Natural and
Innocent, and of the very best and perfectest Actions we do: which, if we do
not take good heed to our selves, will lead us into foul Miscarriages, and
sinful Practices. For, they have some tendency to make us proud, and think too
well and highly of our selves. A good performance makes other Men speak, and us
think well of our selves: and if we at that time forg^t God, and acknowledge not
our dependence on him, we take too much to our selves. Or, if we overlook our
own many Defects and Shortnesses, and are affected to our selves, as if we had
no fault, then the good we have done has led us into a great mischief.

This then is another Reason, why we should be tha^ caucious and circumspect,
because of the evil Tendencies which the very best Actions and Things have.

3. Unless we be very careful and exact, we shall not be able to set the proper
Limits to several virtuous and good Actions. Without which we shall not, in
case of competition, give a true preference to the ^^tt^^* nor shall we allot
to each its proper time. And where we are defective in these, we shall run into
great Faults and grand Mischiefs. I before said, that there is great need of
some exactnese, to set and keep the bounds betwixt Virtue and Vice. I now say,
there is need of great care, to know and observe the difference betwixt one
Virtue and another; the want of which is of most pernicious Consequence in the
Life of Man.

I make account, the comparative knowledge of Good and Evil, i. e. the
understanding what is better or worse than other, is intrinfecal and essential
to that Wisdom that guides our Practice. And according as any Man has more or
less of this Knowledge, he is thus far more or less wise. He is wise that does
all his Actions it such subordination to each other, that they are all
subservient to the best and highest we can exert. But this subordination can
never be kept without great care and exactness.

The truth of this, and the force of the Argument, will be better discerned by
particular Instances.

Obedience to Governors is a great Duty; but he that knows not in what order
this stands to others, may by this neglect and violate some greater. He who
thinks he is to be absolutely and universally determined in his practice by the
decrees of his Superiors, if they enact that which is im^^^^bly and eternally
evil into a Law, will look on himself as obliged to obey: And tho they forbid
what God has expressly commanded, or command what God has forbid, he will think
himself bound to an Universal Obedience to their Edicts. If a Nebuchadnezzar
should set up an Idol, and require him to bow down to it, this Man, who has set
no Limits to his Obedience to Governors, will fall down and worship the Image;
that is, he will obey his earthly Governors in such Instances as are expressly
contrary to the immutable indispensible Laws of Heaven. And on the other hand,
he that has not learned to make difference betwixt his Prince, and his Father,
or Master, or any other Secular Power, and to pay a greater regard to him, than
to any other Superior, will be apt to fall into Snares and Sin. For, as often
as their Commands clash, he will be in danger to disobey the Supreme.

Again; The Man that makes no discrimination betwixt the greater and the other
Commands, the more and less weighty Matters of the Law, will be in danger to
spend his Zeal and Time in tithing Mint, and Aniss; and Cummin, whilst he
neglects Truth and Justice, and the Love of God. He will not omit an hour, by
his own appointment set apart for private or public Devotion, to do the
greatest act of Charity that can be done. He will not profane the Sabbath to
save a Life, etc.

This is sufficient to show the necessity of limiting and distinguishing those
which are confessedly our Duties; that so we may do the greater, and not
culpably leave the lesser undone; that they may not justle out each other. And
what critical exactness is necessary to the thus weighing and ballancing one
good Action with another, to the comparing them so together, that we may see
the order and relation they have to each other, and to all the rest!

4. He had need live very exactly, who keeps himself in a disposition to know
and choose well, and to do that which is good; that is, that he may be in the
best capacity to understand, to apprehend and judge what is Good and Evil;
inclined and forward to will and choose the one and to refuse the other; and
have all his executive Powers ready to obey his Will, guided by Understanding.
How careful and exact must he be in his Actions, who would keep himself in this
fitness, to do all the good that offers it self to him? Especially if we
consider these two things:

1. That every false Reasoning, disorderly Passion, irregular Appetite, ill
Action indisposes, unfits him and makes him averse to doing good. For the truth
of this, I appeal to experience.

And, 2. If he be unprepared, indisposed for the present, whatever Knowledge he
may have acquired, or whatever Habit of doing well he may have, yet all this
will be of little or no use to him, if he be under a present indisposition. It
is requisite that he keep his many-stringed Instrument always in good tune; for
else, tho it self, the Instrument, the Strings, and all be very good, yet it
will not make music till it be tuned, till all the Strings sound concordantly
to each other, and together make an agreeing Harmony. And whosoever considers
the many Faculties and Appetites which are in him, and that they must all be
tuned to one another, that they must answer and serve each other, conspire and
harmonize into one end, that is, terminate in the greatest good; He will be
satisfied, that this is not to be done without great care and exactness.

And thus I hope I have answered the Objection, That it is needless; and shown,
that there is great necessity of Exactness, that is, if we would live well.

If any think this an infinite toil, I would ask him, Whether it would not turn
to account at last, and whether any thing so much deserves his care as this, To
live well? Thou that art so extremely cautious and circumspect, wary and
accurate in petty Trifles, in some of the most inconsiderable things thou do,
How can thou be negligent and heedless how thou live, whether thou do
well or ill, when nothing can possibly be so important to Man as this?

But perhaps some, to excuse themselves from this Exactness, will say, They
have never observed much to come of it; but rather that they who have been so
very exact, have lived worse than they who have lived carelessly.

To such I reply;

1. All who seem careful, or negligent, are not really so.

2. Men have been careful only of some particular Actions, and neglected all
the rest. Now it may perhaps make better music if none of the Strings be wound
up, than only one of them. I am sure there is greater discord and deformity in
our Actions; when a Man shall be devout, and unjust, or uncharitable, or
intemperate, than if he had no Religion, as well as no Justice; and it is, I
think, more ungrateful to the beholder.

3. It may be their care has been wrong directed, and they have striven to be
exact, but have all the while had a false Notion of what Exactness is. As a
Ship that plays up and down the Seas, as the Wind and Tide carries it, will not
(tho no care be taken) be so far from the Port whither it should go; as that
Ship whose Pilot steers a quite contrary Course: So I count, that he who
suffers himself to be driven by every Inclination and Appetite, will not be so
far off his Perfection, as he that aims and strives at the state which is
opposite to it. And alas! How many are those who call Good Evil, and Evil Good?
How many who think that to be their Perfection, which is most opposite to it?
So the Monkish Perfectionists have esteemed it an high attainment, to be
without all sense of this Body, and to be wholly unaffected by it: which is
certainly a most unnatural state, and very unsuitable to humane Condition in
this World, and a great hindrance to a Man from attaining Perfection, and will
make him incapable of doing that good which God intended he should do in this
Life, and by this Body. Others again think it their Perfection, to be in a
passionate emotion of Mind, having no regard to the good use of their
Understanding, or their other Faculties, which yet are far more necessary to
them, and beneficial to others, than that Passion is.

Now whilst Men have been thus mistaken in their Notion of Perfection, or what
it is to be exact; no wonder if their care and endeavor to be so, have done
them little good: Nay, it may be more harm than good.

After all this; if any imagine that this exactness will be a matter of
infinite Scrupulosity and Anxiety, and fill his Mind with perpetual Disquiet
and Trouble, of Pains and Toil: Let him know, that when he is persuaded that it
is good, and useful, and necessary, and when he has accustomed himself to it,
it will be no longer hard and troublesome, but a pleasant and delightful Work.
And the harder it seems at first, the greater reason has he to think it is so
much the more necessary and excellent.

The Sum of what I have exhorted, and which I take to be the true and full
Sense of the Apostle's Words, is, That we should take care, give good heed, use
great caution and diligence, that we never do any ill, nor omit any good we
should not: And that we constantly do all we should. And whatever we do, that
we endeavor to do it as well as is possible, as it can be done. That we
neither through Negligence and Heedlessness, through Ignorance, or Mistake, or
Inadvertency omit, nor knowingly prevaricate in, nor willingly violate, nor
carelessly and lastily perform our Duty; nor do it by halves, lamely and
imperfectly. And that we thus behave our selves, not in some single actions
only, but in the tenor and course of them, and in our whole Life.

The Arguments I have used to persuade to this, have been such as these; 1.
That it is very agreeable to the Christian Dispensation under which we are, that
we should be thus exact in our Lives. 2. That the most absolute and universal
perfection of Life and Action is intrinsecally and essentially necessary to our
complete Happiness: And as it is necessary, so 'twill most certainly procure and
effect it. And such care and caution, endeavor and diligence is no less
necessary, nor will have less Efficacy to make us live perfectly well and
virtuously, than that has to make us happy: Which I have showed, as from
several other Arguments, so from a Consideration of the likeness and nearness
of Vice to Virtue; of the great tendency there is in many good Actions and
Things to that which is ill; of the great difficulty there is in setting bounds
to several Virtues, and giving each its due place and order: And lastly, of the
many things which must be done to keep our selves in a disposition and
readiness to know, and will, and do the will of God.

I might also have pleaded this from the honor that will come to God and
Religion; and the great benefit and advantage that will accrue to other Men,
that shall behold and converse with us if we live thus exactly. But I think
what has been said is sufficient to persuade any one who will consider. I shall
therefore leave this, and proceed to the second Proposition which I propounded
to discourse of.

A DISCOURSE OF Redeeming the Time.
Of the Second Proposition.
EPHESIANS. 5. 16. Redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil.
WE ought to make the best of bad Times, when we fall into them, from those
words, Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil.

I proceed to suggest some few of those many useful and excellent things, which
are contained in these words and to which they lead us naturally and easily, in
this plain method.

First, We will consider what Time, Season, or Opportunity, is in general; and
what in particular was that Season which St. Paul here means. And also what is
the import of Redeeming the Season.

Secondly, I will offer some Reasons why we should redeem the Season, and
particularly consider that which is here expressed, the Days are Evil.

Thirdly, I will mention some of those things which rob us of our Time, and
deprive us of the Season, which St. Paul here exhorts us to make our own.

Fourthly, I will exhibit some of those Advices and Directions, whereby we may
be assisted in Redeeming this Time or or Season.

Of the First;

Season or Opportunity, which is the English of (...), signifies Time of
Action, i. e. such a concurrence of all the Causes, as makes the doing of any
Work easy, and gives hope of Success: When there is such a confluence of Causes
without, that if we will do what is in us, and cooperate with them, we shall
probably not fail to bring what we design to effect.

Thus a good Vessel and Pilot, Wind and Tide, make an Opportunity for us to be
conveyed to such a place: And if we be but willing to use them to this purpose,
they are likely to bring us thither. Whereas, if we would go, when we are not
favored and helped by such Causes, we shall either not at all, or very hardly,
and with much more pains and difficulty come to our Journeys end.

To this it will not be amiss to add, that Opportunity does not only signify
the presence of those things without us, which contribute toward the producing
an Effect, but also the disposition and fitness of our own Faculties to
cooperate with them: For if they be in an incapacity; all External Causes will
not make an Opportunity. As if a Man be sick, that he cannot safely go by
Water, all the Tide and Wind, etc. do not make it a Season for him to go.

And if we take in all this into our Notion of Opportunity, in common Speech we
do not say that a Man has an opportunity of doing an ill thing. Tho it is true,
that external Things may so far concur with an ill Mind, that they may make it
easy to perper (...) some bad Work; as we say, Occasion makes a Thief. That if
we understand (as generally we do) by Opportunity, a concurrence of the Causes
without us, with our own Faculties, there we never say that a Man has
opportunity of doing that which is Evil. It either is, or is thought good,
either by us, or by him that does it. Which shows that even the Community of
Men, who make words signify as they please, do suppose, that our Faculties were
not designed or framed to do evil Things; nor are ever properly and truly fit
to do any thing but good; and therefore we can do nothing which we do not think
so. This Observation I think to be true.

If any be of another mind, and that Opportunity or Season is applicable
indifferently to good or bad Purposes and Practices; yet I suppose it will be
granted, that the Apostle in this place, intends the Time or Season of doing
good Actions, such as are fit and becoming, profitable and beneficial; such as
will be honorable to God, and give a reputation to Christian Religion, helping
forward our own and others Happiness. So that St. Paul exhorts us here, to
redeem the Time of doing all that good which the Gospel requires, of living
that excellent Life, and practicing all those Virtues which are agreeable to
the Dispensation of Christianity; of doing all those good Works here on Earth,
which by our perfect Institution we (...) assisted and obliged to do.

And if this be the Action that St. Paul means, it will not be (...) ou^ the
(...), which when they (...) make it a good Season for doing thus; when ii will
be more easy to live well, and we may (prob^bly) be more successfully good, and
attain all the Ends of our Excellent (...).

Now a constant firm Health, a competent provision of the Necessaries and
Conveniences of Life, freedom from Slavery and long Restraints, for the most
part to live in Society, a state of Peace and Quiet, of good Will and Amity
with Men, and an abode here on Earth, till Age has made us useless; these are
the things which we commonly and truly think do all conduce to this purpose.
But yet I dare not say, that such a Condition would be best for all Men.
Experience proves to us undeniably, that a mixture of Good and Evil is best for
the generality of Men in this State: to have a dash of Adversity, nay, to be in
a more depressed Condition, may, I believe, be generally better for us.

Some Men are good in Sickness, or in Want; who, if they enjoyed their Health,
or lived in Abundance, would not be so. Nay, I doubt not but this is true of
the Community of Mankind! And that the wise and good Providence that rules all
things, has so ordered it, that the far greatest part are poor, or sick, or
under restraint, or have Enemies, or do not live long; because he sees it
necessary to keep them under this sharp Discipline; and for this Reason, that
hereby they may be trained up to be and to do Good, and kept out of those
Temptations which would be irresistible to them, and so preserved from doing
those Wickednesses which would make them liable to the unalterable Justice, and
beget such a disposition in them, as might endanger their being irrecoverably
bad and miserable.

I cannot but think that these Evils are Medicinal, and good Antidotes, which
the wise and good Physician makes use of, for curing the worst of Diseases in
some, and preventing them in others. Nay, that even very good Men have found it
good for them to be thus afflicted; so David tells us: So Job, and other the
best of Men in former Ages. Yea, the Son of God himself, and his first and best
Followers were persecuted by Men, and afflicted by God in the worst of these
Instances.

By all this I am convinced, That even Poverty and Disgrace, and such other
Calamities, do not only contribute to bad Men's becoming good, but to good Men's
being better, by giving them an opportunity for the exercise of some Virtues,
which would have had no place in a prosperous State, and are necessary to our
Perfection.

But tho I grant all this, yet considering the imperfection of the best of Men,
and the necessity of Health, and Liberty, and Plenty, and Peace, to enable them
for those Works which are proper and useful in this State, and to complete
their Virtue, (which can never be, unless they pass through varieties of
Conditions) I cannot but look on these things as conducing to the good Life of
Christians.

However these things may not facilitate the practice of Virtue to all Men, yet
they will to such as know how to use their time; it is best such should be at
liberty, and that they who know how to employ an Estate, should have one; and
if they be disposed to do something better than drudg for the Body, that they
should not be taken up with providing for that; and such real Christians are,
and if they who pretend to be Christians were, I do not doubt but it would be
thus with the generality.

Thus much I thought fit to say, lest from my Explication of this Phrase, any
should raise an Objection against that Providence, which orders all things
according to greatest Wisdom and Goodness, and undoubtedly makes that the
Condition of every Man which is best for him, either to help him to live well,
or to keep him from living ill; to promote his Virtue, or to restrain his
Wickedness: Or where he would not do well, to make him suffer, that so he may
hereby become capable of receiving good from the hands of him who will
recompense us, not only for the good we do, but for the ills we suffer.

After all then it remains, that a healthful, free, peaceable, plentiful
Condition, and a long Life may pass for Opportunity, or such a confluence of
things as make it more easy for us to live well.

Which may be farther evinced by this Reason, that by being in this Condition,
we are freed from the importunate cravings of diverse natural Appetites, which
are hereby gratified and satisfied; and if they were not, would by their
importunity disturb and hinder us in our pursuit and practice of Goodness.

This then that I have said, or part of this, or what ever it is, that in
concurrence with the Goodness of Christians, would contribute to their doing
that Good to which their Religion obliged them, was that Season or Time of
Action which the Apostle here commands them to redeem.

There are particular Seasons or Times of good Actions, when there is such a
confluence of things as help to and in the exercise of particular Virtues;
which, according as there is need or reason for them, we are to endeavor to
procure.

Let us in the next place see what it is to redeem or buy this Opportunity.

This Metaphor signifies, That we must do something to make it our own, to
bring it within our Power; so that if we will, we may use it, and serve our
selves of it; that we may employ it to the purpose for which it serves, as, and
how we will; and it is supposed by the Apostle, That they whom he exhorted to
redeem, buy, purchase, or gain the Season, would improve it to the Purposes of
Christian Life.

So that this Phrase intimates, not only that we are to lay hold on Opportunity
when offered, but also that we must endeavor, and be at cost to procure it;
and that not so much to have, as to use it; for if we do not use, we lose it.
It is no where more true than of Time, and Season, which is the best of Time;
not to use it, is the same as not to have it.

Thus then in general. To purchase this best part of Time, when there is such a
confluence of things, that may be helpful to us in doing some good Work; as it
supposes that we will use it, so it signifies that we should lay out our
Labor, our Money, and be at the Expense, or suffer the loss of any
Gratification that is of less worth than that Good, which by the help of this
Opportunity we hope to do.

And by this I have told you, what is the Price we must pay for such a Season,
when things concur to make Virtue feasible. And the more feasible they make any
good Action, or course of Virtue, the more valuable is that Opportunity which
they give us. And its Rate will be always more or less, according to the
greater or less goodness of that Action or Life which it helps to. Nay, which
may seem strange, yet so it is, That even Life it self is not too much to give
for an opportunity to do some one Action, which may be so hugely beneficial,
that it is really of greater value, than our stay here an hundred Years, and
than all the good we could do in that space (if we left this one undone) could
amount unto. Such, I take to be the laying down my Life for the Sake of
Religion, or the Service of our King and Country, or of any one excellently
good, and publicly useful Man. And it is unquestionably better to part with
Life, much more any thing less valuable, than to do violence to, and forgo a
good Conscience in any one Particular.

I need to add no more to this general Explication of what it is to redeem the
Time or Season, but put you in mind that the Phrase implies,

1. That we are not to neglect, to part from, to lose, and forgo it: but, as
Solomon says of Truth, Buy the Truth, and sell it not; so I may say of
Opportunity, Buy it almost at any price, sell it at none; let it not go,
whatever you may have in lieu of it.

2. That we are by all means to avoid the doing good Actions unseasonably, that
is, where a Season may be had; for otherwise they must be done, if it be
possible, in or out of Season; but when it may be had, it should not be
neglected.

This may suffice for the general. But if it be enquired what in particular the
Apostle moant the Ephesians should do, when he bids them to Redeem the Time?
To this I answer; That I suppose he intended hereby to excite their Care and
Diligence; to put them upon the use of Prudence and Caution; to employ all
honest and innocent Arts, to take all pains to escape those Wiles and Traps,
those Snares and Temptations to Sin, which were laid for them; and those
other impendent Calamities of which they were in danger, if they continued
steadfast in their Profession of Christianity. That they should be very
vvatchful to observe, and in all lawful and harmless vvays, avoid all that
might endanger their losing their Religion, or their Lives, or Liberties for
it; which would in part be a damage or detriment to Religion (for they would
hereby be taken off, if not wholly, yet in great measure from the practice of
it) and consequently to themselves: however, many others would suffer by this,
and the Interest of Religion would be weakened.

And they were not only to avoid the Evils, the Obstructions and Impediments
that attended them, the Mischiefs and Dangers that were impendent, and whatever
it was that might discourage them in, or deter them from the Christian Life;
But also they were to be watchful and diligent Observers of the Times; and with
a prudent dexterity to strike in with, and serve their Christian Designs of
them, so far as could be consistent with Innocence and Honesty. That they
should use honest Endeavors, by the Blessing of God, to preserve and increase
their Estates, take all harmless ways to procure or keep their Liberty; take
care, as much as they may, to remove from their Governors all hatred and ill
will against, or but suspicion of them; behaving themselves so, as to deserve
the good Opinion and good Will of all Men.

In general; That they use their utmost care and diligence to conciliate the
Times to their Religion, that they might both practice that, and escape the
Evils of them. That their being Christians might not exclude them from the good
things of this Life and World, nor bring them into any Condition, whereby they
should be hindered from doing good. Nay, that they should endeavor so to use
them, as they might be most serviceable to a Christian Life; not losing any
advantages to Virtue which they offer; not needlessly and foolishly casting
themselves into any such Condition, as would cut them off from, or hinder them
in their main business, but wisely accommodating their Condition to their
Virtue, so as to make it a Season, and serviceable to their purpose: That tho
the Days were Evil, and very contrary to the Christian Dispensation, yet they
should take care and pains to gain all Advantages which could be had from them,
to serve and promote it, and to make them befriend it; that the Profession and
Professors of Christianity might suffer as little Prejudice, and receive as
much Advantage from that as was possible.

Thus I have given, not only a general but particular account of what Season
and Opportunity is, and of what it is to redeem it.

The sum of all is, That we ought wisely to observe, and diligently to improve
every Season, which the times wherein we are afford us, to do good. I say, to
do good, for it is in order to this, that we are required to redeem the time.
It Is not for the sake of time: for, Time lying on our Hands is a Burden, a
Torment; it is not that we may have it to throw away, that we may be idle and
unactive; for, as good not be, as not act; as good have no time, as not employ
it. Nor yet is it to be laid out on Vanity, and spent in trifling and foolish
Exercises, in being busy to no purpose. Much less are we to redeem Time for
doing Evil, for working Mischief and Wickedness; this is the worst loss of time
that can be: And if none of these be admitted, then it must be in order to
doing good. And this, which is the end of all that we are and have, and indeed
of all things, may well be supposed to be that which the Apostle intended.

What I have thus variously expressed, may be reduced to these three
Particulars, which I think contain the full sense of the Apostle's Exhortation;
Redeem, etc.

1. That they should not neglect any Opportunity which the Times offered them,
but strike in with every Advantage, every Season, and take every occasion of
Good that should be ministered to them; go with Tide, and sail with every Wind,
that would carry them toward the Port whither every Christian is bound, i. e.
his own greatest Perfection, and thereby his doing greatest Honor to God, and
promoting the best state of his Brethren and Fellow Creatures.

2. Whatever Evils they meet with, they should endeavor wisely to turn them
into Good, and of Disadvantages and Hindrances, they should strive to make
them Helps and Furtherances to these good Purposes, and thus serve themselves,
and the Interest of their Christian Religion of them.

3. Those Evils which were unalterable, and indexible, and could not by any
means be accommodated to comply with these good Purposes, they should in all
prudent, honest, harmless ways, avoid them.

This I apprehend to be the meaning of the Apostles Exhortation to the
Ephesians. This I look upon as the Duty of all Christians. I proceed now to the
Reasons of it, and small sum up all in these two: 1. We ought to Redeem the
Time, that we may do most good: 2. Because the Days are Evil. These are both
the Apostles Reasons, only the first is implied, the second expressed. And
indeed, unless the first be supposed, the latter will be of no force.

1. That we may do good, we must redeem the Season.

(1.) I suppose none will deny, but that doing good is the Work and Business,
the End and Design, the very Life of his Life: And that all in Man refers to
this one thing; He is nothing, he is in vain without he attain it. Nor;

(2.) Will it be doubted, but that we act very dependently on things without
us: that there are abundance of Actions, which are Good or Evil, according to
varieties of external Accidents, as they are seasonable and unseasonable; and
that we need the assistance of other things without, for the doing of those
that are unalterably good. How can I relieve my poor Brother with an Alms, if I
my self be poor, and have it not? Or how can I set apart Time for the Service
of my own Soul, or of my Friend, or for my Devotions, as I think best, if I be
a Slave, and not at mine own disposal; if I be under Restraint or Confinement?

The force of this Argument is this: If our very Actions, many of them, be
therefore good, because they are seasonable; if the Season increase their
Goodness, and make those that would be good out of season, much better in it;
(for, whereas in that case there is only an agreeableness betwixt our Actions
and our selves, in this there is also an harmony betwixt us and the World): If
this be true; And if we also in our Actions depend on favorable Circumstances,
and must be befriended by things without us: then we ought to use all honest
Art to gain the Season, and to make things on our side, that we may still hold
on our course of well-doing, tho we have but one Point of the Wind to sail by.

2. The Days are Evil, therefore redeem the Time.

The former Reason was taken from the End, this from the difficulty of
obtaining, and the danger of missing it, unless we observe this Counsel.

All Times are not alike Evil. But yet, as our Savior said, sufficient unto
the day, i. e. every day, is the Evil thereof; so there are no Times, wherein
there is not Evil enough to excite the Cares, and to exercise the Patience and
Diligence of every good Man.

There are Temptations to Sin, and Dangers of Suffering in all Ages. Since Man
was first made, the old Serpent, and all those degenerate Men, whom that wicked
one has gained to his Party, have been in all Times opposing and persecuting
the Good; tho sometimes the Divine Providence has restrained their Fury, and
they have been able to do less harm; yet the All-wise God has thought fit thus
to exercise and try us. And because we are to live under such Trials, it
behooves us to take care, that we do not needlessly run into the Evils with which
we are beset; that we prudently decline the Traps and Gins that are laid for
us; that when a fresh Gale blows, we neglect not to sail with it; that we
dexterously strike in with Opportunity when it invites: And not only so, but
that we use our best skill to procure one, to make things serve our honest
purpose; because if we do not thus, we shall be able to do very little good in
our Lives, since we are like to meet with so many Difficulties and Hindrances
in it.

Having thus argued in General for our Redeeming the Time, I shall now consider
those three Particulars distinctly, in which I summed up the meaning of that
Phrase. And shall give Reasons for every of them severally.

1. Reasons why we should take every Opportunity that offers it self, and be
careful wisely to employ it, neglecting none.

1. If we do not thus, we do not comply with the Divine Providence, we do not
suit our selves to things, nor are uniform with the World. God offers me help,
and I refuse it; He works before, and would work with me when he gives an
Opportunity, but I regard not the Works of the Lord; I reject his assistance.
And what a thing is this to be said by God to Man, I would have helped thee,
and thou would not be helped? I would have relieved thee, but thou regardedst
not the Succors which I sent? And yet thus it may be truly said to every one
that neglects Opportunity. And as there is a profane neglect of God's
providential Dispensations, in letting Seasons of Actions slip by; so there is
an unnatural jarring with things about us, a difformity and discord with the
World. For, they invite us to Action, but we will not act; they have prepared
our way, but we will not walk: All things else are in a readiness to assist us
in some good enterprise, only we our selves are backward.

What a thing is this, that the World, the things about us, should be more
forward than Man to bring forth a good Work? that things below us should so
readily give their attendance, offer their Service, and invite us to it, while
we, the best of God's Creation here, shall be behind-hand? When they meet
together, and, as it were, cry out to us, Lend us your hand, do you our Master
join with us, and this Good, or that great Work will be done; What strange
perverseness is it in us to refuse? When things say, Come, let us go to the
House of God, or to the House of the Poor, or to visit the Sick, or our
Friends; or to our Closet, Study, or Shop, and yet we will not go, what a
schismatical contumacious Humor is this, when we thus divide and cut our
selves off from the World, as every one does that neglects those Opportunities,
which things conspire to make him? That Is the First.

2. The using of Opportunities proceeds from a good Principle, the losing them
from an ill one; and this argues the one to be good, the other bad. For such as
the Causes are, the Effects will be; the sweet and the bitter Fountains will
send forth Streams of the same Nature with their Sources

Now if we trace them upto their Springs, we shall discover that all non-use of
good Occasions arises from such Causes as these: Either Men are ignorant what
makes a fit Season, or inobservant, or careless whether they do well or not; or
slothful, that tho they be jogged, will not waken; or over intent and busy on
other Matters: As Martha was, Luke 10. 42. when our Savior told her she was
troubled, and careful about many things, which took her off from the
Opportunity she then had of hearing his Doctrine, which her Sister gave heed
to: Or, they are froward, and will not comply when things invite and call them.

On the other Hand; he that makes use of the Seasons that are offered him, must
needs be a prudent and careful Observer of things without him, diligent and
intent upon doing good, sensible of his own insufficiency, and of the need he
has of help from abroad. He must be a Man of great Virtue, and good Government
of himself; a Man of an excellent Spirit, whose Heart is always thus fixed, so
as to give no stop, no check to things, but suffers them to have their free
Course, stays not behind, but follows them to all that Good to which they lead
him.

3. Consider the Effects, which are or may be consequent on our using, or not
using the Seasons that are before us. Great Good comes of the one, and as great
Evils of the other: Indeed, no Man knows how great either may be. Exempli
Gratia, The Bells call thee to Church, and no more necessary business keeps
thee from it: thou go, whither not only the Thing it self, but the Season
invites; thou joinest with the Congregation in Prayer, how know thou but God
is prevailed with by the hearty Prayers with which thou art joined, and will
bestow upon thee the greatest of Blessings, the pardon of thy Sin, the healing
thy Distempers; or may supply thee in what thou want at present? Nay, and
these Prayers shall be a stock laid up for thee in Heaven, and be remembered a
great while hence, and on this score thou shall find opportune help in the day
of trouble. Again; thou hear the good Word of God read, or explained; and
thou attendest to it, and art enlightened in some Truth that will direct thee in
thy way to Heaven: Thou have had some good Seed sown in thy Heart, which will
grow up to Eternal Life: Thou have been persuaded of some good proposition,
which afterward becomes a principle of Wisdom, and Virtue; and is indeed the
Foundation of thy Happiness.

On the other hand; Thou regardest not the Summons to Church; but either
sleep, or drinkest, or talkest on, or followest thy Game, or that which thou
call thy Business, as if thou had no other; and thereby, not only
neglectest to honor God in the Assembly, but deprivest thy self of the great,
thou know not how great Good thou might have received. Besides, who can
tell how many Temptations, and Snares, and Mischiefs he has brought himself
into, by refusing to comply with so fair an Offer? Thou would not worship God
in Public, and it may be thou art serving the Devil in Private: Thou would
not associate with them that call upon God, and perhaps in the mean time thou
art got into a rout of profane debauched Revellers; and art fallen into
Temptations from which thou can never get free; but wilt grow worse and
worse, till thou be irrecoverably bad? Thus, the loss of one Season may be
the loss of Happiness, and thy ruin for ever. Take another Instance.

Thou have a sit Season of Reproof administered to thee, i. e. Thou by thy
Office, or by the Rank in which thou art, the Authority thou have over, or the
Interest thou have in some Man, art fit to advise, rebuke, exhort him; and at
this time thou art fit to speak, and he to hear. All things conspire to make
thy Reproof acceptable, and to give probability of Success; at least, there is
nothing to discourage thee from attempting the amendment of thy Brother: If
thou do now strike in with the Opportunity, who knows what good may come of
this? It may prove the recovery of a Sinner out of the Snare of the Devil, and
not only be the saving of his Soul from Death, but the benefits will probably
flow over to many others, his Wife and Children, his Friends and Neighbors,
and as many as have to do with him who has hearkened to thy Counsel, shall be
the better for it. Thou have by thy advice helped to reform him, and will not
he take the same course with others that has been used with himself? And they
likewise will propagate the Good to others, and who knows where it will end?
Thus thou may have done a kind of infinite good, by laying hold of an
opportunity of Reproof, and none knows but all this may be true of every one.
Whereas if he neglects any one, he cannot be sure but that then he might have
said that to his offending Brother, which might have been his Reformation and
Recovery; and the Omission of which may prove his utter Undoing: For ought any
Man knows by his neglect of some, of any one Opportunity, he has lost not only
one, but many Souls. Thus we see how great Good may come of using, and as great
Evil by non-use of Opportunity. That Is the third.

4. We must give an account to God of our Opportunities, and answer before the
great Judge, how we have employed these Talents, and be doomed not only
according to the Good we have done, but the Opportunities we have had. He that
has done no more under more and fairer Opportunities, than he that has had
fewer, will not then be able to acquit himself so well. Can he that has a
thousand pound a Year, but gives no more Alms than he who has a hundred, hope
for the same favorable Sentence from the righteous Judge? Undoubtedly the more
and better Opportunities any Man has had of being, and doing Good, the more he
has to answer for; and according to his improvement, or Non-improvement of
them, will be his Sentence. To whom much is given, of him will much be
required. One by his Learning, and Prudence, and Eloquence, and Riches, and
Honor, and Friends, and Interest has great Opportunities of doing abundance of
Good, which the ignorant and poor Man, who has no Friends, wants: And if the
other does not improve his Advantages of doing the Good which he may, much more
than this unlearned, poor, unacquainted Man of no Interest, he will not be
acquitted by the Judgment of God.

5. Our Opportunities are but few, and those that are, are very uncertain;
therefore neglect none. How seldom is it that things do so happily conspire
into a Season? Therefore we should make the best of those few we have, and
welcome that which comes but seldom to us. If there be but one favorable Wind
that comes at such a time of the Year, the Seaman watches for it, he will be sure
not to stay behind: But besides, as the Winds and Tides of Action do not come
at set-Times, ^o they have no fixed Periods, but are to us very contingent and
uncertain. Now this should make us still more careful not to neglect them. For,
when they are once past, we know not whether ever they will return to us again.
The Wind goes and returns again into the same Coast; the Tides ebb and flow
again after so many Hours: But if an Opportunity be gone, we cannot promise our
selves that we shall ever have another.

I may add, that as Opportunities are but few and uncertain; so when they are,
they are very short and hasting away. All things are in motion, and no one
state of them is lasting, they are perpetually flowing, always on the Wing;
therefore make haste to improve them: Think not only what we shall do, but be
as quick to do what we think; not only resolve, but perform what we resolve
presently; put it not off till to Morrow, not knowing what a Day, what an Hour
may bring forth; a few Minutes may make a great alteration in either us, or the
things that make it opportune for us to act: And if either they, or we alter,
our Opportunity is gone. Life it self is but a short and frail thing, and yet
it is not one half of that, that is a time of action.

6. Some Opportunities once lost, are lost for ever, are irrecoverably gone.
Indeed, in some sense, all that are lost are irrecoverable, for no power can
make that which is past, not to be past: The Guilt I have contracted by such a
Neglect does, continue; and nothing can now hinder that I should not have
sinned. But this is that which I mean, that some Opportunities are so lost,
that not only the same (which can never be) but none of the same kind, none
like them shall ever be again. Exempli Gratia, I part with a Friend, he dies,
or he falls distracted, or he is gone out of my reach; I had opportunity of
saying that to him, which would have been of great use to him to have been told
him. But now the time is past, and I must never more see him to acquaint him
with it. Some such there are, of which we can say, that they never will return
again; and (which amounts much to the same) we cannot say of any that they
will. I saw my Friend yesterday, and had somewhat of moment to say to him, but
I put it off till another time, yet am not sure that I shall ever have another.
I might this day have done a Kindness to such an one, a good Office to another,
but did it not, and it may be I shall not have another day to do, nor they
another to receive it. Thus some Opportunities are lost, irrecoverably lost,
and for ought we know all are so.

7. We have already lost much Time, and many excellent Opportunities, wherein
we might have done much good. Let this be an Argument to us why we should lose
no more, but readily catch hold on them, as they offer themselves.

Who is he that reviews the actions of one day, who may not tax himself either
for his total neglect, or but half-improvement of the Seasons he has had? But
alas! when we look over our Lives, how ought we to be abashed for the many fair
Opportunities we have had of benefiting our selves, and our Brethren; which we
have most shamefully let slip? Nay, have we not abused, and perverted them?
have we not only not done the Good to which they invited, and assisted, but
done the Evil which they hindered? Have we not hurt and mischief'd, both our
selves, and our Brethren, when we might so easily have done good?

If the case be thus for the time past, let us by this be persuaded to be more
careful for the future. Let the remembrance of the many good Hours ill spent,
make us watchful lest we fall into the same Guilt again. If the good Providence
of God shall give us new Opportunities, let us not again foolishly and
carelessly squander, or idly sleep them away, or frowardly waste them; lest we
justly provoke God to deny us any more: Which would be a most terrible
Judgment, and yet very righteous. We have lost much time, never to be
recovered; do therefore what may be done, to redeem what is past, by double
diligence in improving the future.

Let me add, that the time is coming that we shall wish for one of those many
good Opportunities which we trifled away, when we come to our Deathbeds we
shall in vain call back those Seasons. Let this Consideration make us very
careful not to neglect the least occasion of doing any good, because we shall
wish we had not.

These Reasons may be sufficient to persuade us not to neglect any, but to use
every Season of Action, that offers it self to us. I now proceed to

2. Reasons, Why we should not only take Opportunity when it is offered, but
endeavor to make it; and to change the things that are contrary to us, to be
on our side, and serviceable to our good Purposes.

Now that I may evince the reasonableness of this; First, I will declare what
is here supposed. Here are two things supposed, which if they be not true, then
neither is this good Counsel, which is built on, and implys them; but if they
be both true, then is it necessary: They are these.

1. That Opportunities are few. 2. We do very much, in our acting, depend on
them.
1. The first of these I have already said something of, and I believe there is
none who is not fully persuaded of it. For what Man is he, who sees not how
short his Life is? And of that little time, how much is taken for the
maintenance of it? And when we are sit for Action, vacant for doing Good, how
are our Hands held by things falling cross to us?

We fall into Company by accident, or are constrained by some occasions, to be
with such Persons where we spend much time, but can do little to promote either
their welfare, or our own. Whosoever watches for, and is observant of
Opportunities and Seasons, he knows they fall out but seldom; he often finds
things to be wind-bound, and tho he fain would, yet he canriot stir.

I do not mean by this, to justify the lazy and careless in their Complaints,
who lay their own Neglects on want of Opportunities; for tho we have not so
many, yet we are not quite destitute; we have some, tho not so many as the
diligent Man could wish for; yet we have more than the idle will own, or care
to use; and sufficient for the doing that Good, which we are capable of doing,
if we do but observe and make use of them: However, if the Sum total of them be
computed, they may well pass for few. If all our Life were a continued
succession of Opportunities, yet that being so short, and so interrupted, they
are but few at most. This is the first thing supposed.

2. We do very much in our Actions depend on Opportunity, this will appear if
we consider these three things.

1. Some Actions are not good if they be not done in Season, and unless they
comply with, and be suited to external Causes and Circumstances. There must not
only be an agreement betwixt the Action, and him that, does it; but it must
also be suited to its Object, and accommodated to things without. Exempli
Gratia, Reproof to an Equal, or Inferior, that is not by Passion or Prejudice
so possessed, as that what I shall say can make no Impression, is good: But
when it is of a Superior, or an Equal indisposed to receive it, it is not good;
it is unfit and foolish, it is importune and unseasonable. And it is the same in
most of the Actions of our Lives; if they are not opportune, they are not good.
And this I may say of all, that the more seasonable, the better they are. This
is one thing which shows our dependence on a fit Season. In this case, tho we
could do Actions without it, yet we should not.

2. Other Actions, tho we may and would do them, we cannot. We must be helped
from abroad, or of and by our selves we can do nothing. There is no Man such a
Stranger to himself, and so ignorant of his own Insufficiency, but knows he has
need of the concurrence of many Causes with him, to bring forth a good Action,
besides the assistance of God's Grace, and all those many things that fore-pare
a Man for Action, and make him big with it; there are more still that must help
to elicit and bring it forth. Exempli Gratia,

Tho a Man be never so wise, and full of knowledge, and tho he have never so
great a list to communicate it; yet unless he meet with others, and those that
are capable of it, he cannot do what he desires, and is so well qualified to
do. We cannot do the Good we would without the Help, the Midwifery of External
Causes and Things, i. e. if we want Opportunity.

3. Tho we could, and should act without Opportunity; yet our Action would be
very often without effect: For, in most cases, Success depends on the
concurrence of those things that make Opportunity. A Man would not have good
Designs and Performances prove Abortive, yet if they do not, he must be
beholden to this: It Is this must bring what he does to good Issue.

As soon may a Man make a Voyage without a Ship, or Boat, or when he has one,
against Wind and Tide arrive at his intended Port; as in most undertakings,
have desired Success without the concurrence of external Causes. Exempli
Gratia, Tho a Preacher use his utmost Skill and Care, to compose his Discourse
for the benefit of those whom he expects to be his Hearers; yet if it so fall
out, that they either cannot, or will not come to hear; or if they do come, yet
fall asleep, or talk, or their Thoughts are taken up with other matters, that
they do not attend; or if they presently forget what they heard, or never once
consider it: that is, unless things conspire so as not to hinder from hearing,
or attending to what they hear; from remembering and considering, at least, the
drift and scope of the Sermon: He labors without Success, that made and
preached it.

Thus it appears, that we act in dependence on such a happy confluence of
things, as make a Season or Opportunity. And if this be true, and that also,
that the Opportunities are few which offer themselves to us; then it will
follow, that unless we will do nothing at all, or labor in vain, we must
endeavor by our skill and diligence to make Opportunities, to make things as
pliant to our Purposes, as serviceable to our Designs, as is possible. If the
Mariner would never put out of the Harbor, nor weigh Anchor but when the Wind
blows full in the Poop, he must lie still for the most part: And if we will
never act, but when Opportunity favors us with a fair and full Gale; I doubt
we shall be most commonly idle. No, but we must, when the Wind is not with us,
make it serve us, by gathering it into our yielding Sails; and when it is full
against us, yet we must then take the advantage of a Tide.

The sum of this is, That we must have help from things without us, both to
act, and to bring our Action to some Issue. And things without us will not
favor our Enterprises, unless we use our best skill and Endeavors to make
them serve our honest Designs. But when times are ill, and things go cross to
us, then especially are we to labor to serve our selves of them, and make them
helpful to us.

Secondly* This is Wisdom to accommodate things, to make them comply with those
good Purposes, which of themselves they thwart and oppose.

It is Wisdom to take the Occasions that offer themselves, but it is far greater
to make Occasion, and to work things out of an opposition or unprofitableness,
into a subserviency and usefulness to our Undertakings. It Is great skill in the
Mariner to sail with a Wind that is within one Point full against him.

I am apt to think there is nothing we meet with, but may be serviceable to a
good purpose, and if we prudently and dexterously make application, it will be
so; if not to one, yet to another: Nay, possibly to that which it may seem to
oppose. Exempli Gratia, A Man is very impatient of any check, or censure in
himself; but yet forward enough to blame and control other Men (which often go
together); In this case, to deal with this Man, as Nathan did with David, to
lay the Scene in another place, and to cast the Fault on another Person. For he
will not fail to aggravate that Crime in another, which he would spare in
himself. But when he has condemned another, Natural Justice will not suffer him
to be so partial, as to acquit himself. And thus, by a side-Wind, he comes to
the Place whither he was bound, and makes use of that which was in it self
Evil, and a Hindrance, to help him to attain his End. He makes an evil Thing
promote a good Design.

I have said enough for my present purpose, to show, that it is Wisdom to bring
things that are cross to us, to serve us; to make Enemies Friends, and of our
Party; to make that which was a Neuter, and of no use, to be profitable. This
is great Wisdom. It is both the Effect, and Cause of great Wisdom: It is the
Exercise, and will be the Improvement of it. It is one of the greatest and
surest instances of Wisdom that can be given. No Man can give a better proof,
that he is a prudent wise Man, than by making ill things serve good Purposes.
Therefore if we would be, and show our selves to be wise Men; let us, when
things are not to our Minds, nor will fall in with our Designs, by our
dexterous application, make them pliant and serviceable: That others may see,
and admire this our management, and that both we, and they may receive the
benefits of such excellent Wisdom.

3. To this I add, that to do thus is Divine and God-like. This is the Glory of
God, that he can bring Light out of Darkness; Order out of Confusion; Good out
of Evil; nay, the greatest Good out of the worst of Evils: So that nothing, how
bad soever, has fallen out, which the overruling Providence will not make to
promote some most excellent Design. He ordinarily brings about not only the
greatest Ends by the least, and unlikeliest, but by the most opposite contrary
means that are: And sometimes delights to walk in difficult ways. Of all which,
I need but name that one instance of the Salvation of Man.

Now then, if this be the Glory of God, shall we not esteem it ours? Is it our
perfection to be like God? Let us esteem it so, and endeavor to be like him in
this; create Opportunities to our selves, make them to be, where there was none
before. Let your contrivance bring them out of nothing, or that which is worse
than nothing; That is, when all things conspire to oppose, and to hinder you
from doing the good you desire, and intend to do; out of this very opposition
make your selves a Season, and try to turn it into an Occasion and Advantage.
Which if we do, we shall imitate that most adorable Providence, that
accomplishes the Ends of infinite Goodness, by the services of things that are
adverse and contrary to them.

3. If we meet with things that are unalterably evil, and by no prudence or
care of ours, can be made for our purpose, or to minister to any good Action;
we must then decline and shun them: Remove our selves from them, if we cannot
remove them from us.

The Particulars, when this may, and how it should be done, will fall under the
Advices: I am only now to show Reason why it ought to be done. And it will be
sufficient here to mention the Principal, and indeed the Reason of all that can
be assigned; and that is this, viz. That we may be in the best Capacity to do
most good. For this cause we ought to walk accurately. For this we are to
redeem the Season in those two foregoing Particulars, as well as in this.

And it is a very sufficient and satisfactory Reason, why I should by all
prudent Care, and honest Diligence avoid those unhappy Circumstances, which
will not only help, but hinder me in doing the good which I might in another
Condition do. For this cause I must not foolishly throw my self into, no, nor
stay in such a Condition as that, if I can by fair means keep, or get out. If I
should do otherwise, I should do a vain, fruitless thing; I should not put my
self to those good Uses, for which I may serve: I should violate the Precept,
and do directly contrary to the Reason of the Apostle's Exhortation, of
redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Which certainly signifies this
in part, that we are to decline Dangers and Evils, not universally all Dangers
in any ways, but only those that cannot be improved into an Opportunity, either
by our acting with, or suffering under them. If one way or other, they may be
so managed, as to give us an occasion of doing good: I do not think they are to
be declined, unless it may be done honestly, to rescue our selves into better
Circumstances that will assist us to do more and greater good.

This then is the reason why we should shun those Evils which we cannot make
pliant to our Christian Purposes, because we are to employ our selves to the
best Purposes.

I might add also, That to do thus, is but a compliance with a natural
Inclination, which makes us averse from (suppose) Poverty, Disgrace, Sickness,
Death, etc. Now the Design^ and Reason of this natural Inclination is, that we
should keep our selves in the best Condition in which we can be to do most
good. For, all things are good, and therefore desirable, so far as they give us
an opportunity, or help us to do good: And whatever it is that is no way
conducing, much more that is an hinderance to it, is evil. And it is on this
account, and thus far, that we are to avoid Poverty, Sickness, Death, etc.
whatever are incompliant with, unserviceable to, and Hindrances of our doing
good, or living the Christian Life, and practicing the Virtues which our
Religion requires, we are to withdraw from and avoid.

I have done with the Reasons, why we should redeem the Season, which all rest
upon this as their Basis, viz. the great Utility and Necessity of our doing
good, our exercising the Christian Virtues, and the great seryiceableness of
Opportunity or Season, and indeed the absolute necessity of it to our doing
good. Unless we do well, and live the Christian Life, we cannot be happy, nor
attain the End for which we were made; unless we have Opportunity, we cannot do
well.

I proceed, in the third place, to show what some of those things are that
deprive us of our Time, that hinder us from using it as we should. But I will
bring that under the fourth Particular, the Directions and Advices.

Some of these are general and preparatory, others more particular and
immediate. Again; some do more especially respect our selves and our Actions;
others do primarily refer to the things without us, which make Opportunity. I
begin with those that most expressly relate to our selves.

1. If we would lose no opportunity of good Actions, and make to our selves as
many good Seasons as is possible, for the practice of Virtue; Let us endeavor
after a clear and large Knowledge of all that is good for us to do; and strive
to comprehend fully all that, which in our several Varieties of Circumstances
and Conditions we are in capacity of doing. Whatever good it is which comes
within our compass, whether in respect of God, it be honorable to him; or in
relation to our selves, it be Persective of our Natures; or in reference to
others, it be beneficial to them; let us labor to understand this fully.

The Usefulness, and indeed the Necessity of allowing this Direction, appears
at sight, For, whosoever is ignorant in, or mistaken about the Good he should
do; how is it possible that he should lay hold on every occasion of doing it?
We may as well suppose one who knows not what Port to make, to hoist up his
Sails, and make use of the Wind when it blows: Why? He knows not which way to
steer, and the other understands not what is the Good he should do. He also is
in the same case, who is mistaken, and thinks that to be Good which is Evil. He
will steer a quite contrary Course to what he should. He will watch for the
Seasons of doing that Evil which he thinks to be Good; and will force things to
serve him in prosecuting his Mistake: and this is so far from making use of
Opportunity to do well, that he abuses and perverts it to do ill.

But this is not all I intend by this Direction: another Reason of it is this,
lest for want of it, we let slip the occasion of doing some good or other. For
he that understands not (or, which is the same, considers not) his Duty to God,
how he ought to go out after him in Affection, and humbly and sensibly
acknowledge him; he will neglect the many fair occasions of Devotion, that
continually offer themselves to him. But he that comprehends fully not only
that good which has Man, but that also which has God for its Object, will be
out of this Danger.

2. Let Us not only understand, But also be willing and desirous of doing every
good Work; without this our Knowledge will not suffice to engage us to let slip
no Opportunities of doing it. If there be any that we have no mind to, we shall
be regardless of the Seasons of them; we shall rather shut our Eyes against
them, than look for them: rather run and hide our selves away from, than seek
after them. Let us therefore always keep a willing Mind to do every good Work.
What signifies Wind and Tide to him that is unwilling to take a Voyage? If I
have no Mind to my Devotions, what will Health, and Leisure, and a Closet, and
all the things that invite me to that great Duty, signify? And tho I have every
day the same Summons from things without me, yet it is all to no purpose; that
Season is lost upon us, it is a Prize put into the Hands of such, who have no
Hearts to use it. Let us then be willing and desirous, and that in no low
degree, but let it be our chief Desire, or main End and Design, to do all the
Good we can. For, if it shall once obtain this place in our Hearts, we shall
then both take and make all possible occasions of accomplishing this our End;
we shall lose no Advantage that can be had.

3. Nor must we only be willing and desirous of, but ready and prepared
thoroughly for every good Work. We must endeavor to furnish our selves so, as
we may be in a fitness of doing all that good, to which any occasion shall
invite us, E. G. To defend the Truth of my Religion, and to give any one that
asks me a Reason of the hope that is in me; it is necessary that I should not
only understand that this is good and fit, and be willing to do it; but I
should qualify my self for it, by a through Consideration of the Arguments for,
and the Objections against it; and I must, if I would not miss an occasion of
doing so good a thing, endeavor to furnish my self thoroughly with all those
Abilities, and if I would perform it well also to keep that Temper which will
fit me for such an undertaking, and give a Probability of Success.

Again; If I would improve every Season of doing good, I must, if I be poor,
and not able to relieve my necessitous Brother, labor that I may have somewhat
to give to him that wants, as the Apostle advises, i. e. I must take such
honest ways as I can, and use such Diligence, that I may, when a charitable
Occasion offers it self, comply with it, and do that good to my Neighbor, to
which Opportunity invites.

The Reason of this Advice also is very plain: For, tho we understand, and have
a Desire to do some good, yet if we be unqualified, not fit for it, the
Opportunity will be lost notwithstanding. Tho a skilful Musician have never so
good an Instrument in his Hand, yet it will make no Music unless it be well
strung and tuned; nor can we do any good, to which the fairest Occasions invite
us, unless we be strung and tuned, thoroughly furnished for such Performances:
therefore our Care must be to qualify and fit our selves with Abilities, and to
be always ready for every good Word and Work, that none may come amiss to us,
whether it be to convince, exhort, rebuke, persuade, or by innocent humor to
divert and gratify those with whom we converse; or to hear and receive
Instruction from, and be pleased by their Discourse.

When therefore we have a Comprehension of all the good we can do, and have a
good mind to do it; we should likewise endeavor to be duly prepared for the
doing of it; that when ever our great Lord shall, by giving us an Opportunity,
call us forth to the undertaking, we may not, by our unfitness, disobey his
Summons. For, (to keep to our old Metaphor) if the Vessel be not rigged, tho
Wind and Tide serve never so much, they serve to no purpose: And if we be not
ready trimmed, and our Sails up, in vain will Opportunity blow upon us; we shall
still lie in the Harbor, and make no Voyage.

Besides; By being fitted for every good Work, if an Occasion favors, we may
readily strike in with it: As, if things conspire to make it both fit and easy
for me to be alone, that I may employ my self in thinking, reading, writing,
performing my Devotions to God, examining my self, or the like. If I must be in
Company, that I so behave my self, so hearken to them, so discourse with them,
that, in one kind or other, I advantage both my self and them; that where I
cannot speak to any good purpose in one Argument, yet if there be occasion, I
do in another; and where nothing that is proper, and of use can be said by me,
that I be silent, and as ready to receive Instruction from others, as I would
be to give it to them.

There is no Condition we can be in, but presents us with various Occasions of
several good Actions. There are some Virtues that are proper for a poor and
low, others for a rich and exalted State: Some for Disgrace and Disrespect;
others for Honor, and being well-spoken of; some for Sickness, others for
Health, etc. If then we would lose no Season that shall happen, we must be
furnished and disposed for every good Action: Our Furniture must be ready, we
must have it in promptu, within call, for else time passes so fast, that it may
be gone from us before we be ^it for it.

4. If we would be sure to lose no Season of well-doing, we must be sedulous
and diligent, and in one kind or other, be always doing well. And that we may
be so,

1. Let no Time find us idle, and doing nothing, but ever be at work: Let no
Day, no Hour, no Moment pass by thee unimployed. If thou shall at any time
observe, that thou art doing nothing, know thou have lost an Opportunity: for
there is no part of time which may not be a Season for some Action.

2. Be not ill employed. Let not thy Tongue be in motion to utter ill, to speak
wickedly, to tell Lies, to talk profanely or filthily. Let not thy Hands be
hasty to work Mischief, nor thy Feet swift in the ways of Wickedness. Idleness
is a loss of the present time, but to do ill (is not only that, but) a loss of
the future too; for some of that must be taken up in undoing that which I have
ill done.

This is implied in this Direction, that we should neither be idle, nor yet
evilly busy at any time; but ever be doing, and doing good in one kind or
other: which if we be careful to observe, we shall be glad of all the help we
can get, and so shall strike in with every Opportunity that offers it self: And
when we have employed all such, we shall seek for more, and endeavor to find
out such, as are not so open, and in some sense, to make them where they are
not. This Influence will Diligence in well-doing have on us, to make us redeem
the Season.

5. On the other hand; We must take care that we be not at any time
immoderately, or confusedly busy, especially in the lesser matters. 1. By being
immoderately busy, I mean, that we should not so wholly lay our selves out on
one thing, as to make our selves unfit for any other good Work; that we can
neither observe, nor comply with any Season that would assist us in that other,
tho it be better. For this I take to be the State that is best and most
suitable to our Natures, that we be ever in a readiness to do good, as we have
Opportunity. And, if we so busy our selves in some one particular, that either
by being too intent on it, or continuing too long in it, we are disabled from,
or hindered in doing other good things, we are over-busy. And of this we are to
be careful in reference to Season, that we be not so employed as to render our
selves either inobservant of, or incompliant with it.

There are varieties of good Works, which we have to do, and there are Seasons
for every of them. Now, if we be too earnestly, or too long taken up with one,
or with some few of them; we must necessarily neglect the Opportunities which
we might have for doing the rest. 2. As we must not be more busy about any
thing than it requires and deserves: so we must take heed that we be not
disorderly, and preposterously busy; but do those things first, which are in
order to, and make way for the other. Let those Works be first done, which are
either necessary, or at least do very much contribute to the doing of others.

Were these two things well observed, we should save abundance of Time, and
have many good Opportunities, which by our being busy either beyond the
proportions which things require, or without any order, we throw away.

Labor therefore to bring thine Actions into Method, that is, give Preference
to the greatest and best, and do those first, which make way for, and on which
others depend; and so do every day, begin with those which will make way for
the rest.

6. Often consider, and be fully persuaded of the great Advantage, and indeed
Necessity there is of our taking Opportunity: Whosoever observes how much we
depend on it in our Actions, will be assured of it; and he that is, will not
only lay hold on it, when it waits on him; but will with Care and Pains seek
it, and endeavor by all prudent Management to make an Opportunity for himself.

Remember therefore, that it is Season which makes some Actions good, that
without it would be evil; and those that would be good without it, it makes
better. It helps us to do some Works, which without such Assistance would not
be done: And those that might be done without its Aids, are more easily done
with them. It also is necessary to give Success to some of our Undertakings;
and it gives surer and greater Success to them all. And if we are sensible that
it is of this Consequence, surely we shall not be careless of it.

7. Endeavor to understand clearly and distinctly the good or ill Influences
that things without may have on our Actions; and of the several ways in which
they may be serviceable, or opposite, help or hinder our doing well: That is,
understand particularly what Advantages a Man receives from Riches in order to
the Practice of Virtue: And what ways Poverty does of it self, or may be made
to minister to it. Wherein Liberty is profitable to a good Life: and how
Restraint and Confinement may be-friend it. Also of what use the Esteem, and
good Will, and good Word of Men is to our doing well: And how their Contempt
and Hatred, and Reproach may be turned to its Advantage.

Thus let us acquaint our selves with the Advantages and Disadvantages to
Virtue, which are in every Condition; and which are in all things, which make
or spoil Seasons. This will be a sure Direction, and a great help to us to make
the best use of all things.

To every thing there is a Season, says Solomon, and a time to every purpose
under Heaven: a time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time
to pluck up that which was planted, etc. And God has made every thing beautiful
in its time. That is, at whatever moment there is such a Conflux of things, as
makes an Action good, becoming, beneficial, feasible; that is the proper
Season, or time of it. And how wise, and good, and happy is he that understands
the Season of every thing, and neglects it not? Now the way to this Wisdom is
to observe the Influences which things without us, and all Circumstances have
on our Actions; and what Effects they will have in Conjunction with them.

That what I have said hitherto, and shall further say on this matter, may be
more clear, and so find a readier Entertainment. I will here lay down the
follovving Propositions concerning Time, and concerning the redeeming it.

1. By Time, (as I shevv'd in the beginning of this Discourse) we are here to
understand Season, or Opportunity, as, both by the usual Signification of the
word (...), and by the Sense of it in this Text, is plain.

2. Season is Time with reference to Action, i. e. as it does not hinder and
oppose, as it does further and promote Action. Now because Time it self has no
Influence, does nothing one way or other; therefore Time is by an usual Figure
of Speech, taken for its Adjuncts, for the things that are in, and with Time.

3. We are to understand the Action, to which the Apostle here refers, not
generally for any kind but only for good Actions, that Practice to which our
good Religion obliges us.

This Time or Season may be distinguished thus in respect of its Influence on
our Actions.

(1.) It is then whensoever it is possible for us to do Good, tho it be
difficult, when things do not necessarily hinder us from doing that Good,
which, of our selves, and in another Condition, we are in a Capacity of
doing, this is the least that we call Opportunity.

(2.) When the Times, i. e. the Things that meet together in them, do, not only
not hinder, but in some measure, help on a good Action, contributing somevvhat
to promote it. This is a better Season than the former. But,

(3.) That is the best Opportunity, when things do so conspire, and favor
well-doing, that they make it easy to every good Mind: When not only
Impediments are removed, and some things do cooperate with us; but the
Opposites and Difficulties without us are so wholly taken away, and things do
so universally conspire and join with us, that if our selves be not, nothing
else is wanting to our doing all the good, to which our Religion engages us.

These are the three Differences of Seasons in respect of the Influences they
have on our Performances. We should also distinguish them in respect of their
good Actions, to which they refer, i. e. they may either be Opportunities; 1.
Of doing all Good indifferently. Or, 2. Of this or that Good in particular. Or,
3. They may be general Seasons, which yet do particularly favor and help on
such or such particular good Actions: They do not oppose any, but further some.

And lastly, we may distinguish Seasons from their shorter or longer stay: from
their being more or fewer.

All these may, and should be considered by us, if we would know exactly how to
behave our selves in reference to the Season; if we would, as we are here
required, redeem it.

From what has been said, I may fairly deduce these two Corollaries.

1. Those are good Times or Seasons which do not hinder, but further us in
doing good, living well and virtuously.

2. Those are evil Times, which hinder us from doing the good which we are
otherwise capable of doing; much more are those such, which do facilitate the
doing wickedly.

Thus much concerning Time or Season. I proceed next to the redeeming or
gaining it. Which signifies the making it our own: And also the making
advantage of it. And that implies and refers to the using it to all those good
Purposes to which it serves. For having and using are all one in
Scripture-Dialect. This in General.

More particularly, and as it is to be understood in this place.

1. To do that good in any Time or Season, which it either assists us in, or
does not hinder us from doing, is that which the Apostle aims at, when he bids
us redeem the Time: And it is to be our design, when we do endeavor to redeem
it. There can be nothing else but this intended: For if there were, it must be
either, that we should have Time, and put it to no use, which cannot be
supposed; or that we should put it to ill use, and this none will imagine was
meant by the Apostle. And then there only remains our putting it to good use.

2. But that is not all, that doing good is the only end of getting, of having,
and of keeping time; but it is the only way and means to get, and save, and
improve it. As some things perish in the using, so Time or Season is preserved,
and improved in this use of it. Indeed every thing is then kept, when it is put
to the use for which it serves. And it is the only way to preserve it, when we
carry it on to its Perfection: that is, use it for those Ends for which it was
made, and was fit.

Now, that this is that which we are to do, if we would redeem or gain the
Time: To do the good which we then can, or can best do; which is most proper,
and feasible, or which is not impossible to be done by us. And that there is no
other way to redeem it, will be evident, if we consider, that whosoever does
not do thus, he loses his Time. For, so he does, 1. Who spends it idly in doing
nothing. 2. Who vainly attempts; who does much, but it is ineffectual, and comes
to nothing; he brings nothing to pass; he that is busy to no purpose. 3. He that
labors but for no good End, it is not Good that he designs. 4. Much more does
he lose the Season, who imploys it in evil Works. Nay, 5. That Time is in part
lost, and not husbanded, as every one thinks it should be, in which less good
is done than might have been done in it. Tho a Man has been doing well, yet if
he might have done much better, he is commonly thought, and said not to have
employed, and improved his time as he might, and is supposed should have done.

According to this discourse, doing well is not only the End and Reason why,
but also the Way and Means, how we should redeem the Time. And it is a plain
Corollary deducible from hence, that the more and greater Good any Man does in
Time, the more he redeems it. And he that does all that Good in it, which by
Man can be done in such a Time, he performs what the Apostle here requires most
perfectly: He does his Duty fully, On the other hand, he who does less than the
Times will suffer, or it may be help him to do, either doing some lesser Good,
where he neglects a greater, or doing but a part of a much greater Sum, which
he might do, he does fail in his Obedience to this Exhortation of redeeming the
Time, in Proportion to his falling short of doing the good he might.

The Sum of all this is, That he who so complies with Things and Times, and as
far as they are in his Power, so accommodates them to himself, as to do the
most Good which they enable, or assist, or but suffer him to do: He does redeem
the Time in the Apostle's Sense. And thus far the Explication of it shows the
reasons of those Directions for the doing it, which I have already given; and
will make the entertainment of the few I shall add more easy.

Supposing then that we understand what is good for us to do, and that we are
always willing and ready to do this Good we know; and ever moderately, and
orderly busy; that we are sensible of our dependence on Time, and Things
without us; and that we have got a good knowledge what influences they have on
our doing good, to oppose, and hinder, or to farther and promote it, which is
all that I have directed hitherto: I proceed now to another general Advice,
which is this.

8. Take a view of all the Good, which Men in General, or your self in
Particular have a capacity of doing, in respect of human Nature and Faculties.
Set before you, all in any kind, which one endowed with the Faculties of human
Nature can possibly do; which is fit and becoming one in such Relations and
Conditions, as every Man is, to do in respect of God, of Himself, and of all
other Men and Things, all that is honorable to the great Creator and Lord of
all; that is perfective of human Nature in a Man's self, and in other Men; and
conduces also to the welfare and best state of all other Beings and Things.
Take a survey of Man, and of all of this sort that he is capable of doing;
survey your selves also, what Good it is in particular that you can do: whether
it be more or less than others in your Condition. Now this is all summed up in
those general Heads, of doing justly, loving Mercy, and walking humbly with
God, as the Prophet has expressed them: Or, as the Apostle more fully, living
soberly, righteously and godly.

But this is not all I mean, that we should know all the Good that can be done
by us; but that we also set before us all the Actions we can do, which are
capable of being, and doing thus much good. And they are our Thoughts, and all
those which are transacted by, and in the Mind it self; our Words which convey
our Thoughts to others: And all our other mechanical Actions, which directly,
or indirectly fall under Liberty, and to which we may be determined by our
Wills. Consider well, how fit and good all these may be; What is the Goodness
of each of them singly, and of all of them together. And that you may know
this, consider what respects they bear, and in what order they are to one
another; how one does prepare and make Way for another; and consequently, when
they do cross and oppose each other.

Consider also more distinctly, what Actions are the best, which are of less
Goodness, which are of most, and which of least Consequence. This will very
much direct us in what order to do them, and in case of Competition, which to
prefer. This will hugely conduce to our gaining and improvement of Time, that
is, to our doing the most Good, as I have shown.

The Sum of this Direction is, that we consider (and that not slightly, and
seldom, but often, and seriously) of all the Good we can do, and of all the
Actions whereby we may do it. Let us hang a kind of Table before us, wherein
the good Actions of our Lives (the Heads of them, I mean) may be fully
enumerated and delineated in an orderly Series: And let this be in our Eye very
often, every day look on it. Think of it so long, and so often, till you be
perfect in it, and have no need of recourse to it; when your Memory shall
presently and easily suggest it to you on every occasion: And when we consider
what we can do, we must not only think what we can do by our selves
immediately, but by other Men and Things. For tho we cannot by our selves
(suppose) persuade another, yet we may by some other that is abler, and has
greater Authority with him.

There is none but may see the usefulness of this Advice, in order to our doing
Good, in which Men so frequently and grossly miscarry, for no other cause but
want of this Consideration. Tho they know all the Good they can do, and are
willing and ready to do it, yet they do it not; they often do the contray Evil,
because they consider it not: they act preposterously, and so hinder
themselves. They do a less Good, when they might do a greater; they set upon
the End before the Means. They do not the Good they might, if they would but
take a full and distinct view of all they are capable of doing. Seneca, I
remember, gives this Reason, among others, why Men do so grievously miscarry:
Quamvis sepissime de partibus vitae consulitur, nunguam de toto. They seldom or
never take all their Actions they can do into Consideration: They do not take a
full view of their whole Course and Way, as they must, if they consult about it.

If this be so necessary in order to our living virtuously; it is on the same
account necessary for our redeeming Time, which cannot be done but by
well-doing: This being not only the only End why, but the only Means also
whereby we can get and keep Time or Season.

9. Take also a general view of the whole Time you have, for all Good; as well
as of those parts of Time, which will most be-friend you in doing this, or that
good in particular. If we observe this, it will be a great help. For when we
consider in general, what time we have for doing good, we shall see the most we
can reckon to be so very short, and that little so very uncertain, that we
shall not be able to put it under another account, than of possible, or not
improbable: We can be sure of none, but what is present. This will make us very
careful to enquire, what is the best and most necessary of all the good Works
we can do. And when we have found that, we shall be as diligent to do it with
all our might, and without delay. Whatsoever our Hand finds to do, as Solomon
expresses it, we shall do with our whole Strength.

He that is well resolved that he can make no certain account of any Time, but
of that which is, will certainly be careful to employ that to the best and
most necessary Purposes. And he that does this, has learnt one most excellent
Rule for the redeeming his Time.

Let him also think beforehand, what parts of Time do most befriend one good
Action, suppose Thinking; when it may be the fittest season for Speaking, and
when for other Actions.

When you have thus considered your Time, think how you have spent it. And if
you be sensible of mispence; for the future resolve on retrenching all your
unaccountable expenses of your Time: Such as you cannot justify to God, and
your own Conscience; nor to any one that thinks every thing should be put to a
good use.

Having thus used frequent Consideration, both of the good Actions you can do,
and also of the Time you have to do them, and prepared your selves;

10. Let your next care be to make, and keep a serious resolution of filling up
every little space of Time, with doing some Good or other. Let it be your
constaint care and study to be alvvay doing Good of some kind; that no Minutes
be laid out on evil Works; no Time leak from you in Idleness; no Hours be spent
on that which has so very little Goodness, that it is doubtful, or
undiscernable. Many of our Businesses afford us abundance of spare Time, which
a good Mind knovvs how to spend in divine Meditations, or the like.

The Naturalists observe that the same Vessel, when it is filled with Water,
will yet receive Bodies of another Nature: And nothing more common than for
one Body to incorporate and unite with another. I am sure there is no Time but
may be more employed than it is. And very fevv of our good Actions, the
Goodness of which may not be condensated; and will admit of others of other
kinds, and more of the same.

11. Be ever inclined and resolved to do as much good as you can; be not
content to do a little, but design the most; do not satisfy your selves to do
good only, but still aim at doing the best. By this means we shall crowd more
of Good into out Time. The same Ground, well husbanded, will yield twice as
much Corn, as if it were in the Hands of a Sluggard. And the same Time may
bring forth twice as many good Actions, if it be well looked to, as otherwise
it would. Do as many good Actions together as thou can: put as much Good into
as little room as is possible: Do every Action as well as thou can; make it
as good as it is capable of being.

12. Allot the greatest and best, and first Portions, the most of your Time, to
the best and most necessary Works, those which most tend to Man's greatest
Perfection: Such are those that are requisite to the getting and keeping a good
Mind and Conscience, and such a Plight of Body, as renders it most useful to
the Soul, in all wise and virtuous Actions, viz. Consideration; being
conversant in the Scriptures, in Prayer, in Christian Conference: All Acts of
Justice and Mercy, etc.

13. Where there is an Equality on other accounts, that one Action is not
apparently better than the other: Do that to which Season does most invite,
Things will most assist in the doing it, and give Probability of best Success
when it is done. The Reason of this Advice is plain, because by doing thus we
are likely to do most good, and in a shorter time, than if we set our selves to
do that which Opportunity does not so much favor.

14. Take the first Time or Season of doing a good Work; do not stay in hopes
of a better, when, it may be, you may never have another. This is wise Counsel
in any good Work, not to be dilatory, to procrastinate. But it is necessary in
those that are inwardly and immutably good, and eternally obligatory. Let no
Conceit of present Difficulty put thee off. Do not neglect a good Season, in an
uncertain Expectation of one more convenient. Say not to good Works, as Felix
said to St. Paul, Go away for this time, when I have a convenient Season, Acts
24. 25.

15. Avoid those things which are certain, and some of them double mispence of
Time: Such are these,

1. Intemperance. Whosoever exceed the Bounds which Nature and Virtue has set
to their Appetites of bodily Pleasures, they for a space utterly disable
themselves from using their Time to any good purpose. And so they continue,
till by Sleep or Abstinence they are recovered to their natural State: During
which time, how many fair Opportunities of doing brave Actions have they lost?

2. Immoderate Passion: This does so detain the Soul in the Thoughts of some
one Object, that it is wholly inobservant of any thing else that comes before
it. Whilst I am over vehemently angry with one, I take no notice of another,
whose Wants would otherwise move my Compassion. They do loudly call for my
Charity, but I am so deaf with the noise of mine own Passion, that I cannot
hear.

3. Wicked Company. Such will be saying, or doing ill things: There is some
Danger that the Infection catch hold on me; and by sorting with them, I become
one of them. Or, if by God's Grace, I be preserved from running into the same
Excess with them; yet I may through Cowardice or Imprudence not rebuke them. By
suffering Sin on them, I may bring it on my self. If I do rebuke them, it may
be to no purpose, it is not likely to have any Effect. Thus if I be not
Company-proof, I shall be snared. And if I be kept from falling into their
Sins, yet I have lost some hours which might have been better spent in good
Company, or in my Closet.

4. Courtship and Complement; great portions of Time are spent in these
Trifles; by which I do not mean those Expresses of Civility, which become us to
use in many cases: but, when we employ our Minds in studying to speak Words, or
use Gestures, that are wholly insignificant, that do not correspond with the
Sense of our Souls, that have no Truth on which they are bottomed; that are
used with a vain, with no good, perhaps with an ill Design. How idly, how
unprofitably do they lavish away their time, who converse together in this
vain, trifling, false, hypocritical manner, who as they are conscious, that no
Credit is to be given to what they say, so neither do they believe each other?
And to how little purpose do I converse with that Man, whom I cannot think he
means as he speaks?

16. Be very watchful of our selves in such Particulars, which if they be not
regarded, do very much endanger the loss of Time. As,

1. Be careful we be not too prodigal of it in the Gratifications of our
Senses, and the Services of the Body. Whilst thou art eating and drinking, take
heed of devouring Time also: And spend not those hours in Sleep, or in dressing
thy Body, which should have been laid out on thy better Part.

I do not by this put eating and drinking, sleeping, and dressing, into the
vain Consumptions of Time. No, they are all very allowable things: But, this I
say, that we have need to set a Watch over our selves, lest we spend more time
in these things, than we can account for, than is requisite for them; so long
as they are good and natural: Let us be doing other things, while we are doing
these. While we are satisfying our Hunger and Thirst, let us discourse; While
we are dressing our Bodies, let us be clothing, and adorning, and sprucing up
our Souls, by wise and good Thoughts and Affections. But do not do this
profunctorily, and by the by; for that is hateful, and a perverse piece of
Folly, to let thy Soul have thy Bodies leavings: To do the Work of thy Soul
when thou have nothing else to do; to cast off thy refuse Minutes to it, and to
allow it none other; to afford it only the few Minutes, which can be spared
from the Services of the Body.

This may be an Instance, how the same Action may be very good and very bad,
according to the Mind with, and the Principle from which it is done. He that
lays his Bible before him, and fills up those Minutes with reading, and imploys
those Thoughts about God's Revelation, which need not be laid out wholly in
dressing: And does this out of the great Sense he has of the far greater
Excellency and Necessity of one Work than of the other, he does well in this.
But if these little Intervals of Time be all that are given to the Soul; and if
he only cast off the Shreds of Time for the Soul, out of a Preference of the
Body, this is hateful.

2. Beware of all diverting Exercises. Those Games which were invented on
purpose to take off our Minds a while from more serious Employments, on which
they could not be continually fixed, they after prove an infinite Expense of
Time; and by a kind of Witchery do so insinuate themselves, and excite our
Passions, and cause a tickling Pleasure, that they detain us much longer time
than we can spare from important Business.

It is Wisdom in this case, to resolve before we be engaged in it, how long we
will stay at such a Sport: And to be sure not to break our Purpose.

3. Compliance with general Customs. Some of these are great Devourers of Time.
We spend many hours, and it is but very little good we do in them. I do not bid
you be singular, and break such Customs; no, I suppose them innocent in
themselves, and by my Care they may be so to me. All I advise is, that since
they may not require a great, or constant Intention of Mind to use them, we let
out our Thoughts after other matters, and lay hold on such Advantages of doing
any kind of good as are offered.

4. Civil Visits: Such as are made by those who are not quite Strangers to each
other, nor yet so well known, as to be Friends and Confidents. I do not suppose
these to end in mere Tattle, much less in a saucy Discourse against their
Governors, nor in slandering, or uncharitable detracting from their
Neighbors, nor any such ill things as these, which is the worst Consumption of
Time that can be. But if these Visits stay in general and innocent Discourse,
yet we must be careful, that too much of our little Time, which more necessary
things call for, be not laid out on these lesser matters. Let us also endeavor
to improve these Occasions to the best Uses, of which they are capable.

5. Curiosities. They are things that require much Pains, and are of no great
use. Now, if whilst we are in pursuit of these, we neglect something that is
more necessary; if things of far greater moment call for that Time and Pains
which we lay out on these Prettinesses, they prove the loss of our Time: and
there is great Danger lest our Curiosity should engage us so far in the quest
of these dissiciles Nugae, these things that please, merely because they are
rare, and odd, and hard to come at; that we should not mind the Seasons of
doing far better and greater things: Which if we do, we lose the Advantage in
part, for we do not do the best we might.

6. Conversation with Friends. It is commonly said, Amici fures temporis; and
there is some danger of it, as there is of every thing that hugely pleases us,
lest it should so fix and chain our Souls to it, that they be not ready to fly
away with the first Opportunity that calls to the doing some other, and more
necessary Good.

This that I say, is no Disparagement to Friends; and which of all the things,
this World affords that are without us, is of greatest value. And there is
nothing so pleasant, so profitable; nothing so truly honorable; nothing that
carries with it a Signification of greater Wisdom, and Virtue, and good Nature,
than to live in Friendship: And the more there is of this, the larger, the more
universal, still it deserves a greater Praise. It is that, which, tho I am
occasionally fallen into the mention of, yet, I can hardly forbear to persuade
all Men to enter into, and to preserve this most sacred League.

Notwithstanding this, I must intimate, that amongst the other Miscarriages you
may by occasion of it fall into, this is not the least, That the most pleasant
Conversation of your Friend may so take you up, that you may be by this bereft
of the Season of doing some more needful Good, which, it may be, whilst you are
in those delightful Transports you have in the Enjoyment of him you love and
trust, as you do your own Soul, passes away, and will return no more.

This Caution should be no more prejudice to Friendship, or bring us into any
ill Thoughts of that, than if it were (as it might be) applied to a greater
thing than Friendship, that is, Devotion, or converse with God himself, which
is the highest Act we can put forth; yet we may be too long in the Mount. There
are other Services to be done besides, though none so great as this.

17. Do not thy Actions by halves, nor so as thou shall need to do them again.
Strive to do every thing as well, as exactly as thou can. And tho it may
happen so, as that thou must do it again, however thou may be better able to
do it than now thou art, yet this is all can be done to prevent it.

If we have considered the Reasons why we should thus take every Opportunity,
and be persuaded by them; we shall not only do thus our selves, but also
endeavor that others, that all with whom we have to do, especially Children
and Servants, may do so. And for that end, I cannot give a better Advice, than
that we should bring up our Children in some honest Employment or other, not
suffer them to live at large, to do this or that, any thing or nothing, what
and when themselves have a Mind to it. And for our Servants, who are at our
dispose, that we should take care that they be neither idle, nor ill employed.
Let me also add concerning Friends, when we are with them, that as we ought to
be careful, that they do not steal Time from us; so should we charge our
selves, that we do not rob them of it, and by their Civility and Kindness to
us, engage them to neglect their more necessary and important Affairs.

Thus far I have gone in general Directions, how we may not neglect any, but
employ every Opportunity of well-doing that offers it self. The Sum is, Let us
redeem as much Time from the less necessary Works, as is sufficient for our
doing all those that are of greater Importance.

I now proceed to offer some Advice, by what means and ways we should make
Times that are adverse and opposite, to become favorable and serviceable to
us, as we are Christians, that is, to the Christian Life, and to all that
Happiness which we naturally and innocently desire.

And also where we cannot make them thus pliant to our Desires and Purposes,
how we should avoid those Evils with which they threaten us.

That we may proceed more clearly, we we will consider what Days may be said to
be evil, and what makes them so. And by this our way will be more plain, which
we are to take, either to alter, or to decline the Evils.

1. Those Days are said to be evil, which hinder us from doing, or enjoying
that Good, which otherwise we might.

The Evil of them is in such things as these: Poverty, Reproach, and a bad
Name, Slavery, Con^inement, want and loss of Friends, Sickness, and Death, the
Ignorance and Mistakes of many; but above all, Sin, of which there is greatest
Danger. For, all the rest take Men off from doing Good, but Sin makes them also
do Evil.

If we be made poor, we shall not be able to feed the Hungry, or cloth the
Naked, or relieve those that are ready to perish, which the Rich Man can. And
if we die, we are cut off from doing, or enjoying any more the Good of this
Life: but if we commit Sin, and practice Wickedness, we not only do no Good,
but we do that which is contrary to it, Evil. We not only deprive our selves of
the Enjoyments that are innocent and natural, but we, by this, bring our selves
under great Sufferings and Misery.

These, and such like, are the Evils of any Days. And the Divine Providence
brings about all the rest, except Sin, either by natural and unseen Causes,
which we do not know, or cannot resist: Or, by other Men, who either master us
by their Power, or out-reach us by their Wit, or prevail with us by their
Authority: Or lastly, by our selves, i. e. our own Folly, and Negligence, and
Wickedness. Indeed the greatest Evils of any Times come from our selves. And
tho Men generally complain of the Times, the Times; yet in many Cases, if they
would speak truly and properly, they must blame themselves. For, they cannot but
observe, that other Men are, and they might be very good in those very bad
Times, which they so much accuse. Our greatest Danger is from our Selves, more
than from Times and Things without us. For, without our own Consents, nothing
can make us sin: And if we escape Sin and Wickedness; nothing can do us much
harm. If we keep our selves from doing Evil, we shall not fall into the worst
of all those Mischiefs, of which we are in Danger from the Times.

1. Let this then be our first Care, that we do not make the Days evil; that by
our own Ignorance and Folly, our Carelessness, and Viciosity, we do not bring
those Evils upon our selves for which we complain of the Times.

Perhaps by your bad Example you have infected others; or by your ill, or for
want of your good Counsel, some public Persons are vicious, and their Vices
have had Influence on the Generality, and the Age has been corrupted by this.
And now you complain against the Times, when as your self are a great cause why
they are so bad.

How many are there, who should turn their Accusation of the Times against
themselves? They have, and do help to make good Times bad, and bad Times worse.
They neglect their own Duty, and do not do the good of their Place; they are
foolish and idle, and careless, and vicious; and whilst they are so, no Times
will be good to them. They will never find a Season convenient enough wherein
to do well: Such a Temper as this, will turn the best into very bad Times.

Let us therefore, in the first place, take Care, that by our Wickedness and
Folly, we do not change good Days into bad; nor increase the Evil of any Time.
Under this general Advice we shall find most of, or all those particular
Directions, which I shall presently give.

But supposing that the Times are bad, and we have no hand in it: Suppose them
worse than (God be thanked) they are, as bad as in any Age they have been, as
we can well conceive them to be: Let the generality be given up to all
Wickedness, not only debauched and sottish in themselves, but profane and
irreligious toward God; and both uncharitable and and unjust, dishonest and
inhuman toward Men: But let us imagine the Wise, and the Learned, the Rich,
and the Honorable to be hearty Opposers of, and Enemies to the Christian Life
and Spirit, and that they use their Wit, and employ their Knowledge, and their
Interest in obstructing the progress of Goodness and Virtue, as much as is
possible. Nay, not only so, but they who hold the Scepter, by whose Counsel
public Affairs are managed, are violent Persecutors of the Cause and People of
God, and of all Goodness; and their Rage is bent against every one that is like
to, and a Follower of the Son of God. Suppose you be in a Family where not only
thy Fellow Servants, or thy Brothers and Sisters, but thy Father and Mother, or
thy Master and Mistress be not only wicked themselves, but Abetters of
Wickedness in others. Let thy Case also be such, that thou, by being good, wilt
not only be in danger to lose the Good Will of thy Equals, thy Friends, but of
thy Superiors; nay, thy Governors will be ready to punish thee with
Con^iscation of Goods, Imprisonment, perhaps Death it self: Thy Name is cast
out from amongst Men, thou art reckoned as an Evil-doer, and art thought worthy
to suffer all manner of Evils, which Men can inflict on thee. Let this be
supposed to be our Case, which was the Primitive Christians; (but God be
praised it is not ours, for we enjoy Peace and Liberty, we may be as good as we
will; nay, and have many great Advantages and Helps to be good; yet since we
have so very long neglected, and misimproved, and abused them, we know not what
calamitous Times the Divine Providence may bring us into.) Now that we may be
better prepared for the making such Times serviceable to our good Purposes, and
making the best of all these Evils which may at any time befall us, so as to
lose no Opportunity of doing well, which they may be conceived by any Care and
Prudence of ours, to afford us, I will lay down some general Advices. The Sum
of which is, that,

We must endeavor as much as is possible, i. e. as much as is consistent with
Religion and Virtue, to conciliate the good will of all Men; to bring them into
a good opinion both of our Religion, and of our selves: To make not only our
Inferiors and Equals, the generality, the multitude, to think well of both;
but also to strive to approve our selves, and to commend our Religion to the
Rich and the Great, to the Learned and Wise, to Princes and Nobles, to Men of
all Employments and Ways, in all Offices, and Relations, and Conditions. And
that will be by doing those things, which all commend and esteem Good; by
abstaining from those which every one accounts Evil, and blames; by being of
such a behavior as all approve and like.

This I am sure was the Counsel which was given to the first Professors of our
Religion, to teach them how to carry themselves in those difficult Times in
which they lived.

This is the Sense of my Text, and that which St. Paul seems particularly to
have intended, when he bid them walk circumspectly, redeeming the Time; and
that they should strive after an excellent knowledge of the Will of God: All
which seems to have particular reference to the Evil Days.

In a parallel place (which we mentioned in the beginning) the Apostle calls
upon them to walk in Wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the Time;
which plainly imports, that they should have such a Consideration of the
Extranei, the Infidels, that by their Carriage toward them, they might gain
from them those Advantages and Seasons, which were requisite for their doing
the Good which their Religion enjoined them.

This is the general Advice. Strive to adorn your Profession, to commend your
selves by that which every Man approves. Commend your Religion, which you will
do, if you can but make it appear. And therefore give a true clear
representation of it in your Discourses, and then it will carry its own defense
with it; every Man will be convinced of its Goodness. But especially, show in
your Conversation the excellency of this Wisdom. Let it appear by the admirable
Effects which it has on your Spirit and Behavior, that it is a most divine
thing, in that it keeps you from doing that which is Evil, and engages you to
do that which is Good and Honest in the sight of all Men, But

What is that honest Conversation which St. Peter exhorts the Christians to
have among the Gentiles, that whereas they spoke against them as Evildoers,
they might be ashamed, who did falsely accuse the Christian Life? 1 Pet. 3. 16.
I answer,

Tho, it may be, some Men are so greatly corrupted, and become so much either
Brutes, or Devils, that there is very little of that which is truly Good that
they will account so: Yet, I hope, there are not many of these Monsters, and
that there will very few be found, who do not entertain a good opinion of the
Men,

1. Who are Innocent. Which therefore our Savior thought fit particularly to
recommend to his Disciples that were to be among Wolves. Be harmless, says he,
as Doves. Innocence has a certain Charm in it which composes Rage and
Fierceness, and casts a Damp on the fury of a Persecutor. Hurt no Body in Word,
or Deed; This is the likeliest way to procure such safety to your selves, that
none will hurt you. For who will be an Enemy to him, that is an Enemy to no Man?

2. If you would escape the ill-Thoughts, and Oppositions of Men, be humble and
modest. Do not aim at things too high for you. Do not undertake what you are
not fit for, keep within your own Compass. Do not ambitiously contend with more
worthy Men, those that are more fit for a place than your selves. Do not grasp
at every thing, whilst you can do little or nothing; for such a Carriage as
this makes every one your Enemy: Whereas if your Deportment be such, that it
shows you think of your self as you ought, it will conciliate every ones.
Esteem.

3. To be mild and patient, is not only in the sight of God, but of Men also,
very valuable. Soft Words, says Solomon, will turn away Wrath. And common
Observation assures us, that nothing does so blunt the edg of a sharp Anger, as
a ^eek Behavior. If the Man of Fury will begin to afflict such a one, yet he
can hardly continue; the edge will be soon taken off, and his Malice grow
weary, when it is not animated, and enraged by an angry Opposition. The first
Christians wearied the Rage of their Persecutors by their Patience.

4. I advise to hearty and universal Good Will. He that would be hated by none,
must himself hate none. And he that would be loved by all, must love all.

Nor is good Wishes, and a good Will, and good Words all that I mean by Love:
But all such good Deeds as thou can do. Where thou art fit to give it, and
others capable to receive it, counsel, admonish, reprove. Where thou have an
Estate, and see thy Brother in want, relieve him. And by the way, Is not this
the likeliest course to secure thy Estate? For when every one knows that thou
usest it to the best Purposes, that thou neither oppressest thy Neighbor, nor
yet hoardest up thy Treasure, but put it to the best uses, feedest the
Hungry, cloathest the Naked, suppliest the nececessities of the Poor, layest it
out on some public Works: Who will go about to wrong thee of that Estate with
which thou do so much good? Or if there be any such Monsters, yet the
Generality will be on thy side. He must be a great and covetous Tyrant, who
will take away an Estate that does so much Good. And what Man is he who will
abridge those of their Liberty, who make it appear that they do not use it as a
Cloak of Maliciousness, but as an Opportunity of Beneficence. In short, the Man
of universal Good Will obliges all. And he must be very unnatural that can be
an Enemy to him, who is a Friend to every one.

5. And when I have said thou should be loving and kind, merciful and
liberal; I suppose thee to be just and honest, true and faithful: That thou will wrong no Man of his Right, withhold from no Man his Due; but give every
one that to which Law, and Custom, and Equity has given him a Title. That thou will keep thy Word, and stand to thy Bargain, make good thy Promise, and be
faithful to thy Trust. If thou wrongest not other Men, they will not lightly
wrong thee. And by being just and honest to all, thou take the likeliest way
to make them so to thee. Give every Man his, and this will induce all others to
give thee thine: To do to thee, as thou do to him.

6. Be quiet and peaceable, not quarrelsom and contentious with your
Neighbors. Be united, and as far as is possible, live peaceably with all Men,
be of one Heart, and Mind, and Way; do not disagree with them without
necessity. And where there is disagreement in some, either Opinions, or
Practices; yet let it be managed amicably, so as not to cause a Breach, a
Distance; but converse together, as those that agree in the most and greatest
matters, tho you differ in some. Make it appear that your study is to be quiet,
and your design to live in Peace.

Let all the Virtues which fit Men for Society, which are necessary to its
Being, and contribute to its Prosperity, shine forth in your Conversation.

In Particular; Obey those that have the rule over you, obey them universally,
where their Commands do not interfere with God's; and where they do, and your
Allegiance to the Sovereign of all the World challenges your Obedience to his
Law, yet even there, where you deny subjection to your Earthly Governors, let
this be done with that Humility and Quietness, and with that becoming Reverence
to them, that they may see it is not from a perverse, peevish, froward, humor
some, untractable Spirit; nor from the scrupulosities of an anxious, and
unsatisfiable Mind, that you do not comply with their Injunctions: But that it
proceeds from the clear and fixed Resolutions of a well-informed Mind, a
Conscience that is instructed to give God that which is his, and to Man that
which God has given him. Which when it shall be evident to them, if your
Governors have any thing of Humanity left; they will be inclined to favor you.

By these, and such like things, it came to pass that the twelve Fishermen
vanquished the World, and overcame all those seemingly insuperable
Difficulties: That the plain simple Religion of our Savior, took place both of
the Jewish, and the Pagan.

The excellent Spirits, and Lives of Christians, did more to the Conversion of
the World, than all the Miracles which they wrought. It was their Virtue and
Goodness, that made their Enemies become their Friends, and that put an end to
their Persecutions. It was their Innocence and Meekness, Humility and Love,
Justice and Peaceableness, and Obedience, which got them favor with their
Governors, and procured them ease and rest, and all those things which an
Opportunity of doing Good does imply.

Thus we have a verification of these Advices. We have seen an illustrious
proof of their Truth. They who have done thus, have redeemed the Season, by
these ways they gained Opportunity, not only for themselves, but for us also.
And that we enjoy so much Freedom and Wealth, and are not persecuted to Death
for our Religion, we must ascribe to the innocent, holy and useful Lives of the
first Christians. This shows the sufficiency of the Advices I have given, when
they were observed, they proved effectual. To these let me add some others.

1. Let us endeavor to be useful, and serviceable to the Public; that the
place where we live may not know how to be without us. This many times has
saved the Life of a Malefactor; How much more will it expiate a small Offense?
Nay, not only so, but this is the way to obtain Liberty, to raise an Estate, to
gain an Interest, i. e. to redeem a Season of doing more Good.

2. Do your own Business, meddle not with other MensMatters, be not
busy-Bodies; be diligent to do your own Work, that which your Place and Station
requires of you; but be not forward to thrust your selves into other Men's
Affairs, lest you engage in that which you do not understand, nor are able to
perform.

This meddling where we are not concerned, is a great loss of Time; not only, as
it takes us off from that which we can best do, our own Work, and puts us on
what we understand not so well, nor are sit for: But also, as it brings us into
disesteem with Men (who generally think ill of a busy-Body) and thereby makes
us lose that Opportunity, which their no ill Opinion of us would have afforded.

But if we take upon us to be Governors, nay, to be Superior to, and to judge
and censure them; we by thus invading the Throne, and offering to wrest the
Scepter out of the Princes Hand, make it necessary for them to curb our
Insolence. Whereas he that keeps himself within his own Bounds, and is diligent
in his own Affairs; he is easy and profitable to the Government, under which he
lives, and no Man can be angry with him.

3. Be not over-Talkative. A Man full of Words shall not prosper: And there is
a Time when the prudent Man will hold his peace. But, if Men in their
Discounses, speak evil of their Neighbors; much more, if they blaspheme
Dignities, and revile the Rulers; they many ways offend against this Precept of
redeeming the Time. For, 1. They are doing Evil themselves. 2. They, by this,
hinder others from doing the Good they would have done, if they had not been
slandered, or reproached. 3. They provoke those against whom they speak, and
make themselves obnoxious to their Governors: They have made it necessary that
they should be punished, in one kind or other, for Peacesake.

4. Do not affect Singularity in Humor, Garb, Carriage, or any little things:
But be like to, and converse with others, and comply with all the old innocent
Customs of the Places where you are. Where Men do thus, they are not supected
of Innovation, as the affecters of Singularities are by the Government. This we
know was the way of our Savior, and of his Apostles.

5. Be Civil, and Courteous, and Affable to all Men. And where they either do
not want, or you cannot do any thing that is greater and better, yet be not
wanting in these smaller Offices. These little things, sometimes, lay no little
Obligation on Men, and they will hereby be brought to a good Opinion of you.

These are some of those Counsels which I would give, that we may gain Seasons
of doing well in evil Days.

But if things will not yield, or become pliant to our Purpose, if we cannot by
all the honest Arts we use, gain the good Will, nor yet free our selves from
the worst Evils that the Malice of Men may bring upon us: We have then but two
things to do,

1. To withdraw our selves from the Dangers that threaten us, if this may be
done handsomely, and creditably: Or if we cannot,

2. To encounter the Dangers, which we cannot escape, with that Courage and
Constancy of Mind, that becomes the Followers of the Blessed Jesus; those who
have Faith in God, and believe them to be Blessed, who suffer in, and for
well-doing. By this means, we may make our Deaths an Opportunity of doing more
Good, than if we had lived many Years, we should have done. And so shall redeem
the Time, etc.

What I have said of the Wickedness of the Times, refers to the Wickedness of
other Men which may endanger our falling into Sin, and will make us less
successful in doing good, than otherwise we should be.

The Directions which I have given are not sufficiently particular. It will be
useful to consider very particularly, how I should behave my self in this, or
that, or the other Difficulty. To follow the Examples in Scripture, how my
Savior, St. Paul, and others behaved themselves before Magistrates, with
Hypocrites, and with open Sinners; and in the Extremities of Dangers. It is not
for me to give many particular Advices: Your own Prudence in present Straits
will suggest them. Only let me put you in mind of this,

That you use no Arts, for your delivery from any Evils, which do not agree
with the Faith, and Truth, and Honesty that belongs to all Men; which are not
fairly consistent with, and well-becoming the Religion of a Christian, the
Affection and Faithfulness of a Friend, the Duty and Loyalty of a Subject; and
whatever Relation, or Condition you are in.

1. Resolve never unnecessarily to expose our Selves, our Lives, Fortunes,
Names to the Malice, and Rapine, and Censure of private Persons, who are
uncharitable: Or of public Persons, who are notoriously unjust, or rigorously
just. That is, avoid all needless, foolish, hazardous Businesses, Quarrels, and
Oppositions by acting, or speaking about other Men's Matters, where we have
nothing to do; much more doing or saying any thing openly and directly against
their Persons, Interests, Ways, or Opinions: When a more tacit, and
consequential way will probably do what you intend, more effectually. Not
always railing at the (suppose) Idols, and false ways of Worship, which other
Men use: But taking fit Seasons to signify our disapproval of them. Neither
against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, have I offended any
thing at all, says St. Paul, Acts 25. 8. He that would see good Days, let him
refrain his Tongue from Evil, 1 Pet. 3. 10.

2. Make it appear that there is no such great difference betwixt you as is
thought. That you agree in many, and those the most material Things. St. Paul
showed, that the Heathen Poets consented to, and bore witness to the Doctrine
of Christ, For we are his Offspring, Acts 17. 28.

3. Where you cannot make this appear concerning the whole number of your
Adversaries, yet if you can, do it of a part of them; do this, and you will
divide them: So St. Paul, concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, etc. Acts
23. 6, 7, 8.

But thus much may suffice for the second Proposition, which I propounded to
discourse of, viz. That Christians ought to make the best of bad Times, when
they fall into them.

I proceed now to the third and last Proposition in the Text.

A DISCOURSE OF Understanding the Will of God.
Of the Third Proposition.
EPHESIANS. 5. 17. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the Will of the
Lord is.
CHristians ought to use their best Endeavors to understand what the Will of
God is: This appears from the Apostle's Exhortation in those Words, Wherefore
he ye not unwise, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is. The Relation
which these Words have with the foregoing, is intimated to us by the word
Wherefore ((...)); it is as if the Apostle had said, That you may walk
circumspectly, or accurately, as becomes Christians; and that you may redeem
the Season, not needlessly exposing your selves to Dangers, but using all
prudent, honest ways to secure your selves, and gain Opportunity of doing the
Good, your Religion obliges you to; Be not imprudent, as those are that are
either ignorant of, or mistaken in the Will of the Lord. But on the other hand,
endeavor after a very perfect understanding of it: that so you may not think
your selves under Obligations to do that, which he does not require of you; nor
yet be careless of doing that which he does require: and by both ways be
betrayed into the Dangers which threaten you, but that your Practice being
directed by this exact Knowledge of the Divine Will, you may, as much as is
possible, escape the Evils, of which the times are full; and gain to your
selves the best Advantages for good living that you can have.

Our well-doing and well-being does very much depend upon our Knowledge: It is
indeed a very principal Ingredient of our Goodness and Happiness. Without it,
says Solomon, the Heart cannot be good, that is, neither virtuous nor quiet.

Now, there is no Knowledge of greater importance to Man than the Knowledge of
the Will of God. For, this is the Rule of all our Actions, the limits of our
Desires, the direction of all our Counsels.

God's Will is the guide of ours. And as we cannot reasonably will any thing
contrary to what God will's: so it is our Safety, and our Wisdom and Perfection
to will nothing else.

This Knowledge has the greatest influence upon the good government of our
Lives. And whosoever is without it, he cannot express that regard to the great
Governor of the World which he should.

To be ignorant, or to be mistaken, in a matter of this moment, is of fatal
consequence. And yet I doubt we are not, generally, so careful in this as we
ought, as it is our interest to be. There are few that cry so earnestly, and so
often as David, Lord, teach me thy Law, -- thy Judgments, make me to understand
thy Testimonies. And where is he to be found that has made this his Enquiry,
What is the Will of God? Tho we daily pray that God's Will may be done, yet we
consider nor what that Will is: We pretend to be doers of it, tho we know it
not.

But, some may be discouraged from seeking after this Knowledge, as if it were
utterly impossible. For, what Man is he that can pretend to know the Will of
another Man? And how then shall he understand the Will of God?

It may be sufficient to remove this Objection, if I say, That by the Will of
God, in this place, we are to understand only that, which he declares he would
have Man to do, or suffer.

Now though it cannot be conceived, that Man's Mind should comprehend all the
Designs and Determinations of the Will of God, and his whole Counsel:
innumerable of which, are above our comprehension, or belong not to us, and on
one account or other, are, and for ever will be hid from us: Yet as far as we
are concerned, and it may be of advantage to us to know it, God has revealed
his Will to us. And that is, especially, what it is that he would have us to
do; and what will be the issue of such a behavior, or of the contrary to it.

Before I give an account, how and in what ways this is made known to us; I
will take notice of this Expression, the Will of God, which the Scripture so
often uses for his Law. I infer from this, That it is indeed that which God
wills, that we should conform to his Law, do what he has commanded, abstain
from what he has forbid.

It is really the Will of God, that Man should live as God has declared he
would have him. This is God's Pleasure, that which he desires and delights in.
And whosoever does not thus, he, in the use of his Liberty, of and from
himself, that selfmoving power with which he is endowed, opposes and
contradicts the Will of God.

I mention this the rather, because of some ill Expressions, which have been in
great use, that may lead such as are unwary, into great and dangerous Mistakes.
As when Men distinguish the bene-placitum, or good pleasure of God, from his
preceptive or commanding Will, and call this only an expression, or
signification and a show of his Will: as if this were not his real Will and
Good-pleasure.

For the clearing up of such difficulties as these, let us consider, that tho
we may distinguish the Will of God from its Objects, and the various matters
about which it is, yet in it self it is but one simple thing. God has not a
Will and a Will, two Wills, unless we call the willing two Things two Wills.
Much less are we to imagine the least shadow of Contradiction among the several
acts of the divine Will: This were an Imperfection not easily to be fastened
upon a wise Man.

But neither this, nor any other thing that is inconsistent with the
acknowledged Perfections of the Godhead, ought to be suspected of the Divine
Will. God cannot will that which is contrary to his own glorious Nature.

If we be persuaded of these two things (which I think are clear in their own
Light.) 1. That God cannot will inconsistently with the perfections of his most
excellent Nature, that Wisdom and Knowledge, that Justice and Goodness that are
essential to him. And 2. That one act of his Will can never contradict, nor is
in the least repugnant to another: This may be of good use to preserve us from
some dangerous Opinions, which have been held in these latter Ages: We shall
never attribute to God unjust Decrees, nor impossible Commands.

I do not enter into the main Controversy, but yet thought fit on this occasion
to say thus much, lest any one should think that God does not will what he
commands; that it is but a show he makes, when he gives his Law, as if he
really willed that Man should not observe it: A Thought most unworthy of God.

I must not go on in this Argument now. I hope enough has been said to my
Purpose, and that no Man will question whether that be indeed the Will of God,
which he has so often, and so plainly told us is his Will: I mean his Law.

I therefore proceed to show, by what means, and in what way Man may come to as
perfect a knowledge of this Will of God, concerning his Actions, as can be: That
he may know it with as much clearness and certainty, distinction and
particularity, as fully and adequately, as is possible. Also that he may not
only have a positive and absolute, but a comparative and relative knowledge of
God's Commands, which are the greater, and which the less weighty matters of
the Law: What reference the several Precepts bear; and in what order they are
unto each other.

We are commonly told of two general ways, wherein this Knowledge is attained,
which are thus expressed; the Light of Nature, and of Grace, or Reason, and
Faith. Neither of which exclude, but indeed imply Sense, both inward and
outward.

I shall not consider these distinctly, but shall show at least some of those
ways, wherein God discovers his Will to us Men. As,

I. The Manifestation he has made of himself, and the adorable Perfections of
his own Nature. When we understand a Man's Temper and Humors, his Inclinations
and Way, we are better ^apacitated to know what it is that he wills.

II. By the Works which he has wrought, he has made farther discoveries of his
Will; but especially by Man himself: the Nature and Faculties which God has
given us, are a certain Indication to every one that will consider them, what
our Creator would have us to do.

III. The consent of the generality of Men, and of the wisest and best,
universally, that such or such things are the Will of God, is a farther
publication of it.

IV. The Declarations of Men divinely inspired. God has in sundry Ways and
diverse Manners revealed his Will to some Men, and by them to others; the
Records of which we have in the Books of the Old and New Testament.

V. God does by secret Suggestions, and Teachings of his good Spirit, convey
into Men's Minds the notice of his Will; by these he brings to remembrance, or
shows us in particular, which is the way he would have us to go, and which to
avoid.

These are five Ways wherein God declares, and whereby we come to know his
Will, and our Duty.

I. Then we may learn what the Will of God concerning us must be, by what he is
in himself. For such as he is, such is his Will; it being altogether
unconceivable that he should will that which is repugnant to his Nature, or do
any thing unnaturally.

Now God has so far manifested his own most glorious Nature, that all Men (who
consider) know him to be essentially and immutably wise and good, holy, and
just, and true. God is not conceivable without these Excellencies, they are the
Properties which every one ascribes unto him. And if these be intrinsical to,
and as it were constitutive of the divine Nature it self; then they will have
influence on, and be derived upon his Will, and all his Works. And
consequently, his Law must necessarily be holy, and wise, just, and true, and
good. Yea, not only that, but all whatsoever he wills and does, will certainly
be thus qualified.

Again; If these be the essential Properties of God, as by his Power and
Goodness he is communicative and willing to impart, so he must impart of that
which is his, and consequently his Holiness, etc. He will use the Methods that
are proper to make his Creatures partakers of this divine Nature, so far as
they are capable. And then (as we shall see under the next particular) he will
give to Man a holy and righteous Law.

From this Consideration of the Divine Perfections, I infer two things to our
present Purpose.

1. That God can will or require nothing of us, which is not wise and good,
holy, just, and true. So that if any thing pretend to be of God, which is not
thus qualified, it wants sufficient Credentials. If it make show of divine
Authority but is manifestly foolish, unquestionably evil, impure and filthy,
unjust and false, it is not required of us by God, all whose Ways are Holy, and
his Works Righteous, all that he does himself, or commands us to do.

2. That he does will all that is wise and good to be done. As he can will
nothing that is not, so he does certainly will all that is. As he knows it all,
so he must be allowed to will it all. For else we impute defect and
imperfection to God, by supposing him to know that Good which he does not will:
We should by this make his Goodness less than his Knowledge; and his Will not to
follow, but to fall short of his Understanding.

So that this Consideration does not only afford us a Character, whereby we may
distinguish betwixt the true Will of God, and that which pretends to be it, but
is not: But we have also direction to find out what that is which God does will
and command. In general,

If there be any action that is wise, that is good, that is holy and just, and
if there be any Truth; we may from hence be assured what is the Will of God.
For as he cannot will the contrary to these, so he cannot but by a kind of
necessity of his own most excellent Nature, will all these.

From this Knowledge which the Heathens had of God, the wise among them have
excluded all Impurity and Impiety, all Folly and Injustice from Religion.

If then we have an assured knowledge of what is wise and good, holy, and just,
and true (as we all have) we understand withal what it is that God wills we
should do: So certain as thou art that any thing is sit and becoming,
beneficial and profitable; so certain may thou be of the divine Will and Law.
For It is Good, and It is the Will of God, are two Forms of Speech of the same
import. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee? etc. Mic. 6. 8.

This is the first way whereby we come to the Knowledge of what God's Will
concerning Man, or his Law to us is, by the Knowledge of what is wise and good,
etc. Purity, Justice, Truth, Wisdom and Goodness are most certainly concluded
by us to be things which God wills should be in us, because they are all
Perfections of his own most excellent Nature. And he loving those Perfections,
and himself because of them, infinitely; he cannot but will that they should be
propagated; and that every thing which he makes should, according to its
Capacity, partake of them. God's Will is the Spring, as of his creating the
World, so of all his other after-Works, they are all but the exerting of this
teeming overflowing Goodness: He cannot but will and desire that Man should be
as he is; that we should be holy, and merciful, and righteous, and faithful,
and wise in our Measure and Degree, as he himself is infinitely.

So then we have a most certain way to discover what the Will of God is, and
must be, by a Consideration of the Divine Nature, and those Perfections which
are essential to the Deity. And Man is not to seek in this matter: this is so
obvious, and easy, and common a piece of Knowledge, that no Man's Mind is quite
destitute of it. All Men agree in their Notion of God, and it cannot be
otherwise: For either they have the Knowledge impressed on their Minds, when
first they came into Being; or else they are led into it by this plain and
facil reasoning, viz. Whatsoever Good there is in the World, is in God, who is
the Original, eminently and perfectly. From hence we may conclude, that since
all, who believe God to be, think him to be wise and good, holy, and just, and
true; therefore nothing that is foolish or evil, impure or unrighteous, nor no
Falsehood can be required by him. And on the other hand, all Goodness, Wisdom,
Sanctity, Justice, Fidelity, etc. is the Law of Heaven.

II. By a Consideration of God's Works we come to a discovery of his Will. As
Man's Mind is discerned by what he does, so is God's: When God has made Beings
with such Inclinations, and Faculties, and Capacities; if we suppose him (which
we cannot doubt he is) wise and good, we shall certainly know a great deal of
his Will.

Let us take a view of God's Works in general, and consider those Beings which
partake of Life, especially our selves, and we may observe such things as
these, which will lead us to a Knowledge of the Will of our common Creator.

1. We may discern in them a sort of Self-love, whereby they have a Desire of,
or Inclination to their own Preservation and Continuance in that Being and Life
which they have.

2. An Aversation from all Pain, and a Love of Pleasure.

3. A Tendency to, and kind of aspiring after greater Perfection, and the
utmost of which they are capable: To this we may refer the former.

4. A Disposition and Faculties to communicate and impart to others, none of
them to be by and for themselves alone, but for others; that they are
communicative and beneficial, and endeavor to propagate, and make others like
themselves.

5. An exact Order. Among all Beings which God has made, one is plainly
superior to another: And of all these in this lower World, Man is supreme:
There are also higher than he; and all these things are subject to God's Will
and Pleasure.

Now from these Observations, how all living things are made with such
Affections, and in such Condition, we cannot but conclude in general, that it
is the Will of our great Creator, that every one should endeavor both his own
and other Beings Preservation, and Pleasure, and Perfection; that we should be
communicative, and live in Order; that the Inferior be subject to the
Superior, and the worse serve the better.

Does not Nature teach these Lessons plainly to every one that diligently
considers? May not any Man that looks into himself, and abroad, find that both
Mankind, and all the kinds of Animals in the World, have these desires of their
own Being and Perfection? that they do not stay in themselves, but go out to
others in Communications and Services? may he not clearly see, that one kind is
advanced above another, as well as of the same kind that some one is above the
rest? and that Man is above all kinds?

And he that sees all this, how well is he instructed in the Principles of the
Kingdom of Heaven? how may he learn the very Fundamental Laws, whereby God
governs the World? which are such as these, viz.

That every Man should endeavor both his own and others Preservation and
Perfection: That he keep not only himself, but others in that place and order,
which the great and wise Creator has appointed them: That thus doing he carries
on the same Design, which the Maker and Lord of all does most evidently intend,
and prosecute, as appears by the Inclinations and Appetites, which he has given
all his Creatures, and by the Rank and Order in which he has set them to and
with each other.

He that knows, that not only himself, but all living things have these
Inclinations, and do naturally desire their own Pleasure and Perfection, and
that they are all fitted for the Service of each other: He will conclude, that
this is the Will of him that made us all, and is our common Lord; that we
should follow these Inclinations in our selves, and comply with them in others,
endeavoring to preserve every Being, and the lowest Life; and not only so, but
to increase and perfect it as much as is consistent with the Service and
Advancement of the higher and best Life, which is the Divine Life of the Mind,
which in this State depends on the Life of the Animal in us.

If it be thought the Will of God, that we should preserve our selves, because
of that Self-Love that is natural to us; for the same reason it must be thought
his Will, that others preserve themselves: And if we oppose or hinder them that
they cannot, we resist God's Will. If we do not what in us lies help them to do
thus, we do not his Will universally.

He then that observes these things, will read the Will of the World's Maker in
most legible Characters, such as have no Obscurity, but the most unlearned Man
in the World may run and read.

If it be here excepted, That sometimes these Inclinations clash, they cannot
all be gratified: And that Nature's Scholar has no Direction in this case; here
are several things which God wills, but what shall be done, where there is a
Competition?

I answer, That which every Man's Reason will direct him.

1. Be sure there be a Contrariety betwixt an Inconsistency of these natural
Inclinations with each other; that the same living Creature, Man himself,
cannot be preserved, and continue, as it is, if he become serviceable to the
public: If these can both be, let them: If they cannot,

2. Let it be in this, as in all other cases it is, let the Superior dispose
of the Inferior, as may best promote the most public, lasting, greatest Good.

Thus we see a Grain of Corn, which in a close Granary might be kept entire,
for which State one would think it was made, being so whole and one in it self.
But yet it is by the skilful Husbandman thrown into the Ground, where it rots
and dies (as the Apostle says) in a little time, and so the Grain seems lost;
but yet afterward it sprouts and multiplies it self into abundance, perhaps
sixty, or a hundred.

This may teach us not to be so careful of our own particular Beings, when by
the giving them up we may do a far greater good.

Again; By Nature (as I have said) we are inclined to seek after Pleasure; but
yet by Nature also, i. e. by Brute Animals, that seem to regard only what is
present, we are instructed to lay aside our Pleasure, when, by that, we may
pro^ure some better, or more lasting; or publick-Good, than that our Pleasure
would be. So do the old Birds abstain from abundance of particular
Gratifications, to hatch and feed their young; that is, they are more pleased
with a public, than a particular Good. And how common is it with us, to cut
off a part, to save the whole?

But, if natural Reason, unassisted by Revelation, be not sufficient to direct
us in this; yet by the help of that, we shall be fully furnished with the
knowledge of what God would have us to do, where there is a competition of one
natural desire with another.

More particularly: Whosoever considers the Humane Nature (which is the top of
God's Workmanship in this lower World) besides these Affections, which we have
hitherto taken notice of, common to all Animals, he will discover some things,
which are more particularly found in Man, which will show him what the Will of
God is. Some of which are these following.

1. That Man is a compounded Being, made up of very many Parts and Faculties,
and those of very different Natures, and for diverse Uses. The two, to which all
the other are reduceable, are his Body, and his Mind: That has very various
Parts and Members; this contains two illustrious Faculties, the Understanding,
and the Will.

Now whosoever takes notice of this, he cannot but conclude, if he suppose the
Creator wise, that he did design, and does will, that all these Faculties and
Parts should be put to the Uses for which they are fit: That they should
neither be unimploy'd, nor yet diverted from their proper Employment, and used
otherwise than by their Natures they are fitted to be.

Thus then, by what God has wrought in us we infer, That it is his Will, that
we should be employed, and in various Works; that we should neither be idle,
nor yet doing only one thing; that we should be in the Exercise not only of
some Faculty, but of all; and that we should not be in any unnatural use of our
selves, or of any part of us, but ever be doing those Works, for which our
Parts and Faculties were plainly designed by their Maker, and by their Frame
are fitted.

2. The Soul and Body do in this State very much depend on each other, they so
sympathize, that if one be well or ill, the other partakes of its prosperous or
adverse Condition.

I do not say, that they are so totally dependent on each other, that the one
cannot possibly subsist or act without the other, that they began and will end
together. For, natural Reason gives us good probable Presumptions, and the
Religion of Christ assures us of the contrary. St. Paul's, and many other good
Men's Experience proves to us, that the more the outward Man decays, the inward
may grow more vivacious, and be daily renewed and increase in Strength and
Vigor.

This, by the assistance of the Divine Grace, and our cooperation, has often
come to pass. But yet, every one is sensible of such a mutual Dependence of the
Soul and Body, that the good or bad State of the one, ordinarily has Influence
on the other. And this shows plainly, that he who made us so, intended and
wills, that not one, but both of them should be regarded; that when we design
the Welfare of one, we should not look on that, as divided from, but as united
with the other: that we should not so gratify the Body, as if there were no
Soul, nor should the Soul forget, that it is in the Body: that we should not
look on our selves as more brute Animals, nor as unbodied Spirits; that we
should endeavor the Welfare both of the Mind and of the Animal together, of
neither abstractedly and singly.

3. The Soul or Mind is confessed to be more excellent than the Body: And every
one who thinks a Man has Pre-eminence over a Beast, will not deny but that it
is, and ought to be superior. For, tho the Spirit uses the Ministrations of
the Body, yet in abundance of Instances it governs and disposes of it as it
pleases. And it is manifest, that the Mind was not made to be subject to the
Body, but the Body to it; the Soul of Man is supreme. There is none who
observes Man's Frame, but must conclude* that it is the Will of his Creator,
that his Mind should rule, and his Body be in Subjection.

4. The Soul has a sense or understanding of Good and Evil, and an Inclination
or Love to all that appears good, and an Aversion from all that to it seems
evil. And according as any thing is apprehended by the Mind to be good, or
evil: so it determines it self, and all within its Power, to or from it, for or
against it.

This is the Cardo, or Hinge, on which all our Frame turns, the first Spring of
all our Motions, the Primum Mobile in Man; as all Men acknowledge by their
Practice: For, when they would engage themselves or others to any Undertaking,
they show its Goodness; or when they would take them off from it, they make it
appear evil. Which Practice plainly supposes, that we all believe Man
determines himself according as he apprehends a thing to be good or bad.

If this be true, then we cannot but conclude, that God intended, when he made
Man after such a manner, that his Will should be conformable to, and guided by
his Understanding; and in particular, that he should will and do good; that all
he did, should be good: for else, why should he frame him so, as that he can
will nothing, but what appears to him under that color? and why did he so form
the Human Understanding, that some Things and Actions are by all thought Good
and Evil?

But we shall be more fully assured of this, that God, who made us, wills that
we should love and do all Good, and hate and shun all Evil, if we make a
nearer Inspection into the Souls of Men: for we may observe, not only an
unalterable Inclination to do that which we think to be on one account or
other Good; But,

5. Also a very earnest desire and care to know more perfectly what is, and
all that is Good or Evil. No Man is vvilling to be ignorant, or mistaken; and
he is no-vvhere more careful of true Understanding, than in the matters of Good
and Evil. That natural Desire of Perfection, which is common to all things,
does exert it self in the Mind of Man in this Particular.

And if this be the condition of Man, that he does naturally and necessarily
perceive some things that are Good and Evil; and by an easy and natural
Ratiocination, will discover others; And if he go on to Perfection, which all
desire and tend to, he will attain to a clear and certain knowledge of all that
is Good: And if it be unnatural for him to will without, or against all
understanding; Then we must conclude, that his Wise Lord wills that he should
do all that is Good.

6. This will further appear, if we consider the Account to which Men call
themselves for their Actions, wherein they approve and acquit themselves, if
they have done well; but disallow and condemn all evil Actions. Nay, if they
did ill, tho they intended well, they blame themselves for their Miscarriage:
which supposes that they think they might, and should have prevented this, by
being better informed in the matter they undertook. But if they know, or
thought it was Evil, and yet chose to do it, they then rebuke themselves
sharply, and their Consciences arraign them for a notorious Crime, and they are
without Excuse to themselves.

All this shows, that he who made Man thus to review his Performances, to
excuse and approve the Good, to censure and condemn the Evil; willed that all
he does should be good.

Love of Good seems to be the supreme of all our Passions, that to which all
the rest of our Affections lead, and in which all our Faculties terminate, from
which all our other Passions issue, and by which the Mind governs the Body, and
is governed it self.

And the greater and better the Good is, the more naturally it is loved.
Therefore, as we have showed, that, according to natural Order, this Good of
the Mind ought to be preferred before the Good of the Body; so, that which is
right, and fit, and becoming, before any other Good of the Mind, that is, the
Moral before the Natural, for the one is in order to the other.

This Subordination and Subserviency, which is so conspicuous among our several
Faculties, shows us that it is God's Will, that we should thus reduce our
selves out of that Ataxy and Conftssion, into which Sin has brought us, into
that excellent Harmony and Serviceableness of one Faculty to another, and of
all to the supreme; that we should assert the Minds Superiority over the Body;
and as to what is principal in the Mind, viz. the love of what is fit and
becoming, that all the rest should be brought under subjection to it.

I might now proceed to abundance of Particulars, but that they would detain me
too long on this Argument. It may be sufficient to my purpose in general, that
whosoever considers the various Faculties of Man, and the Order and Reference
they have to each other, the many Inclinations, and Appetites, and Capacities
of our Natures, and the Operations which do necessarily flow from them; and
will allow, that the Exercise and Perfection of, and keeping due order amongst
these natural Faculties, the following these Inclinations, and the
Gratification of these Appetites, the filling up these Capacities, the doing
these Actions, which necessarily follow Nature, are the Will of our Creator,
(as they must be, unless he has made things in vain, that is, unless he knew
not, or cared not what he did) From thence he will most certainly collect
abundance of the Divine Laws, and attain to a most clear Knowledge of what God
requires of him.

If we further consider the Reference Man has, 1. To God: 2. To other Men. 3.
The Order, and Rank, and Relation he is in to Inferior Animals, and other
Beings; we should presently discover what kind of Behavior becomes him on all
these accounts, i. e. what is best, and therefore fittest for such a one in
such Circumstances to do; and consequently, what is the Will of the wise and
good Maker and Governor.

Thus we have discovered God's Will, that we should do good not only from a
Consideration of the Divine Nature, to which Goodness is essential: But
likewise from a view of the Nature which he has given us, which is so formed,
that we can will nothing but what seems good. And if we follow our natural
Inclinations, and seek after the greatest Perfection of Knowledge, that will
seem so to us, which indeed is so.

III. A third way whereby the Will of God is notified to us, is the Consent of
Mankind, at least of the generality, and of all the wise and good; when they
shall agree that this ought, and that ought not to be done; we should look on
that, about which they are so agreed, to be commanded or forbid us by God
himself.

It is certain they think so, for else they could not look on Mankind under
Obligation; there being none that has Authority to lay Commands on all Men, but
God himself. But they do look on all Men, as obliged to certain things, as
appears by their saying, they ought to do so or so: For this denotes an
Obligation, and that a Superiority.

Now there is none but God who is superior to all Men, to Kings as well as
Subjects; to Societies as well as to single Persons: And yet of all these it is
agreed, that they ought, or ought not to do several things.

Two things should here be spoken to: 1. That this Consent of the Community is
and may be looked on, as a Declaration of the Divine Will. 2. An Enumeration of
some of those things, in which they thus agree.

1. It is not likely that Men of such different Capacities, Tempers, Interests,
Times and Places, should agree in this, if it were not certainly true, and
somewhat evident. There must be some one cause of this so universal Effect, and
I know none to which it may so probably be imputed as this; that the Wisdom
which formed us, has inspired us with this Knowledge, which was either impressed
on us at first, or else our Minds did with an undiscernable quickness infer it.

That the Wise and the Virtuous agree, that every Man ought, that is, in other
Words, that it is the Will of God that every Man should do this, or not do it;
that is a sufficient Declaration to the rest of the World, that it is indeed
the Will of God. For we may well suppose Men, so qualified, to have this
Knowledge vouchsafed to them; and that they are the Persons to whom God will,
especially, make known his Laws.

But where not only they, but all, or the far greatest part of Mankind agree
with them; this makes the Testimony yet stronger, and shows the Notoriety of
the Thing. And that there is a concurrence of the generality, will appear by
the Instances which I shall produce.

This Consent will, at least, amount to a high Probability; and those who make
least of it, yet must think it to outweigh the sense of one, or some few: But
where it is in concurrence with the other way, it ought to be looked on as a
farther publication of the Divine Law, and a confirmation to us that this is it.

2. The Community of Men, tho they have never seen nor discoursed with each
other, tho they live at the remotest distance, and understand not one another
Language, nor ever maintained any Converse, yet agree in abundance of
Particulars: Which I must not now enumerate. Take these few.

1. That we should all live soberly, that is, in such a government of our
Appetites, and Passions, as to be in the best use of our Understandings, and of
all our Faculties; that Men should not indulge their brutish life so much, at
any time, as to lose the use of themselves; and to have the sense of what is
good and evil, fit and unfit, extinguished, or the care of doing what becomes
us laid aside: That what we do in compliance with our bodily Appetites, be
rather a relief than a gratification, that it be not a thing, in which we take
a full and final satisfaction, but that it be subservient to some greater and
better work.

Tho all Men may not thus express themselves, yet these are their Thoughts; and
tho many practice otherwise, yet it is without the allowance, and against the
sense of their Minds. Or if any have brought themselves to such a Reprobacy of
Mind, as to call Good Evil, and Evil Good; they are by the rest looked on as
Monsters, and their Judgment is of no value; nay, in their sober intervals they
condemn themselves. Thus then, not only the Wise and the Good, but the rest of
Mankind are of the Mind that Men should live soberly.

2. That we should be just and honest, true and faithful in our dealings and
conversation one with other: And that we should do to all Men, as we would have
them do to us. Even those Men that are unrighteous, will yet blame that in
others, which they practice themselves. And those very Societies, which are
Factions, bandying against the common Society of Men, are yet upheld by Truth
and Justice among themselves.

3. Besides these, I might mention Gratitude to Benefactors, Honor to Parents,
Veneration of the Deity, Pity of the Miserable, and many more such things: In
which all Mankind agree, excepting a very few Monsters, that are using all the
Arts they can devise to un-man and un-make themselves.

Now, whence can so universal an Agreement arise, but from Nature it self? And
that which derives from Nature, must be thought to proceed from the Counsel of
the Author of Nature, to whom all such things are seen, and by whom they are
allowed; and consequently must be reckoned as his Will.

IV. God has inspired some holy Men with the knowledge of his Will, which by
them has been delivered to others, and it has been made credible to all, that
this was indeed the Will of God, and by him in a very extraordinary manner
revealed to the inspired Persons. And this partly from the sublimity and
excellency of the matter contained in it; partly, from the fitness, the
usefulness, the necessary importance, the great goodness of it to Men; both
which argue it to come from him, who only knows such things, and is the great
lover of Mankind. The Phrase and Style also are such, as do not misbecome so
wise and great an Author. And then the Miracles wrought in confirmation of it
by some of the Penmen, and by others who owned them to be divinely inspired:
Particularly the Prophecies and Predictions, which are punctually fulfilled,
etc.

Such a revelation of the Divine Will we have in the Bible, that part
especially which is in the Gospel, where we have a clear and full declaration,
of all that which by Nature, and Reason, and the Sense of Mankind, we were
taught was the Will of God. That which the Wise and the Good came to understand
in those ways; the Unlearned and Inconsidering, and all to whom these Oracles
come, are instructed and satisfied in by them.

Thus God has dealt with Men, in the same manner that our Earthly Lawgivers
have done, that is, he has caused his Laws to be Printed, and Published. And
the Bible is the Divine Pandects and Code: It Is Heaven's Statute-Book: It Is
both the Common, and Civil, and Canon Law, whereby God governs his Subjects.

If any should imagine that because a great part of, or all the Bible was
directed to particular Persons, of such Times and Places, that therefore they
were intended for no more; Or, because they were writ in an exotic and strange
Tongue, with which most of the World are unacquainted, therefore they must not
be looked on as a Revelation of the Divine Will to all Men: I would desire such
to consider,

1. That in whatever Language they were writ, the same Objection would lie
against them.

2. Here is work for Industry, and that which may engage Men in Study, and
encourage Learning; and may occasion Men of one Nation's acquainting themselves
with others, and with the Wisdom and Customs of all Places and Times.

3. That what is contained in our Bible, was directed to some particular
Persons, this was no more than was fit to procure its Entertainment amongst
them. If it had been spoke to all, perhaps none might have minded it, at least
not so much, as they (probably) would to whom it was particularly addressed.

4. That however some few might be immediately concerned in it, and it might
have especial respect to the Men of one Age and Place, yet this hinders not,
but that it might have a farther reference to all that were them, or should be
afterward, in all Nations to whom it should come.

And tho there might be, and were some of the Laws founded on particular
Reasons, which afterward might cease; yet this takes not off the Obligations
of those Laws, which are founded on universal and immutable Reasons, such as
belong to all Mankind in all Ages. Where the very same reason does not
continue, yet there is often a Parity, which is sufficient to lay an Obligation
on us. Exempli Gratia, Tho we may not look on our selves as obliged to offer
Sacrifices on an Altar to God, by the Hands of a Priest, yet we may and should
offer up to God of our Substance by the Hands of the Poor. And so the Law of
Sacrifices may still direct, and in some sort bind us. And thus we may make use
of the abrogated Laws, which were temporary, to direct our selves in the
Knowledge of what the Will of God is to us, by considering Parity of Reason,
which is the way we take in all Humane Laws.

This Exception being thus removed, we need not question but the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament contain a Revelation of God's Will to us, and all Men.

V. God teaches Men what his Will is, by secret Suggestions of his Spirit. It Is
this, which often shows us the way in which we should go, which directs us,
saying, This is the way, walk in it.

I believe there is no Man, but one time or other feels himself most powerfully
instigated to do such or such an Action, which at that time he clearly
apprehends to be good: And at other times, he is as forcibly withheld from
what by a clear light, he sees to be evil. And this he cannot reasonably impute
to any other cause besides the Spirit of God. He is not conscious of any Power
within himself that can do thus, and there is no other visible Cause of this
powerful Influence: So that it may well be ascribed to the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation.

This brings to mind some of the Divine Precepts which we had forgot, or did
not then think of: This discovers to us in some particular Instances, what God
would have us do, which in other ways we could not have known.

Now, this being so distinguishable from the other ways as to the manner, and
yet so consistent with, and agreeable to them in the matter of the Revelation;
we may well conclude, that it is another way in which God discovers his Will
unto Mankind.

Thus I have briefly considered the five ways in which God makes his Will known
unto us: Concerning which ways I will further say;

1. That there is no Law of God, which is not, in one or more of them,
published unto us.

2. That some of them, and indeed many, are in all these ways to be known by us.

3. Those that are thus many ways declared, are hereby signified to be of great
Importance to be known and done by us: Therefore was it that the Divine
Providence took such care, that they should not be concealed from us.

4. Those which are notisied to us, in some one way only, e. g. the Scriptures,
are not contradictory to, nor contradicted by any other that are revealed to us
in the other ways. There is no Repugnancy, no Inconsistency betwixt them, but
they all exactly harmonize and agree with each other. Whosoever thinks
otherwise, he takes that to be a Command of God, which is not.

There may be, and is something more revealed in one way than in another; but
there is nothing in one, that is repugnant to, that is inconsistent with,
indeed, that is not agreeable to what is in another.

Therefore, if we at any time should interpret the Scripture-Revelation in
contradiction to the unquestionable Principles of the Reason and Mind of Man,
we misunderstand it. These are both God's Revelation of his Will to us, and he
cannot contradict himself.

Whosoever will do that which is every Man's necessary Duty, and greatest
Interest to do, that is, seek after a perfect understanding of the Will of God
concerning Man; he may, by a diligent Exercise of himself in these ways, attain
unto it. And whatever Pains he takes in it, I can assure him, he will find
himself well appaid in the Effect of his Labor: For that must be great
Holiness of Life, and abundant Satisfaction and Quiet of Mind.

If I were to give a Compendium of that which all these ways appears to be the
Will of God, (and more than a Compendium I must not offer at) it should be
this, viz. the Perfection and good State of all Men.

Whosoever either considers the Goodness and Wisdom of God, or the Inclinations
and Faculties which he has given to all Men, or the Sense of the wisest and
best, nay, of all Men, who are in a restless Pursuit of somewhat they often
mistake for their Happiness; or the holy Scriptures, or the secret Motions of
the Divine Spirit: He will say, that all these do center in, and aim at this;
And consequently show that this is certainly the Will of God.

And if we be once assured in our Minds, that the Goodness and Perfection, or
best State of Man is the Divine Will; we have got a Clue that will direct us
through all the Labyrinths of Particulars. And if we have but once formed true
and distinct Notion of what our Perfection is, we shall then see clearly what
are the Particulars of which it consists, what are the means that are in order
to it, and what are the things that oppose and hinder it. And in effect, we
shall be directed to a right understanding of all the Particular Precepts which
God has any ways published to the World, and to a proper use of all those Helps
which the Divine Wisdom has afforded us.

This is one way, but there are diverse others: Every one may take that which
best suits him.

There is no Man who considers, but will confess, that the Knowledge of the Will
of God, is the most excellent and useful Knowledge we can have; and that it is a
principal Ingredient in, and essential to all true Wisdom: and whosoever is
destitute of it, he must live like a Fool: For he wants that sure Direction of
his whole Life, which he can only have from the understanding of the Divine
Will: he wants that Principle, which is powerful enough to determine him.

He that is ignorant, or mistaken in this matter, must in proportion want
Wisdom and Goodness.

And this I think sufficient to raise the price of this Knowledge in every Man's
esteem, to assure him that without it he can neither be wise, nor live well.

If I should be particular, I should enumerate abundance of Mischiefs, into
which Ignorance or Mistake of the Will of God, and his Law, betrays us.

I will only say this, That as Ignorance of it pulls up the Floodgates, takes
away all Restraints, and gives free Passage to every vicious Inclination, and
unreasonable Appetite, setting them all loose: So Error and Mistake about it
lays a kind of Obligation on, and makes it in a sort necessary for us to do ill.

For, if any wicked Practice, how monstrous and mischievous soever it be, come
with a Commission from Heaven, and pretend the Authority of a Divine Law; we
shall look on our selves as bound to obey: Nay, and the better we are disposed,
i. e. the more inclined to be obedient to God, the more zealous and carnest we
shall be to do this, which we, by a mistake, think to be his Will. And if it
do, as it certainly will, oppose something that is in our Nature, and be never
so contrary to our Inclinations; we shall break through all this opposition,
and do Violence to our Nature, I mean to our Mind, which is the best and
highest thing in us, to do it.

Nay, tho it should be never so prejudicial to the Society in which we live,
confound the Order, and disturb the Peace of it; tho it should be attended with
Tumult, and War, and Bloodshed: yet a false Conceit, that it is the Will of
God, will make us break all Bonds, and nothing will hold us, but we shall, like
the Daemoniac among the Tombs, be hurting our selves, and disturbing others.

This is that, which under the Pretense of Religion, to which it is most
contrary, has wrought so much Mischief in the World. I am sure the worst things
that have ever been done by Men, have proceeded from their thinking that to be
the Divine Will, which was not, which was most opposite to it.

It may be, some will infer from this kind of Discourse, that God has not made
a clear Discovery of his Will to us, because if he had, how should Mankind be
so void of the true Knowledge of it, how could they so grossly err about it?

To this I reply, That God has made it so plain what he would have us do, that
no Men in the World can be wholly ignorant of it. And there is such a Connection
betwixt the Divine Laws, they are so uniform, that the Knowledge of one will
lead us to the understanding of more; and if we will obey those we know, it is
the sure way to understand more, and by degrees all.

I say all this on Supposition, That Men will use their Understandings, and
consider what is before them: For, if they will not do this, they must continue
in Ignorance and Error in all Cases. But as it is no Argument the Sun does not
shine, because he that winks does not see it; no more is it that our Creator
has not discovered his Mind to us, because they who will not consider, do not
discern it, or are deceived about it.

But, that God has made a clear Discovery of his Mind to us is, I hope, out of
doubt with us, by what has been said concerning the ways in which he has done
it.

For, whosoever believes God to be what his own Mind tells him He is, what his
Works declare He is, what the common Sense of Mankind in all Ages report Him to
be, i. e. Wise, and Good, Holy, and Just, and True; he cannot be ignorant what
it is that God wills him to be: For God cannot but will, that Man should
according to his Capacity, be like unto Himself.

He that is not wholly ignorant of, or mistaken in himself, cannot but have
some certain understanding of God's Law: For, if he know the Faculties with
which he was made, the Order in which they are set to each other, the
Inclinations and Appetites that are natural to him: he is assured that the
Exercise and Perfection of these Faculties, the Preservation of this Order, the
pursuit of these Inclinations, is the Will of his wise and good Creator.

He that understands what it is, that the wise and good, nay the generality of
Men agree ought to be done; what in their constant, unprejudiced, unbiased
Sense, which is not hard to know: he does hereby discover the Will of the Lord
of all.

And this Law is in the Bible writ in most legible Characters: All the weighty
matters are there set down in so plain Words, that they are understood by all
that understand the Languages: And by help of that Learning, which God has
given Men, are translated into their own Native Language.

As many as have and can understand the Language of the Bible, cannot possibly
be ignorant of, or misunderstand the Fundamental Laws of Heaven: And the rest
are to be understood with relation to them.

And then over and above all these ways, God teaches Man by his Spirit.

In these several ways I have shown how God discovers, and we may come to the
Knowledge of his Will. But because, notwithstanding all, many continue ignorant,
and not a few are mistaken, thinking that not to be the Will of God which is,
and that to be, which is not; and because of the great Mischiefs that come upon
themelves and others through these their Errors: Before I dismiss this
Argument, I will lay down some Directions and Cautions, that so we may be
preserved from so baleful an Ignorance, and so fatal Errors.

1. In general, as I have intimated, we must use our Minds, diligently attend
to, and carefully consider, whatever it is that pretends to be the Will of God,
and Law of Heaven: Think whether it be agreeable to the Wisdom and Goodness,
and the other acknowledged Perfections of God: Whether it be suitable to the
Nature he has given you; whether it be matter that falls under common
Observation, and not only the Wise and the Virtuous, but the Community of
Mankind think themselves and all obliged? To the Law and the Testimony; search
the Scriptures, and see if they say so: Hearken also to the Voice within you,
whether the same be ecchoed to you from that Wind, which you know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes.

Nor ought you only to examine what pretends to be God's Law, but enquire after
his Will in all these, and if there be any other ways wherein he manifests it
to Mankind.

Let us use all Diligence that we may come to a perfect understanding of all
Divine Precepts. For, if we be careless, listless, and will not consider, we
can never understand. If we could suppose God should discover his Mind much
more clearly than he has, yet he that will not regard, that will not attend,
nor consider, cannot know.

Whosoever therefore would attain to the Knowledge of God's Law, let me entreat
him to beware of all things that tend to make him inconsiderate in general; or
in particular, regardless of God's Will. Two things I would caution you against
on this account.

1. Sensualities, which depress the Mind, and sink us into Beasts, insomuch
that by long use of our felves in this manner, we shall have no more regard to
the Law than Brutes have, and shall live as they, without Sense of God, and our
Obligation to him.

2. All Opinions, and Discourses, and all things that weaken, or any way
undermine our Faith of God. Avoid every thing which we observe to extinguish
our Sense, or but to lessen our Esteem and Veneration of the Divine Majesty.
For whatever makes us regardless of God, does necessarily make us less careful
to know his Will.

This leads me to some particular Cautions, all which do respect the five ways
which I have discoursed of.

2. Take heed of false and foolish Thoughts of God: For such as we think God to
be, such we shall think his Laws.

If we look upon God as a mere Arbitrary Humoursome Being, that does now this,
now that, as the Humor takes him: that does nothing from a steady Principle of
Reason, nothing that is accountable to and by Wisdom and Goodness; we shall
think his Laws to be the Determinations of a Will unguided by Understanding; a
Will that does not determine it self from unalterable Goodness. And this
Thought will not only discredit his Laws, but make them unknowable by us: For
who can find out the Determinations of an arbitrary unreasonable Will, a Will
separate from Goodness? And suppose we could know them, yet it would be very
hard to value and esteem them.

Again; If we think God to be altogether like our selves, as unwise, impure,
and unholy, unjust, evil, as careless of our Doings as we are; what dangerous
Mistakes shall we fall into concerning his Laws? For we shall then think, that
what we will, he wills also: And therefore, if we have a Mind to deceive, to
injure, and oppress others, or to drown our selves in Sensuality and
Sottishness, that God approves of our Injustice and Beastiality. And indeed
whatever our Heart, our Inclination carries us to, we shall conclude that God
wills we should do it: For we think him like our selves.

Again; If we think God not to be true, that he deals not sincerely with us,
that that is not his real Will, which he has declared is; that however he tells
us he would have us do so, or so, yet he indeed wills that we should do the
contrary: This will derogate from our esteem both of God, and of his Law; It
will seem an Illusion and Mockery.

These few Instances, amongst many more which might be given, show us how
great Reason we have, in order to our knowing his Law, to endeavor after a
true Knowledge of the essential immutable Perfections of the Divine Nature.

As the true Knowledge of God is an excellent means for our discovery of his
Will, so a false Notion of him must necessarily lead Men into most dangerous
Mistakes about it. And if we make God altogether unknowable by us (as we do, if
we suppose him to act from a Will unguided by Wisdom and Goodness, separable
from Justice and Sincerity) we likewise make his Will unknowable; for we
deprive our selves of not only one, but I think, all the ways whereby we can
know it. For then neither can we argue any thing from the Natures he has
given us, nor from the Sense of other Men, no, nor from the Scripture it self:
For, if we should not think that God means as he says, the Scripture can
assure us of nothing: And what heed can in this case be given to those Motions
which we ascribe to God's Spirit?

Thus one false Thought of God makes it impossible for us to be certain of
what his Will is.

I might here give abundance of Examples, Modern and Ancient, what ill Effects
false Conceits of the Divine Nature have had on the Minds of Men; and how by
these they have been misled into most pernicous Errors concerning their Duty.

Was not this the Original Cause of all the Idolatries and Superstitions,
Impurities; (...), of all the abominable unnatural Practices of the Heathens;
the Pharisees among the Jews; and those nominal Christians which are a
mixture of both? Did they not all spring from hence, that they had unvvorthy,
untrue Imaginations of God: But this is obvious to every Observation.

To conclude this Particular: Let every Man that would know God's Will, take
care what Thoughts he entertains of God: For as our Apprehensions of his
Nature are true or false, such will be our Knowledge of his Will. Have
recourse therefore to the (...) Impressions; which God has made of himself: on
your own Minds, to the sure Reasonings you have of him, which are confirmed
to you by the almost universal, Agreement of Mankind: To those Manifestations
which the incomprehensible One had made of himself to and by holy-inspired
Men; especially the Blessed Jesus and his Followers; and then you will know him
to be Wise, and Good, Holy, (...), and True; you will be assured that these be
the Perfections of his Nature; and consequently the Principles of his Will;
from and according to which he always determines himself. And as any of his
Creatures have Capacities, he cannot but will that they should be like him.

3. Take heed of false, inadequate, confused, Thoughts of your selves. The
right and true understanding of Human Nature, I have showed, contributes much
to our understanding of the Will of our Creator; because by a Knowledge of our
Faculties, of their Perfections simply, and of their Order among themselves, we
discern what is our end for which we were made, and consequently what is to be
done by us. But then,

1. We must beware, that we do not take that to be our Nature, which is most
contrary to, which is the corruption of it. We must not call that a natural,
which is an unnatural Appetite, or Inclination, as every one is, that is
immoderate, inordinate, that is destructive, or but hurtful to the whole Man,
or to the Society, the Community of which he is a Member: That is not to be
counted natural to Man which is corruptive of Men, this is a false Notion. We
must not look on our selves as merely passive.

2. We must not take up with inadequate Thoughts of our selves, so as to take a
part for the whole; to think that we are nothing but Body, leads us into
Sensuality, and a Study to please and serve the Flesh. Or on the other hand, to
imagine that we are in this State nothing but Soul, will dispose us to neglect
the Body; and so we shall be prone to turn either Brutish or Monkish.

3. It is not enough that we know our whole selves, but we must rid our Minds
of confused Imaginations: For whilst these remain, we do, if not prefer the
Body before the Mind, yet equal them, and either set the lower Faculties above
the higher, or in the same Rank: And this, as all Disorders are, is very
pernicious, and therefore not the Will of the Good One.

For the making all this clear, let us consider a particular Instance. Suppose
a Man persuaded that it is the Will of his Maker, that he should endeavor his
own Preservation and Perfection; So long as he esteems the Depravation of his
Nature, (as, a very vehement Desire of bodily Pleasure) to be natural, he will
then study to procure such Delights, he will earnestly intend them, tho they be
indeed the bane of his Pleasure, and of his very Being.

This Man, so long as he has these imperfect Thoughts of himself, will not look
on himself as obliged to mind that part, which he considers not as part of
himself: He will not intend the preservation and perfection of his Mind, whilst
he looks only on his Body as himself.

And if he has confused Thoughts of his Nature, not distinguishing betwixt his
Machine and his Life, nor preferring one before the other; as he cannot
possibly think himself bound to preserve that Order betwixt these two, which he
understands not? So whenever the Body is in danger to be destroyed, he will
apprehend that the Soul is in the same Hazard. And so can never willingly
sacrifice his bodily Life, whilst he thinks it the same with the higher Life of
the Mind. Nay, it is much if the Law of Self-Preservation does not prevail
against any other. And how (...) or necessary soever it be for him to die for
his Religion, on Country, etc. yet he will not choose it, he will not think
himself obliged unto it.

4. I have directed you to seek for the Will and Law of God, in the sense of
the Wise and Good, and the Agreement of the Community of Mankind with them, for
it is not likely they should all be deceived, when they all agree that this or
that ought, or ought not to be done.

But here I must caution you,

1. Not to divide these, but to take their Suffrages where they consent* I dare
not lay so great stress on either singly, as I do on both jointly.

2. Be careful not to mistake those for Wise and Good, who are neither. Do not
^^unt Men wise, because they are fortunate and successful* which is a common
Chea^* Neither call Men Good, 1. Who only make a show, but are not what they
seem; nor, (...). Those that have something which has the Vogue to be Good but
is not (...) Pharisees (...) 3. Those who are but partially and very imperfect
(...) Good, not so Good as to bear a Denomination, which is always taken a
parts (...); their Ill still weighs it down.

3. As I would not in this case lean on the Understanding of the Wise and
Vertnous, when they think contrarily to the Community; so neither would I be
concluded from the Opinions of one, or of some few, against the generality of
the Righteous.

4. See that it be the unfeigned Sense of their most impartial uncorrupted
Judgments, which is best known by proposing a matter generally, so as that they
be not actually concerned in it; when no Appetite, nor Passion, nor Custom,
does corrupt and bribe them: I mean by this, that we should observe Men that
are, and when they are most free from those things, which too often obliterate
and extinguish the Sense which their Souls have of what is fit, and what is not.

To this let me add, That we should do well to take notice of the first
thoughts which Men have of these matters; which as they are freest and truest,
so commonly they are the most inward, and the very sense of their Minds.

The Reasons of these Cautions will appear to any one that considers them. I
need say no more but this, to show their necessity. That Men have often thought
that to be the Sense of Mankind, which was not, and have been frequently
imposed on under an appearance of Goodness, so as to think that to be their
Duty which they judged was, and were ready to take up every Burden which they
laid on them, the they required not only more than, but contrary to what God
required.

5. In reference to that way of God's making known his Mind in an extraordinary
manner to some, and by them to others: If I were to speak to those who are
Strangers to our holy Scriptures, and might have some Enthusiastic Dream, as
the Alcoran, obtruded on them, with all the Vogue and Noise of the credulous
Multitude.

I would advise them to look well, that the pretended Revelation of the Divine
Law be in every respect worthy of that God, whose Authority it boast^^

1. That the things therein revealed be such as may beseen the great Author, in
the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Holiness of them, they bear these Characters of
Divinity; and every one that sees them, may say, these are the Laws of the good
Creator.

2. That the manner of the Publication may not be unbecoming him.

3. That they receive some super-human Attestation; that something be done,
which may convince all considering Persons that they have a Divine Author.

By these things I should detect the Frauds and Forgeries of abundance of Men,
who have pretended Inspiration, and to give us the Laws of Heaven. But to us
who have examined the Scripture by these Marks, and are persuaded of their
Divinity, I need not insist on these matters.

My Business is to prevent our mistaking the sense of these Divine Writings:
That they are abused and miserably wrested by some that receive and rely upon
them, cannot be doubted by us. St. Peter himself, one of the inspired Writers,
complains of some that wrested St. Paul' s Epistles to their own destruction.
It concerns us therefore to see that we have the true sense and meaning of
these Books. As to the understanding the Will of God concerning us, let me
offer a few Considerations.

1. That there is nothing in the Bible, to which God obliges us, that is
repugnant to the Law of Nature, and the Reason of our Mind.

2. He has enjoined us nothing, but what is pursuant of the End for which he
made us, that is, our Perfection.

3. The Scripture does not contradict it self.

4. Where there are any seeming Repugnancies, that Sense is to be taken; 1.
Which is most plain in it self* 2. Most agreeable to the Design of the Whole,
3. To other plain Places; and, 4. Most consistent with the eternal Reason of
Man's Mind.

5. As you have Ability and Opportunity, acquaint your selves,

1. With the Scripture-Dialect and Phrase, the knowledge of which would have
kept an ancient Author of Credit, from interpreting that Command, Thou shall
love the Lord with all thy Heart, so as to infer that we should love nothing
else. It would also have hindered others from arguing, that God does more than
permit Sin, because he is said to do those things which are done by Men's Sins,
etc.

2. With the Customs to which the Scriptures refer, and with those Reasons on
which any of the written Laws are founded: And observe the same Rules in
understanding and interpreting these, which you use in any other humane
Writings and Laws: As,

(1.) Where any of the Precepts aro shortly, obscurely, or figuratively
expressed in one place, and in others more largely, properly, and plainly;
interpret and understand the first by the latter.

And take heed of pressing and squeezing Metaphors: As here in this Chapter,
Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee
Light; no Sense can be made of this, if we strain the Metaphor, from the Dead.

(2.) Do not make Precepts given to particular Persons, general and obligatory
to all, where there is not the same nor a like Reason: But where there is that,
reckon that what God by his holy Prophets has said to one, or to a few, he
intended it to all.

6. Take heed of imputing those Suggestions to the Holy Spirit, which are only
the Effects of an overheated Brain, an extravagant Fancy, a deep Melancholy,
or some such thing.

I am not of their number, who laugh at all the Illuminations of the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation; I cannot restrain all that the Scripture says of these
secret Teachings, to the miraculous. Effusion (...) cannot but think that the
Experience and Observation that every Man makes of himself, especially every
(...) Man, will assure him of the heavenly Irradiations.

But yet I doubt not that the Enemy of God and Goodness, who ^pposes all God's
merciful Designs to Man and endeavors to defeat them, is hard at work here.
And as he has been observed to imitate the rest of the Divine Methods, so he is
not wanting to resemble this also; and therefore does inject Thoughts, does
cause unnatural Agitations in the Blond and i Humors, does make use of a
Melancholy Temper, a wild Imagination, a Time of Passion, etc.

Great Care is to be used, that we impute not our own wild Ravings, in the
Suggestions of the wicked One, to the good and holy Spirit of God: For so we
shall be in danger to think that to be the Will of God, which is most contrary
to it; as we know many of old, and too many of late have done. I will here very
briefly lay down some Marks, whereby we may discern the one from the other.

1. Ordinarily and after the first beginning, the Holy Spirit works in us in a
manner that is agreeable to our Natures and Tempers, suited to our Faculties,
and to the Order in which they are set. Let us only here distinguish, as I said
before, betwixt Nature, and the Depravation of it: And I doubt not but by
Observation we may easily difference these two, for we shall discover something
violent and unnatural in all the Diabolical: And particularly I would observe,
whether theirise of such thoughts was from the Mind it self, or from the Body,
and some Motions in it.

2. The Holy Spirit does cooperate with us, his Teachings are commonly the
Reward of earnest Prayer, and diligent Endeavors. I do not say but he also
prevents our earliest Endeavors but as our Savior has taught us to ask, and
seek, and knock, and has promised that the Spirit shall be given to us; soul
take this Method to be a good sign that it is that Holy Spirit, when he (...)
in this way.

3. I consider the Opportunity, the Necessity of his teaching us, and look on
it as no improbable Argument that it is he indeed, when there is an apparent
need of his Operation. To help our Infirmities, to lead us when we are in the
dark, to farther us when we are at work; and when we are seeking the knowledge
of his Laws, then to enlighten us.

4. I will observe not only the general Temper, but the present Disposition of
my Soul, when I suppose the Spirit teaches me. Holiness, Purity, Humility,
Meekness, a calm, an obedient, a loving Spirit, are such Difpositions as
invite, the Divine Spirit, he loves to visit, to dwell in such Souls, they are
Temples for him! If that be my general Frame, my present Disposition, I may
reasonably presume it is the good Spirit that acts me. But if I be impure and
proud, etc. I have reason to fear the contrary.

5. Above all, consider the thing it self which is suggested: If that be
consistent with what we are by Scripture and other ways taught to be the Divine
Will; if it be pursuant of the Designs of Goodness; if in order to our
Perfection, and the good State of God's other Creatures: In short, Is it good?
does it become us? will it be beneficial to us and them? If not, assuredly it
is not of God, of whom comes all, and only that which is good; who wills all
that is, and nothing but what is good.

To conclude; Endeavor therefore after a true, clear, and full knowledge of
what is good for you to do; and then have you got the most certain undoubted
Mark of what is the Will and Law of Heaven concerning you. If you once know
this, you will not be unwise, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is.

THE ADVANTAGES OF CHRISTIANITY.
EPHESIANS. 3. 6. That the Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs, and of the same Body,
and Partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel.
IN 1 Timothy 3. 16. the Apostle reckons these as two parts of the Great Mystery
of Godliness, that the Gospel should be preached unto the Gentiles, and
believed on in the World. And in the Verse before my Text, he calls it, The
Mystery which i^ other Ages was not made known to the Sons of Men, as it is now
revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. And in the 7th and
8th Verses he seems to glory, that he was made a Minister of this Dispensation;
and accounts it a very signal Favor of God, that he should be employed in
preaching the unsearchable Riches of Christ to the Gentiles; that is, his
unconceivable Grace, that They should be brought into this State, that the
Offer of so great Privileges should be made to Them.

And he tells us, that now This is done, the Angels understand by it the
manifold Wisdom of God, which has appeared in all his various Dispensations
and Providence to his Church. This, it seems, was a Secret to the Angels
themselves.

But what is this of which so great things are spoken? This that is called a
Mystery, that deserves so great a Name? For it intimates to us,

1. That it is a thing of great importance and moment, a matter of great
consequence; as well as,

2. That it is secret and concealed. And indeed if it were not a matter of
moment, the Obscurity and Secrecy of it would not make it of more account with
wise Men, whatever it may do with the Ignorant* This was an Art the Heathens
used, to b^ get in the Worshippers of their Gods a Veneration of their
Religion, by concealing some parts of it, and turning them into Mystery.

They in this imitated some Painters, who draw a Curtain which has nothing
behind it. But far be it from us to imagine any such Artisice used by the
Author and Publishers of the true Religion: No, their business has been to
reveal, not hide; not to obscure and vail, but to declare and uncover Truths.
They have manifested them to us as much as the Matters themselves, and our
Capacities would bear: and when they have done all, such is the greatness of
some things in Religion, and such is the littleness of our Understanding; that
there will yet and always remain something that is beyond our reach, too big for
us to comprehend, too glorious for our Minds to behold!

There are Mysteries to the highest Angels of Heaven, much more to us Mortals.
Their knowledge is gradual, (That now, says the Apostle in the tenth verse of
this Chapter, unto the Principalities and Powers in heavinly Places, might be
known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God); and so may ours well be
thought: It increases according to the further discoveries God makes to us; so
that that is known in a following Age, which was not in the formet. Thus it was
in this particular before us, That the Gentiles should be Fellow-heirs, and of
the same Body, and Partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel.

For the full understanding of which Words, and the Mystery they import, we
will consider;

I. In what condition the Gentiles were, before they were called to be
Christians.

II. Their excellent State after they became Christians.

And from both these will appear how great things are done for the Gentiles;
and how much the Christian Dispensation excells not only the Gentile, but the
Jewish also. This is expressed in the Text by such Words, that they are
Fellow-heirs, etc.

III. We will consider by what means this is to be done, which is here also
declared to be the Gospel.

IV. And then we will conclude with some Inferences.

I. As to the Condition of the Gentiles before Christianity.

1. If we take an account of this Matter from the Jews, I know not whether we
should look on the Gentiles to be Men or not; for they will scarce afford the
Nations, (as they called them by way of contempt, as we say the People) any
better Names than Dogs. But we will not rely upon them, who were so highly
conceited of themselves, and their own Privileges, and who treated all other
Men with so much disdain and scorn, as the Jews are known to have done. Nor,

2. Will we take our account from some Christians of a Jewish Spirit, who
confine the Divine Love to some Places and Times, and will not allow that God
has had any regard at all for Men, that have not been baptized in these latter,
or circumcised in the former Ages: If they were not of such a Denomination,
within such an Enclosure, they exclude them from the Favor of God, and look on
them as wholly rejected, as those for whom God has no regard at all. They will
not allow them to be in any possibility of escaping the Torments of Hell, and
the Miseries of the future State. That is, because God thought not fit to
confer on them all the Privileges which he vouchsafed to some, they conclude he
had no kindness for them.

Because he bestowed on the Isra^^^^es greater Helps to Virtue, than he (...)
to the rest of the World, (which he (...), partly, for the sakes of those
excell^^tly good Men from whom they sprang* and partly, because they were so
very ^ull and hardhearted, as Moses every* ^here tells them, therefore in
compassion to their Infirmities he vouchsafed them ^^ese Helps) therefore he
loved the Israel^tes, and had no affection for any other.

Or because we Christians are blessed with the Gospel-Revelation, which is not
made to others, that therefore God loves us only, and either hates of slights
all the World besides. All which are great Mistakes, and false Conclusions,
which neither agree with the natural Notions which we all have of God, for with
the Revelations he has made of himself.

For how can we conceive, that that God, who is Love it self, and the tender
and compassionate Father of Spirits, and who has inculcated this in the Bible,
that he loves the World, and desires not the Death of a Sinner; that he should
lay aside all thoughts of the far greatest part of Mankind, and wholly abandon
their interests; that he should have no care of their Concerns, no regard
whether they be happy or miserable for ever?

No, no; these are unworthy, dishonorable, unnatural, unreasonable,
unscriptural Representations of God. Men of these conceits make our Condition
worse than (...) Jews themselves: for the Jews (as I re^ember) thought the
Gentiles would not after death; but these Men conclude (...) under everlasting
Woe. And as much (...) is better not to be, than to be miserable; so much better
do the Jews think of the Gentiles, than such mistaken Christians.

We will dismiss ^oth these, and take our Information from Scripture. We will
neither rely on the proud and scornful Jews, nor yet on such narrow-spirited
Christians, as I have mentioned, but see what representation the Gospel makes
of the Gentiles.

See in the second Chapter of this Epistle, where the Apostle describes to us
the State of these Ephesians, before they became Christians; and we have no
reason to think them to have been worse than others.

Verse 1. They were dead in Trespasses and Sins: So immerst in them, that there
was very little hope they should ever get out of them. They walked in them; it
was their practice, their course and way of life. According to the fashion or
course ((...)) of this World, after the guise and manner of Men, as to the far
greatest part. According to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that
now works in the Children of Disobedience; i. e. They lived in obedidience to,
and were under the Dominion of the Devil, to whom they are still in subjection,
who will not obey the Divine Laws. Doing the Will of the Flesh, and of the
Mind; that is, indulging themselves in Sensuality, and also being Slaves to
Pride and Revenge, and such which I take here to be the Will or Desires of the
Mind, or Discourses (...), as the former are (...). And were by nature the
Children of Wrath, even as others: And were truly, really, as (...) is used,
Gal. 4. 8. or fully and perfectly, as the Syriack, and St. Hierom; or by
Nature, i. e. made by Custom, such as deserved and became obnoxious to
Punishment; or by Birth, born Idolaters.

And as if he had not fully enough described their Misery before they were
converted to Christianity, in the 11th Verse he calls on them to remember, that
they who were Gentiles in the Flesh were called the Uncircumcision, that is,
were destitute of that Federal Rite, whereby the Israelites entered into
Covenant with God: Were at that time without Christ; that is, had not the
Promises of Christ, at least not so plainly as the Jews; or knew not, and so
had no expectation of a Messiah.

Alienated from the Commonwealth of Israel; Were not Members of that
Commonwealth, which was by God's own appointment, and wherein he did preside in
a special manner; for he was their King, and bestowed many special Favors on
them that were his Subjects.

And Strangers from the Covenant of Promise; that is, those which were made
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses, which had great and good
Promises annexed to them.

Having no Hope; that is, no sure wellgrounded Hope of Pardon, and
Resurrection, and Eternal Life. The Philosophers themselves were very uncertain
and doubtful in these matters.

And without God in the World; i. e. without the true and certain Knowledge of,
and Love to God, and Worship of him. And also set at the greatest distance from
the Influences of the Divine Goodness, as all wicked Persons, and those that
are led Captives by the Devil at his will, are. A most dismal Condition, to be
without God in the World.

See a farther Description of this sad State, Ephesians. 4. 17. As other Gentiles
walk in the Vanity of their Minds, which is expressed most signally in the
worshipping of Idols, as that Phrase is used in Romans 1. They became vain in
their Imaginations.

Having their Understandings darkened; their Minds being ignorant and mistaken,
their Discourses obscure and confused, perplexed and doubtful.

Being alienated from the Life of God: Mere Strangers to that Divine Life which
God lives, and requires them to live.

Through the Ignorance that is in them; because of the hardness of their Heart.
Here he assigns the Cause of all the other Mischiefs, which are also a part of
them, that is Ignorance proceeding from ill Custom, or that Unwillingness,
which was the Effect of ill Custom; for that is signified by (...).

I need not give any further account from the Scriptures of the Condition of
the Gentiles before Christianity. The Sum of what we have found concerning it,
is, that they by long ill use of themselves, had as it were so seared their
Hearts, and made them so senseless, that they were ignorant and vain in their
Imaginations, and obscure, and uncertain, and frequently mistaken in their
Reasonings in general; and more particularly, they were without the Knowledge of
the true God, Worshippers of Idols, and of vicious and wicked Practices, to
which they were engaged by the Examples of most Men. And that they were under
the Power of the Devil, and liable to that Punishment, which the Divine Justice
would inflict on them. Very great was the Misery they lay order at present; and
they were still liable to, and in danger of more and greater afterward, and
very little were the Probabilities of escaping from them.

They were as miserable as Ignorance and Folly, as Wickedness and Vice, as
Idolatry and Atheism, as the Malice and the Power of the Devil could make them;
and then their Misery must be very great. They were Men of vicious Lives, and
when this is said, enough is said to show their Misery; for they that are
without Virtue, want the greatest Good of which Humane Nature is capable: and
they that are wicked, are under the worst Evil that can befall a Man in this
State; and they are in great danger of all that Misery to which Man is liable;
they are obnoxious to these terrible Punishments, which the Divine Vengeance
will certainly inflict on all wicked Doers: the very Apprehension of which (tho
uncertain) did so astonish and amaze them, that it was alone a great
Punishment, as the Poet excellently describes it.

Quos diri confcia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente Animo tortore flagellum.
Paena autem vehemens and multo savior illis,
Quos (...) aedituus, etc.
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore Testem.
If the Presensions of that Misery were so ^rmenting, what will the Misery it
self be? For those are not the Effects of a deluded Imagination, which many
times make things greater than we find them, but they are the very Results of
our Natures, the Discoveries which natural Sagacity makes; and Nature does not
deceive us.

This was the Condition of the Heathen World, and no Possibility of escaping,
but by living well: which how hard was it for them to do, who must struggle
with so many Difficulties, vanquish so mighty Oppositions, before they could
forsake their evil Ways, and learn to do well!

It is true, it was not impossible; for God has implanted in Man a Power of
Consideration, which is inseparable from his Nature, and to which he has
engaged and inclined him by a love of Truth, and desire of Good; which are also
inseparable from the Nature of Man.

Now in whatsoever Condition any Man on Earth is, if he come to consider
impartially and universally, he will (through the Grace of God, which is never
wanting to him that diligently uses God's means) in time be recovered out of
the worst State. But alas! how hard is it for him to consider, who has been
long accustomed to Inconsideration? How easily is he diverted from beginning
this Work? How frequently interrupted in it? How apt is he to give it over?

Nay, and tho Men did with some Diligence consider themselves and the World;
yet how easily might they slip into Error, and mistake Good and Evil in diverse
Instances: And so notwithstanding that it was not utterly impossible for them,
through God's Grace assisting, to get out of that woeful Condition, in which the
Gentiles were; yet it was extremely difficult: and tho they might get out of
Danger, yet they could not be quite out of Fear; for they had no Revelation
that God would accept of their Repentance, they had no assurance of a future
Life; and therefore they must through fear of Death, be all their Lifetime
subject to Bondage.

So then we have no Reason to question that Account of their Condition, which
the Scripture has given; as that the whole World of Gentiles did lie in
Wickedness; 1 John 5. 19. (...), lay prostrate before the wicked One: or was
prone to, and set upon Mischief or Wickedness.

For a further Confirmation of this, I might appeal to their own Histories,
which give an abundant Testimony to this sad Truth. Those that have been
conversant in their Writings, cannot but call to Mind two things especially,
which are but too convincing a Proof, that it was so with them as the Scripture
has said. That is,

1. The Folly and Wickedness of the Gentile Religion, and the abominable Evils
which were committed by them in the Worship of their Gods.

2. The absurd Mistakes and enormous Practices of many of their Philosophers,
who were the wisest and most considering Men among them.

It is needless to give Instances of either: and these are a great Confirmation
of our Belief of what the Scripture has said. For if their Religion, their
very Worship be wicked, what can we expect of their other Works, which must
either be influenced by their Religion or not; if they be, they must be wicked,
as that was: Or, if they be not, yet then they did not live good Lives,
because they were not religious.

Again; If the Philosophers so grossly miscarried, as too many did, what shall
we think of the ignorant and unconsidering Multitude: Romans 1. 20, 21. When they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc.

I need not now stand to show the Advantages which the Jews had over the
Gentiles, expressed in these following places, Romans 9. 4, 5. Who are Israelites,
to whom pertain the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving
of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, etc. Romans 2. 17, 18, 19,
20. and Romans 3. 1, 2. But for our more distinct understanding of the Condition
of the Gentiles before they became Christians, we may consider it in these
Particulars.

First; We will take a view of them singly and in themselves: and here both
their Understanding and their Virtue, their Knowledge and Practice will be
considered.

Secondly; We'll also show how they stood in reference to God. And,

Thirdly; How in reference to the Devil. From all which will appear, in what
Condition they were, both as to this present, and as to the future Life.

First; With reference to themselves, their Knowledge was upon many accounts
short and defective. For,

1. It was not so large and extensive in respect of its Object: They were
ignorant in very many Particulars, both of God and Themselves: They understood
not the particular Providence, or the determinate Counsel of God concerning the
future State of Men: They knew not by what means themselves, and all Men became
so very bad and miserable, nor the Terms on which God would deal with them, nor
the Way and Method in which they should be recovered. Or,

2. Where their Understanding did reach any of these things, their Knowledge was
very obscure and inevident, and also very wavering and uncertain: They had but
very imperfect Glimmerings and Dawnings of Knowledge: They rather conjectured
and guest, than knew these things.

3. They had also many gross Mistakes, and absurd Opinions, both concerning
God, as to his Nature and Works, as well as concerning the Number of Gods.

4. From all which will follow, that their Knowledge was not greatly useful to
them in that,

(1.) It did not reach to many useful things: It fell short of some that were
almost necessary to be known, in order to Men's living well and virtuously: at
least they wanted some Knowledge which is absolutely necessary to the greatest
Perfection of Virtue.

(2.) Where it did extend to several things, yet for want of greater Clearness
and Certainty, it could not be so useful to the Guidance of their Practice, as
otherwise it might. And,

(3.) Their Errors and false Opinions must needs lead them into the ways of
Vice and Wickedness, at least of Folly and Vanity.

2. As their defect of Knowledge must make them less wise and virtuous: So their
Errors and Mistakes, would also betray them to foolish and wicked Actions; That
I am next to consider, their want of Virtue, their abounding in Viciousness.

We may take the Apostles Words in Tit. 3. 3. in which he gives an account of
himself and others, before they became Christians: Foolish, disobedient, (to
Governors I suppose) deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, hateful and
hating one another, living in Malice and Envy.

We see another Catalogue of Vices which were too too rife amongst the
unconverted Gentiles, in Romans 1. 29, 30, 31, 32. Being filled with all
Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full of
Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, etc.

For a Confirmation of this, that these were the Practices of the Heathens
before Christianity, be may be assured of it from their own Writers; and not
only the Satyrists, but the Historians will attest it, as any may be satisfied,
who consult either the Greek or Roman Writers, where we find frequent Relations
of gross Idolatry, of fensless Superstition, of most salvage Inhumanity, of
most filthy and unnatural Bestiality.

These and such like were the enormous Crimes of the Pagan World, before the
Light of the glorious Gospel scattered these Works of Darkness, and made them
fly before it, as the Shadows of the Night do before the Rising Sun.

This may suffice concerning the Ignorance and Wickedness of the Gentiles, and
what manner of Persons they were, considered in themselves.

Secondly; Let us next consider how they stood in reference to God: And we must
conclude that they were at Enmity with him; by which we must not understand
that God had no Mercy, no Good Will for them, (for this is to contradict the
Scripture, and every Man's Sense, who retains his natural Notions of God) but
that God could take no Delight nor Pleasure in them, that they acted in
Contrariety and Opposition to him, and by this means had estranged and set
themselves at the farthest distance from the Emanations of Divine Goodness, and
out of the way of his Mercy, and had put themselves in almost an Incapacity of
receiving Good from him. Nay, as long as they continued in the same State, they
were in an utter Incapacity of those Influences from God, whereby he makes Men
happy.

I must add, that they had made themselves obnoxious to Justice, and liable to
the Punishments, which the Holy God had denounced against the Transgressors of
his Laws. They had offended God, and knew of no Mediator, no Intercessor, no
Sacrifice to make Expiation, no Priest to offer it. This was the Condition of
the Gentiles with respect to God.

Thirdly; If we also add to this, that they were under the Power of the Devil;
as all that are Rebels against God, and have renounced their Allegiance to
Heaven, must be: For, they that are not Subject to God, have Satan for their
Governor; for he is the Head of the Apostasy from God and Goodness.

If we add this to the former Considerations, we may seem to have completed
the Misery of the Gentile State: For, what greater Misery than to be the Slaves
of this Enemy of God and all Goodness? This grand Opposer of Man's Happiness?
To be led Captive by him at his Will? To be dragged at the Chariot-Wheels of
this insulting Conqueror? What can be worse than first to execute his malicious
Will, and then be punished for so doing? To be most cruelly tormented for
obeying those Laws of Sin and Death which he gave them?

And this was the State of the Pagan World; they worshipped Devils, they
received Oracles from them, they obeyed them, they were subject to their
Dominion. This is also plainly attested by their own Writers. And when the
Scripture speaks of their Conversion to Christianity, it expresses it thus;
that they were turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God: Acts. 26. 18.

I have said enough, one would think, to set forth the miserable State of us
Gentiles before-our Conversion: but yet there is one Consideration more, which
exceedingly aggravates their Woe, and that is, that they are liable to be
condemned to the greater and more lasting Miseries of the future State; those
Torments which admit of no Ease, and will have no end, which they cannot escape
except they be recovered out of this Snare of the Devil, and become the
Servants of God. That is, unless they cease to do evil, and learn to do well:
which how hard it was for them to do, we may conclude from the Difficulty that
we (who have the many greater Helps, which the Gospel Dispensation affords us)
find in it.

And besides, how full of Anxiety and disquieting Thoughts must their Sin and
Ignorance, and their Presensions and Boadings of Evil to come, of a deserved
Punishment for their Faults, fill them with? Nay, tho they should repent and
amend, how uncertain must they be of the Pardon and Favor of God? And
therefore how must they through Fear of Death, be all their Lifetime subject
to Bondage?

Thus I have very curiously given an account of the first Particular, viz. The
Condition of the Gentiles before Christianity.

II. I now proceed to sew some of the Advantages which the Gentiles have by
becoming Christians: And this will appear both in respect of Themselves, and in
respect of Others.

First; If we consider them in themselves singly, their Advantage appears in
this, that their Minds are greatly enlightened, their Hearts are thoroughly
purified, their Lives are reformed and amended.

1. Their Minds are enlightened: Their Knowledge is both larger, and clearer, and
surer than it was; and consequently far more efficacious and powerful.

They know the Nature and Condition of Man far better; they are now assured of
a Spiritual and Immortal Soul which inhabits this Body, which is the far more
excellent Part of Man. They have now assurance, that they and all Men shall
live after Death, and that they shall be for ever happy or miserable, according
as they have lived here: If they have lived a Holy and Virtuous Life, they
shall be brought into a State of endless Bliss: If they have done Evil; if they
have not done Good, that they shall fall under unsufferable and perpetual
Torments.

They now understand, that the Cause of all the Miseries and Imperfections of
Mankind is their Sin: That all the Calamities in the World owe their Original
to the Wickedness of Men.

They now understand the Dangerousness of their Condition, and they are fully
convinced of their own Impotency and Insufficiency; which Acquaintance with
themselves, what a Preparation it is to Virtue and Holiness, we shall see
presently.

Again; They know now, that God is a Spirit of an Incorporeal Nature, and such
as their own Souls are; and that He is but one: The Father, the Word, and the
Holy Spirit being all one. That it was He, that made the Heavens and the Earth
by the Eternal Word; and that by his powerful Decree all things are continued,
and that his Providence does so particularly superintend all things, that not a
Sparrow falls to the Ground without his Knowledge and Permission. And that this
God knows all things; that he searches the Hearts, and sees the secret Works,
and the inward Thoughts of all Men: and that he is infinitely good and kind:
That he is immutably Holy, and Just, and Pure: That he will call Men to Account
for the Deeds they have done in this Body, and will reward the Good with
Everlasting Life, and will adjudg the Wicked to Everlasting Woe.

They also more perfectly understand their Duty, and the way of Life in which
they should walk. They now know that Spiritual Worship is that which God
principally looks at: and that this is not only to be confined to certain
Times, and Places, and Actions; but that at all Times, and every where God may
be worshipped, and that in the whole Course of our Lives, and in all our
Actions, his glorious Perfections may be, and are to be acknowledged: And to
him is to be ascribed his Excellency above all, by Loving, and Fearing, and
Believing, and Obeying Him more than all.

They know they ought in all their Wants to make their Supplications to God;
and that they should praise and be thankful to him, for all the Good they
receive.

They know also, that they are to apply themselves to God by Jesus Christ; that
it is by and through him, the Merits of his Life and Death, the Prevailing of
his Intercession with the Father, that they are accepted.

They are likewise fully instructed, that they are to purify themselves from
all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; that they are to bring into subjection the
Body, and to keep it under: that is, that all the inferior Appetites and
Inclinations be kept in a due subordination to the Reason and Law of their
Minds.

They are now told plainly, That they must not only be Just, and True, and
Honest, and Fair in their Dealings with Men; so as not to circumvent and cozen;
not to deceive and disappoint, but must stand to their Word, keep to their
Promises, make good their Contracts; but that they must also be compassionate
and merciful, courteous and kind, gentle and meek, loving and good to all Men;
to Neighbors and Acquaintance, and also to Strangers and Foreigners; to
Enemies as well as Friends: Nor only to the Good, (tho to them principally) but
also to the Bad.

Thus are they instructed in their Duty; and they see not only what they are to
do, but why they should do it. They understand clearly the goodness, the
fitness, the beneficialness, the necessity of such a Life. They see how
natural, how reasonable it is; how just it is to live thus, if they respect God
who requires it, who made and preserves them, and from whom they receive all
Good; who is their undoubted Lord, and perfectly Wise and Good, and who will be
their Judge.

They know their dependence on Him, and therefore must conclude that they ought
to be at His dispose, and be directed and governed by Him. They see the
manifold Advantages which accrue to them, as well as to others, by such a
practice. They feel a present Ease and Satisfaction, an inward Pleasure and
Delight, such as they take when they do any natural Actions: and they are also
sensible that they are more perfected, that all their Faculties receive now
Accessions of Strength, and are more enabled for their several Functions and
Offices.

Besides; they perceive, that other Men are the better for their being better;
that not only their Families, but the more public Societies of which they are
Members, are beneficed by their holy and good Lives.

And since they feel so much good in them at present, they cannot but earnestly
desire and hope for that Happiness which their Minds presage, and the Gospel
assures them, remains for good Men in the future State.

Furthermore; the Gospel ascertains them of the manifest danger they run, who
do not live thus; they are assured that they cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
that their Doom must be, to go away from the Presence of God into Everlasting
Misery.

These are some of those things in which the Gentiles are instructed when they
become Christians, of which they were in their Gentile State either wholly
ignorant, or at least very uncertain.

2. And we may well suppose that where the Mind is thus enlightened, the Heart
will be purified, and the Life amended: for Impurity and Wickedness, are Works
of Darkness and Ignorance. And where the Light of a clear and certain Knowledge
breaks into the Soul, it must needs dispel all those foggy Mists, and those
Shadows of Darkness which had overspread and benighted it: Those Owls and Bats,
and those Beasts of the Forest, which went abroad in the Night of Ignorance,
will not show their Heads, now the Sun of Righteousness has displayed his
Beams in the Soul.

So that now the Flesh is crucified with its Affections and Lusts. All those
wicked Passions which rebelled against Reason and Conscience, and robbed the
Soul of its Innocense and Quiet, are now subdued by Christ. The Mind does now
no longer serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures; nor is it at the Mercy of those
Furies of Revenge, and Malice, and Envy. But in the room of these are come
Mildness and Gentleness, Benignity and Mercy, and universal Good Will.

The Gentile turned Christian, is not now addicted to Gluttony and Drunkenness,
to Chambering, Wantonness, and suchlike revelling and riotous Courses: but he
is temperate and chaste, and keeps these Appetites of bodily Pleasure within
the Bounds which Nature and approved Custom, which Reason and Laws, and
Religion, have set.

He lives in the constant exercise of a pure and spiritual Religion, and
expresses a regard to God in his whole Life, acknowledging the Divine
Perfections, as well as God's Superiority over, and Right to him, by his loving
and fearing Him above all, and his constant study to please Him, in obedience
to his Laws, and imitation of his Works.

He keeps all his Faculties in that due and natural Order in which God placed
them, when Man came first out of his hands; that is, the Body is subject to the
Soul, and the Will is under the conduct of the Understanding. He rids himself
of all irregular Appetites, and disorderly Passions, and so walks not in those
ways of Sensuality in which brutish-Men are found.

And his Conversation to others is innocent and simple, full of Plain-dealing
and Honesty, adorned with Mildness and Equity; nor has he any other Designs,
but those to which he is engaged by the most undissembled and servent Love.

In respect of other Men, the Christian may be said to live a Life of Love; for
this is that which directs, which ingages him to all he does to them. This is
the predominant Affection, the most powerful and prevalent Principle of all his
Actions.

But I shall not now engage in a particular Discourse of the Goodness of a
Christian's Life: What has been said, may be sufficient to show that the
Christian's Heart is purified, and his Life reformed; that he is not affected,
nor does he walk as other Gentiles, who have not known Christ.

If any should think that I have set his Holiness too high, (tho I doubt not
but many have exemplified all that I have described) yet suppose the more
common sort of Christians, who have not yet attained to all this Perfection,
only they are earnestly pursuing and reaching after it, even such do far
transcend the unchristened Heathens. And those of this lowest Rank of
Christians have great Peace and Qulet of Mind, a thing to which the Ignorant
and Superstitious, the Vicious and Wicked amongst the Heathens must be utter
Strangers; For the Wicked, he is so full of guilty Fears, that he flees when no
Man pursues him; and it is an eternal Truth, that there is no Peace to the
Wicked.

If we'll allow some of them not to have been wicked, yet we must confess that
their Knowledge was far short of the Christians; and all Ignorance and
Uncertainty must be attended with Fear and Unquietness. But the Christian's
clear and certain Knowledge of God, and of himself, of the Undertaking and
Performance of Christ, and of his own Duty, and the Encouragement he has to
that, together with his sincere and honest Endeavor to do what is good, must
lay a sure Foundation of lasting Peace, and be a Fountain of Pleasure ever
springing up in his Soul.

Thus I have briefly considered the converted Gentile in himself singly: but
because Man is weak and dependent, and not sufficient for his own Happiness, I
will now go on to show how it is with him,

Secondly, In respect of other Men: And of,

1. Those that are no Christians, as well^ as, 2. Of those that are.
1. Those that are no Christians, if they have any remainder of Love to
Goodnes^, will esteem and reverence that admirable Virtue which they see the
Christian practice: For, his Life being an Exemplification of the Precepts of
the Gospel, must needs make every Beholder in love with it. The Christian's
universal Love, his Good Will to all Men, must constrain all Men to love him;
and whilst he is intent on doing good to them, as by his Profession he is
obliged, it is not likely that they will do Evil to him.

I grant, that sometime this may happen, that Men may hurt us whilst we are
following that which is good; but this comes to pass, for the most part,
through a persuasion that such Men are mere Pretenders, and not what they seem.
And I am sure it is the likeliest, and therefore the wisest way we can take to
prevent opposition and harm from other Men; for no Man will lightly set himself
against him who is doing good.

But if any should think, that this is the way that will lead him into all
Sufferings from others; and that if he cease from Evil, he certainly makes
himself a Prey; that his Innocence is the white Mark at which the Wicked aim;
and that they who are resolved to be wicked themselves, will be angry at every
one that is more righteous than themselves. Let us suppose that some Men are
such Devils as to hate Virtue, and that they are enraged against every one that
is a Lover of Goodness; Yet even in this case, Care is taken by the great
Governor of his Church, and of the World,

1. That no opposition shall prevail against the Christian Society, but that
they shall contiuue some-where or other in the World, in spite of the Malice of
Earth and Hell. And,

2. That whatsoever any Man suffers in and for well-doing, he shall receive an
abundant Recompense for it: He shall at present feel that inward satisfaction
of Mind, which will make the worst Condition not only tolerable, but easy; and
perhaps his very Persecutors will give a testimony to his Virtue, and will (at
least tacitly) approve that which they punish and persecute. And after he has
ended this Life with Self-satisfaction, as well as Honor from all that knew
him, and were Lovers of Goodness, he shall then enter into inconceivable Bliss,
and be filled with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

2. This is the Condition of Christians in respect of them who are without. Let
us now consider them with reference to those that are within, the Members of
the same Body, united with them in the same Society; Men who are of the same
Institution, and under the same Obligations with themselves.

Now as there is scarce any Society in which Men are, but they receive
considerable Advantages by it; for they are by this secured from very many
Outrages, to which, if they were alone, they must necessarily be exposed; and
they, by the mutual Assistance one of another, have their Wants supplied much
more conveniently than they could have been, if they had continued by
themselves: Insomuch that it is scarce conceivable, that any Society should be
so bad as Solitude. They are a wretched Company of Men indeed, from whom a Man
will fl^e into a Wilderness, and rather choose to be among the wild Beasts, than
to associate with them.

But grant, that a Solitude, a Desert, may be more desirable than some
Societies; yet this cannot be imagined of that which is the best Society of the
whole World: And such is the Christian Church, to be a Member of which, and
live in Communion with it, is one of the greatest Blessings that can be given
to any Man, because of the inestimable Benefits he is entitled to, and receives
by this.

For, by being one of this Corporation, he is both more obliged and engaged, as
well as more assisted and helped to do well, and consequently to be happy, than
he could be if he was alone, or of any other Society. This will be very
evident, if we consider these following Particulars:

1. The Profession which every one makes when he becomes a Christian; the Terms
on which, and the Rite with which all are first admitted to this holy
Corporation; and also the Condition of our Continuance in it, by which we
understand the Quality of the Members of this Body.

2. The large Bounds and vast Extent of this Society; the great Numbers of them
that have been, and are of it; and the Length of its Duration.

3. The Excellency of the Order and Government which is established in this
spiritual Polity.

4. The good Laws, that regulate our Affections and Carriage to each other,
which are given to all the Members of this Holy Society.

5. The Holy Solemnities, and Sacred Rites, to which every Christian is
admitted in the public Assemblies.

6. The proper and wholesome Discipline, which is used toward Offenders.

7. The wise and good Counsels, the holy and vertious Examples of the Members
of this Society.

These and such like Particulars, if well considered, will make it evident, how
much advantage it is likely to be to those who are received into this excellent
Society: Let us briefly run over them.

First; Every Man by his entering into it, professes he will observe the
Counsels, obey the Precepts, and follow the Example of Jesus Christ; that is,
he engages himself to the practice of all Holiness and Purity, of all Goodness
and Virtue whatsoever. And whosoever does not thus, must contradict and belly
his Profession, and proclaim himself an Hypocrite, which Men are not willing to
do.

The Conditions of Men's being received into the Church, are these that I have
already mentioned, or which is the same in other words, to repent and believe,
or obey the Gospel. These are the Terms upon which every one is admitted at
first; and those upon which he continues, is his Perseverance, and not only so,
but also his bringing forth Fruits meet for Repentance: For every Branch that
bears not Fruit, is cut off, says our Savior.

Thus then by the very Terms on which I am received into, and continued in this
Society, I am mightily engaged to an holy and excellent Life. If I do what I
have taken upon me to do, I shall be a very good Man; and if I be only a
Pretender, but make not good my Engagement, if I only pretend to be a
Christian, but am none; I am an Hypocrite here, and my Portion shall be with
Hypocrites hereafter.

And if other Men will make good their Profession, and perform the Conditions
of Christianity, then will manifold Advantages accrue to me from this: For,
they are obliged, both by the Commands and Example of our Savior, to be not
only just and honest, but merciful, and kind, and bountiful to all, but
especially to their Fellow Christians.

And lastly; To ratify this Engagement and make it more solemn, and sensible,
and strong, that common, and easy, and significant Ceremony of Baptism, or
Washing, is used: which, as it signifies to us that inward Purity to which
Christianity obliges us, so it brings this to our remembrance; as all corporal
and sensible things do put us in mind of those more spiritual, with which they
are joined.

I will not now insist on those secret Blessings, and unseen Graces, which we
may upon good grounds believe God vouchsafes to all that use his Ordinances.

The Sum of what I have said under this Particular is, That it is a very great
Advantage to be of the Church of Christ, because of the Terms on which, and the
Rite by which we are received into it, and because of the Profession we and all
Men make at our first entrance.

All which lays a great obligation on us all to live good Lives; which if we
do, we shall be in capacity of receiving, and they in a disposition of doing
great Good to us.

By this we understand the Nature and Quality of the Members of the Christian
Society, that they are holy, and virtuous, and good Men; for such must they be,
who are resolved to obey the Commands, and imitate the Example of Christ.

I speak of that which indeed is, not that which only seems to be, the Church
of Christ, of real, not nominal Christians. I proceed,

Secondly; To a Consideration of the vast Extent and long Duration of this Holy
Society. It is spread over the face of the whole Earth: for in all places where
there are Men of this Character and Quality, Men of the truly Christian Temper
and Spirit, Men that obey the Law of Christ, and live as he did; there are the
Members of Christ's Body: For Christ is not a Name, and a Word; nor is
Christianity a Profession and a Show only; nor is the Company of the Faithful,
Men of an external Denomination: but Christ is a spiritual Head, and
Christianity is an inward Principle of Life and Power; and Christians are not
those who have a Form of Knowledge and Godliness, but the Power.

They are Christians, who are inwardly such; who have not only washed their
Flesh in the Sacred Font, but who have purified their Hearts, who have cleansed
their Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God.

And wherever in the World such Men are, in what places, how remote soever,
they are of the same Body of which Christ is Head; and in whatsoever distant
times they lived, they were of the same Society: For, there were always two
great Corporations or Bodies of Men in the World, and never more: one who
obeyed the Laws of God, of whom the only begotten of the Father, the Eternal
Word is the Head; the other, who cast the Laws of God behind them, and follow
their own Lusts, of these the Devil, the Prince of Apostate Angels, is the
Governor.

So that the Men of this Christian Temper and Life, in whatever Ages or Places
of the World they have lived, or do, or shall live, they are of this Society or
Church. Nay, it extends it self further, to those in Heaven also, the Spirits
of just Men made perfect: They are indeed the Church Triumphant, but they are
still of the Church; so that of this there shall be no end. When we shall put
off these corruptible Bodies, and leave this Earth, and go to Heaven; yet even
then and there we shall continue in the same Society, and be Members of the
Body of Christ.

From this Consideration we may infer, What a grand Privilege it is to be of
this truly Catholic Church, which has been in all Ages of the World, and
which will continue for ever; which is not only in all places of this Earth,
but in Heaven also: For by our being of the same Body, we are engaged and
disposed to an universal Love to all holy and good Men; as Men of the fame
Country or Town, are more inclined to love each other, rather than Strangers.

And this is a great Advantage indeed, to have our Love directed aright, and
increased. But besides this, we communicate with the Saints of all Times and
Places, and receive many Benefits upon the account of their Prayers, and their
Holiness.

How many times has the infinitely good God transmitted down his Blessings to
many Generations, for the sakes of his Abraham's and his David's, and the whole
World? but especially Men of the same Society with them, have fared the better
because of them.

This also is considerable, That we cannot be separated from this Body by any
length of Time, or distance of Place; wherever we live, or wherever we are,
if we be of the Christian Spirit and Temper, and live the Life of Christ, we
are of the Christian Church. Nay, tho it should happen that we be deprived of
the outward Ordinances, (provided this be not through our own ^ault, our
Neglect, or Contempt of the Divine Institutions) we are not in this Case
deprived of the Inward and Spiritual Influences which we have by our Union with
this Mystical Body. For, the Prayers of the Universal Church bring Blessings
upon us, and the Spirit of Christ, which enlivens and animates all his Members,
quickens us, excites and assists our Endeavors; and that care which our great
and good Lord has of all his Disciples, reaches us, and we partake of his
Protection, as well as others that are of his Kingdom.

Thirdly; There is such an excellent Order established in this Christian
Polity, that there is no clashing nor interfering of opposite interests; but on
the contrary, each part does assist other, and is assisted by it, and they all
most friendly conspire together, in the best manner to promote the welfare of
all and every one. There are no Confusions and Disorders, but every one has
his Work, his Business allotted him; and that is according to every Man's Gifts
and Qualifications; and every Man is required to attend and do that Work which
he is sitted for.

Now because Order, and consequently Peace, cannot be preserved without
Government, Christ has instituted an excellent Government in his Church, a
Government that is both gentle, and yet sufficiently strict, for the attaining
its Ends, which is the Common Good. And herein our Savior has shown, that he
has a care of the Body, and therefore has appointed Officers, Deacons, to see
to the necessities of the Saints; Men, whose Business it should be to receive
the charitable Gifts of some, and bestow them upon the Indigent. But he has
taken especial care of the Soul, and therefore has appointed others
Presbyters, whose Work this is, to teach and instruct, to exhort and persuade
Men to live well, and to administer his Holy Sacraments.

And he has set Bishops over them, to see that they do their Office; and these
Superiors are to engage, Men by their own Examples, as well as by their
Authority.

There are several Abuses, and things which are destructive of Government; all
which our wise and good Governor, the Lord Jesus, has (as much as can be) by
his Institution prevented. They are such such as these.

1. Usurpation of Office. This will quickly bring in the greatest Disorder
imaginable into any state, if any Man may thrust himself into what Office he
pleases: for, men's Ambition will lead them to desire those things for which
they are no way fitted; and diverse will be aiming at the same, which would
therefore bring in Everlasting Contentions.

To prevent this, our Savior has shown by his own Example, that Men must not
take the honor of such Offices to themselves; and by his Apostles has
straightly charged, that none run before they be sent. And therefore they did, in
the first times of Christianity (which has been continued ever since) solemnly
Ordai^, and set apart, Men by Fasting and Prayer, and Imposition of Hands.

2. But lest they should authorize Men, that were not fit for that Employment,
we have, in several places of the inspired Epistles; the Qualifications and
Characters of those Men who should be commissioned, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3.

3. That they may not affect a boundless Absoluteness; he has declared to them
and others, that he is Supreme, that they are all subject to him; and that
therefore we are to call no Man Master on Earth: That is, own none here to be
Absolute and Supreme; account none to have Dominion ever our Faith. They are
all under Christ, tho they be above us, and must be accountable to him. Nay,
they must be owned and obeyed by us, no farther than they act in subordination
to Christ.

4. Another great Abuse of Government is, Arbitrariness, by which I mean a
lawless, unreasonable, unaccountable imposing on their Subjects; which if it
happen to be of such things as are grievous and burdensome, and against all
natural Equity, it is then Tyranny.

Our Savior has done much to prevent this also: for, himself has given all
those Laws which are Fundamental and Essential, and has left them on Record:
So that Men can add none, but such as are circumstantial about Time or Place,
or some such things: and these also must not oppose and thwart, but be in
subordination to those Laws which our Supreme Lord himself has enacted. And,

5. By this he has also prevented those many Innovations which probably must
otherwise have been; than which, perhaps, there is not a worse Pest to any
Government. But in the Christian Institution, how are all probable Pretenses of
Innovating cut off? The Laws of Christ must not be repealed, but continue in
force for ever; and they were found sufficient to direct and regulate the
Christians Practice, in those first Times when they lived best; and the Church
was in the most flourishing, tho in the most persecuted Condition.

I believe, all that have consulted History will attest this, That whatever
Innovations have been made in the Christian Church, since the very first
establishment of it, have been very hurtful and mischievous.

6. As this Spiritual Government does not cross its own Ends, nor is
inconsistent with it self; so neither does it interfere with the Civil and
Secular Government: but they may and do conspire together, to promote the
welfare and good State, both of the Souls and Bodies of Men; as well in respect
of this Life, as that to come.

7. Great care is taken, that the Officers discharge their Trusts, and perform
the Duties of their Places: for, glorious Rewards are proposed and promised to
them, that shall convert Sinners from the Error of their Ways, Dan. 12. 3. And
terrible are the Threats denounced against those that neglect their Duty, Ezekiel.
3. 18. So that if reasonable Hopes and Fears will engage Men to their Duty, our
Savior has taken care to do it.

8. A Charge is laid upon the People, that they obey those that are set over
them, Heb. 3. 17, etc.

But I proceed to consider those other Advantages which a Christian receives by
being a Member of the Church of Christ, that excellent Society of Christians. I
have already mentioned three; The

Fourth is, The excellently good Laws by which this Polity is to be governed.
This will be evinced by considering,

1. The Persons to whom the Christian Laws are given; and they are All those to
whom they are or may be known: but they who are actually and immediately obliged
by them, are All that have given up their Names to Christ; whether they be high
or low, rich or poor, learned or ignorant, old or young. In whatsoever
condition any Man is, if he call himself a Christian, he is under the Law of
Christ. None of the Society are exempted, neither St. Peter nor his Successors,
nor whoever they be that assume to themselves the highest place in the Church,
can plead they are not under Obligation to the Laws, which require all Men to
live soberly, righteously, and godlily. They cannot make themselves Superiors
to the Laws of Humility and Meekness, of Temperance and Chastity, of Truth and
Fidelity, of Innocence and Honesty, of Equity and Charity, of Devotion and
Piety. These and the rest of the Christian Laws, lay an Obligation on every
Member of the Christian Church to obey them.

And this is a great Security to Men of the same Society, that all the Members
of it are subject to the same Laws with themselves. None can plead an Exemption
from, nor look on themselves as Superiors to the Laws of the Society. They are
not the Makers of those Laws, and therefore can neither dispense with
themselves nor others, for the breach of them: for, none that has a less Power
than that by which any Law was made, can control it; and he that takes this
upon him, assumes to himself a Power which belongs not to him.

Thus then we that are Christians, are all under the same Christian Laws; and
whosoever does not obey it, is self-convicted, and a confessed Criminal* he
must own himself a Transgressor of the Laws of that Society of which he is.

But besides the Laws which oblige Christians in common, there are those which
are given to Men, in those different Relations and Conditions, in which they
are either antecedentally to, and independently on their being Christians, or
consequently to this: That is, both Husbands and Wives, Fathers and Children,
Masters and Servants, and all Subjects, as well as spiritual Governors and
Teachers, and those that are under them, and taught by them. All those, nay and
in all varieties of Conditions, in which Men usually are, they have Laws
peculiar to that Relation or Condition in which they are.

There is scarce any particular Case can happen to any Man, in which the Law of
Christ does not direct him how to behave himself. And this leads us to another
Consideration, which commends the Law of Christ, so that it is a great
privilege to be in that Society which is under it; that is,

2. The Matter about which it is conversant, which is no less than all the
Faculties and Powers of Humane Nature, all the Works and Actions which Man
does, not only the outward, but the inward, those of the Soul, as well as those
of the Body; his Affections and Desires, his Discourses and Thoughts are
regulated by this Law, as well as his Words and external Acts.

Under the former Particular, I said, All Men to whom this Law is published,
were obliged by it; and in this, I say, That all that is in Man, is under its
Government. It regulates all our Thoughts of, and Affections to, and carriage
toward God.

We are all required to love God with all our Heart, to fear him above all; to
submit to all his Dispensations cheerfully; and in all we do, to refer to him
principally.

In reference to each other, every Man is bound to be just and honest to all;
nay; to be good and charitable to every; other Man; to hurt, to injure none;
neither to speak evil of, nor do evil to any Man; to be kind to Friends, and to
forgive Enemies; not to be angry with any rashly.

I must not descend to Particulars but this I may say in general, That the Laws
of Christianity regulate all our; Affections and Actions toward one another, in
such sort, that they engage us to do no kind of Evil to any one, but all manner
of Good to every one in particular; as far as that can consist with the common
Good of all.

And this the Christian Law does consider so particularly, and so fully and
perfectly, that there is no room for, no need of a review. Here is no Defect to
be supplied by Equity. It is not so general, that it does not descend to
Particular Instances. There is no Necessity of new Laws to be added, or a
Dispensation from those that are already. As there is the great Justice, so the
greatest Equity in the Laws of Christ.

Besides this, I also infer these two great Commendations of the Laws of Christ
from what I have said.

(1.) That care is taken by them to prevent the secret commission of those
Faults whereby one might hurt another. Tho humane Laws and Courts may never
take cognizance of some Crimes; and if they do, may not condemn them; yet the
Christian Law obliges in such Cases to forbear those Practices whereby we might
prejudice our Brethren. We must not harm another, tho no Man does see, or can
ever discover us. And we are injoined to do those good Offices to others, to
which we are not tied by any humane Authority.

(2.) The very Principles of all Good and Evil, Practices to our Neighbors,
are the Matter of the Christian Law: For, those Affections, nay, the very first
Motions and Thoughts, that lead to do them Evil, are restrained, and (as far as
they can be supposed to fall under our Liberty) forbid. And therefore not only
Murder, but Hatred, and Malice, and Envy, yea, unjust Anger, and even
Uncharitableness, are forbidden: and whosoever allows himself in such evil
Affections as these, transgresses the Law of Christ.

All those immoderate and unreasonable Appetites and Desires of Honors, and
Riches, and Pleasures, which are the Springs of all Injustice and Injuries to
our Brethren, are prohibited, and as much as may be suppressed and cut off by
the Law.

Thus it is not in Humane Laws, they cannot take such an effectual Course to
prevent the secret Practices of Mischief: and they do not so much as pretend to
command or forbid Men's inward Thoughts and Affections.

3. Let us consider the End at which the Christian Law aims: That is in
general, ultimately the Perfection and Happiness of all Men; but more
especially and immediately, the Perfection of Virtue and Holiness in them who
obey it. Which will be easily understood by this, That this Law directs and
ingages to all virtuous and good Practices. As many as are obedient to it,
have, by doing well, attained an excellent Temper; and are from this New Nature
disposed, constantly and strongly inclined to do well. So that now they act
from an inward Principle, from a Nature, a Life; and by this means they are
filled with Satisfaction and Joy. And being now in a disposition to use
themselves, and what they have, to the best and the wisest Purposes; that is,
for the Perfection of all God's Creatures, and thereby for the Service, and
Pleasure, and Honor of God himself, they are in the likeliest way, and have
taken the best course to receive more outward Advantages and Accessions of
Power from him, who is always designing and doing the greatest Good; and whose
usual Method is, to give to them who improve what they have. And so all other
Perfections, and whatever else is requisite to complete the greatest
Happiness, of which Humane Nature is capable, may well be expected to follow
Perfection of Holiness.

But then besides, as to other Men; see how their good State is also consequent
on the Holiness of them who obey the Gospel. For, according as they attain to
more Perfection, they are by their very Natures inclined, as well as engaged by
particular Precepts, to communicate their good things to their Brethren; and
when themselves are become Virtuous, to be diligent and restless in their
Endeavors, to make other Men so too: and consequently to do them all the good
Office, in all kinds, which are in their Power.

Thus I have briefly showed, That the End of the Commandment, or
Gospel-Declaration, is the doing good to one another, and to all Men, by
showing how it effects this, and brings it to pass.

And is not this an admirable Advantage, to be of a Society;

(1.) Where the Law does not, as the Laws of too many Societies do, intend the
and Mischief, if not to the most, yet to very many?

Nor (2.) where it does not only aim at some petty, inconsiderable, inferior
Good, which is only good in a Subordination and Subservienty to some higher,
which is the Case of the Laws of all Civil Corporations.

But (3.) it aims at the greatest, and highest, and best Good; and not only of
the Generality, but of all and every one that are Members of this Society, nay,
and of every Man in the World: Not only the present temporary; but also, and
more especially, the future and everlasting Happiness of them.

4. Let us consider the Authority, which is no less than that of the Sovereign
Lord of Men and Angels. It is no petty and controlable, nor yet an unjust and
usurped Power, by which this Law is enacted. It is not the decree of Impotence,
or Folly, or Madness; nor is it the Effect of the greatest, wisest, and justest
earthly Powers: but it is the Determination of Heaven, the Counsel of the
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power which made, and now upholds the World.

All which manifestly appears from the Harmony of this Law, with the Principles
of our Nature and Creation; and also from the direct tendency it has to the
Perfection and Happiness of Mankind. For which Reasons, we cannot but think it
a Contrivance of the Maker and Preserver of Man, the infinitely good God.

And besides; this Law was so attested with mighty Wonders and Miracles, such
as by their Goodness and Greatness proclaimed their Author.

Now a Law, enacted by such an Authority, must necessarily come with a great
Force upon the Minds of them that are subject: For, if the Command of a King
come with Power, How unresistible must we think the Commands of God himself?
How will it engage every one to Obedience? And then, how happy must they needs
be, who live in a Society where the Laws of God are so carefully observed?

There are few Societies in the World so ill bested with Laws, but that if they
be obeyed out of reverence to the Authority that made them, the Members of it
will be in a good State. How much more must it be so here, where the Laws have
such an immediate and direct tendency, to make those that observe them perfect
and happy? where they do so straightly injoin a mutual care of, and love to one
another?

5. The Sanction on which our Christian Law is established, is next to be
considered. By this I understand (as all do) those Rewards, but especially
Punishments, which are promised and threatened, whereby the Hopes and Fears of
Men are excited, and they by them engaged to Obedience, and deterred from the
Transgression of the Laws?

This seems to me as a Reserve, which wise Lawgivers have for foolish, and
inconsiderate, and degenerate Man. For, whilst Men are Wise and Good, they will
discover the Good at which the Law aims, and that will be sufficient to move
them to Obedience: as well it may, for this contains not only their own, but
also their Brethrens good State. But when they are grown so foolish, as not to
see what the Law intends, or so wicked as not to regard it, at least so
unnatural as to mind none but themselves, then comes in the Supplement of the
Sanction, which propounds and promises great Rewards to the Obedient: and if
they be sunk so low, as not to desire to better their Condition, or at least
not much to desire it, then they are presented and menaced with Evils to awaken
and alarm their Fears; which seems the last hold that can be taken of Man, to
bring him to a good State. And it is the Principle which is most operative, in
the worst and most degenerace of Men.

Now what greater or better Promises can be made, than those which in the
Gospel are given us, to encourage our Obedience? For, we are assured, that if
we patiently continue in well-doing, we shall receive the pardon of Sin; and
not only that, but also Eternal Life and Happiness.

And what more terrible Threats can be made, than those which are denounced
against all ungodly and unrighteous Men, that obey not the Gospel of Christ?
For it is said, That they shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

6. And lastly; as to the publication of those Laws (which is also necessary to
make them obligatory) this is so plain, and they are so knowable and easy, that
not only the Wise and Considering, but the Rash and the Ignorant may
understand, both what the Laws require, and of whom; and what is their End, and
who their Author; and what will be consequent on the observance or violation of
them.

Whosoever is capable of the plainest sense, and will believe the most
unquestionable Tradition; whoever observes Humane Nature, and is acquainted
with his own Faculties and Inclinations, or will be concluded by Experience, he
will be fully resolved that these are the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ, and
that they intend the Good of the Christian Church; nay, of the whole World of
Mankind; and that they have God for their Author, and are established on so
firm a Sanction. He cannot doubt this; Men of little and low Understanding, may
be very sure of all this, it comes with so clear an Evidence. And if they have
any assurance, it will constrain them to Obedience: and if it has this Effect,
How happy must that Society be, where they all conspire together, to make
themselves, and one another, and all Men, as happy as they can possibly?

O how pleasant a sight is this, to see Brethren thus united, to see every Man
loving every one as his Brother, nay, as himself? But how blessed a thing is
it, not only to behold this, but to partake of it, to be one of that loving
Corporation, where every Member is touched with a sense of the Infirmities of
the others, and altogether do conspire to promote each others Good and Welfare?

This is the State of the Christian Church in respect of its Laws. How much
better than either the Gentile or the Jewish? Nay, how much better are our Laws
than our Lives? Our Laws are far more excellent than any that have ever been in
the World; but our Lives, I doubt, are not better; nay, I wish they be not
worse than others. If the Laws be good, we should, and therefore we may live
well if we will, and it is our fault if we do not.

Here I might compare the Jewish and the Gentile Laws with the Christian, not
only those Doctrine, of the Rabbis, and the Laws of the famous Lawmakers
amongst the Heathens, but even the Laws of Nature and of Moses, and show how
far short they were of the Law of Christ: But I shall not enter on this
Argument now.

See our Savior's Law, in the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of St. Matthew, and
other places of the Gospel; and the ends of most of the Epistles.

Fifthly; I proceed briefly to the Discipline which is appointed to be used in
the Church toward Offenders. This we have set down Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 21, 22.
compared with Luke 17. 3, 4. If thy Brother sin against thee, etc.

1. We are not to understand this of every petty trivial Offense, (for such as
these must be pardoned of course) but of some greater and more heinous Fault
and Injury perhaps.

2. Nor is this to be restrained to Sins against our selves, so as to exclude
those that are committed against other Men, or against God. The Sins against
God, are against all Men. This premised; 1. Thou art to go to the Offender
alone, and privately, betwixt thee and him, tell him his Fault: and if he own
it, and confess, then proceed no further. If he do not receive thy Admonition,
then, 2. take one or two more. And if he reject their Reproof also; then, 3.
tell the Church: Make it known to the Governor of the Society, and let him in
the public. Assembly admonish and reprove him. But if he still persist
obstinately in his Crimes, then let him be to thee as an Heathen, as one that
is shut out of the Society.

And our Savior has determined, That as often as he repents, he must be
forgiven, Mat. 18. 22. Luke 17. 4.

We find the Apostle St. Paul, according to this Rule of our Savior, giving
direction to the Thessalonians, 2 Epist. 3. v. 6, 14. To withdraw from those
Brethren that walk disorderly; i. e. from those, the course of whose Life is
such. And this may suppose, that the other former Methods have been used. And
not to converse with such an one, that he may be ashamed.

1 Cor. 5. 5. To deliver an incestuous Person up to Satan. That is, to cast him
out of the Church; and so he must fall under the Power of the Devil, under
whose Dominion all they were supposed to be, who were not in the Kingdom of
Christ; and he then exercised his Power over them, inflicting diverse Diseases
on them, even to the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved,
etc.

Verse. 11. If any that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Reviler, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, not to keep Company,
nor to eat with such an one, either in Civil or Sacred Converse.

From these and the like Passages of Scripture, we may observe, That the
Discipline prescribed to be used in the Christian Church, is highly
commendable, in that it inflicts Punishments

1. That are proper and very naturally consequent on the Offense: for, so it
is, to withdraw from the Company of one that is injurious to me or others; and
to put him out of the Church, that will not hear the Church; to deliver him up
to Satan, that will not have Christ to rule over him. Men that thus offend, do,
as it were, by their very Offenses, execute these Punishments on themselves.

2. The Penalties are very Humane, such as will chiefly work on Men's
Understandings and Modesty, and do suppose their Love to Virtue, and Sense of
Religion, and Value for the Christian Institution: To admonish, to withdraw
from, to account him as an Heathen; to shut him out of the Church.

Indeed there followed upon this, Diseases and Death; but these were
instructive, and by such Punishments, greater might be, and were prevented.

3. They were as gentle and easy as could be inflicted; no more than Necessity,
and the Nature of the Crime extorted. They were gradual. And yet,

4. Sufficiently severe; that if a Man had any Sense of Goodness, they must
reclaim him.

5. Yet even the most severe were very charitable. They were not inflicted to
satisfy Revenge and Malice; but in compliance with Love, and to carry on the
De^igns of Charity. -- That the Spirit may be saved; and thou have gained thy
Brother. No other end.

Sixthly; The Holy Solemnities and Sacred Rites (to which every one, as a
Christian, is admitted in the public Assemblies) are such as are instructive
to those that use them; as well as full of Argument, to engage them to the
practice of Virtue; and they have a manifest aim and tendency, to make all that
are admitted to them truly religious toward God, and to unite them in Love to
each other.

Besides; we may well suppose the Divine Blessing and Influence on these his
own Institutions and Ordinances; and that we receive more good by them, than is
naturally consequent on the use of them.

I may refer them to these three Heads.

1. Praying to God. 2. Hearing his Word. 3. The Sacraments.
1. Prayer is one of the first and most natural of those Acknowledgments we
make to God. And there is no holy good Man, that is not frequent in this: For,
^he is sensible of his dependence on God, and therefore he supplicates; he
knows his own Guilt, and therefore confesses; he understands his own
Inability, and God's Power and Readiness to help others, and therefore he
intercedes; and upon the receipt of any Good, he gives Thanks: and by all he
praises and glorifies the great Power and Wisdom, the Goodness and Holiness of
God. He owns him to be the Great and Good God, on whom all depend; and who
governs the Worlds, and is the Author of all that Good which we or others
enjoy; that he has Right to our Obedience, and may require of, and do with us
what he will.

All this we ascribe to God by our Prayers and Praises, by our Confessions of
our Faults, and Intercessions for our Brethren. This is a piece of Worship so
due to God, that we may not alienate it from him; it is an incommunicable
Honor, which must not be given to any of his Creatures.

This is so just, and so fit a thing, that every one is naturally inclined to,
and can hardly be withheld from it: Rather than not do it at all, they will
pay this Homage where it is not due, and pray to Stocks and Stones, or to Men,
that cannot hear, nor help them.

All which shows that we have a secret sense of our Dependence on God, and our
Obnoxiousness to him, and of his Perfections. This is inherent in us, and we
cannot but know it: and if we would carefully observe and trace this
Inclination, it would lead us to the knowledge of God, and we should easily
infer that he must be powerful, and wise, and good, and holy.

Now tho no good Man can be withheld from frequently addressing himself to God
in this manner, (for his Mind will silently ejaculate his good thoughts of God,
and his holy Fervors will ascend up to Heaven, like the Fumes of sweet Incense;
and he has also his constant Times of entering into his Closet, and shutting
his Door, and there pouring out his very Soul before Him that sees in secret,
and will reward openly) yet besides all this, his great Humility in himself,
and Charity to others, and Desire of God's Glory, make him to set a great value
on the Public Prayers; and it is, and ought to be a thing of great account, to
join with the Assembly in Prayer and Thanksgiving to God. When a Man confesses
his own and his Brethrens Faults thus publicly, it must necessarily lay an
Engagement on him for the future, to be careful to prevent the Repetition of
the same, or the Commission of any others, by himself, or his Brethren who join
with him. His Intercession for others, and theirs for him, does both suppose,
and will increase their mutual Love and Friendship.

But all those Acknowledgements of the Divine Goodness, which are made in the
solemn public Prayers and Praises of the holy Congregation, as they proceed
from true and right thoughts of God, and becoming Affections toward him; so
they tend to continue and increase their Knowledge and Devotions, and will have
a mighty Influence on their Love and Good Will to each other. For, whilst they
pray and give thanks for one another, they are in the greatest exercise and
highest expression of their Love to one another, that can be; and by this they
engage themselves to use their utmost endeavors to do all good Offices for,
and to make one another as happy as they can: For they that pray to God for the
greatest Blessings of Heaven upon their Brethren, will not fail to do all they
can toward the procuring of that Happiness for them, which in their Prayers
they have desired of God.

And whosoever he be, that joins with the Public Assembly in Prayers for all
the Congregation, but in private opposes the Welfare and good Estate of any,
or that does not constantly and heartily endeavor it; he proclaims to the
World that he is an Hypocrite, that he goes about to mock God, and to cheat the
World, in that he pretends to pray for the Welfare, but acts for the Ruin of
his Neighbor.

Again; the joining together in the same Religious Worship, the doing the same
Actions, tends greatly to Love and Unity; especially when by this we discover
our selves to have the same De^ires and Designs, as Men that pray together do.

Besides, a Man may reasonably expect to receive greater Benefits on the
account of the united Prayers of many, than of his own single ones: and
therefore our Savior has made the Promise to two or three met, and agreeing
together to ask any thing.

It is on this consideration, that an humble Christian relies so much on the
Prayers of the Church; and even when he is in secret, he is comforted with the
thoughts, that the Prayers of the whole Catholic Church are made to God on his
behalf.

And this I heartily with they would consider, who make so small account of
those good Prayers, which are the Common Prayers of our whole Church, and are
used by all the Members of it.

2. Hearing the Word of God frequently read; and sometimes expo^^ded. But is
this such an Advantage? Yes ^urely. Two sorts of Men will look on it as a great
Privilege, only to have the Word of God read to them: 1. Those that cannot read
it themselves. 2. They who have it not in a known Tongue.

And hence it was, that in the beginning of the Reformation here in England,
when it was first ordered that the Bible should be read in English in the
Congregation, that the People flocked so very much to the Churches. Tho this is
a thing now despised, and Men make no account of coming into Church till after
the Chapters, as if it was nothing to have the Word of God read, by one whose
Office it is to proclaim the Divine Counsel.

But if any will pretend, that he can read the Bible as well at home, and it is
all one to have it read by one of his own Family, as by Christ's Minister and
Officer: I will only say this, That the sacred Place, and the Time set apart
for this thing, and the Presence of others, may all contribute to his greater
attendance to, and better observation of it. Mirum Judicium oritur ex aliorum
praesentia. And when I see many others harkening to the Word read, it will
excite my Attention, and thereby help my Understanding.

I need not put you in mind, that care has been taken in selecting those
Portions of Scripture to be publicly read, which are most easy to be
understood, and most useful and necessary to be remembered and practiced.

But if a Man should persuade himself, that no Benefit will come to him by
conforming to the Orders of the Church, in coming to the public Assembly to
hear the Word of God read; yet he ought to do this, for the sake of that
Society of which he is a Member, and for the sakes of the Ignorant, who by
their attendance on the public reading of the Word, will proclaim to the World
that they are the only ignorant Persons, if none else will come to hear it: And
the Shame of this may make them absent themselves too, because they would not
be looked upon as so altogether, and only without understanding. Therefore to
encourage and keep them in countenance, even such as can themselves read,
should come to Church to hear the Scriptures read, tho there are other Reasons
to move them to this.

But besides the bare reading, there is also the Expounding of the Word of God
in the Public Congregations, and it is applied to particular Cases: For, this
is the business both of all Catechizing and Preaching. Where any Text is not at
all, or so well understood, there the Minister does expound it by some plainer
Text, or by an Interpretation of the Original; and he always shows its
agreement with the common Notions and Sense of Mankind.

And if any be so careless or dull, as not to deduce the particular
Consequences they might, nor make use of it to direct their own Practices, they
are helped by the Sermon in those matters.

And thus by hearing the Divine Commands, and Promises, and Threatenings read,
and explained, and applied, Men's Understandings are increased, their Memories
refreshed, their Affections quickened, and consequently their Practice is
bettered. For the Word of God, where it is understood and believed, where it is
entertained and kept, it will have this certain Effect, to help Men to live
holy and virtuous Lives; for it is a Spirit of Holiness and Purity that breaths
in those Divine Writings, and they have this only design to make Men good.

3. The last of the Benefits I mentioned, which the Christian has in the
public Assemblies, is the Sacraments.

I have already said something concerning Baptism, which is the initial Rite
that is used at our first Admission, which solemnizes, and as it were confirms
and ratifies the Engagement, which the Proselite to Christianity then takes
upon him.

I might here add, that it cannot seem improbable to expect the secret and
unseen, tho not unfelt Blessing of God to be conveyed upon the Observance of
his own Institution, and the Prayers which are made by the Church on the behalf
of the Party baptized.

The other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, if we consider by whom, and at what
time it was instituted, we shall look on it as a mighty Privilege to be
admitted to it: For our Savior ordained it, and he did this at the time of his
Death, when he was about to give the greatest Instance of his Love to us, that
ever the World had.

If we think how frequently it was used by the Primitive Christians, and what
an Esteem they had of it, we shall by this also be persuaded, that it is a very
valuable thing. But on the other hand, if we make an Estimate of it according
to the Judgment of our own Times, we must then look on it, as having either
much Evil, or very little Good in it, for else sure Men could not possibly
neglect it as they do.

But let us not judge of it by any extrinsecal Considerations whatsoever. Let
us consider the Nature of the Thing it self, and the excellent Uses it serves,
and then we shall better discern the Advantages it brings.

The thing we are to do, is to commemorate the great Performances of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which were consummated in that painful and ignominious Death he
underwent for our sakes: This we are commanded to do in eating Bread, and
drinking Wine.

Now whilst we do an Action which so well becomes us, and that is so honorable
to our dearest Lord, we receive unto our selves unconceivable Benefits: For,
when we look on Christ crucified for our Sins, as the Sacrifice offered for us,
this shows us the Heinousness of Sin, and makes us more sensible of, and
sorrowful for the Sins we have committed; as also more to detest and resolve
against all Sin for time to come.

This also convinces us of God's Right to challenge our Obedience, and to
punish us for our Default. And he does by this Instance ((...)) show us what we
are to expect, if we continue in a sinful Practice.

Again; When we look on the Sacrifice, as accepted and esteemed by God, this
will increase our value of Obedience to the Divine Law, and we shall set an
higher Price on Holiness; for it was this which made our Savior's Oblation so
acceptable unto God.

This will also encourage our Faith and Hope in God, when we consider that a
Sacrifice has been offered, and is accepted on our behalf.

When we take a view of our dying Savior, as our Example and Pattern, we then
learn the most perfect Submission of our Wills, the most entire Resignation of
our Selves to the Will of God, the most unconquerable Patience, the greatest
Resolution, and yet the most of Mildness, and above all, the most universal and
intense Love that can be expressed; Love to Enemies, to malicious and wicked
Persecutors, to be desiring heartily, and earnestly endeavoring their Welfare,
whilst they are eagerly seeking our Ruin.

And when we have had Christ set before us, as dying for our Brethren, this
will engage us also to do or suffer any thing for them. We cannot but draw this
easy Conclusion, If he so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

I mention only some, and those but a few, of the Advantages which we may and
do receive by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, for the increase of our
Holiness, and our Peace. And this may suffice at present to the Sixth
Particular; I now proceed to the Seventh and last.

Seventhly; The wise and good Counsels, together with the holy and virtuous
Examples of the Members of this Society, both those that are on Earth, and
those that are in Heaven.

There is no Member of the Christian Church, who wants Counsel, or deserves
Reproof, or to whom Exhortation is necessary, but lives among those who both
can and will (as Occasion serves) advise, and rebuke, and persuade him: for the
Christian is fully instructed in what is good and fit; and it is his duty not
to suffer Sin upon his Brother, but we are to exhort one another daily to the
practice of Holiness.

And if we look into the Remains of the good Men, who in former Ages were
Members of the Church on Earth, we shall find a rich Treasure of most wise and
excellent Counsels, that will direct our Behavior in every Condition we can
fall into. These are extant in the Books of the Scripture, and in other
Writings of a Christian Spirit and Temper.

And as for the Examples, how many are those that have gone before us in the
ways of Holiness and Virtue, whose Practice is our sure Guide in the ways that
lead to Happiness. I need not mention those known and celebrated Names of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of Job, and David, and the Prophets of the Lord, who
were all Members of the same Church, of which the Eternal Word, the only
Begotten of the Father, is the Head.

Besides these ancient Worthies, we have the Lives of those good Men, who were
with, and since our Savior, who have set us the fairest Copies of Meekness and
Humility, of an undaunted Courage, a firm Patience, an Obedience to Superiors,
a Justice and Honesty in all Dealings, an universal Charity and Good Will, an
exact Temperance, a true and an excellent Religion: In short, they have gone
before us in all the ways of Holiness and Goodness.

But over and above, and which is more than all these, we have upon sure Record
the most admirable Pattern of Goodness that ever the World saw, in the most
excellent Life of our most blessed Lord. There is Holiness in perfection, and
Virtue in its most exalted state; there we see the utmost possibilities of
Goodness, to which Human Nature can be raised on this Earth.

This and the rest of those great Examples, serve to instruct our Ignorance, to
quicken our Dullness, and to encourage our Faintings and Despondencies.

Besides these, we have Examples of Men now alive, which teach us Religion and
Virtue, and engage us to practice it. As bad as the World is, there are those
who shine as Lights in the midst of the darkness of this Earth. There are many
whom the Grace of God has taught to live soberly, and righteously, and godly;
who keep their Appetites and Passions under due restraint, and good government,
so that they are harmless in their Conversation; and not only so, but they live
to the good purposes of promoting their own and other Men's good Estate and
Welfare.

I have now briefly touched upon the Privileges Men do or may receive by being
Members of the Christian Church: but I have not in my Discourse observed the
Method which I intended, because I would be shorter; I shall therefore only
mention how it is with them in respect of God, and of the Devil.

And briefly, the Case is thus in respect of God, That it is a matter of far
less difficulty for us, who have the Gospel, and live tho but in the outward
Communion with the Church, to repent of our Sins, and become good Men, and to
live holy Lives, than it was or is to any others. This is now made so
practicable, so feasible a matter, that no Man falls short of it, who is not
foolishly obstinate, unaccountably sottish, and unnaturally neglectful of
himself, and careless of his own Happiness: so that whoever fails, it must be
resolved into his own gross stupidity, sottishness, and self-neglect; for he is
now put into a condition and capacity of receiving the greatest Mercies from
the Divine Bounty, and is in the way in which God usually does communicate them.

But as many as are recovered out of a state of Sin, to a Life of Virtue, their
past Sins are all pardoned, their frequent Infirmities and Shortnesses are also
remitted, so as they shall not rise up in Judgment to condemn them: and they
have eternal Life ascertained to them, by the immutable Promise of that God who
cannot lie. They are under his Protection and special Providence, who orders
all things that befall them, so as that they turn to their Advantage, and are
made serviceable to their Virtue, and will increase their Happiness.

Lastly; As to the Devil, the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that
works in the Children of Disobedience: They are redeemed from under his
Vassalage, he has now no more Power over them; he cannot domineer over their
Souls or Bodies, as he did before the coming of our Savior: His Oracles are
silenced; his Power lessened; the Light of the glorious Gospel has scattered
the Powers of Darkness, so that now they creep into the Corners of the Earth.

Now that Men's Souls are freed from the Ignorance, and those Errors under which
they were held, their Bodies are also free from the Hellish Cruelties of
Tyrannical Fiends: They are no longer under the Power of Satan, now that they
are become Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, who has conquered and triumphed
over the Head of the Apostate Spirits, and has the Keys of Hell and Death.

Thus I have briefly represented the great Benefits which accrue to Men by
being Members of the Church of Christ, whether we consider them as single
Persons, or as in Societies, with reference to God, or the Devil. For, whether
we consider the Greatness and Largeness, the vast Extent and long Continuance
of the Church, or the excellent Wisdom and Goodness of many of its Members;
whether we look on the Engagement laid upon them in their first Admission into
the Church, or the admirable Order and Government of it, or the incomparably
good Laws which are given to all its Members, or the proper and wholesome
Discipline which is used in it, or the Religious Exercises which are used in
the Public Assemblies, we must necessarily confess, that all these will have a
mighty Influence on Men, to make them good in themselves, and good in all their
Relations. And if they become good, they are then from under the Dominion of
the Devil, and within the Kingdom, and so under the Protection and Care of the
Sovereign Lord of Men and Angels: and they continuing to do well, shall be
Partakers of everlasting Life and Happiness.

This is the Condition, these are the Privileges of every true Christian, of
every Man, who is not grossly wanting to himself, and careless of his own
manifestly greatest and best Interests.

The Inferences I would make, are these two:

I. Let us then set an high value upon the Christian Religion in general; and
in particular, on our being Members of that Body of which Christ is the Head.
Since so many, and such inestimable Advantages accrue to us by being parts of
this Society; let us take the greatest care to preserve our selves in Union
with it: Let us not, as too many in our Days are, be indifferent whether we be
of this Body, or no: Let us not needlessly separate our selves from it. Do not
make slight Account of those Censures, which cut us off from the Church: for if
they be exercised, non errante Clave, that is, upon good ground, a just Cause,
and by a just Authority; God confirms in Heaven, what his Commissioners do upon
Earth: Whose Sins they remit or retain, are remitted or retained by him also.
And if there be a Male Administration, yet the excommunicated Person is
deprived of some Benefits which otherwise he might have.

Have a great regard for that Body, of which whosoever is a Member, has so
great Privileges. Be careful not to make any unnecessary and unnatural
Divisions and Schisms in it, or to do any thing that may tend to the
dissolution of that most excellent Scociety.

II. Let us behave our selves as becomes the Members of this excellent Society;
and let our Lives and Tempers, our Devotion toward God, our Justice and
Charity toward Men, our good Government of our selves according to the Rules
of Temperance and Moderation* let these make it manifest, what excellent
Advantages we have by being Members of the Christian Church.

We have Advantages above others; let us show this by living better Lives than
others: If we be not much better than other Men, we must needs be far worse,

Let us not be so foolish as to neglect the Advantages we have. Forsake not the
assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is, etc. Neglect not
the Sacraments, as too too many do.

I conclude all, by reminding you, in short, of the Advantages of which I have
spoken: And desire you,

1. To consider Men singly. And, 2. In Societies.
And under the First;

That their Knowledge and Wisdom, their Virtue and Goodness, their Quiet and
Peace, their Joy and Pleasure, their future and everlasting Happiness, are
furthered and secured by their being Members of this Society.

Under the second;

That this sacred Society is a great Security to, and Establishment of that
Order, which is necessary to all Civil Societies, and does greatly conduce to
that Peace and Prosperity, i. e. Wealth and Credit, which is their End. This
Society is so far from interfering with the Civil, that it is very beneficial
to them, for it preserves and confirms them.

All this Good is procured by Men's being incorporated into the Body of Christ;
as appears,

First; By the first Admission and Entrance into the Church, which is done by a
public Profession of the Religion of Christ, a being baptized into the Name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: All which must lay a great Engagement on us to
live holy and excellent Lives, that so we may live answerably to the Profession
we have made, and the Engagement we have taken upon us.

Secondly; This will also appear hugely beneficial to that excellent Order and
Government, which is settled and is to be observed in the Church; but especially
those incomparably good Laws, which are given to this Society, those especially
which are peculiar to it: Those of Love, and doing good to all; in especial
manner, of Love to one another, of forgiving even Enemies, of Meekness, etc.

And also that most humane and proper Discipline, which is prescribed to be
used toward Offenders: For, this is a Government, whose design is the Increase
of every Man's Virtue and Happiness.

And this Government is so excellently contrived, that the particular and
private Interests of any do never clash or interfere with the public Interest
of the Society in general.

And tho many Corruptions and Abuses have crept into the Government of the
Christian Church; yet even in a very Maladministration of it, there are still
great Helps to Virtue: And those very Formalities, and Shadows, and Names of
some Offices and Things, which remain, may serve to put us in mind what ought
to be, and what we should take care to do, or to avoid.

It is in this, as in other Governments, better to be under bad ones, than none
at all; and more eligible to bear the Corruptions of Men, who are at present in
place of Power, than to attempt a Change of the Constitution, or to go about to
alter the Government it self.

Thirdly; The Archives and Records of this Society; which are contained in the
Books of the Old and New Testament, (which indeed it is possible a Man may
have, that is not of this Society; but by his being of it, he is entitled to
this Privilege) he now has free access to them.

And how much these Divine Records tend to enlighten Men's Minds, and to purify
their Hearts, only they know, who have used them. There we have upon Record the
first Original of this excellent Society, the gradual Dispensations of God to
his Church of all Ages; the Examples and Lives of many of the Members of it,
but especially the Holy Jesus; the Acts of Government and Discipline, which
have been in the first Age after Christ.

Fourthly; The Public Assemblies for the Exercise of Religion, to which they
are admitted: Where,

1. They pray to God publicly for and with each other. 2. The Scriptures are
read. 3. They receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and Infants are
baptized.
Fifthly; The Conversation, the Counsels, and Exhortations, and Reproofs, and
Examples of their Fellow Members.

All these tend to make Men virtuous, and that brings with it present Peace,
and future Happiness; for God loves, and will reward Virtue, etc.

OF LOVING OUR ENEMIES.
MATTHEW. 5. 44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use
you, etc.
THese Words are enforced by a very great Authority, and it was necessary in
the Opinion of some, that they should be born up by the Credit of the
Lawgiver: that the repute of his Wisdom and Goodness might take off the
Scandal of Folly and Evil in the Command: For, with many this Text and diverse
others are contradictory to Reason, and opposite to the Nature of Man: than
which Opinion, I know nothing more prejudicial to Christian Religion.

For, if this be granted, it is then confessed, that our Religion is false and
evil; that whosoever believes it, believes in Opposition to his Mind; and he
that obeys it, does it to his own Hurt; that he ruins himself, and depraves
his Nature.

This Error tends to the utter Subversion of Christianity: For, it makes it
impossible to be either believed, or practiced: For no Man can give Credit to
that, which contradicts what he cannot doubt; and no Man can do that, which he
is assured tends to his Destruction, as all Actions do, which are repugnant to
his Nature.

No Man can believe what he cannot conceive, nor can he conceive a
Contradiction, not apprehend what is impossible; nor can he do that, which he
thinks so evil, as that is, which is intrinsecally repugnant to his Nature.

He that has entertained this Conceit, must also assert, that he who will
believe the Articles of our Faith, must lay aside his Reason; and he who will
obey the Precepts of Christ, must put off his Nature, and cease to be a Man, if
he will be a Christian.

But how unworthily does this reflect upon God, by making him thus at odds with
himself; that what he made at first, he after destroys; that his Works of
Creation and Redemption clash? It argues him to have forgot the Capacities of
his Creatures, when he makes a Revelation of that, which is unconceivable by
them; or has required them to do what is not possible they should do; and does
all this for their Advantage, which will infallibly ruin them.

Besides; What a disparagement is this to Religion? How justly is that
suspected for a Cheat, where to the belief of its Articles, and practice of its
Duties, Men must be Unreasonable and Unnatural? And how does this open a door
to Error and evil Practice, by deposing Reason, and casting off Nature? For, he
that does this in any Case, may for ought I know, do it in every one; and then
he must believe all that is told, and do all that is bid him; and then he will
believe Lies, and practice Wickedness.

In short; This Opinion takes away from Christians all means of distinguishing
Truth from Falsehood, it subverts the Foundations of all Discourse, it leaves no
differences of Good and Evil. All this is most true, if Man must believe what
is contrary to the undoubted Principles, and the truest Discourses of his
Reason, or do what is repugnant to his Nature.

He that is thus persuaded, has cast off his sure and faithful Guide, and now
must wander after Fancy, and be at the Mercy of every one, who will pretend
Inspiration.

This evil and false Opinion (...) by some Men's Mistake of (...) some few other
Texts; which yet to them that have well considered, appear both consonant to
Reason, and agreeable to Nature. The Design of this Discourse is to remove that
Prejudice, which many have entertained against this Precept of our Savior, and
to show that it is not unreasonable, as many, whose Mistake and Passion make
them unwilling to practice it, pretend it to be.

This will be very evident to them that consider; I. The true Sense and Import
of the Words. II. The Reasonableness of that Practice which they direct to, and
the Arguments which persuade to it. And, III. The Falseness of those Objections
that are against it.


I. The true meaning of the Words will be apparent, if we consider,

1. The common Acception of them.

2. How they were understood of old; for they are here brought in, in
opposition to what was then spoke, and so the Words must have the same Sense
they then had.

3. The Relation and Order they have to other Precepts; for without this
Comparative Knowledge of the Law it cannot be understood.

1. As to the common Acception of the Words, there can be no Controversy,
because the Philosophers (who have frequently taken to themselves a Liberty of
imposing their Sense upon Words, yet) in this agree with the Vulgar, both of
them understanding these two things by Love. 1. To wish and desire well to any.
2. To do well to them.

1. To think well of, and toward another, to wish and desire their Welfare,
that is the Soul; to do them that Good which is wished them, that is the Body
of Love: both are essential and necessary to the being of a real Love.

This Love will express it self variously, according to the different
Conditions of its Object, and the diverse Degrees of its own Power. If the thing
loved be very good, then Love puts on the Garment of Gladness, and is delighted
in it. If it be in very bad State, and destitute of Good, then Love turns into
Pity, and commiserates. If it be unable to help, it stays in Desires, and good
Wishes; but if it have any Power, it exerts it, and goes forth into Action.

All agree, that to love is (according to St. James) not only to speak good
Words, but to have good Thoughts and Desires; not only to wish well, but also
to do well, where we can. To speak well is but the Picture of Love; to think
well, is Love in the Womb; but to do well also, is Love brought forth, and
perfect, now it is finished.

Our Enemies are those that hate us, that is, who both think, and do us evil,
who both desire and do us Mischief: Neither of these alone are sufficient to
denominate Men our Enemies. All grant our Friends may do us ill Offices, and
they that heartily wish us well, may do that which they desire to do, who
intend to ruin us; and yet we call them not Enemies. Nor on the other part, can
we justly call any Man so, who has Power to hurt us, and does not: for we have
no other way to know his Thoughts but by his Works; and if they do not yet come
to these, it is an Argument they are not the settled Judgment of a Man's Mind;
that they are not consented to; and no Man is to be censured for that which is
a matter of Practice, and is not his practical Judgment.

No Man can be said to be, or to do any thing that merits Praise or Blame,
where he has not given his Consent, and where the Action is within his Power,
and follows not, there he does not consent.

2. These Words were so understood by them of old, as they generally are: This
appears sufficiently by both the Doctrines and Practices of those Jews who were
phariseiz'd, and wholly adhered to the Traditions of the Elders, and the
Opinions of their Doctors and Rabbis. Their Carriage was such, as showed they
thought themselves not only permitted, but commanded to desire and do Evil to
their Enemies; and all were such in their Esteem, who were not Jews or
Proselites: And therefore they denied them common Offices of Civility, would
not (Monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti) so much as direct a Stranger in
his way, if he were not of their Religion. And besides, called them by most
uncivil Names, as Dogs, etc. and would injure them by Fraud or Violence, and
did all that which I before said of Love, to those of their own Nation.

So then the Words of the Text being spoken in opposition to their Opinion of
old, must be understood in the same Sense they took them in; and then the plain
Sense of our Savior is; that we should design their Good and Welfare, who
desire and intend ill to us. That we should repay Hatred with Love, ill Offices
with good ones: and in sum, do well to them, that do evil to us; not requiting
Hatred with Hatred, one ill turn with another.

3. Let us consider the Words with Relation to other Precepts: This is
necessary to be considered for the understanding the Bounds and Limits of any
Precept, and consequently how far it is obligatory.

There are two Propositions, which in general may serve for Rules, in the
Interpretation of any Command, and they are not, that I know, denied by any.

First; That no Action that is impossible, is commanded, and none that is
necessary forbidden. If any Laws be made that keep not within these Bounds, it
argues Folly, and perhaps Cruelty in the Maker of them; and he to whom they are
made, cannot be under any Obligation.

Secondly; No Law that is particular, and of less moment, can null one that is
greater and universally obliging: Such are those, Love and do Good: Avoid Evil,
etc. And where two good things are in Competition, and one is apperently
better, choose the best; because that which is less good, habet Rationem mali:
(...): This is the untransgressible Law; it is contrary to Nature to do
otherwise, this is perpetually obliging: This is a Law which cannot be
abrogated, from which no other Law can derogate in the least. So that no
Precept whatsoever can oblige any Person not to do that which is better: Of two
good things, the greater; of two Evils, the lesser is always to be chosen: And
indeed Men naturally do choose that which they appreliend to be so.

These two Rules premised, it is manifest that our Savior, in this Precept of
loving our Enemies, does not command us;

1. To love any thing that is in it self Evil, nor to be pleased with our own
Harm considered in it self: This is impossible for Humane Nature to do. He does
not by this intend to make us affected to Evil, as we are to Good. This we
cannot be whilst we are Men; our Nature must be first destroyed. Every one
naturally and necessarily intends his own Preservation, and is averse from that
which tends to his Ruin. The desire of his own Preservation and Perfection is
a Principle so deeply engraven in Man's Nature, that it cannot be obliterated.
Nor,

2. Are we here commanded to do no Evil to those who are our Enemies. Men who
are competent Judges of Offenses, and who have Power and Right to punish
Offenders, are not hereby forbidden to inflict Penalties on them, where other
Methods will be probably ineffectual, to remove or prevent some greater Evils.
This makes doing ill to any, not only excusable, but necessary, where a greater
Evil cannot be removed without it. And,

3. If we may do any Evil to another, then we may also desire and will it. It
is unquestionable, a Man may will to do what he may do. And he may do Evil to
another Man, where,

1. It is the likeliest means to procure the Offender some greater Good, than
by this he is deprived of. Or,

2. Where it is but consistent with his Happiness; if it be in order to the
greater Good and Advantage of others, the Liberty and Security of other Men,
the Public Peace. This is the only Reason I can readily think of, why the Life
of a Robber should be taken away, that People may be secure and quiet in their
Possessions, and encouraged to Labor and Industry to get, by their being
protected by the Laws in keeping what they have; and also lest the Contagion
should spread, and the Malefactor himself proceed to more Offenses, and others
receive the Infection from him. All which is more valuable than such a Man's
Life.

These are the Principles of Justice; and our Savior came not to overturn any
of these Foundations.

This then seems to be the Sense of our Savior in this Precept. Not that we
should love any thing that is Evil to us, and tends to our Ruin as such: Nor,
that we should not endeavor and take the best and likeliest ways to free our
selves from a bad Estate: Nor that we should not do and desire some Evil to Men
who may be our Enemies, provided that it be in order to a greater Good, than it
is a Deprivation of to themselves or others, and never inconsistent with their
Happiness. But that we should desire and do as much as we can, all that Good to
them who design and do the worst Evils to us, which can be consistent with our
wisest Endeavors after their, our own and others greatest Good.

This seems to be all that is meant by this Precept. Only this Caution is
necessary; that Passion, and Interest, and Folly must not determine in the
case; but Wisdom and Righteousness must sit in Judgment, and decide what is,
and what is not consistent with their, or other Men's greater Good.

II. Now let us consider the Reasonableness of such a Practice considered in it
self; and the Arguments that are drawn from such a Consideration of it, as well
as the more external that persuade to it.

1. Consider Love in it self. It is the most pleasant as well as the most
beneficial and perfective Operation of Man.

There is none but will confess himself beholden to this Passion, for the
greatest Delights he has ever met with. It is that which makes us receive any
thing of Pleasure in our Enjoyments: Without it the best Condition would afford
us no Content, and with it we shall have Satisfaction in the worst. It is Love
more than any other thing, that differences Men's Delights, Estates, Enjoyments,
etc.

Our Delight consists not in having abundance of Riches, nor in being honored,
nor in knowing much; but in our Love and value for these things. He that has
much, and loves not his Wealth, has no more of pleasure from his Riches, than
he who is poor. Hence is it that the Necessitous has more of Delight in his
Condition, than the Wealthy-Man in his; because he more loves and values his
few Necessaries, than the other can his many Superfluiries.

But I need no further Evidence of the Pleasures of Love and Good Will, than an
Appeal to every Man's Sense and Observation of himself will give. The more he
has of this, the better it is with him. If therefore it be extended as far as
there is any thing that may be an Object of Love, how great must his Delight
be? The most that we know of Heaven, which is a State of the greatest Pleasure
and Delight that Humane Nature can have, is, that there is a constant and a
great Love; and Hell; which is the greatest Torment, is destitute of all
Good Will: Love and Kindness are banished hence, and Spite, and Hatred, and
Envy, take the place.

How beneficial this Temper is to Humane Nature, is very apparent. The Body it
self shares in the Advantages that come by it. In the Opinion of the French
Philosopher, as well as the Observation of many, it is literally Health to the
Navel, and Marrow to all the Bones. It gives Warmth and Motion to the Blood,
and new fresh Spirits to the whole Body: and on this account he thinks it more
advisable to live in a mistaken Love, than in Hatred that is true, and has a
Foundation.

But if this admit of Dispute, yet that is unquestionable, that it is far
better to love with Reason, than to hate without it; and that is all I plead
for.

But these are the least of the Advantages we have by Love: the greater are
those, which more immediately concern the Soul, and they are summed up in this,
the knocking off the Shackles and Fetters, which Hatred, and Sorrow and Fear
had bound up our Powers by; Love, that comes and mightily rescues us from that
Bondage and Thraldom: It sets us at liberty, unties the Tongue of the Dumb, and
unlooses our Hands that were bound. It brings us back from the Solitude,
whither Hatred or Fear had driven us, to a Converse amongst Men, and makes us
active, and disposes us to the Employment of all our Powers, which is necessary
to their Perfection, and has a great tendency to it. That is the first, from
the consideration of Love in General.

Secondly; Now consider it with its Object, Enemies.

1. They may do us much Good, and we are often the better for them.

(1.) That whereby they intend to ruin us, is often our Advancement; the Blow
by which they would kill, cures us; so that the Sword becomes a Lancet; and the
Enemy who designs to make Wounds, proves a Surgeon and heals them.

Indeed this being besides their Intention, we perhaps shall not think they
merit our Love, or Thanks the more; but however, they are Instruments of Good
to us; and we should love that which is any cause of Good to us. Joseph, on
this account, was not himself, nor would have his Brethren angry with
themselves, because tho they intended him Evil, yet God did him good by it, and
used them as Instruments thereof. We love things that cannot intend us any
Good, if yet we receive any from them, such are all without Reason. Thus the
Sword with which a Man has defended himself, is of great value with him; and
why should not we as well love them that do us Good against their Will, as
those that do it without any Will at all? But,

(2.) We owe much to their evil Designs and mischievous Devices against us.

This makes us cautious and circumspect, and this Caution makes us wise. He
considered this rightly, who when he would repay every one what he had received
from them, gave his Prudence to his Enemies. This Apprehension makes us more
exact in what we do, than otherwise we should be. We shall go upright, if we
know there be those that watch for our halting: We shall be more accurat in our
Actions, where we are to receive our Doom from Enemies, than where Friends are
to judge us. Friends are often so blinded with Passion, that they can see
nothing that is amiss; and Enemies are so envious, that they acknowledge nothing
Good, but what is eminently so. This is therefore a Spur to make us do our best.

Many Men, if they had had fewer Friends, and more Enemies, had been much
better than now they are: Therefore we must love them as we love Poisons, that
are mixed by the Physician so, as they are made sovereign Medicines, and cure
our Disease. This is the first.

2. Tho our Enemies do Evil to us, yet there is Good in them; and for the sake
of that we must love them. Will thou destroy the Righteous with the Wicked?
said Abraham to God, Far be it from thee. It is the same Injustice, for any to
hate and destroy the Good which is in any Man with the Evil, where a Separation
can be made. God sent his Angel to bring Lot out of Sodom; and in the Deluge,
Noah was warned and saved in the Ark We should follow this Example; prosecute
and destroy the Wickedness, the Evil of a Man; hate that with a perfect Hatred;
but spare the Man, be kind to our own Kindred, have regard to God's Creature
and Image, lov^ the Christian.

Physicians do never cut off any part of the Body which is not so corrupted,
that there is no hopes of a Cure, and where the rest of the Body is not in
danger by it, and the Part it self not vital, not necessary to Life.

And in the Body Politic, the Relatives of an Offender are not involved in his
Sufferings, where the Offense is not very great; nor there unless it can be
supposed they were Partners with him; or it be necessary for the public and
greater Good, both to demonstrate a great Severity against such Crimes, and
thereby to terrify Men, and also the more to engage all Relations to concern
themselves in one another well-doing.

Somewhat like this should our Carriage be in the Case before us. Is there any
hopes that the Evil may be removed from the Life and Mind of the Man, without
his Ruin? Try if it may. And it is hard to say that a Man is, or can be so
much our Enemy, that he will never be our Friend. We cannot affirm that the
Case is desperate, that he is unreconcileable. Surely no Man is so much a
Devil, as to be implacable, this can never be. Besides, there may sometimes be
a deal of Wisdom and Goodness, which must be loved, and the Man valued for it.

Lastly; We are never to do any Evil which will make it impossible for our
Enemies to be happy: this would be to cut off a vital Part. Such was his
hellish Malice, who persuaded his Enemy to blaspheme in hopes of Life, and then
presently stabbed him, and then triumphed in the greatness of the Mischief. I
never yet met with an Instance of one more a Devil. This Man had perfectly cast
off Humanity; and he has done so too in great measure, who does not so much
desire every other Man's Happiness, as that he can do nothing, that is not in
order to, at least very consistent with it.

As to the other Comparison, let us not do that which the Sovereign Lord of
Heaven and Earth so much disowns, punish the Fathers for the Transgression of
the Children. Let every one die for his own iniquity: Find out the Criminal,
let him suffer. Here Is a disorderly Passion founded on some easy and ordinary
Mistakes; remove these, but let the Man live: Let not him suffer, unless this
be the best Method for the removal of this, and prevention of a worse Evil that
may befall him.

What I have now said, signifies, that a special Care and due Regard should be
had to all that is good: and when our Anger and Displeasure would instigate us
to devise and do Mischief to our Enemy, then consider, he is a Man, that is,
one who is liable to Error, but yet capable of Information: One who is subject
to do Evil, but yet often is changed, and amends his Life: One of God's
Creatures, and one of the most excellent of them; and shall we destroy that
which we could not make, that which God himself made, with so much Wisdom, and
such greatness of Power? Can we have so little esteem of the Work of God? Can
we destroy what we do not understand?

Besides; Man is God's Image, and all the Lines can never be so much
obliterated, as that there should be no resemblance: And if there remain any
Lineaments of our Father's Face in a Picture, we shall surely keep it as a
sacred Relic.

Will not this move us? Yet our own Likeness may. Can we love our selves, and
not love our own Picture, that is so very like us? Or not love one, that is
Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone? So every Man is to another.

Or lastly; Have we any Love to our Savior? and shall not we love his
Disciple? Do we value our Religion, and have no more regard to the Professors
of it? Did Christ die for him, that he might live for ever? and will not you
suffer him to live here?

Briefly; there is often a great deal of Good in him that is our Enemy; and we
must love that, and him, for the sake of that Good. We do not well to cast away
the Corn with the Chaff; nor the Garment, because of one Spot; nor disfigure
the Face, because of a Mole; nor pull out the other Eye, because one is lost
already. And yet thus we do here, when we hate the Man, tho he be otherwise
very good, because he is our Enemy. But,

3. If there be very little that can be called good in him; if he be an
Infidel, and foolish, and evil; if he not only be no Christian, but has also
put off Humanity; if worse than a Beast, if almost as bad as we imagine the
Devil is: then the greater is his Misery; and since he is capable of Recovery,
the more compassionable is his Case.

The Man is miserable, and therefore to be pitied: It is unnatural Cruelty, it
is monstrous Inhumanity, to hate, to prosecute one in Misery. And this is the
State of that Man whom I have here described; nay, it is in part true of every
one that is my Enemy: For every Man is so far from Happiness, as he is from
Love, and Hatred is distant enough from that.

Besides; He who continues in Spite and Malice against me, is an Enemy to God;
and he that is so, is in the unhappiest Condition imaginable: Why should we add
to his Misery, which is already so great?

Thirdly; Consider your selves, they are your Enemies.

1. It is no way proper for your selves to sentence and punish in the case,
because you are so apt to mistake every where, and especially to be partial in
your own cause. We are neither wise nor just enough to be Judges in such a
matter. We may be so far deceived, as to think them our Enemies who are not;
and we oftener mistake thus than we think we do: In this case to hate, is very
evil in the opinion of all.

It is supposed in the Text, that Men are our Enemies, yet we must love them:
If they be not so, we are worse than Heathens; and if they be, yet,

The Cause being our own, we cannot be thought competent Judges for our selves,
against another Man. We are so apt to overvalue every petty Interest of our
own, as to think that all other Men's Concerns, how great and valuable soever,
must give place to ours. We generally only consider our own Affairs, and are
wholly regardless of other Men's.

This is one Reason why all Controversies betwixt Man and Man, are referred in
all Countries to a third Person, who is more indifferent and impartial, and so
will probably be more wise and just than a Party would be. Here also it cannot
be proper for you, because it belongs to God himself. Vengeance is mine, and I
will repay it, says the Lord, He only can understand the Crime, so as to
proportion a Punishment to it.

Considering how apt we are to be overpassionate in our own Concerns, and to be
too much exasperated, where we are opposed in any little trifling Interest, we
should rather refer our selves to one that is perfectly wise and just, than
pass Sentence our selves against a Man, as we do if we hate him.

It becomes the Modesty of one that knows himself apt to mistake, to refer
himself to the Judgment of another; and if we will be decided by him who is
most fit to determine, that is, by God himself, then the Controversy is ended,
and we must not hate, but love our Enemies.

2. He is our Enemy, but a Friend perhaps to many others as good and better
than we: and cannot we be satisfied with, and love that which is prejudicial to
our particular Interest, if others receive Advantage by it? If the Rain that
overflows me, make my Neighbor's Field fruitful, I must not dislike it: And if
the Sun warms thousands by the Heat, which scorches me; or the Season by which
I suffer, favor many others; I am not to be displeased.

And if he that is mine Enemy, and opposes my Interest, be a Friend to many, I
will love him, in as much as I am taught to regard other Men's Interests, and
not only to mind mine own Things. He that only considers himself, and his own
particular Advantage is his Center, may hate every thing that opposes him in
it; but he that takes other Men's Concernments into his thoughts, and desires
their Welfare as his own, as everyone does, that is true either to Christianity
or Nature, will not be so much disaffected to that which is against himself, if
it be for others; but will love that which does them good, tho it prejudice
himself.

3dly; Your Enemies; Who have therefore known what it is to have Enemies, and
have felt the evil Effects of Hatred and Uncharitableness: It is reasonable to
expect that such should not do that, which they know to be so great an Evil.

If it be no Evil to have Enemies, why do you complain? And if it be, why will
you do thus? You see the Evil of it in others, why not in your selves? Will you
condemn that in them, which you allow and practice?

Both Religion and Nature teach us to be affected toward other Men, as we are
to our selves; to love our Neighbors as our selves; and to do to them, as we
would have them do to us.

The Providence of God has given us such Natures, and put us in such
Circumstances in the World, that we have the greatest Engagements laid upon us
to mutual Kindness and Good Will. He had made us all of one Stock; we are also
like one another; we stand in need of each others Help and Service: We make
voluntary Agreements, and enter into Covenants and Contracts, by the
Institution of God, as well as by the Constitutions and Appointments of Men, to
love and serve one another. Love is the Heart of Civil Society.

And besides all this Provision, which Divine Wisdom has made for our Exercise
of Love; he has by the Gospel taught it us, and obliged us to it in a most
extraordinary manner: For, Love your Enemies; that is,

4thly; Yours, who were loved when you were Enemies, and had been miserable if
you had not. Romans 5. 10. When we were yet Enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the Death of his Son.

Here are three Particulars very considerable:

(1.) What kind of Enemies we were. (2.) Who it was to whom we were Enemies,
and who loved us. (3.) With what kind of Love.
(1.) We were the most causeless and unreasonable, the most disingenuous and
unworthy, the most weak and inconsiderable Enemies that could be. What Reason,
or shadow of Reason will any Man bring for his Hatred against God? Why should
Man be angry with God? Or why should he hate him, who is altogether Good, and
can do no Evil? What could make him at odds with his Maker? or engage him in a
quarrel with his Preserver? This is wholly unaccountable. How base and
ungrateful is Man, to oppose the Interest of God, who has done him so much
Good? Does he thus requite his Love, his great Kindness?

Lastly; How little can he do against God? He is not, nor cannot be hurt by
Men's Ingratitude and Rebellion: No; what we intended against Heaven, falls upon
our own Heads. Such a kind of Enemies we were; and yet,

(2.) Our God and Savior loved us. God who is infinitely wise, who depended
not on us, who is our Example and Pattern, and to be like him is our greatest
Perfection.

And lest any should say, Because he depended not on us, and was so much above
us, therefore he loved us: God in our Nature, the Man Jesus Christ, loved us;
he who was like as we are in all things, except Sin. He that was so injured as
never Man was, who received the greatest Indignities and Contun^elies, and
tasted the bitterest Fruits of Malice; yet he loved, and prayed for, and did
good to his worst and cruellest Enemies.

(3.) God and Christ loved their Enemies with the greatest and reallest Love.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. And our
Savior, laid down his Life; and, greater Love than this has none.

Now then we, who have seen such Examples of Love, as are those of the
everblessed God and our Savior, and who have received so much of Good by this
Love to us, when we were Enemies; how can we not love our Enemies, who are in
no degree so unreasonable, or disingenuous, or inconsiderable as we were to God?

5thly; Tours, who are Christians, and therefore cannot be hurt by any Man, so
as to be made miserable. All that any Man can do against a Disciple of Christ,
is but little, so little, that it is not worth his earnest Contention. Our
Savior bids us not fear them that can kill the Body, and after that have no
more that they can do. And our Imagination representing Evils much greater than
we find them, if there be no reason to fear our Enemies, there can be none to
hate them.

There is nothing more conducing, nor indeed essential to our Happiness, than
Love. And therefore the Religion of Christ, which manifestly designs our
greatest Happiness, has by all means secured the Practice of Love; it has
removed all Obstacles out of the way, and enlarged its Bounds; discovering new
Objects, that were not before thought of; extending it to Just and Unjust,
Strangers and Acquaintance, Friends and Enemies.

6thly; This is the wisest Method we can take to be freed from the Evil we
complain of. We shall hereby most probably,

1. Put an end to this Evil. 2. Prevent new ones to our selves and others. And
if this be true, then there can be no Plea for Hatred.
This is the meaning of Hatred, to deliver our selves from some Evil, to
destroy that. Now let us compare and see, whether Love be not a better and
wiser Method to this, than Hatred.

1. It is more innocent, does less harm to the Party himself or others, and
destroys less Good.

2. It does more ordinarily prevail upon Men to lay aside all malicious
thoughts. And there are many Causes in Nature, which make it necessary so to do:

(1.) We are naturally prone to imitate; and here is a contrary Example set
before us, a Pattern of Love.

(2.) There is no Reason for any to hate one that loves him, because we only
hate that which is evil to us; but if any Person love us, we cannot think he
does us evil, for he designs and will do us good: So that he who hates such an
one, hates his own Good.

(3.) Ingenuity.

3. Returning Love for Hatred quenches the Violence of it. The common opinion
is, let the Sun shine upon the Kitchin-Fire, it will put it out. Love takes
away the Fuel from those consuming Fires: it destroys both the Parents and the
Nurse of Enmity, which are Hatred and Evil: These propagate and preserve, but
Love and Goodness destroy and extirpate it. Overcome Evil with Good, says the
Apostle: that indeed is the likeliest way to overcome it.

Love by yielding overcome that, which by resistance increases its strength; as
Wooll-packs damp the force of that Cannon-Bullet, which will make Breaches upon
a Stone-Wall. Farther, let us consider,

1. Either we deserved to be opposed in this Interest, or we did not: If we
did, why do we complain? If not, our Reward will be greater. Let us patiently
bear Persecution, and the Revilings of Men: and great will be our Recompense
that God will give us.

2. Our Enemy either does well or ill in being so: if well, love; if ill, pity
him. His Sin is worse to him, than our Suffering can be to us. If he do ill, do
not follow his Example; if well, do not hate him.

3. This Practice will bring Religion into Repute, we shall adorn our
Profission, and show that Christianity can do something singular, somewhat
above other Religions; that they who have the Light of the Gospel, exceed
Heathens and Infidels in their Lives.

4. It is necessary to Salvation. Our Sins will not be pardoned to us, unless
we pardon others. If ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your
Heavenly Father forgive yours. Whatsoever ye would that others should do to
you, the same do ye to them.

5. We condemn our selves if we do not. Our Prayers and our Lives clash: We
daily pray for Forgiveness from God, as we forgive others; and yet we do it not.

6. This is a firm Foundation of Peace. If this Principle obtained, there would
be no Quarrels; for these cannot arise, except both Parties be agreed to be
Enemies.

If all these Arguments be well considered, it will appear how little reason
the Enemies of our Religion have to take any Advantage from this, as they
account, unnatural Precept of our Savior, to disparage his whole Gospel. I
hope my Discourse has shown both how reasonable and how natural it is; and that
it has taken away all the Pretenses, which weak and inconsiderate, or
ill-natured Men have for their neglect of it. So that I have prevented my self
of what I propounded to do next, viz.

III. To show the Falseness of those Objections which are offered against it.
The most considerable, I think, are these:

Object. 1. It is unnatural to love one that does and intends us Mischief.

Object. 2. It is necessary to hate for our own Defense and Preservation.

Object. 3. Example does incline us to it.

Object. 4. If we hate our Enemies, they will expect and be afraid of this, and
so will be deterred from being our Enemies.

In Answer to the First Objection;

1. I have shown in my Explication, that we are not required to love any thing
that is in it self evil.

2. I have in my following Discourse shown, that this Evil may be a Cause of
much Good unto us here, but especially hereafter: Or if of no Good to us, yet
there is so much Good to others, as may make our Love prevail above Hatred.

For the 2d Objection, I have made out, that Hatred is not the likeliest:
Method to be rid of this Evil, or to prevent it for the future.

For the 3d Objection; I have showed that we must not follow Example to do
Evil. It may become Apes and Children to be wholly determined by Example, and
to imitate every thing they see; but it is very unworthy of them who have the
use of their Reason.

As for the fourth Objection, I answer;

1. This is no Method to remove or lessen, but to continue and increase their
Hatred. It is commonly said, Men hate what they fear. These two differ very
little: We hate all Evil, and fear that which is absent; but Love, on the other
hand, removes this Evil from the Mind; and therefore,

2. Tends to reform and mend the Offender himself: It is a means to free him
from his Malice, which is not extinguished, but rather inflamed by that which
increases his Fear: For, notwithstanding that his Intention and Mind is as
evil as before, Fear not at all abating his desire of doing harm, but only
cutting short his Opportunity. And therefore,

3. It will (if it increase his Hatred, and lessen his Opportunity) make him
watch every little occasion of doing the Mischief he designs. And it is hard
for us to keep such a constant and strict Watch, as to give no Advantage to one
who seeks it.

If all these Reasons which I have proposed, prevail not with us to put in
practice this Precept of Loving our Enemies; yet let the Authority of our Lord
and Savior persuade us. I say unto you: I who practiced thus my self; I, whose
you are, who have Right to you and all Men; I, who know what is good for you,
better than you do your selves; I say unto you, Love your Enemies.

All the Inference I shall make is, That then we must love those who are not
our Enemies, and still much more our Friends, and those that love us. If we
must love those that intend and practice Evil against us, much more those that
desire and do us Good. If he that loves not his Enemy, be short of a Christian;
he who loves not his Friend, is worse than an Infidel: and if he be so, then
the Name of Christ, will not save him. He that is a Pagan, tho he seem a
Christian, shall fall under the Condemnation of Unbelievers.

I conclude all, with reminding you of my Intention in this Discourse, which
was to serve the Designs of Love, by removing one of the greatest Obstacles of
it out of the way. Let us all therefore be persuaded to love universally; to be
pleased with Good wherever we see it, even in our Enemies; to procure it
wherever it is wanting, and there is any capacity of it. Let us be so wise,
as to serve our selves and Religion of all the Conditions of Life which we are
in, by making them serviceable to Love and Good Will, which assuredly is the
best Life we can live; that which will make us most acceptable to God, most
easy and delightful to our selves, and most useful and pleasant to others; it
is the best that Earth or Heaven is capable of.

God of his infinite Mercy grant unto us the true Spirit of Christ, that Spirit
whose Fruits are Love, and Joy, and Peace, Meekness, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Patience Goodness, Faith, and Temperance; that no Law may be
against us; that we may begin to live that Life here, which we hope to live
hereafter, and which glorified Saints and Angels now live in the highest
Heavens, you, the Life which God himself lives, who is Love it self, to whom he
Honor, and Glory, and Praise. for ever and ever.

Amen.
OF Calling no Man MASTER.
MATTHEW. 23. 8, 9, 10. But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all ye are Brethren. And call no Man your Father upon Earth; for
one is your Father which is in Heaven: Neither be ye called Masters; for one is
your Master, even Christ.
IT appears from his Discourse in this Chapter, that our Blessed Savior had
conceived a great and just Indignation against the Scribes and Pharisees. It
was surely a great Anger, that moyed the meekest Man upon Earth so freely and
sharply to rebuke them. The Lamb of God here became a Lion: and he who was
ordinarily a Man of Consolations, is now turned into a Son of Thunder,
denouncing Woes against them; which we cannot construe as the Issue of a hot
and hasty Temper; for our Savior's whole Carriage, both to his own Disciples
(who were such as would have sufficiently exercised a great Patience) as well
as to his deadly Enemies, argues his admirable Mildness; and that he it was in
whom that Prophecy was fulfilled, that he should not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his Voice to be heard in the Streets. A bruised Reed he should not break,
etc.

We may therefore conclude that there must be some just, and reasonable, and
great Cause of this great Indignation: and this we find was an Accumulation of
great Wickedness in these Men, which received Aggravations,

1. From their Pretenses to greater Sanctity than others.

2. From their having greater Opportunities of being better than others.

3. Because they being many of them in in public place, their Practice must
have a bad Influence on their Followers. For they who pretend Holiness, and are
wicked; they who are wicked, tho they have great helps to be good; and by being
wicked cause others to be so too, their Sin is exceeding sinful.

The Particulars for which our Savior taxes them, were principally these.

1. Their great Pride. They loved the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief
Seats in the Synagogues, and Greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men,
Rabbi, Rabbi, etc. And under that Title affected a greater Authority, then is
competible to Men.

2. Their wretched Covetousness, which showed it self in the Instances of
devouring Widows Houses, of esteeming the Gifts and the Gold above the Altar
and the Temple.

3. Their abominable Hypocrisy, which appeared in their teaching others to do
what themselves would not do; in serving a carnal Interest by a Religious
Carriage, making long Prayers in pretense, and wearing broader Phylacteries,
that so under these Vizards they might pass more unsuspected, and have a better
Opportunity to seize on their prey. This further appeared in their partial
Obedience, choosing to obey those Commands that were least considerable, but yet
make the greatest appearance of an extraordinary Holiness, whilst they omitted
the weightier and more necessary, but which have less of Pomp and Ostentation.
They were much in external Washings and Purifications, neglecting to wash their
Hearts from Wickedness: They (...) Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, in which they
would seem to supererrogate, their Goodness transcending the too narrow Bounds
of the Law, whilst they omitted Faith and Judgment and Meroy. They would build
the Sepulchers of the Prophets whom their Fathers had slain, whilst themselves
persecuted, and at last murdered the greatest Prophet that ever the World had.
Who could have believed, that they who pretended to such as honorable Esteem
of the Dead, should have so little Affection for the Living?

The fairest account of this Carriage is this; Nos mericles ca qua per didimus
bona magni facimus, qua habimus nihili: But perhaps the truest is, mortui non
^^rdent. The Prophets that were dead could not be Witnesses of their
Wickedness, nor rebuke them otherwise than by their Writings, which themselves
having both the keeping and the interpreting of, would be sure to make them
speak nothing to their Disparagement.

But tho they could either conceal, or put a false gloss on the Writings of
dead Men; yet they could not either silence our Savior, or by any Arts of
interpreting clude the sense of his Words: No, he would speak and tell them
their Faults truly and plainly.

These and such like were those great Crimes in these Enemies of our Religion,
which our Blessed Savior so severely taxed, and threatened. Whereupon it might
have been supposed that his Disciples had been out of danger of these Evils,
that they would not have come near the place where their Pilot had set a
Sea-mark. But, (not to go further back) whose takes a view of the Christian
Church (at least a great part of it in these Western Parts) as Erasmus has
represented it, he will say, that Pharisaism then lived, and r^^gned as much as
ever.

Our Savior had not, it (...) by all those terrible Denunciations afrighted
this unchristian Temper out of the World; but it appeared rather to have gotten
ground, and to have prevailed against the true Christian Spirit.

Now, as Erasmus complains, the Disciples of Christ are more truly Pharisees,
than the Pharisees themselves, and Christians are become more ceremonious than
Jews. How every where does so far this in the Romish Church, even in those that
should have been Examples of good Works? And what Reformation has since been
made, let every Man judge, who does not only judge of Things by Names, and of Men
by Professions.

There has indeed been a very great and good Change made, for which thousands
of Souls must bless God: but that much of this Leaven of the Pharisees still
remains, is too notorious; that this Proteus, who can change himself into any
Shape or Color, who is of all Sects and Professions, who can be Pagan, or Jew,
or Mohammedan, or Christian, Papist or Protestant, a Member of the Church of
Rome or Geneva, Scotland or England, a Teacher or a Learner: That he is under
these several Forms; that this Pharisee is to be found in the Christian Church
as well as the Jewish Synagogues, that he is both of (...) and Bellarmine's
Persuasion, a Follower of Calvin and of Arminius. In brief, I know no Way, no
Sect, but this Serpent insinuates it self amongst them.

That I be not mistaken, I understand by all this, what our Savior plainly
taxes, viz. a Spirit of Pride that affects, and arrogates undeserved Titles,
and a Power which no Man can reasonably challenge; of Covetousness, or an
Humor of monopolizing all the World; a neglect of the greatest Commands, with
endeavors to make amends by a Zeal in the lesser matters. An exact Observance
of Externals, with a Supine Omission of the Intrinsicks and Essentials of
Religion; such are Truth, and Justice, Love to God and Men. This is what I
understand by a Pharisee.

Whilst I am on this Argument I must insert this necessary Caution, that all I
aim at, is to tax the Vices of some Men in our Church, not to disparage all.

Let none therefore take occasion from what I say, to wrest my Words, and think
me an Enemy to the Church, who if I had been so, I should then have been
silent, or flattered and said, all is well. Let none be so unreasonably
suspicious of my honest Intentions, as to think me to be undermining, whilst I
am really using the best Method I know to build and settle. That I take to be a
free and plain censuring, a public Notice-taking of those Sins that are done
openly in the Face of the Sun: such we are guilty of, and these are the
Disturbers of our Peace, these shake our Foundations: These are they that cause
Earthquakes, and raise those Tempests that threaten our Subversion.

Whilst we pretend to instruct others who are grossly ignorant our selves, to
exhort them to a diligent Observance of those Commands which we neglect, and so
pull down what we would seem to build: Whilst we are frequently guilty of
profane Swearing, Intemperance, and other Immoralities, we open other Men's
Mouths, but stop our own: for we cannot condemn that in them, which we allow in
our selves; nor can they approve that in us, which we have taught to condemn in
them.

Whilst we live in the neglect of God, are really without any Sense of, or Love
to him in our Minds, have not Faith and Hope in him: Whilst we are void of true
Love to Men, are so far from Charity, from Bounty and Kindness, that we are not
Just: Whilst we omit Judgment, Mercy and Faith, tho we be very punctual in all
lesser Observances, both of God's and the Churches Commands; we are no better
than they who tithed Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, and made long Prayers.

And if we be such, our Savior threatens us, and Men not only threaten us, but
our way too; by such Practices a good way is evil spoken of.

Assuredly those are the things that have given Men that Advantage against us,
which else they could never have had; for, Who shall harm us if we do well? No
certainly, if we lived in the Love of God and of all Men, in Humility and
meekness, in Temperance, in Justice, and Truth, in Mercy and Goodness, tho our
Church-Constitutions were worse than (in the Sense of those that think them
bad) they are, yet they would be accounted very tolerable. And whilst Men see
them so well agreeing, so very consistent with a good Life, surely they would
not so easily separate from us.

But when it is too too evident that Men do not grow better but worse,
notwithstanding their Communion with us; others will be afraid of entering into
that Communion. Pagans would be prone to think, that the Cup of the Lord is
indeed a Cup of Devils; the Circean Cup, which turns Men into Swine. And such
as find fault with the Constitutions of our Church, will the same way conclude,
that it is our Cross, or Surplice, or Kneeling, or Forms of Prayer, that makes
us so bad. Which Opinion cannot be confuted by any Argument so well, as by a
good Life, this will do it effectually: When Men shall gather these good Fruits
in abundance, they will think the Root and Tree good that bears them; when they
see us that profess our selves Sons of the Church of England, Virtuous and
truly Christian, they will think the better of our Mother for our sakes.

We all know it was (principally) Sincere Piety, and an excellent Virtue, which
shone forth in the Lives of its first Professors, that so much commanded
Christianity, and made it so successful in the World: and it must be the same
good Life, that must gain Proselites to our Church. If we, the Members of it,
live badly, if Men shall be made worse by their Society with us, they will not
fear, but desire Excommunication; they will join themselves to Rome or Gen^v^,
and if they find no better Christians there neither, will betake themselves to
a Wilderness, where amongst all the Beasts of the Forest, they will fear none
so much, for they find none so bad, as this Wolf in a Lambs Skin.

To conclude this Digression (which nothing but Love and Faithfulness have put
the upon); as we desire our Religion should thrive, the Name of our Savior be
glorious, Peace continue, our own Church be unshaken from its Foundations; as
we would be in Favor with God and Men, let us lay aside Pride, Covetousness,
Hypocrisy: Let us do the greater matters, and not leave the (...) undone? Then
will Gainsayers be convinced that our Ceremonies are innocent, when our selves
are so.

Virtue and Vice will make these (...) as well as others, good or bad. To the
pure and good, all things of this trature are so too; but to the ungodly and
wicked; as their Mind and Consciencer, so all things else are difiled: What
ever he meddles with, he pollutes.

It is Virtue that puts an Esteem upon Men, it makes their Countenances lovely,
their Words to be remembered; it casts a Perfume on all that Men do or say,
gives every Word and Action a rich Scent: This will make our so much (...)
Habits and Gestures, that they shall not be contemned and derided, but
reverenced and honored. This is the best way, the only Method I know to beget
in Men a good Esteem of our selves, and of our Way. Whosoever neglects this,
whilst he pretends to be a Friend to the Church, he is, an Enemy to Christ. And
how many such there are, who falsely arrogate to themselves that honorable
Name, of Sons of the Church of England, but are indeed Sons of Belial, who
think to have their Vices as well as themselves adopted; who look upon
Conformity to the Commands of the Church, as making amends for their
Disobedience to Christ's; who put on our form as a Cloak of Maliciousness.

Alas! How many such base Sons as these is our Mother discredited with? On this
account is She suspected by many not to be the Spouse of Christ. They consider
not, that She indeed owns none for her Children, whom she cannot in Charity
think to be the Children of God; nor any to be Members of her, who are not of
Christ.

If any, for whom neither God, nor the Church intends the Blessing, shall get
the Genuine Childrens Garments, and lie, feigning themselves to be her
Offspring, when they are not, and so get a share in the Inheritance by abusing
her Charity; Shall she therefore be blamed? Why alas! like good old Isaac, she
is imposed upon; her own great Sincerity makes her think her Children have no
more Guilt than her self, and her mighty Charity covers their Sins from her.

Thus it may be for a time, but I hope ere long the Fathers in our Church will
find out those amongst us, who walk so as that they are Enemies, etc. And when
they have found them, will use that Severity which is meet for so gross
Misdemeanors; as some of them have already in their Visitations declared they
will. And may they prosper, who after the Example of our Blessed Savior, whip
out of the Temple all those Money Changers, those Religious Merchants, whose
Devotion is a Trade, their Church a Marketplace; those who buy and sell, who
have turned the House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves, have made the Habitation
of Holiness a place of Uncleanness. May they succeed in their opposition to all
Vice, and prevail against it; and may they serve in the Advancement of the
Kingdom, and Name of our Blessed Lord and Savior.

I have now done with this Digression, for which I have only this to plead,
that it came from a great Affection to, and a sincere Aim at our Churches Good.

To return then to Words of the Text, which intimate to us one fundamental
Error of the Pharisees, on which much of their false Opinions, as well as bad
Practice was built: It was this, They ascribed to Men more than their due, and
to God Iess; they took too much from him, and gave too much to them; made God
no God, by making Men Gods: this I think to be implied in the Text.

From hence it was, that they were so strict and zealous in observing the
Traditions of Men, whilst they were careless of the Commands of God. They had
expressly owned their Rabbis as Fathers and Masters, without any respect to a
Superior, and therefore concluded themselves under necessary Obedience to
their Commands, and a Faith in their Opinions.

They had not so explicitly resigned up their Understanding and Will to God,
whence he was not believed, or obeyed as they were; and therefore they were
zealous to tithe Mint, Anise, and Cummin; but very indifferent to keep Faith,
and Judgment, and Mercy. They had resolved their Faith into a very fallible
Authority, and their Obedience to the Determinations of a Will subject to
Misguidance, which for any Man to do universally, cannot be without manifest
Danger. For in this case the Blind lead the Blind, and such our Savior tells
us the Pharisees were.

That this was their Miscarriage, appears from our Savior's Exhortation to his
Disciples, which plainly implies an Opposition to the Practice of the Pharisees.

He will not have his Disciples, as the Pharisees, to arrogate to themselves,
or attribute to others, that which is God's peculiar, or is proper to himself,
whom God has anointed, viz. To be Absolute over Men's Faith or Manners. He
requires they should not challenge to themselves such a Sovereignty as admits
of no Control; such an Authority, from whence no Appeal may be made, or which
must not be contradicted. They must not take to themselves, nor give to others,
such a Power whereby they or others shall be confined to the Opinions, no*
(...) universally held to the Words of any Man.

Our Savior will not have his Followers to affect those Titles which denote a
Superiori^^ that cannot belong to them, who are equal, who are Brethren, and
have all one common Father; who are Fellow Servants, and have one Lord and
Master.

He does not allow that any one person, or (...) of Men should take the Chair,
and dictate; and all the rest to be co^^luded and d^termined absolutely,
necessarily, by what they (...)*

That this is the meaning of these Words ^ppears thus: Here our Heavenly
Father, and our Blessed Savior are ow^ed as above all other* as ^upream* and
therefore the Name of F^ther and Lord, are most truly and properly given to
them* There must be some reason why God is (...)* to be called Father, and
Christ, Mast^r: and I know none other account* can be given of this Superiority
and ^^^heminence above others* but (...) that God is Absolute, Supreme Lord and
Lawgiver: Therefore what he says must stand* if an Article of Faith, our
Assent is concluded, if God propose it; and if a Precept of his, Obedience must
be given* But this is the Prerogative of Heaven, no mere Man can challenge it

Thus having declared what I take to be the true Sense of the Words, it will be
needless for me to add any more, to show their Mistake, who think from this
place, that the use of these Words, Master, Father, etc. is forbidden. No
surely, our Savior did not condemn the Words, but as they carried a bad
Signification, and did humor Men's Pride.

He was displeased that the Pharisees would, under these Titles, arrogate a
Power that did not belong to them; and that they could be so hugely pleased
with a Lie of their own making; that they could be delighted with the empty
Titles of Master and Doctor, which themselves had assumed.

And it is a sufficient Argument, that he did not forbid the use of these
Titles, because himself allowed and used that of Father and Mother. And his
Apostle St. Paul called himself a Father and a Teacher of the Gentiles; which
we must think he would not have done, if he had understood our Savior to have
absolutely forbid it; and surely he would have understood it, if it had been so.

Having said what I think necessary for the Explication of these Words, I
proceed in the next place to lay down those Propositions which may be deduced
from, and also those that are more expressly contained in the Words.

I. Christians have a Master and a Father.

In the largest Notion wherein these Words are sometimes taken, it is true of
all Men in the World: for every Man living is dependent and subject, they may
all make that Confession: It is he that has made us, and not we our selves; we
are his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture.

It is true also in that more restrained Sense, wherein these Titles signify
instructing and teaching (and thus I understand them here) for all Men will
acknowledge some Superior, who teaches them, and from whom they can make no
Appeal.

That this is very natural to the Mind of every Man thus to think, will appear,
if we consider how generally the most part acquiesce in the Testimonies of Men:
and it is almost necessary that both they and others should do so, if we
consider the way we are all educated; for we take all our Words upon trust from
others, and we derive our Actions too from an Imitation of what we see them do.
And whilst we do thus, we acknowledge Superiors. And for them that are more
wise, that perceive themselves to stand upon pretty equal Ground with other
Men, yet they find they are liable to be deceived, and therefore they make
their last Appeal to the Veracity and Goodness of God. This made the Principle,
from which they infer the Truth and Certainty of all the Knowledge they have.

There is no Man who considers himself, and his ways of working, but will
acknowledge he is beholden to some other than himself for his Understanding: but
whether he will own it or no, there is a Light that enlightens every Man that;
comes into (...) World, from whence the Candle of the Lord, the Spirit of a
Man derives its Light.

Every Man is conscious that himself was not the sole cause of his first
Thoughts: ^^deed he knows not how he came by them; but this he probably thinks
there is some very wise knowing Mind that teaches his Ignorance by diverse
natural Impressions o^ him, as well as by some more secret Inspirations.

Whosoever will confess himself wholly beholden to another for his Soul, for
his Faculty, and in particular for the Exercise of this Faculty, he plainly
confesses a SSuperriour, one above him, and an Instructor also. And if he
further shall acquiesce i^ the Judgment, which this Mind thus directed shall
make, as certain; he says in effect, that this Guide is infallible, and no
Appeal to be made from him; which is the true Notion of the Word Father, etc.
in this place.

Now every Man does thus: upon several Motions he has diverse Thoughts
suggested to him, which without demur, without all hesitancy he entertains and
proceeds to observe; he doubts not of the Testimony which his Senses bring in,
and proceeds forthwith to pass Judgment. All which supposes him to make no
Appeal from that Ca^se that has led him into th^se Thoughts, he acquiosces
there. But for Christians, their very Name implies them* to have a Master, one
whom they believe and follow. A Christian is a Believer, and so every Scholar
ought to be, and they profess themselves to be the Scholars of Christ.

If this be true of all Christians, that they have a Master, a Father, then
none of them are to assume this Honor to themselves. They must carry
themselves as Fellow-Scholars, as Brethren; that is, they must not propose
their own Doctrines, (such as are properly their own) which they have not
received from their Master, to be assented to as infallible: Indeed they must
not propose them at all, so as to determine others; for in so doing they desert
their Stations, forget they are but Scholars. If they will propound to others
that which shall determine them, it must be their Master's, not their own; for
otherwise they will not be so much Praecones and Nuncii, as Inventores and
Autores Dogmatum.

They that demand Men's Assent to their Opinions, and Obedience to their
Commands, which are theirs, and not their Master's, do by this make themselves
Masters.

All they then fall under Censure, who are Creed-Coiners, or Lawmakers in
Christianity; who frame Creeds, and make Laws of their own, such as they had
not from the Father of the Christian Church.

II. Christians have but one Master, but one Father.

Indeed if we suppose the Institution rational, there can be no more than one,
because there can be but One Infallible, and we cannot imagine that the
Christians would set up any other, by whom they would be universally and
absolutely determined.

Tho there be many Names that have proposed the Christian Doctrine to us, and
from whom we cannot appeal; yet all their Authority is derived from One, and it
is by his Commission that they have done it. They are his Heralds, and he has
authorized them. They propose his Doctrine, and not their own; his Articles and
Canons: That they are so, we are assured, because he bears them witness by
Signs and Wonders, and many mighty Works. And that they are his, is further
evident from this, that they are very agreeing with, and in pursuit of the
Revelation which is undoubtedly his.

If thus, whence are those diversities of Names amongst us? I am of Paul, I of
Apollo, a third of Cephas: One is a Poniifician, another a Lutheran, a third a
Calvinist, a fourth an Arminian: Are any of these our Fathers? If they be not,
why are we called by their Names?

Why should any of these dividing Names be heard amongst us? Are not we all the
Children of one Father, the Disciples of one Master, the Servants of one Lord?
Are we not Brethren? why should we then fall out? Are we not Fellow-Scholars of
one and the same Master?

Yes, it will be said, we are so indeed, but we may differ about our Master's
Sense. Plato and Aristotle were both Socrates's Scholars, but yet agreed not.
We all own the same Master, but yet cannot agree in his Mind, in many both
Articles of Faith, and Rules of Life.

This is granted, and yet the Expedient whereby Unity may be preserved in the
Church is not hard, if we come with peaceable Minds, if we indeed desire it.
Therefore in this case, if we can but suppose our selves fallible in
interpreting, and grant our Brethren a liberty of judging; if we can think the
Words capable of the Sense they give, or can but believe that they think them
so, tho we do not; if the Sense they put upon them be not in it self opposite
to, and inconsistent with the Foundations of Faith, a good Life, the great
Design of our Master, and only necessary to Salvation.

Or tho their Construction be in its tendency destructive of a good Life, yet
if it be not so in them; if notwithstanding this difference in (perhaps) some
obscure and great Mystery, they agree with us in all that is plain, and their
Practice is suitable to the Rules of our Master; in this case I see no reason
to disown them, as no Christians; and whilst we own them as Christians, we must
love them as Brethren.

Perhaps their Understanding is short of mine, (but perhaps also mine may be
short of theirs) shall I not therefore bear with them? Yes, as long as they
hold the Foundation, tho they build on it Wood, Hay, Stubble, etc. they must
not be rejected; for they shall be saved, tho it be as by Fire.

The great Apostle's Resolution in the like case should be ours: If in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you.

Here it may be objected;

Object. Does not this abridg them of their liberty of thinking, and
consequently hinder that Improvement which might be in a free Enquiry after
Truth, which the Mind would make, that is not determined by the Dictates of
others?

To this I answer;

1. That they do thus give up themselves absolutely to the determination of
one, is agreeable to the best Reason. If there be One who is infallible, who
neither can be deceived, nor deceive; it is most highly rational to resign up
our selves, to believe and obey him. No Man can assent on better Evidence, or
act on better Reason, than the determination of such an One, and such an One as
he is, into whose Authority Christians have resolved their Faith and Obedience.

2. This no way prejudices, but rather advantages the true Use of our Reason;
for it determines us to examine all Revelations that pretend an infallible
Authority, whether they do not contradict those Principles which we know are
infallible. This Course we are put upon, that we may secure our selves from
Cheats; for if that which is proposed, contradict the Principles commonly
received, and which all Men take as true, we have reason to suspect it, and
must think, that out Master who taught us these, if he be wise and good, did
not teach us this.

But then (because Principles commonly received may be doubted by some, and
some granted by all perhaps may be false) if any Doctrine be proposed to be
believed, which is impossible to be believed, that cannot come from him who is
Wise and Good.

Now I account it impossible for a Man to assent to contradictory Propositions,
whether the Contradiction be express or implicit; for it is all one to say, A
Man is reasonable, and not reasonable, and, A Man is a Stone. They therefore
that would bring in Contradictions into our Religion, and assert that there are
Doctrines in it, which are not only above our Comprehension, but are plainly
repugnane to the true Principles of Reason, as well as to themselves, they are
a great Offense to Christianity, and lay a sure Foundation of Men's rejecting
it; for they put them upon doing what they cannot do: I say, what they cannot,
not only because of the Corruption and Weakness, but because of the Nature of
our Faculties.

In this case a Man must either forsake his Religion, or his Reason: And I know
not to what purpose any should keep his Religion, if he forsake his Reason; nor
indeed do I see how he can do it, if his Religion be reasonable; and his Reason
will signify little, if Contradictions may be true.

By all this I blame their Practice, who affix a Sense to the Scriptures, and
to those Confessions of Faith, which the Church agrees should be publicly
used, that is contradictious; and then to make the best of their Miscarriage,
and keep their own Error in credit, will tell us we must believe
Contradictions; when they may as well bid the Sun give forth darkness, or the
Fire to wet, and the Water to burn.

For all this they pretend an Authority into which we are to resolve our Faith,
not considering that they deny the Authority which they pretend: for can it be
consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of a Superior, to oblige his Subjects
to Impossibles, to require them to do what is repugnant and destructive to
their Natures?

Whosoever therefore have, under the Pretext of such an uncontrollable
Authority, ventured so far in the Explication of the Mysteries of our Religion,
that they have used such Words as in their most proper and usual Sense, imply
manifest Contradictions, they have been no Friends to the Christian Faith. And
whatsoever they say, the Christians Father will not dertermine his Sons to
believe Contradictions. But I conclude this second Proposition with this
practical Inference.

If Christians have but one Master, one Father, then they must own his
Authority; that is, believe his Revelations, obey his Commands without any
doubt or dispute: for his Authority is undeniable, his Will uncontrollable, no
Appeal to be made from his Determination. Therefore assent without debate, obey
without demur. If we have a Father, give him his Honor; and a Master, let him
have his Fea^.

III. There is no Man upon Earth that is the Christian's Father or Master None
by whose Sense he is to be absolutely, necessarily determined. He needs not to
resolve his Obedience into any Man's or Men's Authority. Our Religion is so very
excellent and wise, that it could not be of humane Original. Surely this Tree
of Life never grew first in an Earthly Paradise, but was transplanted from some
more excellent Soil, and set in this red Earth.

Besides; if we consider the Design of it, it is to prepare Men for the
Heavenly Life, which it does, by begetting in them such Persuasions and
Affections, and teaching them to act here, just as they do there. Therefore our
Creed and Law must probably be a brief Transcript of some of theirs; and none
can tell what theirs is, but he that made it, God. Religion, like Water, will
not rise higher than the Spring; if it derives its Origin from this Earth
only, it will not rise and raise us up with it to Heaven.

But if this be true, that we have no Father on Earth, how is it that: we hear
so much of an Infallible Judge: either an old Man sitting in a Chair at Rome: Or
else a Synod of Doctors, for the most part packed together by a Faction, and
designed to drive on some Secular Interest? For, such have been many Councils,
tho not all.

But what mean those Pretenders that they thus take upon them? Will they decide
all our Controversies end our Debates? An excellent Attempt! But will they do
it indeed? Yes, effectually; and if any doubt of their Decrees, they shall be
quickly convinced by a light burning Fire. They Will take care to keep those that
are under them iniIgnorance, they shall not have Knowledge enough to question
their Determinations; Or, if any little Light do break through all the Curtains
they have drawn, then they afright them with Anathema's; and if these will not
do neither, they shall to the Stake.

How grievously the Christian World has been abused by these Practices, is too
notorious; whilst, these false Fathers do not at all serve the Designs of Truth
and Piety, but merely of their own Ambition and Covetousness.

Notwithstanding what I have said of those Conventions that are politickly and
unwarrantably peck'd together by a Party, for the holding up of a Faction, and
serving a carnal Interest; I would not be understood to detract in the least
from a duly congregated Synod of wise and learned Men their just Authority:
which yet I must think does not amount to that of a Father or Rabbi, as here
explained. They are not absolute, cannot determine universally.

But have they no Power in determining? What is it? Tho this be an Argument
fitter for a larger Discourse; yet to prevent Mistakes and Abuse of what I have
said, I shall here speak somewhat of my Mind, in two or three Particulars.

1. They who cannot be supposed to have any better Reason than the Authority of
a Synod, should be determined by them in matters both of Faith and Practice.
That this may be the case of the Vulgar, I doubt not. Many are in the state of
Children, who at first must take all on trust, and it is best for them in that
State so to do, tho afterward they may see how they have been imposed upon,
and lay aside those infant-Prejudices: the common People first believe and
obey, because a Company of wise and learned Men tell them, that what is
proposed is true and good; but afterward these Men's Reason may be more
improved, they may have better Arguments to believe, and higher Motives to
obey, than their Word; and may say as the Samaritans, we now believe, not
because of your Words, but because we our selves see.

The ground of this first Position is, that Men are to be determined to assent
or act by the best Arguments they can have. Now I suppose very many in so low a
Condition, that this is the best they can meet with, viz. the Authority of a
Synod; nay, many times the Determination of a single Man. This is indeed a
pitious Case, when in all matters of Good and Evil, true and false, a Man must
rely on another Testimony: and yet it had not been so sad, if Men that had
Learning and Knowledge enough, had had more of Honesty; but they have been so
unfaithful to their Trusts, that they have very much impaired their Credit with
the World. I understand the Popish Councils especially.

2. More improved Men, where the matter is disputable, and somewhat equal, and
unconcluding Arguments on both sides appear, if a Synod interpose their
Authority, I think, should be determined by that; yet not so far as to exclude
all after-Thoughts, they must leave room for them. For if their Reasons against
the Synod's Determinations should prove concluding, and afterward appear
evidently so, they need not continue under that former Determination.

In this case a Man must compare his own best Arguments with that of the
Testimony of those Men; that is, he must consider as well as he can, not only
whether they be wiser than himself, (which will be granted) but also whether
they be honest.

3. That I may show whither their Authotity cannot reach, I lay down this
Position: That where the Synod shall determine that to be believed, which is,
and appears repugnant to it self, to granted Principles of Reason, or plain
Scriptures; or where they shall enjoin that to be done, which is, and appears
intrinsecally and eternally evil; or, which I can certainly conclude, is in
those Circumstances evil, they are not to be believed or obeyed. Of this nature
I understand Transubstantiation, and worshipping Images, etc.

What the Sense of our Church is in this matter, appears by the 6th, 20th, 21st
Articles. The Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

And in the 20th: It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing contrary
to God's Word written; neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that
it be repugnant to another. Wherefore the Church, tho it be a Witness and
Keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same,
so besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for
necessity of Salvation.

And for Councils: In the 21st after it is declared, that they have erred, and
may err, it is concluded: Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
Salvation, have neither Strength nor Authority; unless it may be declared that
they be taken out of Scripture.

Whence is there such an Inequality, that any should undertake thus the
Guidance of others? Were they born with more Wisdom than their Brethren? Or
have they had so much better Opportunities to get it? Or, has God
extraordinarily conveyed it to them? And does he give them Commission? Let them
produce it: God's Commission is a Power to work Miracles, which if I see
exerted in Attestation of a Doctrine agreeable to Principles of Reason and
Scripture, then I will believe such a Man to be God's Instrument; I will yield
up my self to be determined by him in all Particulars, where I do not see a
Contradiction to Reason and Scripture.

4: God is the Christians only Father, Jesus Christ their only Master. Grosius
tells us that (...) is a greater Title then (...) and therefore our Savior
takes the lesser to himself, and gives the greater to God. This may poss, if we
only look at the Man Christ Jesus; but under another Consideration, we know all
Men are to honor the S^^* as they honor the Father.

It was the great Promise and Prophecy concerning the Times of the Messiah,
that they should be all taught of God. Well may the Christians resign
themselves to the Determinations of such an Authority: they may be secure in
the Guidance of an infinite unerring Understanding; are in no danger of
straying where they have such a Conduct. They may also sit down quietly and
rest under the Shadow of Divine Goodness, nor fear that the Master should
himself be mistaken, for his Understanding is infinite; nor yet deceive them,
because his Love is (...) less.

If any shall ask, Where we are to expect those Decreta Factis, those Articles
of Faith, and Rules of Life, which he has given us?

I answer,

1. In the plain Principles of Reasan, and the necessary Conclusions that flow
from them: Such there are, from whence no Appeal can be made, of whose Truth we
cannot doubt. Notwithstanding all that the Sceptick can say, we need not be
deceived in very many Cases, and in some we cannot.

2. The Revelations made by Men, with whom God was in an extraordinary manner:
Such were Moses and the Prophets, and the Apostles of our Lord, but especially
the Blessed Jesus himself, with whom God was present in a far more
extraordinary manner, and so as he was with none other, for he was (...) with
him. God in him assumed our Nature into Union with himself. God was manifest in
the Flesh.

When I say, God was with them, I mean that an extraordinary Spirit of Wisdom
and Holiness rested upon them, accompanied with a Power of working Miracles.
Besides; they were extraordinarily inspired with a Doctrine, which they then
delivered, and is now recorded in Scripture: Many of which were indeed
immediately directed to others, and therefore concern us no further, than a
Parity of Reason makes them: that part of those Writings which most belong to
us, is the Sayings of our Lord, and all the rest so far as is consistent with
and agreeable to them.

The Inference that follows from this, is, That we would behave our selves
toward our Master as it becomes us; that is, receive his Instructions, follow
his Directions, be wholly resigned up to him, acquiesce in his Determinations,
believe what he reports without dispute, obey what he commands without demur:
Give full assent to the Principles of natural Reason, give a ready Obedience to
the Natural Law. These were the first Creeds and Commands that ever were given.
This was the Faith once delivered to the Saints, when there was yet no written
Word; and these Laws were engraven in the Heart, before the two Tables of Stone
were hewn.

Since God has set out a large and fair Edition of these Articles and Canons
in the Scripture; which are an Exposition of what was before imprinted in Man's
Nature. The first Edition was in danger to be lost, and therefore our good
Master made Provision for us in this second.

This is then our Duty to refer all to those Teachings of God, whose
Inspiration gives Understanding; whose Word makes wise the Simple. If any
therefore speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; and let us, as the noble
Bereans, judge by the Scriptures whether the things they say be so or not. To
the Law and to the Testimony (where we doubt): for, if they speak not according
to this, it is because they have no Morning in them.

Before I conclude this Particular, I cannot but take notice of the excellent
Condition of Christians. See our Liberty, our Nobleness; both these appear in
that we are not determined by any thing, but what appears to be of God: He is
our only absolute Sovereign. If any on Earth challenge a Power over us, it is
only under God; and we are subject to them in and for him, and because by being
so, we obey him: And there is no Man living, whom we are bound to believe on
his own Authorityl he must produce his Reason, or cite his Text: Or, if he
propose some new Doctrine, it must be consistent with these, and he must work
his Miracle.

If, any Man therefore demand my Assent to his Doctrine, I may and must ask for
his Authority: and if he have no more than his ipse dixit, I must tell him, he
is not my Master, nor any Man on Earth, but One, even Christ. Let us then scorn
to live in Slavery to any Man's Opinions; but stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free. If we fail to do this, we are wanting to
our selves, and our Master too, we (...) our Liberty, we are in manifest danger
of erring, we give from him the Honor that is due to him; he will be jealous
of this piece as well as any other. Indeed it is as great as any; it is the
Honor of his Wisdom and Goodness. Whosoever fully acquiesces in any Man's
Authority, and upon his single Testimony superpercedes further reasoning, he
ascribes to him infallibility, and makes him a God.

And then how exceedingly does Christianity ennoble us? by which we are taught
to consider God in all we do, and own no Authority but his.

Lastly; We must infer, from this Precept of our Lord, that we should not
undury assume or attribute Pi^^es of Honor to our selves or others. That is,

1. We should not over-earnestly desire those that are deserved and due. Nor,
2. Much less affect such as are false, and above our Merit.
To do thus, proceeds from an Ambition, that ill becomes the Disciples of him
that was so exceeding lowly: who tho he was Lord of all, yet came here into the
World, not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

If we much affect these Titles, tho deserved, it is from a weak Understanding:
But if we seek an Honor above our desert (to omit other Considerations) we
shall lose that which we have: whilst we catch at these Shadows we shall lose
what we are possessed of.

Never was Alexander more below a Man, than when he affected to be a God. A
Sword and Spear did get him more Renown than the Thunderbolts with which he
was pictured. This was our first Parents Sin, to desire to be as God; let it
not be ours. No, let us not rob God, but give him that which is his, and to
Man what belongs to him.

OF Inordinate Desire, OR COVETING.
ROMANS 13. 9. Thou shall not covet.
HE who knows not, or is unconcerned in the Unquietness, Disorder, Injustice,
Violence, Fraud, that is amongst Men, has either banished himself from their
Sociciety, or Pity from his own Breast. He that does not see or hear those
Tumults, and Confusions, and Complaints, with which the whole Earth is filled,
either is not yet born, or is gone into the Land of Darkness, and dwells in the
Regions of Silence amongst the Dead. And whoever is not hereby moved to pity,
he either never had, or has lost the Nature of a Man.

I can snspect no Man of so much Cruelty, as not to have his Heart relenting
with Compassion: There is none sure so far removed from these common
Calamities, as not to bear a part of them himself; or if he be exempt, yet has
not put off Humanity so much, as not to sympathize with others.

Ay, but that is fruitless Pity, which affords no help. The Tears which flow
from a Compassion that brings no relief with it, are as the Showers which the
Heavens pour upon the Lylia^ Sands, that, notwithstanding them, continue still
bar^en. What shall be done to remove these Evils? Let us enquire into the Cause
of, and the Means to remove them.

Indeed the Case is such as may make us question whether there be any Remedy.
This Chronical Disease has continued now some thousands of Years, and no Cure
has been found: No; the great Physician, the Healer of all our Diste^^ers, ^^e
Blessed Jesus himself, has not ef^^cted ^^is Cure: For, I need not tell you
that* ^he Christian World has been, and is more filled with Deceit and Force,
Rapine and Tumult, Contention and Quarrel, than either the Jewish, Mahunietan,
or Pagan.

Nor yet does this redound to the disparagement of our great Deliverec, because
his Prescriptions are excellent, and his Medicines sovereign and approved; but
it shows either the Unskilfulness or Unfaithfulness of those that are employed
by him, or the Ignorance and Perverseness of the Patients.

He has discovered the Causes of our Distemper, and has told us therefore
what is to be done for prevention or recovery. The Holy Scripture in many
places, and in these few Words of the Text, has directed us, to the Root of
all the Evils that are amongst us, our own Inordinate Affections, and has
^ounsell'd us to pluck it up, and we shall assuredly eat no more of those
bitter Fruits, that Gall and Wormwood which grow on it.

That immoderate Desires and lawless Appetites are the Spring of all Injustice
and Disorder that is amongst us, is notorious. These are the Fountains which
flow forth in the more violent Torrents and rapid Streams of Force, or in the
crooked and more winding Meanders of Craft* which all concur to make an
overflowing Deluge, that threatens to drown the World.

Whether we look back to the Times that are past, or take a view of the Age in
which we live; whether we consider our own Country, or the Lands that are more
remote; we shall in all different Times and Places find the same Cause of all
the Evils and Injuries that are amongst Men. Our over-^ager Desire is the
common and too fruitful Parent of all those Mischiefs; ^his is the Womb that
bears, and these the Breast^ that give them suck.

Des^^e is, and ever was the great Incendiary of the World, which kindles and
foments those unquenchable Flames, that waste and make desolate all Places.

Desire is the Devil that sows Discord amongst Brethren, that goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. This was the Serpent that tempted Man
to Discontent in Paradise; this made him soar too high, and make too bold and
near Approaches to the Throne of Majesty, until his Wings melted, and he was
plunged and perished in the great Waters.

It was Desire that engaged the Giants of the old World in their War; which was
the Builder of a Babel that threatened Heaven.

And if Desire can so far prevail with Man, as to make him wage War against.
God, it will unquestionably make him quarrel with those to whom he is less
obliged, whom he can have more hopes to overcome, those of his own kind.

It Is but reasonable now to expect that Princes should oppress, and People
rebel; that Governors should become Tyrants, and Subjects refractory; that
Jezebel should murder poor Naboth for his Vineyard, and Jehu seventy Princes
for a Throne; that Masters should be rigorous in exacting what they ought not,
and Servants perverse in not obeying where they ought; that Parents should be
cruel to their Children, and they again unnatural to their Parents.

If Desire could break those Bonds, and cast away those Cords with which God
has tied us, it will not be held by Man's. If God himself has not set Bounds
to this raging Sea, how shall Man? If these Waters of Strife scale Heaven in
black and dark Clouds, they will fall down upon the Earth in Rains and
Tempests; and so they have, and have covered it with a Flood more destructive
than Noah's: For that drowned the World but once, this always: In the time of
that the Righteous were saved from perishing by an Ark; but now the Ark the
Church leaks, and lets in these Waters of Contention so fast, that the pure and
harmless Doves are even forced out of it, to seek a dry and Resting Place.

In that Ark Men and Beasts could live in quietness; in this, Men are less
sociable, more savage than Brutes.

And whence are all these Quarrels? Surely they have the same rise that all
others have; and that, St. James tells us, is, our Lasts that war in our
Members.

They whose Lips should preserve Knowledge, who should speak as the Oracles of
God, they make Merchandise of his Word, and regard not so much the Truth, as
the Gainfulness of their Doctrine; nor how much the Souls of their People, but
how much their own Estates are bettered.

Assuredly from hence it is, that they who minister in Holy Things, and serve
at the Alt ^^, are not content to live of the Altar; that the Mitre affects to
outshine the Crown; that Priests covet the Power and Wealth of Princes, and a
Superiority over them; that the Church seeks to outvie the Splendour of the
Court.

This is it that broaches the Doctrine of Indulgences for Sins to come, of
Masses for the Dead, and the like: which whosoever considers in their
tendencies, I doubt not but they will be satisfied it is the Interest of Money,
not of Goodness, that is carried on by the Asserters of those Opinions; that
they serve Mammon, and their Religion is Covetousness.

This Inordinacy of Desire turns Apostles into Judas's, Pastors into Robbers,
the House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves; and it does as easily transform the
Flocks of Sheep into Herds of Wolves: For, notwithstanding the Sheep's Coat and
Shape, if there be a ravening Appetite, an unsatisfied Desire, it is a Wolf, tho
it seem a Sheep, a Wolf in Sheeps clothing.

Nor can it be expected it should be otherwise; but if the Sea has overflown
its high Banks, the lower Marshes must needs be drowned; and if the Physician
be seized with this Disease, the unskilful Patient must be so much more. If the
Spiritual Men, whose Converse is in Heaven, yet be so much within the
Influences of this Earth; the Laity, they whose Employment is in it, must be
more under the power of them. If the Light of the Heavenly Bodies be obscured
by terrestrial Vapors; then the Candle which is in the Earth, must be put out
by its Damps. And if the Disciples of Jesus be under the Power of Desire, it is
not to be imagined, that Moses's Scholars, or the Followers of Mahomes, or the
Worshippers of many Gods, should be free from its Dominion.

We'll therefore take it for granted, that if Christendom be not exempt from
this Tyranny of Desire, the rest of the World is not: If the Gospel has not
rectified Men's Affections, neither the Pentateuch, nor the Alcoran, nor the
Traditions of the Gentiles, have or can do it.

Thus we see, that Desire has an Empire further extended than ever they had,
who would be called Lords of the World. We'll next consider how this Catholic
King, this universal Bishop, this proud Sultan, this great Cham manages his
Affairs.

And we may observe that this Usurper, who has dethroned Reason, the lawful
Sovereign of the World, and has assumed his Scepter, does use the same evil
Arts which all others do. Where he hopes to gain the Affections of his
Subjects, he practices Flattery, gratifies them tho to then Ruin; and pleases,
tho in that he undoes them. Where they will not love, they shall fear; and if
he cannot court them by Flatteries, he will rule them as a Tyrant; and in both
ways his Government is arbitrary and irregular.

Either Laws are never made, or never kept in his Dominions. That which is
commanded is for the most part evil, or impossible, no Reason to be given of it
besides Will. And tho it were not, yet sooner might the free Air be hedged in,
or the Winds chained up, than the Subjects of this Prince, who are Sons of
Appetite, be restrained.

Nor can they be turned from their Purpose, unless by a Passion accompanied
with more Power than they have. As the Stream of a great River cannot be turned
from its Course, except it be met by the fiercer Tide.

The calm and quiet Decisions of Controversies, that used to be in Courts of
Judicature, where Reason ruled, are either wholly laid aside, or strangely
degenerate; and so either to bad purpose, or to none at all.

Here the Clients do not consider Justice, but Interest; neither do they regard
Right or Title, if they can make the least Pretense, and therefore will desire
in their Advocates not Law, but Oratory and Sophistry.

They will also suborn Witnesses that shall swear for Hire, not for Truth, and
will corrupt their Judges to pervert the Sense of the Law; and under color of
Justice, to be unjust.

In these Courts the richest Client has most Right, and the best Purse carries
the Cause.

Or, if this will not do, they try another. If they either want Craft or Money,
they will fly to Power; if they cannot out-wit their Neighbors, they will try
to outmaster them; if the Court and the Law will not give it for them, they will
see what the Camp and Army will.

And now the Armor is put on, the Sword girded on the Thigh, and the Trumpet
sounds to Battle, the Guns begin to thunder and lighten, thousands are
murdered, Cities burnt, whole Countries laid waste.

Or, if this fail too, and be found insufficient to execute the Commands of
inordinate Desire, the Soldier then will turn a Religionist; and he that wore
a Vizard of Justice, will put on a Form of Godliness, will persuade People to
gaze into Heaven, whilst he picks their Pockets; and will tell them, they
cannot make sure of an Inheritance there, unless they part with their
Possessions here; falsifying the Gospel now, as he did the Law before; and
wresting our Savior's plain Words to the enriching himself, and impoverishing
his Brother.

Thus I have given a brief Representation of the State where Desire rules, by
which Fiction we may a little guess at the Truth of Things, and how they are,
and have been, and are likely to be in the World, because of Covetousness.

Assuredly this was it that made the Grecian and Romans in former days, and the
Turks in these later, to make so great a part of Mankind their Tributaries.
This has made Men seek after new Worlds, as if the old were too little to
bound their Desires.

This took away the Land, and Liberties, and Lives too of many thousand
Americans. This made the Goths and Vandals invade Italy; the Moors, Spain; and
the Danes and Saxons (to mention no other) England.

But need we go to Histories and past Times, for proof of the evil Effects of
Desire? No surely; our own Observation, and the Days we live in, will give us
too many. Nor will I rake into the Ashes, where lie hid the Sparks of
Contention that kindled our late Wars; no, let them lie buried in eternal
Oblivion. Nor do I care to uncover the Graves of the Dead; let their Dust rest
in Peace for me. Nor will I discourse of the Actions of our Governors, where we
are for the most part unable to understand, and therefore incompetent to judge
whether they proceed from Desire or Understanding; for so I should speak
rashly, and perhaps falsely too, of my Rulers. Let us therefore consider the
Mischief Desire does amongst our selves, and so we shall, keep within the
compass of our Knowledge.

What Havoc does it make, whilst the poor envy their rich Neighbors, and they
again grind the Faces of the Poor? Whilst they that have much, grasp at all,
and would leave their Brethren Possessors of nothing; and in this Sense seem to
construe our Savior's Words, To him that has, shall be given; and from him
that has (...), that has little, that makes no Increase, shall be taken what
he has.

But I need not insist on the Oppression, Force, Extortion, Overreaching, that
is amongst us, which is the Issue of unlawful Desire. They whose Employment
lies in Courts of Judicature, have, I fear, too great evidence of this, and
discern that it (...) rather Cunning than Ignorance, and a Desire of doing, not
a fear of suffering In^^ry, that brings so many Causes before them.

All they, whose Work is to end Debates, (...) Peace, (and that is the Work of
Lawyers, and Ministers, and every good an) all these can sufficiently witness,
what a Breaker of the Peace: and an Enemy to all Soceity and Order, Desire is.

And if this Evidence which has been brought in, be full, what remains but
that (...) grand and Malefacton, this Cheat, this Robber this Murderer, this
Traitor, should receive his Sentence; or rather that Senentence which has been
given against him long since by the Judge of all the World, should now be
executed? For, he has bid us (...) or kill our earthly Affections; and in the
Words of my Text, has commanded us not to desire, has made it every ones
Duty; he speaks indeed to one, but intends all; and therefore speaks to one,
that all may the more regard him: As if be had said, Thou, whoever thou art,
(...) ownest God for thy Sovereign, and his Law for the measure of thy Duty;
this is thy Charge, not to desire, or cover, as we ^ender i^.

Object. That, may some think, is a hard saying; Does God oblige us to
impossibilities? Or, how can he require this of us, who made it natural to us
to desire? Is he fallen out with himself, or displeased with the works of his
own Hands? Does he first give us a faculty, and then forbid us to use it? Or,
is Christianity a piece of Stoicism? Does our Religion teach us to maim our
Natures? to cease to be Men? Does it instruct us unto Apathy? Is this the
perfection it points and leads to.

Answer. Far be it from us to suffer such a blemish as this to lie on our
Profession; let none have such an unworthy thought of our Religion, as if it
should be at variance with Nature, as if the Disciple of Jesus could not be a
Son of Man: For surely, never any Religion in the World did so be-friend, nor
was so perfective of Humane Nature as ours. And it is only a mistake of the true
meaning of these Words, that can make any to think otherwise. For they do not
(as they seem) forbid all Desire, but only that which is Evil and Unreasonable,
of that which we either have not, or cannot have a Right to.

This appears, because the word in the Original is mediae significationis in
all Writings; and may indifferently signify good or ill, and in Scripture
seems generally to be taken in the worser part: and so our Interpreters usually
render it by Concupisence or Coveting, which words we now generally understand
in an ill sense.

Besides; these words refer to the tenth Command of the Decalogue (and that
speaks of other Men's Goods) they are an Abridgment of it; and yet, because the
object of the Desire is not expressed, may give us the liberty of a larger
Discourse, than if we only confined our selves to speak of desiring what is
another Man's. And I shall accordingly,

I. Discourse briefly and in general, what may, and what may not be desired,
what Desires are approved or forbidden. And then more particularly,

II. How far the desires of another Man's Goods are prohibited. And here it
will be requisite to discourse what that is which gives Propriety, and makes
any thing to be a Man's Peculiar.

III. I shall offer some Considerations, which both by persuading and
directing, may assist us in the restraining all unreasonable and unjust Desires.

1. Concerning Desires in general: I will not go about to prove, but will
suppose that all are not evil, but that some are lawful, nay and good too; that
some may and should be, are not only matters of our Liberty, but Duty.

This is Evident to him that considers that they are natural to us, and
therefore necessary; that Humane nature cannot in this Estate be without them.
Also that many of our Duties toward God, our selves, and the Public, cannot
be performed without Desire; such are Prayer, and Hope, and Submission to the
Divine Will, and exercising our selves in seeking after such a condition, as
may be best both for us and others.

These and the like Considerations may serve to convince those, that question
whether they may have any desires at all.

This then supposed, we will now consider of what sort they are, which may and
must be had.

1. Therefore all Men may, and ought to desire what is and appears to be good
for them, and they have not.

But yet here are three Cautions to be attended to, which indeed are all
implied in this Rule, but deserve to be more expressly taken notice of.

1st. That the Good we desire be possible.

2dly. That that which is good for our selves, be also good, at least no
detriment, to the Public. And

3dly. That it be not prejudicial (however not near so much as the want of it
would be to us and the public) to any other Man.

Our Desires should not be extended beyond what is good to us, nor can they
beyond that which seems so: If that seem good which is not, the fault is in our
Understanding, not in our Affection; our Guide has made us to wander.

Again; if there be good which yet appears? not, here also we are to blame our
Understanding now for not informing us at all, as before for misinforming. Our
Spy before gave us Intelligence that our Friends were coming, and they proved
Enemies; and now that our friends are indeed near, we have no notice.

All this while I suppose, that the thing we desire we want, and we want only
that which we can use: So that, if we either have it, or do not want it,
neither should we desire it. Such Desires are superfluous and vain, and engage
us in a needless labor. And the cause of all this is our Ignorance of what we
have or want.

This Rule, as I said, does imply,

1. That the thing we want and seek, is Possible: for that cannot be good for
us, that cannot be; nor can we stand in need of impossibilities; nor can we
desire what appears to be such.

But this is not all what I understand by this word Possible, viz. all that is
not a contradiction absolutely; but that which is not repugnant on supposition
of such and such an order of things. And thus we generally observe, God himself
does not do all, that absolutely implies no contradiction to be done; but he
does all that is consistent with such Beings and Natures, such a Constitution
as he has ordained, which was the best that could be.

And this well considered, would be sufficient to free us from either
suspicions of inflexible Fate, or from unworthy and hard thoughts of God: we
should not tax him for want of Goodness, because he does not all that is
absolutely possible, since he does all that in such a constitution (which is
the best that can be thought on) can be done. But to return to my Argument.

If the great God (to whom nothing is hard, yet) do not will to effect all
that, which implies no contradiction to be done; much less should Man let his
Desires run parallel with Possibility: nor can it be congruous for him, whose
Power is limited, to have an unlimited Will, a Will that is only bounded by
contradictions, an affection commensurate to the greatest Power.

This surely was the Stoicks-sense, when they would not have us to extend our
desires beyond the (...), things in our Power. And if they intend this, that
where we can do nothing by it in order to the obtaining the thing we wish,
there we should cease to desire; I am of the same mind.

But if they intend, that we should be unconcerned in all that is not wholly
and solely in our Power, I think they leave us little or nothing to be employed
in: for, our very Acts, which we are said to be Lords of, seem most, if not
all, partly to depend on other causes besides our selves.

There is thus much of Truth in their Precept, that we should have the greatest
affection to those matters, where, if we engage our own Power, we may
reasonably expect the Concurrence of all other Causes, that are necessary to
effect it. And it will be our Wisdom, if we would avoid the Torment of
Disappointment, only to desire that, which in such an order of Causes, not only
can, but probably will be produced; and on whose production that Desire may
have some Influence. This is the first Caution, that the thing we desire be
Possible. The

2d, is That it be for Common-Good, at least not to the prejudice of the
Public. And this is also sufficiently intimated in the Rule it self: For, if
any thing be really advantageous to a Man's Private Interest, it must be also
to the Public; and if it be not this, it cannot be the other. He that sinks
the Ship, endangers his own Life; nor shall any one Member of the Body better
its condition, by drawing to it self the Nourishment which should be dispensed
to all. No, if all the other Members suffer, that one must suffer too.

Man is a Member of the Body Politic, a part of Society; and if it do not go
well with the Polity in general, it must go ill with him in particular. As
therefore we should not, for the safety of one Member, destroy the Body; so it
would be equally unreasonable for a Private Interest to undo the Public.

And besides this consideration of every private persons reference to the
Community, as he is a part of it, if we further look on him as a Lover of Good,
and can but suppose him to prefer the greater before the less, and to think
that that which is beneficial to many, is better than that which is so to one,
or to a few; he cannot (if these be his Thoughts) desire his own particular
Interest may be promoted with Disadvantage to the Public. That Is the second.

3. As our Desires must be harmless, as to the Public, so likewise to every
other Man. For there can be no Reason why I should pull down his House, that I
may build one for my self upon its Ruins; why I should endanger his Life to
save my own: for he is naturally of equal value with my self; and if he be not
so well improved as I, perhaps neither may he deserve much Blame, nor I Praise
for this, but it may be the Circumstances into which we fell, were the chief
cause of this Difference: Perhaps if he had been in mine, he might have been
better than I; and if I had been in his, I might have been worse than he. But
be it otherwise, our present Inequality does not argue however, that he has
forfeited the Right he had; or if he has, yet not to me.

This then must be remembered, that my Desires be innocent. I may be as wise as
a Serpent for my self; but then I must be as innocent as the Dove to others.

Nor yet do I deny, but my Desires may extend to those things which may a
little inconvenience my Neighbor, provided that Inconvenience bear no
Proportion to the Loss I should sustain by the want of what I desire. It seems
not unreasonable that he should be debarred of the Pleasure of his Prospect,
rather than I want a House to dwell in.

Thus all the Members of the Body will suffer a little, rather than one should
perish; and many will rather put their Shoulders to the Burden, than one should
be oppressed with it.

This is the third and last Particular to be considered for the regulating our
Desires, which I shall further discourse of in the second part of the proposed
Method.

II. How far the Desires of what belongs to another are forbidden. Where I
shall consider,

First; What is that which gives Titl^, and makes any Possession proper to a
Man. And, Secondly; In what case such Properties may, or may not be desired by
Another.
First; That Men have Properties, that some have Right where others have none,
we suppose, and the Scripture allows it in the 10th Commandment, and in other
places, where buying and selling is spoken of; or indeed where Charity, and
lending to him that would borrow, or giving Alms is commanded: For no Man can
lend or give what is not his own; if there were no Property, any Man might take
without another leave.

This then supposed, we'll consider the Foundation of this, and that we may in
generel conclude is the Law; by this understanding both the Law of Nature, and
of Nations, and the Municipal.

The Municipal Laws are very various, according as the Condition and Temper of
the People, and Custom of the Place, and such other Circumstances inclined the
Wisdom of the Governors to make them. And that they have very variously
determined of Proprieties, and the ways of acquiring just Title, is known to
them, who have but looked into the Laws of several People, as of the Jews,
Athenidns, Spartans, Romans, etc.

Those ways which obtain amongst us, and have been generally received (if we
abstract from the Particular Modes and Determinations of them) are these;
Inheritance, Gift, Contract, and Cession: The rest are sufficiently known.

I forbear to speak any thing of the Particularities which are observed amongst
us in giving or buying, or the rest, because it would be needless to do it at
this time. Only this I add, That there being several wise uninterested Men made
Judges in these Cases when they come in debate, and they have the Law reported
to them on both sides by the Advocates; and in case of Defect in the Law, or
Failure in Judgment, there are Courts of Equity for the supply of such
Shortness, or Redress of such Wrongs: Things being thus, nothing can be
imagined better, nor a more commodious Settlement invented.

This I have said, that we may acquiesce in our own excellent Constitutions;
and be satisfied that he to whom our Law gives Right, has a good and undoubted
Title; especially since our Law is so agreeable to, and founded on both the Law
of Nations and Nature. Thus much concerning the Municipal Laws.

As for the Jus Gentium, Civilians tell us, that ex hoc Jure distincta sunt
Dominia, Commercia, and Obligationes institutae. From hence it is that Pacts
are observed, which it is generally supposed were made at the first Division,
and that amongst others, is thought to have been universally consented to, that
the first Possessor should be accounted the rightful Owner. Censeri debet inter
omnes convenisse, ut quod quisque occupasset, id proprium haberet. That Right
which is obtained by Victory, supposes a just War; and that the Party who had
the Title, has forfeited it; and that he, who contends with him, has Right to
take that Forfeiture.

Thus far Writers ordinarily go in their Account of this matter; and here for
the most part they stay. And it is sufficient to put a stop to the Enquiries of
the greatest part, that the Covenants and Consent of the Ancient, of their
Forefathers, as also the Laws and Customs of the Places where they live, have
determined, that there shall be Property, and what shall be so accounted.

Few Men are capable of higher Reasons than Law and long Custom, but some are,
and some that are not, yet think they are; and both these will be enquiring
into the rise of such Customs, the Reasons of such Laws, the Cause of so
universal a Consent.

And this may also make it necessary for us to search into the very first
Foundations of these Municipal Laws, and those Jura Gentium, which both have
given Man a Right to Propriety; because there is a Generation of Levellers, who
pretend that all this is without Reason, and that they have the Law of Nature
on their side for a Community.

This we shall briefly consider: But as for that which they alledg from
Scripture, I do not think it worth mentioning, it is so palpable a mistake to
think, that one particular Example of the Primitive Christians can be
obligatory to all Persons, in all Places and Times whatsoever. And the
Arguments from the great Love that Christians owe to each other, are of no
force, unless they first prove it best, that there should be no Propriety.

And as the Law of Christ does not favor that Opinion, so nor the Law of
Nature; which will appear, if we can discover that the first Foundations of
these Laws, Customs, and Pacts, that settle Properties, are laid in Man's
Nature, and in the Nature of the things which he uses and converses with.

And this will be very evident to him who considers, that all Men have use and
read of several things in Life; that they are of different Tempers, and some
more inclined to make use of one sort of things, others of another: that one
Man cannot be in all places, nor all Men in one; that all places will not bring
forth all things; that several things which are useful to Man, may receive
Increase, and consequently Man's Condition be bettered by his Diligence and
good Husbandry; and again, through his Unskilfulness, and Neglect, and ill
Management, their number may be lessened.

Thus the wise Governor of the World has ordered it for the Punishment of
Man's Sloth, and the Reward of his Industry.

Add to this, That Men are not of very unequal Powers, but ordinarily one uses
himself, and manageth his Affairs as well as another; and that it is very
needful that all things should be put to their best use; and that Peace and
Quiet should be preserved in humane Society.

We have enumerated sufficient Causes of Division and Propriety, so that we
need not either tax God, as if he had too much stinted Man, and not made a
plentiful Provision for him, and so necessitated Men to scramble and to catch
that catch can. Nor yet should we have recourse to Men's Vice and Fault in this
case, nor attribute the Original of Property to their covetous or ambitious
Desires, which might proceed from Reason and just Appetites.

Let none blame that which was reasonable, nor ascribe that to a vain cause
which was necessary. If Men were from their differing Tempers variously
inclined, they will hereby be engaged in differing Employments, and various
Pleasures. And if every place will not afford them all sorts of Materials for
their Exercise, or Objects for their Delight, if no one place will contain them
all, then they must part. If they do so, every one will be best acquainted with
the things he most converses with; he that knows them best, will use them best,
and on that score has most right to them, because it is fit that all things
should be put to the best use that they are capable of.

And hence is it that Possession gives so good a Title; as also because it is
presumed that Men will seize on that only, which by their natural Constitutions
they are more disposed to use or enjoy. And besides this, it is supposed that
they are for the most part not very unequal; or if they be, yet that is not so
easily known: and then all this considered, no Pretense can be made, why one
should be thrust out of his Possession to make way for another; since it cannot
be known, that this latter will make better (but probably worse) use of what he
shall have, than the former had done.

And if this were not admitted, that in Vacuities, first Possession gives
Right, the World must be perpetually filled with Disorder, and Tumult, and
Injustice; and he that has thrust another out of his Possession, shall be
dealt so with himself by others.

And in after-Ages, when their Title shall be examined, where will the Records
be found by which it shall be cleared? Or, what other evidence can be hoped
for, but a long Possession? No People on the Earth can at this day make a
better Claim than this.

And if we suppose Men idle and inordinate in their Desires, there is a further
necessity of Property and Division: for else some would live on other Men's
Labors, would do nothing, yet enjoy as much as any; and this would tend to
impoverish the World, since Increase depends on Men's Labors.

And indeed this is one of the excellent Fruits of Propriety, that it is an
Engagement to Industry, and a Spur to the Lazy; for that is the regular and
innocent way for Men to acquire Right, and to become Owners.

It Is true, it cannot be avoided but there will be some ill Consequents of
Propriety: For Owners knowing that the things they possess are part of their
Power; and it being natural to Man to have an Affection for that which he
usually converses with, and so loath to part with it; hence they will not many
times, neither by way of Gift, nor upon reasonable Terms, and where they may
have a valuable Exchange, for go their Title. And hence it will come to pass,
that some will have all, and others nothing; that they whose lot it is to be
born of rich Parents, or who have more immoderate Desires, and are more
endlesly busy, they shall abound with Wealth, whilst they that are not so
fortunate or foolish, shall be in want.

But notwithstanding these, and other like Inconveniences, we cannot be made to
disallow of Proprieties, till we find that Community has none, or fewer,
which, things standing as they do, cannot be proved.

And then there is as good Provision as can be made, in the two Cases supposed,
that Fools may have abundance, and Wise and Good Men be in extreme want: For,
our Law gives the Estates of those that are judged Fools, to the King. And in
the other Case of extreme Necessity, and where the Owner will not recede from
his Right (according as some in the Civil Law determine) the Necessitous may
take what will be sufficient for him in that Exigence. But then, as Grotius
well considers, there must be these three Restrictions:

1. That the Necessitous cannot by any pains, or other way extricate himself;
for if he can, he must. Solon has well determined in one Case, that a Man must
dig forty Cubits in his own Ground, before he take Water out of his Neighbor's
Well; as Plutarch observes in his Life, and giv^^ this Reason, because
Necessity, not Sloth, must be relieved.

2. The second Limitation of this Rule is, That the Owner himself must not be
in the same case, when his Po^session shall be seized; for in this Case, Melior
est ca^^^ possidentis, and non tradentis Jus suum, qu^^ poscentis aliem^m: The
Right of the Possessor is always prefer able to that of a Stran^er.

3. The third is, That the Person who is now indigent, when he shall be able,
make Restitution.

The same Author goes further, and determines, That where one may be profited,
and another not inconvenienced, there ^oth a Right ac^rue to another Man's
Pos^^ssion.

It Is very reasonable indeed, that the former Possessor should quit his Title
to that, which will be of no use to him, and of great use to another: And this
is all that can be (...) from that Passage in Tully; Quidn^ (...), qu^ndo sine
detrimento suo po^est, alter^ (...) in iis quae sunt accipi^nti utilia, (...)
non molest^.

But if the Possessor should be froward, and refuse to communicate, in this
case it seems not reasonable, that the other (unless he be warranted by Public
Authority) should ravish his Possession from him; for this might open too wide
a Door for Disorders.

This is the short Account of Propr^eties, and the ways of acquiring just
Titles. I proceed,

Secondly; To consider whether, and (...) far I may desire any thing that
another (...) is rightfully possessed of.

That such Desires are lawful, seems evi^ent, because they are the Foundation
of all that Commerce, which is amongst Men in their Bargains of buying and
selling. If there were no such Desires, there could be no such Contracts and
Exchanges as there are; if we might not desire that which is another, then we
should not ask him to Iend or give us any thing: for this also, as well as that
of bargaining* signifies and supposes one Man to desire to have what another
has. And if we can think God has forbidden all such Desires, we must also
think he has prohibited all buying and selling, all begging and borrowing,
which none can be so vain as to imagine.

If it be lawful for me to do that, whereby what another has may be made mine*
then it is lawful for me to desire it. Indeed it is impossible for me not to
desire, so long as it appears good to me, and possible to be had, if I suppose
Right may be transferred.

As soon may the Light not shine, or the Fire not burn, as the Representation
of a Good that I have not, and may have, not excite Desire. These two always
run parallel, are Twins, and Twins that grow together, or rather the very same.
Such an Apprehension is Desire in its Infancy, Desire beginning; and Desire is
that Apprehension in its Manhood, its Continuance.

Thus far then Desire is not only lawful, but necessary. And for a further and
full Answer to this Question, we may, I think, safely assert, That we may
desire all that we want, and another has, to which we can acquire a title
according to Law and Equity.

And by this we are prohibited to desire in these three cases.

1. Where the Right cannot* and we know it cannot, according to Law or Equity,
be aliena^ed; that is the Case of a Man's Wife, or a Woman's Husband Nor,

2. Is it lawful to desire to have that, whose Right may be transfe^^'d (...)
we have, or can ^resume on the Con^^nt: of the Owner; no Title can be passed
away without this. Here we except the case of extreme Necessity before
mentioned*

3. Nor yet the we suppose both these* is it lawful to desire another Man's
Possession, where it will be manifestly prejudicial to him to part with it. I
know (...) said, Vol^^^i non fit Injur^^, and that a Man shall satisfy the Law
of the Land, if he observe the two former; but he will violate the Law of his
Mind, which comma^ds Innocence, and doing to others, as himself would be done
to; and forbids him therefore to take advantage of another Man's Weakness, or
Oversight, or the like. This is the second.

III. That which I have to add both by way of Direction and Argument, shall
be in these four Considerations. Two of which may pass for Rules, and may give
Advice to them that are willing to have their evil Desires restrained, but know
not how: and the other two may tend to pe^swade those that are regardless in
this matter, to think it their Concernment.

1. Let every one that would prevent or subdue all Desires that are not wise,
just, and innocent, inform himself truly of all his real Wan^^.

This may at first proposal seem rather a Method to inflame, than cool Desire:
and it may be thought better Advice to him to be ignorant of, than to be
acquainted with his Wants: For, so long as a Man thinks himself rich, tho he be
poor, he will not ask a Supply.

But who knows how long this Ignorance may continue? that would be to make it,
impossible for Man ever to be happy: for Sense of his present Misery, and
Distance from that good State, is the first step to his seeking it, and that is
indispensably necessary to his obtaining it. For a Man to affect Ignorance for
the Mortification of his Affections, is all one, as to put out his Eyes, that
he may rectify the Feature or Motions of his Body. And he that would lay aside
his Knowledge to regulate his Passion, murders himself to remove a Disease.

Besides, no Man can be perfectly ignorant of his Wants; and where we cannot be
wholly ignorant, it is best to be thoroughly informed; till we be, we are in the
Dark or Twilight, which are Seasons of Mistake and Passion.

In the Night we may as well, and do as usually imagine our Friend to be our
Enemy, than otherwise; or if we do take out Enemy for a Friend, this Mistake
has indeed less of Fear, but more of Danger with it. He that is benighted,
follows an Ignis (...) as a trusty Guide, and loses his own faithful Companion
that was with him.

Thus Ignorance increases our Wants, and Want is the Mother of Desire. It
cannot therefore upon any account be advisable to keep our selves from evil
Desires, by not understanding our Necessities.

This might be a way to take away Desire it self, and not only the Evil of it:
for, to cure the Wound, it cuts off the affected part. That Is not it we are
endeavoring, to kill Desire, but only to bind it to its Good-Behaviour. And
the way to regulate it, is this which I have proposed.

For surely all the Irregularities of our Desires proceed from our failure in
this Particular. Our Imagination has made our Wants more and greater, or less
than indeed they are; has made them be when there were none, has made them
seem contrary to what they are; and hereupon we desire where there is no cause:
Our Desires are over-vigorous, or too faint; are directly opposite to what they
should be.

He that imagines he wants what he has, his Desire will be vain; and he that
apprehends himself to want all he has not, he will desire infinitely, and
Impossibilities shall not escape him.

But he that thinks he has no need of that, of which he has no use, and knows
all that is useful to him, and keeps his Desire within these Bounds, will not
transgress. He that can come to an end of his Wants, that can determine rightly
what is enough, his Desires will not be endless.

Thus far Men do generally agree, that that is only to be desired which is
useful. But that is Wisdom to be truly informed what that is. He that knows
this, and all that is useful to him, has resolved what is sufficient, what is
enough for him, and he that is determined in this case, cannot be infinite in
his Desires.

This is the Sum. Let not our Desires exceed our Wants, nor let us imagine we
want that which will not be useful, nor greatly want that which is not
necessary to us. And very few are the things that are of necessary use in order
to our Happiness. He that lives within Natures Bounds, is satisfied with a
little; having Food and Raiment, can be content.

If his House will defend him against the Injuries of the open Air, tho it be
not built after the newest Fashion, nor of the finest Materials, he is pleased;
and is not grieved tho it have no Marble Pillars, or Flowers, curious
Chimney-pieces, or Wainscot of the finest Grain, on which the Italian Artist
has shown his Skill in Colors and Shadow. This Man can make a hearty Dinner,
tho his his Meat be not served in Plate, tho he do not drink in Gold, nor have
his Cup-board of Plate and Glasses before him, nor his Table spread with
Pheasant or Partridg, or Quail. He is not much aggrieved that he does not rusle
in Silks, nor that his Suit is not made after the latest Mode at Court, his
Frieze Coat pleases him as well: Nor does he find himself more healthful, or
quiet, or merry, or wise, or virtuous, by having large Fields, full Barns, much
Cattle, and his Bags full of Silver and Gold. He observes, that they that have
all these, yet live without them; they have no more than the sight of them: and
he will set the same Bounds to his Desires, that Nature and Use has set; and
there is no difference then betwixt him that has more, or him that has less.

To conclude this Direction; When I advise to know your Wants, I would have you
in order to this understand what is Good and Evil, the want of which is the
great reason of our want of Contentation.

2. Be diligent to seek a supply of your real Wants in all lawful, likely,
harmless Ways: Then do not increase them by Prodigalities and Excess, by vain
and unreasonable Expenses. Men that are profuse in their Expenses, must have
proportionable Incomes; and where they are unaccountable in those, they must
either be unjust in these, or they will quickly be Beggars or Thieves; for
ordinarily Men cannot, in honest and innocent ways, make provision for profuse
layings out.

(1.) Be not idle; for Idleness is the Highway to Want, and that to Desire,
and such Desire as shall be only an Instrument of Torment, not in order to
obtain. The Sluggard, whom Solomon represents in his sleepy: Posture, has
received this Doom, he shall have Poverty coming on him as sure as the
Traveller, and Wans as irresistibly as an armed Man.

And in another place he tells us, The Soul of a Sluggard desires, and has
nothing: And he that has nothing, must desire to have; and if he will not seek
it by Labor, he will by some unlawful ways. The idle Man will desire; and if
he desire any thing, it is that which he has no Right to; for I look on that
Rule of the Apostle's as an eternal Truth, He that will not work, let him not
eat. And it almost universally obtains, as if it were of natural impression;
for when we see a Man poor through his Laziness, we deny him our Al^^, and send
him to his Work: This seems to proceed from the Sense we have, that Idleness
has such a tendency to Injustice.

On this account those People deserve Praise, who made such early Provision
against unjust Practices and Desires, when they would not give their very
little Children Meat, till they had performed some bodily Exercise. And I look
upon them to have outdone us in Politics, who will have all their Inhabitants
to be of some Trade: They have crushed the Viper in the Egg, and have prevented
all unjust Actions by preventing the unjust Desires. We may wrest the Poet's
Words to this Sense:

(...) si tollas, periere Cupidinis Arcus,
Contemptaeque jacent, and sine luce faces.
(2.) That which is added in the Rule is, That our Diligence must be employed
in the (...) of Means,

First; That are likely, else it will be foolish. And,

Secondly; Lawful, else we shall be unjust. And,

Thirdly; They must be harmless, else we cannot be innocent; and no Action can
be good, where Innocence is not.

All this supposes, (which is most true), that Things are so ordered in the
World, that Industry, which is wise, and just, and innocent, cannot be
destitute of that which is of necessary use.

And that we need not at any time have recourse to unlikely and unlawful Ways
for a Supply of that which we really need: Nor are Humane Affairs so ill
managed by the Wise Governor of the World, as that one must be robbed, to
enrich another; that I cannot be made happy, unless my Brother be made
miserable.

I conclude this Direction with the Reason of it, which is this, That the more
wisely and harmlessly industrious any Man is in seeking after supply of his
Wants, the less he will want; and the less he wants, the less he must* desire,
if he act by Reason. And so long as Want continues, Desire must; and if it be
earnest, it may probably hinder us in the good use of our Reason, and so engage
us in that which is dishonest, making us transgress those Bounds and Landmarks
which Propriety has set.

On the other hand; It would be strange, if the happy Man should be envious or
ravening: When the Sun shines upon his Tabernacle, who can desire his
Neighbor's Candle?

That which may confirm all this, is, That in all the Descriptions we have of
the Golden Age, which is supposed to have been in the World, we have no mention
made of Men's Inordinate Desires: which shows, that when they are in good
condition, these have no place; or if they have, they spoil it. And this leads
me to the Arguments against all unreasonable and unjust Desires.

First; They are both noxious and vain: They do others hurt, and our selves no
good. How much Harm they do in the World, I have sufficiently declared, when I
have said, that all the Disorders, and Injustice, and all the Evil that one Man
does another, grow from this Root. Whatever Mischief of this sort you complain
of, know that unreasonable Desire is accessory to them.

All Murders, and Robberies, and Wars, and Overreaching in Bargains, owe their
Original to this. This turns Men into Brutes, and makes Societies of Reasonable
Creatures, become Dens of Lions, or Kennels of Foxes. Nay, this has made a
City less eligible than a Wilderness; and it is more safe to be in a Herd of
Brutes, than in a Society of Men; so much more insatiable are our Desires than
theirs: And there is therefore less Danger in converse with unreasonable
Nature, than with immoderate Desires.

And as unreasonable Desires do harm to others, so they are no way advantageous
to our selves: for, whilst we desire unjustly, we lay a Foundation for Disquiet
to the Public Peace, and also of Ruin to our own particular Interest. For,
our Example has an Influence on others, to make them do as we do; and that
will bring in all Confusion amongst us.

Besides this, whilst any one impropriates too much, the less remains for
others Uses. And this brings near extreme Necessity; and when that is their
Case, they have Right to other Men's Properties; and when they are near it, they
may easily mistake it for their own Case; and if they do but think it is their
Case, they will act as if it was, and seize upon that which they have not, but
imagine they have Right to.

Secondly; Remember our Profession. We call our selves the Disciples of him,
who had not where to lay his Head; who tho he was Lord of all, yet Possessor of
almost nothing: And shall the Disciple be above his Master? Had our Lord so
very little, and shall we grasp at all? Why have we need of more than he had?
If we have, show it; if not, why do we desire it? How is it that we cannot be
content with Food and Raiment, (when by a harmless diligence we can obtain no
more) when our Savior was? For, if we be indeed his Disciples, that is, if we
live well, and follow his Example, we have also the Promises of this Life, and
of that which is to come. We have all Assurance given us, that the great
Disposer of all Things interests himself in our Affairs, and will manage all
for the good of them that live well.

We know that the worst that can befall us is Death; and that is the End of all
our Miseries, and is our Passage to a blessed and endless Life. We know also,
that the Unrighteous shall not be Partakers of this Happiness; that the
Violent, the Oppressor, the Deceiver, shall be excluded: Nay, that they who
have not subdued and overcome the evil Desires of doing such Things, are not
owned by Christ to be his Followers, and then they cannot be saved. And if we
cannot be Christians, if we cannot be happy whilst they prevail in us, why do
we suffer them?

Besides; The Gospel which we own, nay, and our own Reason, has represented
all the Things of this World as very undesirable. We cannot but see how little
Tendency they all have to make us happy. Do we not ordinarily find the Poor as
good as the Rich, and the Servant as wise as his Master?

And we know, that all these Things are to us as We are: To the Good, all are
Good. Res perinde sunt, ut illiu animus qui ^a possidet: Qui uti scit, ei bon^;
illi, qui non utitur recta, mala.

And if the Things themselves be not valuable, their Number does not add to
their Esteem. And our Savior has expressly told us, that our Life consists not
in the Abundance of Things we possess: Nay, and that Riches make it hard for us
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This they do by exciting unreasonable
Desires.

He that believes all this, it ill becomes him to be a passionate Lover of the
Things of this World. The Gentiles, who are un^^q^^inted with our Religion, who
have as (...) suppose, almost lost their Reason, for them to seek after these
things, is tolerable; but for Christians, there is no Excuse.

Besides all these Engagements which our Christian Profession lays on us, to
subdue our Desires, there is this one other, which I will only mention, and that
is, that Universal Love, that Love to all the World, which Christianity does so
much oblige us to. We are commanded, we are exhorted to this, the highest
Examples lead us to it; our God and Savior go before us in the plainest ways
of Love and Kindness. It is a great part of our Religion, and indispensable to
Happiness: Yea the very Badg and Character of Christians; so that we are not to
be called by that Name, if we do not live a Life of Love; and if we do, we
shall not covet what is another's. For Love, as the Apostle says, fulfils the
Law: it will not only preserve us from doing, but also from desiring any other
Man's Injury.

If then we would do well to the Public by preserving Peace and Order: if we
have any regard to other Men that are like to, and generally equal with, or
better than our selves: If we would not fall of Happiness; if we would not act
in Contradiction to Religion and Reason; if we would approve our selves to be
Men or Christians: let all our Desires be wise, and just, and innocent: Let it
be all our Endeavors; and God of his infinite Mercy afford us the necessary
Aids of his Grace, which we beg for the sake of his Son, to whom, etc.

OF Doing our own BUSINESS.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4. 11. That ye study to be quiet, and to do your own Business.
THE Apostle in these Words exhorts Christians, that they would study, or
strive earnestly, as Men do who are in pursuit after Honor ((...)) that they
would lay out themselves, and do their best,

1. To be quiet. To give no occasion of Disturbance to others, to be no way
accessory to the Disquiet of their Neighbors; to prevent (as much as in them
lies) all Molestations, that might arise in the Society whereof they are
Members; neither to say, nor do, nor leave unsaid or undone any thing from
whence Commotions and Quarrels, Anger, Enmity, or any foolish and hurtful
Unquietness might ensue: But on the contrary, to preserve Peace, and Love, and
Friendship, and Kindness amongst Men. And as one of the Means that lead and
contribute to this Quiet,

2. To do their own Business, their proper particular Work: On which, how much
the Quiet and State of Men depends, may appear in the Sequel of this Discourse.
And I hope to make it evident, that this is a thing more considerable, and of
far greater moment than at first it may seem, and that it deservedly challenges
our utmost Care and Diligence.

And this latter Duty being in order, and a help to our Discharge of the
former, I shall begin with it: And shall enquire,

I. Into the Occasion of this Precept, when it was given by St. Paul.

II. Into the true Meaning and Impose of the Words here used. When I have done
this, I shall offer some Considerations, which will make it appear to be good
and fit, and profitable and necessary for us to do as we are here directed.

I. As to the Occasion of this Precept: It was probably the same with that in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. We command and exhort, that with Quietness they work and eat
their own Bread. Such he means, as he described Verse. 11. Who walk disorderly,
((...), out of their Rank) working not at all, but Busy^^die^, ((...)) very
busy, yet did nothing, nothing they should do, nothing to the purpose; that
which they did, or seemed to do* was next to, nay, worse than nothing. They
neglected their own Business, but would be thrusting themselves into other
(...).

By this neglect of their own Affairs, they were reduced to such Straits; that
they could not live of themselves; and by their over^^^o^ousness they so
insinuated into others, that they lived upon them. Which dependent parasitical
Life being so unbecoming and base, and casting so much Ignominy upon the
Religion they professed: Nay, it being so unjust, that they who did nothing,
and therefore deserved nothing, should have anything; the Apostle enjoins them
as he had before, that they who would not work, should not eat: And that they
should work (...) Quietness, and eat their own Bread.

This was the occasion of that Exhortation in the second Epistle; and it is most
likely^, that on the same occasion, he had before given them the same Precept
in the Text, To do their own Business: In which we may be further confirmed by
what follows in the end of the 11th and 12th Verses, Working with your own
Hands; that ye may walk honestly toward the Gentiles, and that ye may have
need of nothing. By which, as he plainly intimates, that the very Heathens did
not approve of Idleness and Beggary, but thought it unseemly for Men to live
the Lives of Drones and Parasites; so likewise that he should prevent such foul
Miscarriages, with the ill Consequents of them, if he could engage them to mind
and do their own Business. This would raise them from the Bed of Sloth, this
would keep them from being Eves-droppers, and Interlopers in other Men's
matters, and thereby cut off many Occasions of great Troubles both to
themselves and their Neighbors. This would probably secure them from
necessitous Dependances, and their Religion from Contempt.

Thus we see the Occasion of this Precept, partly from the History set down in
the second Epistle, where it is repeated, partly from the Reasons annexed to it
in this. From which we may conclude (in order to our next Enquiry) that this
doing their own Business was something, that was good and honest in the account
of the Heathens, and that by natural Light might be discovered to be so:
Something also that would be a means to secure them from a Dependence on other
Men for Necessaries, which is one of the worst States of Humane Life.

Erasmus thinks the Apostle had in his Eye both the Idle, and the Busy-bodies.
Deterret, says he, ab otio, and ab alienis Appetendis. Grotius is of the same
Mind, and tells us that they who offend against this Rule, are by St. Peter
called (...), and by St. Paul (...), and by the Greeks commonly (...): Of which
number he reckons parasitical Smell-feasts, drolling Buffoons, and such like
Flies, with which Greece then swarmed.

II. Having seen the Occasion, let us now proceed to the Sense and Import of
the Words. And here the main Enquiry is, What is meant by (the (...)) your own
private matters, those which are peculiarly and properly yours.

(...) seems here to be opposed to (...), and to be distinguished from the
(...), our own, in opposition to other Men's, and in distinction from what is
common both to us and them. Do your own, not others Men's Business. Do not only
what belongs to all Men, but that also which particularly appertains to you.
For our better understanding this, we may consider Man under a fourfold respect.

1. Of his Nature as he differs from Beasts, and as he differs from other Men,
i. e. we may look on him as endowed with Understanding and Liberty in general,
which is common to all Men; or, as with greater Understanding, with all those
Inclinations and Aversations (which may be supposed to be born with Men) that
are peculiar to this or that Man.

2. We may consider a Man under the various Changes that are made in his
Nature, the several Accessions to his natural Faculties, with all that Knowledge
with which Study and Experience has enriched him; with all those Arts and
Habits, which by Time and Exercise he has acquired; or else with all inculpable
Impairments, and Lessenings of the Faculties, either of his Body, or of his
Soul.

3. We may consider him in that Condition, in which he is in respect of outward
things, such as Poverty of Riches, Liberty or Confinement, Honor or Disgrace,
etc.

4. Consider him in those Relations in which he is to other Men; whether he
came into them by Necessity, arising either from Nature or Laws, or voluntarily
and out of Choice: As Husband or Wife, Parent or Child, Master or Servant,
Magistrate or one of the People, Teacher or Learner, of the Clergy or the
Laity, etc.

This, with some Addition, is Tully's Quadruplex Persona, which every Man
bears. Now as to the Business before us: Whatever Work is suitable and proper to
Man under any of these Considerations, that may be said to be his Work; he was,
as it were; made and fitted for it, it is proper to him, he is obliged by the
Divine Law to do it.

And because Man cannot be supposed to have been designed for such a Work as is
unsuitable to his Nature; as false Reasoning, not following his Understanding,
not loving that which is good, etc. and because all Wickedness and Vice is thus
unnatural; therefore nothing can be proper for a Man that is unreasonable or
vicious; every Work of his must be rational and virtuous, Truth and Goodness
must be inseparable Attendants, the necessary Ingredients of every Business,
which Man can call his own. Briefly then, that in general is called any Man's
Work, which is both good in it self, and fit for him, that for which he was, as
it were made and framed; that, of which by his Nature and Temper, by his
Abilities and Inclinations, and Opportunities, his Relation to others, and his
Conditions in respect of external Goods and Evils he is capable, and for which
he is fitted.

Thus we call the making, the Preservation and Government of this World, the
Redemption of it by Christ, the recompencing Men according to their Ways, the
hearing the Prayers, and granting the Desires of the Poor, Destitute, etc. The
Works of God, as being proper to the most glorious Perfections of the Divine
Nature. Indeed there is nothing else to be considered besides the most
absolutely perfect Nature of God, in respect of which any Work may be called
his; that being the sole Cause of them all. But it is otherwise with Man, who
both in his being and working, so depends on God, and on other things, that he
can neither be nor act without them.

Hence it is, that many Works belong to Man, and are properly his, not only in
respect of his Nature generally considered, as unclothed of all Circumstances,
but also of his Dependancy and Subjection: In which respect, that may be said
to be a Man's Work, which he is appointed to do by one who has Right to dispose
of him, i. e God, and by those who have Authority over him: That is said to be
a Servants Work, which his Master sets him to do.

That also which a Man undertakes to do, he being at his own dispose, may be
called his Work: As also that which is mostly and immediately conversant about
himself, or about that, in which he is most nearly concerned, as his Family,
etc. which will be his in the Issue and Effect, as well as it was in the
Beginning and Production; that which will redound to his proper Advantage and
Benefit, as well as it did proceed from his Power, which will be for him, as it
was from him; it is his own, i. e. for his Interest.

On these accounts any Work or Business may be called a Man's own. And if they
be considered in general, as they are common to, and the same in all Men; they
are the Foundation of that, which is all Men's Work or Business: but if they be
considered particularly with the Differences, with which they are found in
several Men, so they constitute every Man's particular Business.

To make this plain by Instances. The common Work or Business of all Men, is to
worship God, and to serve him in promoting the Perfection and Happiness of
themselves and all Men; and as much as in them lies in cooperating toward,
and setting forward the good State of the whole World. To this every Man is
bound in proportion to his Ability, and as he has Opportunity.

The Business of this or that Man in particular is to do such part of this, and
in such manner and way, as by the inculpable peculiarities, which are found in
his Abilities and Inclinations, his acquisitions and the accessions he has made
to his natural Power, his different conditions in respect of things without
him; the particular appointments of his Sovereign Lord, and of those that have
Authority from him; or by his own undertaking (where he is at liberty) he is
especially determined, qualified, and obliged to do.

Every man in the World is in some particular relation to God and Men, and in a
condition which Challenges some special Service from him; so that he is obliged
to do something for his part (by the natural and perhaps the written Laws of
God, or also by the good Laws and Customs of Men) to serve the whole Society,
of which he is a Member, and God the supreme Head and Governor. Every Man is a
Governor or a Subject; some are set apart to attend the public Worship of
God, and the Instruction of Men in the Divine Laws; others have undertaken to
study the Municipal Laws, and by their Skill in these to secure Men's Rights and
Properties; others take upon them (and are authorized to do so) the Care of
Men's Health; some are Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Servants, Merchants,
Mechanics, etc.

Whatever Particular Employment (wherein a Man can in some peculiar way set
forth the Glory of God, and contribute toward any part of the good State of
his Creatures, particularly of himself and his Family) is by one, who has Right
to dispose of him, laid on any Man, or according to (at least with the
allowance of) the Laws of God, and good Constitutions of Men, is undertaken by
himself; That is his Work, his own proper Business. This is his Place, his
Station, his Part, his Province, his Office, his Trust, his Trade, his
particular Calling, his Profession from whence he is denominated. And to
fulfill this his Place, to keep his Station, to act his Part, to govern his
Province, to execute his Office, to discharge his Trust, to follow his Trade,
to do that which he professes to do, and which he bears the World in hand he
does: This the Apostle seems to mean by our own Business.

He illustrates this, Romans 12. 4. by comparing Christians to the Members of a
natural Body. As we having many Members in one Body, and all have not the same
Office ((...) the same Employment) etc. And so descends to particulars.

Which way then soever we serve the great Lord of All, in prosecuting the ends
of his Goodness, which is the welfare of his whole Family; whether by
ministering to your necessities or conveniences of his Creatures, by serving
the greater Bodies, or less Societies, or Single Persons in reference either to
this or a future Life: Whatever our Employment be, if innocent and useful, if
Lawful and Honest, whether in public Office, or a more private Capacity, in
what place soever we are, let us whilst we are in it, do the work of it.
Spartam, quam nactus (...), Orna, as they use to say, and hoc age. Look that
things be well done, and that your matters he managed to the best advantage.
Understand and mind, and do this which is your proper Business.

This I hope is sufficient to make the meanest Capacities understand what the
Apostle does require of them; and to prevent those Mistakes which might arise
in weak minds about this matter; and to show that there is no interfering
betwixt this and other Duties, which I have an especial regard to, lest whilst
I am exhorting to the obedience of one Command, I should occasion the neglect
of another, and perhaps a greater. I shall only mention the Mistakes which some
may have, of which they may rid themselves by what has been said.

1. One Mistake is, that they should so do their own Business, as to allow none
else to do any thing for them, to use the Service of none, to endeavor to have
need of no Man, to live without the help of any. But this cannot be the
Apostles meaning: because the Scriptures in many places, and the Apostle in
diverse of his Epistles supposes, and allows, and gives Directions both to
Masters and Servants.

It was a piece of Cynical Morosness in Diegenes, not to have a Servant; and no
way agreeable with the State in which we are, nor with those Customs of the
World, which Experience has confirmed to be good, and all Laws have approved. I
know there is a great vanity in many, who devolve all their weighty Business,
wherein their own Care is most necessary, upon their Servants, but I meddle not
with that now.

2. Another Mistake may be, That we be so intent on our own Matters, as not to
regard other Men's. This was St. Paul's Complaint, that All minded their own
things. Phil. 2. 21. And it is the Law of Christ that we bear one another
Burdens. Gal. 6. 2. The Apostle's Intent was to take Men off from vain
Curiosity about, from unnecessary meddling in other Men's matters: But when
Humanity and Kindness, Compassion and Civility, when Justice it self calls us
out of our Houses, and takes us from our Employments to help our Brethren in
managing their Affairs; we are not in this case to excuse our selves under
pretense that we are doing our own Business.

If there be danger of a Vacuum in the natural World, the next Bodies will (as
some Philosophers speak) against their Natures, remove out of their Places to
prevent it: the same must be done by us in the Moral World. But indeed, it is
not against Nature that we should do thus: For, by Nature we are made to
promote the Common Good, not our own only but other Men's, and in the
Explication I have shown, that that is every Man's own Business, which belongs
to that Place or Station, in which he is in relation to other Men. His proper
Business has, in the very Notion of it, a reference to others.

3. After what has been said, none sure will think themselves excused from the
Common Works of all Men, because they must do their own proper Business; that
because I am to do that which is my particular Work, I may therefore neglect
that which is every ones, but mine no less then theirs. The works of our
general and particular Calling (as Divines express it) consist and agree and
are subordinate to each other. Every Man's business is to help forward the good
of the World, but that which is mine and yours in particular, is to do it in
this or that was as our Place and Office requires. Do your particular Business,
but do not think you may leave your Common undone. On the other hand,

4. None must think they have done what is here enjoined, because they have
done the Common Work of all Men. This Mistake began in the Primitive Times, and
continues till ours: There were some then, who thought themselves exempted from
Earthly Masters, by their being Servants of Christ: And how many are there now,
who imagine that if they fast and pray, and read the Bible, and do those things
which every Man in the World ought to do, they have then done all; but they
have something more to do still in their Families or Shops, or Fields, in the
Towns, and Kingdoms, and Churches, of which they are Members.

5. Nor let any so mistake the Apostle, as if he forbad them at any time to
rest from their Labor, or that all manner of Diversion or Curiosity must now
become unlawful. No such matter, there is an (...), a C^ssation from Work,
which is not only lawful, but necessary. Curiosities and Diversions are
natural, and may be not only innocent but useful, and so far from hindering us
in our Business, that they may help us in it.

6. Nor will any, I suppose Infer, that every Man is bound to be a M^chanich,
because St. Paul adds, working with your own hand^, etc. For first, If he had
respect to manual Labor primarily and immediately, when he required them to do
their own Business, yet not only. 2dly, If he had respected that only* yet it
cannot be proved, that he intended hereby to oblige all, but only those
indigent Persons to whom he had a more particular reference, and whose
Employment was of that Nature. 3dly. If he had a reference to all, yet he never
intended to oblige then farther, than would be seemly among the Heathens; and
that they might not be so poor and unjust as to eat other Men's Bread* when they
did nothing toward a Compensation, nothing that would turn to account
answerable to the Meat they eat.

Indeed he obliged them and us all, if our condition were such as that we stood
in need of any thing for the support and Comfort of our Lives, rather to work
with our Hands, stoop to the lowest and most laborious Drudgeries (supposing us
able to undergo them) than continue indigent, or in any un^^coming ways to li^e
on others. This Ob^i^ation, on supposition that our Condition requires it, I do
acknowledge is Universal, and reaches us all. But that absolutely and without
any respect to this, all Men are obliged to be Mechanics, I cannot see; or
that the Apostle intended only working with (...) own Hands.

However, Certainly the Wisdom of those People, who have so great a pai^ of the
World in Subjection, may deserve our consideration, and particularly this
Practice of theirs: For even their Sovereign. Princes are brought up to some
Mechanic Works (and probably our Lord Jesus himself was in his younger years
excercised in the Trade of his supposed Father) They look not on this as
inconsistent with their Grandeur, nor does any decline it because ^e is a
Student^; they know it conducts very much to their Health, and is no way
^^becoming those that have strong Bodies: It may also be a Refuge against a
Storm; the over-r^ling^ Providence may deprive Men of what they have, and then
it would ^e much better to Work then to Beg.

But it is enough to have mentioned these Mistakes; I must not descend to
explain what every Man's particular Office requires of him, nor shall I need,
for every one is the most likely to know, what he ought to do in his Place. I
shall therefore content my self with what I have said in the general
Explication.

Having then resolved that, whatever good Work it is, of which a Man is
naturally capable, and the Divine Providence has given him opportunity of
doing, and has peculiarly fitted him for, and (where that is needful) has
otherwise authorized him to the doing it, much more which God has commanded him
to do, or Men (who have Right so to do) have imposed it on him, or himself has
Voluntarily undertaken, that is his proper Work, his own Business: I now
proceed to those Arguments which persuade us to mind, to do, to be diligent in
this.

III. The considerations which may persuade us that this is very good and
necessary, and according to the Will of God, are such as these.

1. The Account it was in with the wisest of the Heathens.

2. The Testimony which the Holy Scriptures give to it.

3. The suitableness of it to the Nature of Man, and to his State and Condition.

4. The numberless Benefits which flow from it, both upon our selves and
others, upon single Persons and upon Societies. And also the horrible Mischiefs
which arise from the neglect of it.

1. St. Paul gives this as one reason, why they should do their own Business,
that they might walk honestly, [(...)] seemly, toward them that are without:
which plainly implies that when Men minded their own Business, they did that
which was seemly and fit in the account of the Heathens.

It is plain what the great Athenian Lawgivers thought of it by these two or
three Laws: (...); Any one that would, might indite an idle Person; he was, it
seems, outlawed; and the Punishment in Draco's Laws was no less than Death. So
it was also amongst the Egyptians, as Heredotus and Di^dorus Siculus inform us,
from whom probably this Law was brought into Greece.

The other was, (...), That no Man should be of two Professions, or exercise
two Trades. We may suppose one Reason of this to be, lest being divided betwixt
both, they should be good at neither: And another Reason, because as they would
not allow Men to be idle, so neither to be over-busy; they would have them
moderately employed.

And in pursuance of the Design of this Law, which was to keep Men at work,
they required them every Year to appear before that great Court of the
Areopagites, to give an Account how they maintained themselves.

It is a known Story of Menedemus and Asclepiades, who had no visible Estate,
and yet looked well, and lived handsomely, tho they followed the Study of
Philosophy all day, (which it seems was not the way to get^ Livelihood then
neither) which made them to be suspected; and when they were cited into the
Court, they called for the Millers, who testified that they wrought with them
in the Nights, and so earned their Living: Which procured them, not only an
honorable Dismission, but also a great Reward from their Judges.

Besides, They have another Law, whereby they excuse a Son from maintaining his
old and indigent Father, if he had never put him to a Trade.

Nay, amongst them none might be allowed to keep a Servant in his House, who
had not been brought up in some Employment.

To this let me add; That I have not yet observed any flourishing Commonwealth
or Kingdom, where their Lawmakers and Magistrates have not taken care, that
all Men should be employed in some honest useful Calling, and be industrious in
it.

When Rome it self was degenerate, yet one of the Emperors, when he saw an
officious Courtier sprinkling Water before him, to lay the Dust as he walked;
and seeing he expected Thanks for it, told him, That he was so far from
rewarding, that he used to punish Works that deserved much better than his. But
I pass on to some more cogent Arguments.

2. See what the Scripture says in this matter, and it is full and plain.
Besides this, and the parallel Place in 2 Thessalonians. we have St. Paul exhorting
the Romans, chap. 12. 11. that in Business they should not be slothful; which
(by a (...)) signifies they should be sedulous and diligent, active and
industrious. To be earnest and active in Business, he thought very consistent
with Fervency of Spirit, and to be a part of the Service we do to God. And as
he exhorted the Thessalonians to Industry in their Callings, that they might
want nothing themselves; so he charges the Ephesians, that they should work
with their own hands, that they might be able to supply the Wants of others.

Let us hear St. Peter, in 1 Pet. 5. 15. Let (...) of you suffer as a Murderer,
or Thief, or as Evil-doer; that is, a Transgressor by Per^ury, etc. of the
Laws; or as a Busy-body in other Men's Matters. Did Busy-bodies suffer in those
days? Were they punished as Malefactors? Was this counted a Crime? If it were
punished in ours, we must enlarge and multiply our Bridewels.

(...), a kind of Pope, that will not contain himself within his own (...), his
proper Diocese, but will be an Ecumenical Pastor. One that takes upon him the
inspection into other Men's Business, see at what Company the Apostle puts him;
and in the next Verse plainly opposes to these, Suffering as a Christian; he
looked on these as no Christians. Let the pretended Successor of St. Peter well
consider, how far he is guilty of what St. Peter here condemns.

I conclude with St. Jude, who gives us an account of the Sin of the Angels,
which as far as I can understand by the Expressions, was a Violation of this
Precept I am now discoursing of, v. 6. (...). We render the first Words, kept
not their first State; but they may as well be read, they kept not their
Principality, their high Place of Regiment and Power, in which the Sovereign
Lord had set them: They did not discharge the Office they bore in that
Celestial Hierarchy. But some of them, it is likely, affecting an universal
Monarchy in Heaven, and others out of Idleness, left their own Habitation,
deserted their Station, forsook the Province allotted to them; that is,
neglected their own proper Work and Business: For, this is spoken as their Sin,
and not their Punishment; they forsook (not, were cast out of) (...), their
proper Place. (...) may also signify the Place of their Administration, their
Province: I know not whether (...) be not so to be understood, when it is said,
that Moses was faithful in all his House.

If this were the Sin of the Angels, as it seems not improbable; it should be a
Warning to us how we desert our Station, and neglect our own Business, and so
either become idle and useless, or troublesome to others, and perhaps rebellious
against our Governors, as they may be thought to has been: For, if we commit
the Sin, we must expect to fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. So much for
Scripture.

3. To do a Man's own Business, is very suitable to Humane Nature, and the
Condition in which it is here. In the Nature and State of Man here, these
Things are observable:

1. He is endowed with many active Powers, which were never intended by the
wise Contriver to lie idle, and do nothing. What means this Shop of Tools which
we have in our Body, if they must never be used? Man's Body is the House where
his Soul must dwell: It must be (...), whilst in this State, the Soul must act
with and by the Body.

2. That he is limited in his Presence, and Power, and Knowledge. He cannot be
in many Places at once, nor endure to be in perpetual motion; nor can he so
well understand and act, but very little at a distance. Now by all these things
he seems to be directed and determined by his Nature and State, to some
Business that is near him; for, he can best understand and act where he is
present. I said, Man and many Faculties, but they are not sufficient for every
Work, for they may as well be over as under-wrought.

3. He does that most willingly, which he has been accustomed to do, and which
he can do with most ease, and most perfectly. And this we may suppose of his
own Business: For probably a Man falls upon that Profession, to which he has
either been trained up by his Parents, or to which his own Inclination has led
him. Now that in which he has been instructed and exercised, or to which he
has been inclined, will be most easy to him: for he understand it best, and has
greatest Skill in it, and has likewise the greatest and most frequent
Opportunities of doing it.

He that leaves his own Work, which he is fittest for, and meddles with the
Affairs of others, by this means neglects what he can best do, and faulters in
the doing that for which he is not qualified.

4. He must be most concerned to do it, and best affected to it: For, he has a
great Love to, and Care of himself, and a natural Affection to his Kindred, and
those who are near him; he is more sensibly moved by them than others, and by
them when they are near him, than when at a distance?

Now this is a considerable part of a Man's Business, to provide for himself
and Family; to order matters so, that it may be well with his Wife, Children,
and Relations. If he has so little Love for himself, as not to do his own Work,
who does he think will do it?

5. There is such a fitness in it, that it would be a great Injustice for any
Man: not to do his own Work. God has committed to his Care a proper Depositum,
a particular Trust is laid on him by the great Governor of the World, which is,
That he do that Good which the Place in which he stands, and the Relation he
bears to others, calls for. If he be a Parent, he is to see to the Education of
his Children; if a Magistrate, to the keeping of the Laws of the Society; if a
Minister, to instruct his People in their Duty. And whosoever does not the
Duties of these and such Places, they are unjust.

Or in whatsoever Employment any one is, if he does not what he pretends to, if
he takes upon himself a Profession, but neglects to do the Work of i^* he is a
Liar, a Hypocrite, makes a show of what he does not do; promises, but performs
not; bears Men in hand, makes them rely on him, but deceives and disappoints
them.

He that does not suum opus facere, cannot suum cuique tribue^e; for the
Necessities of others, his Family, his Country, challenge this from him.

6. It is fit for every Man to be doing his own Business, because if he do not
this, he will be doing something else for which he is not so fit. If he does
not his own, he will be a-doing other Men's, and so will be guilty of two great
Faults, neglecting what he is fit to do, and offering to do what he is unfit
for, as I have already suggested. And to this I might add, that every Man is
accountable for his own Work, and not for other Men's.

On all these Accounts Man is fittest for his own Work. And if Order be
observed, every thing will be put to that use for which it is fittest, because
probably every thing will then attain its End. But how unbecoming and ugly, how
vain and ineffectual is it, to use Things to other purposes than those they are
fitted for?

If the Ox and Horse should change Conditions, as the Poet expresses it, Optat
Ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus;


The Saddle would not sit well upon the Ox, nor the Yoke upon the Horse: Just
so unseemly, so to no purpose will it be, for one Man to undertake another's
Business.

The last Argument by which I would engage all Men to a diligent Attendance on
their own proper Business, is, from the numberless Benefits which will flow in
upon us and others, if we do thus.

Let Reason be heard, let your own Experience and Observation be consulted, let
the Records of Ancient Times be looked into, and these will all bear witness to
this Truth.

They will assure us, that Industry is the best Preserver and Restorer of
Health; that the Bed of Idleness becomes very often a sick Bed; that a needless
Medler in other Men's Matters, very frequently loses his Life for a punishment
of his vain Curiosity.

And is not this the plain and sure Way to Riches? Have you observed many of
those that mind their Business, fall into Want? I deny not but Accidents may
befall them, by the overruling Providence. The Battle is not always to the
Strong, nor the Race to the Swift; but ordinarily it is. And the best way for a
Man to secure his Estate from such Accidents, is to be at his Business. Time
and Chance happens to all Things; but commonly Solomon's Observation holds, The
diligent Hand makes rich.

I appeal again to your Experience, whether those that break amongst us, be the
Industrious, the Sedulous, the Shopkeepers, the Men that mind their own
Affairs; or rather the Idle, the Men who are in all places, and thrusting
themselves into every Man's Company and Business.

Our neighboring Commonwealth puts it out of doubt, that Industry is the
Highway to Wealth. They have no Mines, but this has brought home the Indies,
and has made a Place that is barren of all things, to be the Storehouse of
these Western Parts of the World.

Nor is this the way to Riches only, but also to Honor. See thou, says
Solomon, a Man diligent in his Business? He shall stand before Kings, he shall
not stand before mean Men; he shall be exalted. There are few Men who are so
unfit for, or so averse from the Business of their Calling, but by diligence
they may attain to a Mastery, to have a perfection in it; and if they do, let
it be what it will, they will be praised whilst they live, and when they die,
be remembered with esteem.

But is it thus with the idle Man? No; as he is dead whilst he lives, and as
his Soul, so his Name is perished before his Body. No Man was ever esteemed for
sleeping, nor is a Bed, but a Field, the Place of Honor. Have the trifling
busy Medlers ever been known to gain a Reputation? No; they have constantly
been the Subject of Reproaches and Scorn. How are they exposed by the
Descriptions that are given of them?

Says one, Est Ardelionum Romae quad^^ natio, trepide concursans, occupata in
o^^o, gratis anhelans, mult^ agendo nihil agens, sibi m^lesta, and aliis
odiosissima.

But I stay too long on these lesser Advantages. Let us go on to consider what
benefit accrues to the Soul by Men's diligence in their Callings, and minding
their own proper Business. This ministers both to our Virtue, and to our Quiet.

First; To our Virtue.

1. I need not say what an Hedge this is to Virtue; from how many Temptations
Business secures us, to which we are exposed by Idleness and Meddling.

2. By this our Understandings are preserved. The idle Man loses his for want
of Exercise; he has only some fluttering Conceits, and they are for the most
part superficial, but he can have no orderly Series of Thoughts. And the busy
Intruder into other Men's Business, the (...), his Thoughts are so distracted,
that he loses his Soul in a Crowd, in too much Business, as the other did in
too little: He has no vacancy, no leisure for Reflection, but is always going
out of himself.

3. This is an Occasion for the Exercise of many Virtues. Every Man's
particular ^^siness is the Stage, the Theater in which (...) Virtue is acted
and seen, the Sphere in which he moves and shines. He has here an Opportunity
to exercise his Prudence and his Justice, his Temperance and his Patience. And
it is a kind of Nursery, from whence they may be transplanted into a more
public Employment. In the best times of the Christian Church, they that were
admitted into the Priesthood, were such as had first ruled their own Houses
well; and after they had discharged the Office of a Deacon, so as to be
approved, were then made Presbyters. And never did the Roman Government prosper
more, than when they fetched their Dictator from the Plow.

4. This will help to perfect Virtue: For, this brings it into Act, and it is
never perfect till then. Whilst it stays in Thoughts and Desires, in Designs
and Resolutions, it i^ an Embryo; it is not complete till it come forth in
action.

5. This will help to preserve a Man from entertaining wild and unpracticable
Conceits in Religion, from running out into airy and useless Speculations, to
fond Conceits, and groundless Imaginations, which are usually the Products of
idle Contemplatists, and are never confuted till they be brought to Practice,
which is a Touchstone to try them. For, whatever Men's Thoughts are in their
Retirement, if they be not practical, or do not assist us in our Practices,
they are not true, nor good.

Secondly; As doing our own Business ministers to our Virtue, so likewise to
our Quiet. I appeal to Experience, if it be not, and to Reason, if it must not
be so, that he who faithfully discharges the Duties of his Employment, will be
at peace within himself; when the idle Person is tormented with the Conscience
of his Neglect, and the Over-busy is distracted with the Multiplicity of his
Business, and the Medler is disquieted with the needless Hazards he runs, and
with the sense of vain and hopeless Attempts.

It is with many of these that are so busy abroad, as it is with some
Travelers, who when they are in other Countries, are unquiet because they are
not in their own; and when they are there, they are uneasy, because they are
not in Travel: So these Men are restless because they do not their own
Business; and when they are about that, they are so used to variety and
rambling, that they have no quiet.

There are three things which greatly disquiet Men:

1. When they have no one settled, fixed End, which they prosecute. 2. When they
propound to themselves an End which they cannot attain. 3. When they are in so
close a pursuit of their Design, that they have no Rest, or Time to consider
what they are doing, or whereabout they are.
Nor is this well-guided Industry beneficial to a Man's self alone, but to
others also; his Family, his Neighborhood are the better for it: If he be in
public place, the Church, the Kingdom in which he is, are served by his
well-regulated Diligence.

On the contrary, how many, how fatal are those Mischiefs, which he who
neglects his own, and thrusts himself into other Men's Businesses, brings upon
Families, upon Towns, Churches, nay, and whole Kingdoms? when the Tradesmen
will not stay in their Shops, but must leap into the Pulpit, etc.

I need not be particular, but I will represent this by such Similitudes as
these: Whilst the River keeps its Course in the Channel, it is pleasant, it
does no harm, the Stream will carry Vessels from one place to another, and the
Water is preserved; but if it leap over the Banks, spread it self all over
Fields of Corn, it does great Mischief, and is lost in the Ground.

If the Fire keep in the Chimney, its proper place, it is pleasant and useful;
but if it move into every part of the Room, and every Place of the House, it
then proves mischievous.

The Poets have represented the Folly and Mischief of busying one's self in
other Men's Affairs, in Phaeton, who would needs mount his Father's Chariot,
undertake a thing in which he had no Skill; but what came of it? Himself was
thrown out of Heaven, and the World had almost been set on fire.

To come nearer: In a Ship, how necessary is it for every Man to mind his
Business? how dangerous, if he neglect? How careful is every Man to do his own?
If any one fail, it may cost his own Life, and all theirs that are with him. Of
so great efficacy is this, that they are preserved by it, in the midst of
Waves, and Winds, and Rocks.

In an Army every Soldier must observe his Orders, must keep his Rank: if he
do not, if he will not obey, but give Command, by this he hazards his own Life,
and endangers the Loss of the whole Army.

I add but one more: How much the Community depends on every Man's doing his
Office; his own proper Work appears by the natural Body, in which if any one
part fail in its Function, the Whole suffers; and if the Body be kept in a good
state of Health, every Member in it must do that for which by Nature it was
fitted.

I need make no Application, nor add any more on this Particular; for there is
no Man of any Observation, but sees how much the Quiet of Families, of
Neighbors, nay, and of Kingdoms, depends on this regular, orderly Industry:
For, who are the Talebearers, the Persons that cause Anger in Families, that do
the Devil's Work in fowing Discord amongst Friends and Brethren? Who are the
Picklocks of, and Pryers into other Men's Secrets, the Observers of others, the
Story-tellers, the Makebates? Are they not the Idle?

Who are they that sit in Judgment on every Man? Who call their Governors to
account? Who gravely blame their Councils, and censure them for impolitick or
unjust Administration? Are they not Men that neglect their own Business?

If others were as vain as they, and would be as inquisitive into their
Affairs, as they are into other Men's; might they not discover as many
Miscarriages in them, as they do in others? Why, Thou Hypocrite, first (...)
the Beam out of thine own Eye: Thou that judge another, judge thy self. First
do thine own Business, and then I dare say, thou will not be so much at
leisure, or have no great list to meddle with other Men.

Thus I have represented some of the Advantages that arise from Men's doing
their own Work, and the Mischiefs which follow on the neglect of it. They are
either idle, and do nothing; or needlessly, and foolishly, and mischievously
busy, and so do worse than nothing. And both ways bring innumerable Mischiefs
on themselves, and are the Authors of the greatest Disturbances and Calamities
in Human Society.

In short then, that I may conclude this Discourse. Such who spend their Time
in doing nothing, let me ask them, Why will they stand all the day idle? I am
sure they cannot answer me, as they in the Parable, No one has set us to work:
For, the great Lord and Master of us all, has sent us into this his Vineyard,
that we should labor in it; he has given us a Charge to promote the Perfection
and Happiness of our selves, and of our Brethren; and has directed us to the
particular ways in which we are to do it, by the natural and acquired Abilities
he has given us, and by our outward Condition, and the Relations we are in to
others, and the Opportunities we have; has shown us particularly what is that
Good which he would have us do.

God and our own Nature, the Necessities of our private Relations, and perhaps
also the Service of the Public, call aloud to us, that we would up and be
doing; that we would pull our hands out of our Bosom, and be at work.

Consider also, when the Time shall come when we must receive according to our
Works, how we shall be abashed and confounded, if we have spent our Life in
Sloth and Idleness, if we have, like that idle Servant, laid up our Talent in a
Napkin.

I would hope that this Discourse is less needful in this Renowned City, where
you have learned by long experience, that whatever some mistaken Gentlemen may
think or say to the contrary, your Business is not only your Profit, but your
Honor.

I will therefore say something to the other sort, at whom the Apostle aimed in
this Exhortation, those that are idly and very evilly busy, that spend much of
their Time in observing other Men, are very inquisitive what others do, but
observe not themselves. They, like those Women in 1 Timothy 5. 13. are first idle,
and then asking concerning others, (as Gr^^ius renders (...)) and Pratlers, and
then speaking things they ought not; for in many Words must be Vanity. They
speak against their Neighbors, against their Governors; nay, and perhaps stay
not there, but go on, and open their Mouths against Heaven; they blaspheme God,
and speak evil of his Administration of Things.

Let me a little plead with you. And first I will ask you, Have you so much
leisure over from your own Business, as to take upon you the Care of others
Concerns, and such as do not in the least appertain to you?

1. Have you done your own Business? or have you done it so well? Have you so
discharged your Office, your Trust? if you have not, mind what belongs to you.
Be not dressing other Men's Vineyards, whilst you neglect your own; nor be so
your Brother's Keeeper, as not to be Keeper of your self.

2. Again, Let me ask you, Who made you a Judge? Has God made you a Censor of
the Manners and Ways of your Brethren? Where is your Commission? And ^hy will
you meddle with that which concerns you not? Why will you run whither neither
Charity nor Wisdom sends you? Why will you do so foolish, so vain, so hazardous
a thing as this? Why will you cease to live the innocent and useful Lives of
Men, and live the Life of Flies; wondrous busy, posting from one place to
another, making a great Buz, spoiling many things, mending nothing, causing a
disturbance, blowing upon every thing, but doing nothing to any good purpose?

If any think themselves too much confined, and that a larger Sphere would
better become their great Minds; I desire them to consider the Apologue: If the
Candle should think it self confined in the Lanthorn, and therefore take it
self out, and set it self upon a great Hill, it would neither be so secure it
self, nor so useful to others; it would be in danger to be blown out; and
whilst it burned, it would not serve the Necessities of Men so well as it did
in the Lanthorn.

To conclude; Remember, I beseech you, the Time is coming, when it will be
required of every one of us, what we have done with the Talent, those Parts,
and those Opportunities which were committed to us; and how we have behaved our
selves in that Station and Place in which we are set; and how every one of us,
Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, Servants, Merchants, Mechanics, discharged
our several Work we undertook.

Let us all therefore be persuaded, first, to show Piety at home, to rule well
our own House, our own Province; to be true to our Trusts, and faithful in the
discharge of every Office in which we are; to do carefully our own Work,
whatever it be; that so when the great Lord shall come, he may find us All to
have been faithful and good Stewards: And we may then hear him saying,
Well-done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a few things;
thou shall receive more.

Amen. Amen.
OF STUDYING TO BE QUIET.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4. 11. And that ye study to be Quiet.
THE Apostle is here after his manner, crowding together and heaping his
Exhortations on one another: This he usually does without any respect to their
Connection with, and Dependence on each other: He knew the Cognation of all
Virtues to be such, that any one disposes to any, to every one. Yet in this
place there is a more than ordinary Coherence betwixt the Exhortations: For,
Brotherly Love certainly will make Men live quietly: He that loves another
heartily cannot lightly disturb him (...) and he (...) quiet and peaceable,
will do his own Business* and not busily meddle with other Men's.

That this Exhortation of the Apostle deserves our great regard, will, I hope,
appear upon consideration, however some may slight it, either because it is
plain and easy, Or, because it seems no part of Religion.

Such may consider that the most ^se^^^ and necessary Truths are always most
plain and certain; and that they who despise what is clear and evident, and
value what is more mystical and obscure should by the same Reason prefer the
Twilight or Nigh^ before the Day.

Nor is this Mistake absurd only, but dangerous: For, from hence it is that Men
take off their Minds from the most necessary and fundamental Articles of Faith
(which are always most plain and evident) and earnestly contend for doubtful
Opinions, and questionable Doctrines. To this also it is to be imputed, that
too many from a Principle of Religion, practice Folly and ^^dness: For, when
they once despise those low and plain Methods; wherein God ^^^ws Man what is
good; when they will not observe their own Natures, nor value those Precepts of
Scripture, which are within the reach of every Capacity; They fall into
abundance of useless Observances, and too often into most destructive
Practices. When they will not keep that ^ath, which God by Nature and Scripture
has made plain, they wander into impassible and dangerous ways.

As for those who will not allow this Text to belong to Religion: They look
upon it as Advice given them, how to manage their secular and domestic
Affairs, and that it has no relation to their Spiritual State; Or at best, that
it is only a piece of Morality, which they allow to come no farther than the
Court of the Gentiles; that it might be a proper Argument for the Discourse of
a Heathen, but not of a Minister of Christ.

To these I say, that this is indeed excellent Counsel, and very advantageous
to Men's secular Interests; but it is also of great moment to our Spiritual
State, the Welfare of our Souls.

We must not oppose Soul and Body, the present and the future Life. Godliness,
or the Christian Religion, has Precepts as well as Promises, whereby it is
profitable to the Life that now is, as well as to that which is to come. But I
beseech you take care how you separate Morality from Religion, this will prove
the most (...) Division, the most dangerous Schism that ever was, it will be as
the Separation of Soul and Body, it will be the Dissolution, the Death of
Religion.

There is no such Gulf betwixt these two, as they imagine, who confine Religion
to those Actions which immediately respect God; no, it extends it self to the
whole course of our Lives: Nay, let us not undervalue Morality, as if it did
not (if rightly understood) make the far greatest part of our Religion; or as
if it were not necessary to make us good and happy; for nothing can be more
necessary than that is, nothing can be so necessary as that.

This I premise, that no Prejudice whatsoever may make the Apostle's
Exhortation less effectual: The particular occasion of which seems to have been
this: There were those among the Thessalonians, who were thrusting themselves
into other Men's Business and Concerns, but neglected their own, by which they
occasioned Trouble to themselves, and Disturbance to their Neighbors. The
Apostle therefore, willing to reform this great Abuse and Disorder, and to
remove and prevent all that Disquiet and Disturbance which rose from it: He
requires them in general, To study to be quiet, i. e. to keep themselves and
others out of Trouble, to do nothing that may cause, or, but occasion
disquiets, to omit nothing that may keep them off. And in particular, he
advises them to do their own Business, which implies that they should not
meddle with other Men's; this having been the Inlet to, and Cause of those
Disturbances which had been amongst them.

This appears to have been the occasion of these Words. In discoursing of
which, I shall,

I. Explain and declare what is the Duty here enjoined.

II. Shall offer some Reasons of it.

III. Shall lay down Directions, and give some Advices, whereby we may be
assisted in doing it. And having shown what it is we are to do, and why, and
how it is to be done, I shall conclude with a short Reflection upon the whole.

I. For Explication of the Words. That which we here render, to study,
signifies such an earnest Contention, as Men use when they are in pursuit of
Honor: therefore it denotes the showing our greatest Care, and exerting our
utmost Endeavors.

That about which we are required to be so earnest, is to be quiet ((...))
which Word when it is applied to natural Agents, signifies Rest, the Absence
of, and the Opposite to Motion: When it is transferred to moral, we understand
by it a Privation or Cessation from some voluntary Action or Passion, which may
be either good or bad, but is for the most part bad, either physically or
morally, or both. So this Word is rendered, to keep silence, in the Acts; and in
St. Luke, to rest from Work; in other Authors it is commonly put for Truce and
Peace, and is opposed to War; and likewise to (...), to being unduly and
over-busy; and indeed to all Trouble whatsoever, a quiet and a troubled Mind
are Expressions of two very contrary States, as all understand them.

I suppose the Apostle might use the Word in this large Sense, and so give a
general Precept on a particular occasion of the Troubles that arose from some
Men's Negligence in their own Affairs, and Pragmatlcalness in other Men's, to
which he chiefly referred: And I shall have regard to this also in my
Discourse, tho I shall not confine my self to it, but shall consider Quiet more
largely, as it denotes freedom from other Troubles, besides those that have
their Rise from the meddling with matters that belong not to us.

Some perhaps may here enquire, whether this Precept be universal, and how far
it obliges, whether in all Cases, or in some only? I answer;

1. This reaches Christians of all Times and Places, as well as those that
lived in Thessalonica 1600 Years ago. For, it was not founded on any
particular, but on general and eternal Reasons, and is a Law to us all.

2. I cannot say it obliges us either to be our selves, or to keep others
always quiet, (for in many Cases; this is neither possible, nor fit, nor
beneficial) yet it does lay this Obligation on us, always to intend and aim at,
to pursue and endeavor after it, even in those very Instances where it would
be evil and mischievous to us, if we were not under some present Disquiet, we
are in and by those particular Troubles to seek after Quiet.

And when we are, and it is good we should be under some Discomposure, yet
ought we to take care, that we be not prodigal of this Treasure, and that we
forego no more than Necessity extorts; i. e. we ought not, where we can help
it, to suffer our selves to be more or longer under Trouble, than will serve
for the attaining some greater good, some greater and more lalbing
Tranquillity. As much as is possible, we should take care never to suffer our
selves to be disturbed, unless it be in order to something that is better, and
will be attended with a greater Quiet than that was, of which by this Trouble
we were dispossessed.

If we do otherwise, we make a very foolish Bargain: for, we shall part with a
present and certain Good (as Quiet is) for something that is worse, or that we
are not sure of obtaining. We must do in this case, as Merchants do, when they
are in danger of Shipwrac^* then, and not till they be out of hopes to save
themselves any other way, will they throw their Goods overboard. We must never
part with our Quiet, but to gain something better by it: part with it as the
Husbandman does with his Seed, which he throws into the Gro^nd; forego some
present Quiet, that it may be re^^ored unto us with great Increase.

Thus then we are obliged to be quiet in all cases, where it is good so to be;
and it is good (as all things else are) as far as it has a Tendency to the
Perfection, and best State of our selves and others: and wherever it will
contribute more to this, than the contrary Trouble, there it is not only
positively, but comparatively good, and (...) to be preferred.

This, I think, is as much as is necessary (...) be said for the Satisfaction
of this Enquity, how far we are obliged to be Quiet, viz. (...) all Instances,
where we do not know that (...) is better to be disquieted; that is, why that
is absolutely necessary to procure so^^ greater Good, and so to make way for
greater and more durable Quiet.

This may suffice to show how far we (...) obliged to keep our selves quiet,
(...) something more should be added concerning the Obligation that lies on us
as to others. Two things I shall advertise.

1. That we cannot judge so well for that as we may for our selves, when it
will be best for them to be disturbed; and consequently it will be seldomer
that we must deprive them of their Quiet, than we may forgo our own For, we
must never do this, but when we know it is best, and that we can very hardly
know of other Men. But this is not (...) neither. For,

2. We must also know, that we are fitted with Skill and Power, and qualified
with Authority to give them this Disquiet. For how profitable soever it might
be to them yet if we be not thus instructed and authorized for the doing it, we
must not do it E. g. I a private Man, must not take upon me to punish another
Man's Child or Servant, tho his Father, or Master, or the Magistrate may.

By what has been said, may appear, how far this Precept of Studying to be
Quiet is obligatory; and it does appear to be of a large extent. For there are
few Instances, wherein we can say concerning our selves, that it is better and
more conducing to our happiness, that we be in Trouble than in Quiet.

And there are fewer, in which we can pronounce thus concerning other Men, who
are less known to us than our selves. And where we can come to any certainty
concerning them, yet for the most part we want Wisdom to manage their
Disturbance to such an advantage, or Warrant from the Laws to undertake it.

Our Savior would not give Sentence betwixt two Brothers, when one of them
de^^ed it; and it was on this account, because he was not authorized, Luke 12.
14. Man, ^^^th he, who has made ((...)) who has constituted me a Judge or
Arbitrator amongst you?

II. I proceed now to give Reasons why we must use our utmost endeavor to be
quiet our selves, and do nothing to trouble and disturb other Men, but all we
can to make and keep them quiet too. They are all contained in this one, viz.
Quiet is so excellently and so un^^^erably Good, and Trouble has always so much
Evil in it, and is almost always so ^^rtful, or at least unprofitable, that if
we be duly affected to things, we must strive to be Quiet with all our Might.

We shall be convinced of this, if we consider the following Particulars.

1st. That to be Quiet is the Desire of all Men that have ever been. The very
Soldier himself, who of all Men seems Ieash to regard it, yet makes this his
Motto, Pax B^ll^ ^^^renda: By all the Noise and Shouting, the clattering of
Armor, and roaring of Cannons, he hopes to attain a firmer Peace at the last.
And how sweet, how welcome is it to him when it comes?

The Common People, as many of them as have the Wisdom to understand the
goodness of their Condition, how far are they from envying the High and the
Great* How do they applaud their own State? And it is merely from this
consideration, that they can be Quiet, when the other live in Noise and
Hurly-burly* and their Souls are in a Hurry* and Tumult. On the contrary* those
great and rich Men envy the others Quiet. All their Wealth and Honor does not
satisfy them without this; and this, with a very little Portion of those*
other things, makes the mean Man contented. Thus both of them confirm Solomon's
Observation, Prove. 17. 1. Better is a dry Mors^l with Quietness, than a House
full of Sacrifice^ with ^^rife.

Now if that be good which all d^sir^* then we must conclude it very good to be
Quiet; because if any thing be, this is the Universal Desire of all Sorts and
Conditions* of all Ages and Sexes. In whatsoever the Old and the Young, the
Learned and the Ignorant Man differ, yet they agree in this, they all intend as
much Quiet to themselves as they can have, and to avoid trouble.

2. This is one great end of the two great Ordinances of Heaven, the Magistracy
and the Ministry, to keep Peace amongst Men; for this cause especially Laws are
made, and for this cause they are executed. That which is principally designed
by all wise Governors, is, as is commonly expressed, the peace and Prosperity of
their Subjects.

And if we of the Ministry understand our own Function, and prosecute the true
end of it, I am sure we shall be the Peacemakers of the World. For there is
nothing more evident, than that this is a great part of the design of that
Gospel which we preach; and any Man may discern this to be the necessary result
of the Christian Institution, to make Men Peac^able. So that if we preach the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and pursue the true ends of our Office, we shall
promote (...) on Earth, and Good Will amongst Men.

And if any of us be found Dividers and Troublers, Breakers of the Peace,
Sowers of Discord, Contentious, and not Healers of Breaches, Enders of strife,
and Peacemakers, we may call our selves Ministers of Christ, but he will not
own us as such at that great Day.

3. I conclude the great goodness of Qui^^, and the evil of Trouble, when I
observe that it has been the Way of God with Man, in almost all his
Dispensations toward him, to keep us from great Disquiets.

When he first manifested himself to Adam after his disobedience, how sedately
does he reason it with him and Eve? and it was in the cool of the Day; the time
fittest for Quiet Meditation.

Afterward, when he was pleased to visit Noah, and to make a Covenant with
Abr^ham, and renewed it with Isaac and Jacob, how did he lay aside Majesty, and
appear to them in such a manner, that they seem not at all to have been
terrified? as their familiar Conference makes very plain. In the giving of the
Law on Sinai, though the Divine* Wisdom thought it necessary to make some
Impressions on the fears of a People, that were sunk below more ingenuous
Principles, yet that terrible Sight was at a distance from them, and they
received the Law from Moses, a Man like themselves.

And in all the old Dispensation, when God manifested himself and his Will to
the Prophets, and by them to the rest of Mankind, how well did all his
Administrations comport, with the calm and composed Frame of Man's Mind? That
which was once said, might be said almost generally of all the Divine
Appearances to Man; that God was not in the Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in
the Fire, Kings 19. 11. (all terrible things) but in the still Voice.

But that which makes this undeniable* is the last and great Administration of
Humane Affairs, by God's only begotten Son, and by his Holy Spirit. The Son of
God became Man, and took upon him the form of a Servant, that we might think
of, and address to him without any Discomposure. And how quietly did he behave
himself? He indeed fulfilled the Prophecy which said, that he should not cry,
nor lift up, nor cause his Voice to be heard in the Street.

As he was meek and lowly all his Life, so at his Death, like a Sheep before
his Shearers is ^^mb, so he opened not his mouth. If at any time he clad
himself in Zeal, and appeared in Anger, yet this troublesome Passion was in him
so moderate and calm, and under the Government of Wisdom and Charity, that it
neither discomposed him, nor those with whom he conversed.

The holy Spirit of God in his most plentiful effusions, had not this effect to
make Men raving and frantic, but calm and composed. All his Influences fall on
our Souls gently and easily: he does not use Violence and Force, but moves us
naturally. He does not afright and amaze, but insinuate; nor suddenly excite
vehement Passions, but instruct and teach; and in this natural way raises those
Affections that are consequent on, and do comport with the use of our Minds.

If we take a view of all the Methods which the Wisdom of God has used with us,
we shall observe that his Doctrine has ^i^^illed on us as the Dew, and his
Speech has dr^pp'd as the Rain, as the small Rain on the tender Grass: as Moses
said of his, that is, gently and gradually, and in no such way as might
astonish and dismay us. As there was no noise of Axes and Hammers in building
the Temple at Jerusalem, so neither has any noise been in building the Temple,
of which that was a Type, the Christian Church.

Since then God has been pleased to administer humane affairs in so quiet and
still a way, as not to put us into the least Discomposure, we cannot but
conclude, that a quiet even frame of Spirit, is with God a thing of great
Price, and therefore most excellently Good.

4. If any desire yet further assurance in this matter, let him consider the
Nature of Man. Let him consider it both Singly and in Society, and see if
Quietness be not exceedingly well suited to it, and if the contrary be not very
incongruous.

Let any one that sees a Man in Fury and Rage, or under any disturbance, say if
he be himself, if this become him. On the contrary, if he see him quiet and
composed, and reason calmly and cooly, this is a pleasing Sight; now he acts as
he thinks a Man should.

It is for Lions and Tigers, for Bears and Wolves to roar and howl and rage;
but this is not fit for Men; it belongs to them to reason, and to be wise, and
judge truly of things; but Wisdom and Unquietness are seldom consistent
together.

And for Society, though it is a most lovely thing when the Members of it are all
united in a firm Peace; yet when they are Quarrel some and Contentious, when
they are cashing with each others Interests, there is not a more horrid Monster
to be found than this; It appears ugly and deformed to all Men.

From whence it appears, that Quietness is most agreeable to Humane Nature,
whether alone or incorporated in Society; and consequently highly good and
commendable.

I need not add to this, how well it becomes us, as Christians, to be quiet. I
will only say this, he that has the Faith of Christ, what should dismay or
disquiet him? He may triumph over all the troublers of other Men's Peace, and
say that none of them all shall discompose him.

5. To this we may add the numberless Advantages, which arise from being quiet,
both to Single Persons and to Bodies of Men. He that keeps himself undisturbed,
has a clear understanding, a perfect freedom, and is hereby enabled to the
best Discharge of all the Functions of his Mind. He enjoys a great and constant
satisfaction: this being the State of (and according to Epicurus) the highest
Pleasure.

In short, this Man has attained to a great degree of happiness already, and
is in the ready way to the most consummate Perfection and Bliss of which he is
capable.

6. This is intrinsecal to, and an essential part of Happiness, insomuch that
it cannot be without it. No Man that is in trouble is happy, and no Man that is
quiet can be thought miserable.

After all this, which is but a short summary of what might be said to show the
goodness, the profitableness, the absolute necessity of Quiet, sure every one
will set an high value on this most inestimable Jewel, and will by no means
prodigally throw away his own, nor uncharitably hinder other Men's Quiet. Nay,
I hope every one will by the excellent Goodness of this be persuaded to be so
wise as to provide for, and secure Quiet to himself: and that he will also, in
all prudent and fit ways bestir himself, that all others may live quiet and
peaceable Lives as well as himself.

Since therefore Quiet is so necessary to so great a part of humane Happiness,
out of the desire we have that both we and others should be happy, let us
endeavor to keep them and our selves quiet: and as we would not be accessory
to our own, or their misery, let us not trouble our selves or them.

III. I proceed now to the Directions and Advices, whereby we may be assisted
in the Performance of this great and good Duty.

I begin with those, that respect every Man's own Quiet. Indeed this is in the
first place to be looked to; because it will have a mighty Influence on the
Quiet of others. There is nothing more truly observed than this, that if a Man
be at Peace within himself, he will behave himself peaceably to others. And
accordingly we may see, that all they who are the Disturbers of the Peace of
Societies, are unquiet in their own Minds. They have unsatisfied Desires,
ungoverned Appetites, tumultuous Passions, a War within their own Breasts;
Understanding and Will, Reason and Passions are at variance: How can it be
then, but that as they are in themselves, they should be to others?

He that does not keep Peace within himself, how is it to be expected he should
keep it in his Family, or Neighborhood; in the Church or State wherein he
lives? The first Springs of all the Disorders, Commotions, Tumults, Wars in the
World, are the Disorders and Commotions that are in the Minds of private Men.

My general Counsel to particular Persons is, That they would strive after
Perfection, or all Good in themselves and others, by a diligent, constant,
orderly Exercise of all their Faculties, and pursuit of all their Inclinations.

The reason of this Advice is, That we naturally and necessarily desire the
Perfection of our selves or others, and we cannot be quiet but in the
Accomplishment of that great Desire, which our great Creator has implanted in
our Natures, and has rooted so deep, that it can never be separated from them.

More particularly; Let us above all keeping, keep a good Conscience, a
Conscience void of Offense toward God and Men. Let us undertake every thing
with the Counsel of our own Mind, and do every thing so as to have our own
Approbation, and to have reason to believe that we are approved by God, and by
all wise and good Men. If we do thus, we do well, and that is the only firm
Foundation of inward Peace.

On the other hand, There is no Peace to the Wicked, but he is like the
troubled Sea, whose Waters cast up M^^e and Dirt. He is troublesome to himself,
and he that is so, will be troublesome to others.

This is the Sum of the Advice I would give, in order to our being quiet in our
selves, Live well, do good, be holy and virtuous.

And if we would endeavor that others may be quiet, as we our selves are, let
us endeavor to promote their Holiness, and Virtue, and Perfection, as we do
our own: For assuredly, an unmovable Quiet, and a sure and lasting Peace, can
be set on no other Foundation, but Holiness and Virtue. So much are they
mistaken, who think to make Men quiet, by making them vicious, and wicked, or
by lessening their Understanding.

They that govern the World, and design the Peace of it, would do well to
observe, if this course they take, be the way to make any Man quiet in himself;
if Ignorance and Wickedness will make him peaceable within, then they may
expect the same success from them in Societies and States: but if most of our
inward Trouble rise from these Springs: Why should it not be thought that they
will have the same Effects in others, which they have in us, in Communities as
in private Persons; and that they will as much disturb the World, as they do
the Mind where they are?

No, if Politicians would observe, they might take notice, that as Satisfaction
of Appetites, and pursuit of the Inclinations, which are natural, and the
neglect of those that are not; the constant and orderly exercise of all our
natural Faculties in a tendency to the perfection of the whole, is the only
way to procure an universal and lasting Quiet in a Man's own Mind; so neither
is there any other way to procure the Peace of all Men.

Yet more particularly; the Sum of what I should advise for the removing and
obviating Trouble, and the procuring and preserving Quiet in our selves and
among Men, is;

1. That we should oppose no Man's true Interest, where that does not oppose
the public and greater Good.

2. That we should reconcile it with, nay, as much as is possible, make it our
own, as indeed it is, since no Man can be happy if another be miserable. No Man
can be quiet in himself, while another that is by him is in trouble.

3. Be willing to remit of, and recede from your own strict Right, if that
will contribute to Peace. So Abraham did with Lot, tho being the elder, and
his Uncle, he might, if he would, have insisted on it, have had the choice,
yet he leaves it to Lot: See, the Land is before thee, said he, etc.

4. Keep your selves innocent, hurt no Man by Word or Deed; let no Man be the
worse for you: Do ill to none, speak ill of none. Do not take upon you to be
an Historian, an Intelligencer of Men's Faults, nor ever uncover the Shame and
Nakedness of your Brother, but when Necessity compels, and Charity incites you.

5. Be just: Allow every Man that which the Laws of Nature and Society have
given him. Entrench the Rights, invade the Properties of no Man: do not abridg
him of that which God and Nature, or Men have conferred on him; or, which by
his own Virtue, his Prudence, Care and Industry he has acquired.

6. Be universally charitable; that is, be willing to contribute what in you
lies, to every Man's Happiness. Maintain a constant Disposition to Goodness and
Benignity. Hate none, envy none: Love not only your self, or a few, but all.

7. Be diligent in your own Business: for by this means, you,

(1.) Will have more Liberty, and be better able to assist others. Work, says
the Apostle, that ye may have to give to him that needs. The diligent Man does
not only get that which is sufficient for his own Necessity, but an Overplus
for other Men: whereas the idle Man, his own Mouth (as Solomon says) his own
Wants take up not only all that he gets, but still calls for more. And yet,

(2.) The diligent Man, tho he has some time to spare from his own Work, he
has not so much as to throw away in a needless busying himself in other Men's
matters: he is so much at liberty from the Service of himself, by his having
been diligent, as that he has leisure to help his Brother; to do whatever
Justice and Charity under the Conduct of Prudence shall direct him: but his
Diligence will not suffer him to be vainly and merely out of Curiosity prying
into, and busied about other Men's matters. Tantumne ab re tua tibi suppetit
otii aliena ut cures, eaque quae nihil ad te attinent? What, says he to
himself, when he finds he is hastily engaging himself in such foreign Affairs,
Can I find nothing to do of my own, that I must thus go a forraging for Work?
Is not mine own Vineyard neglected, whilst I dress other Men's? Is there not
something to be done, which is more my proper Business than this I am about?

This is that which follows in the Verse, to do our own Business; which one
Counsel, if it were well minded, would prevent the most and greatest Troubles
that we have from one another. If we would keep within our own Compass, move in
our own Spheres; reach not at things too high for us, engage not to do what we
cannot do; not judge, where we do not understand; observe our Order, and keep
our Rank; it would contribute very much both to the quiet of our own Minds, and
to the Peace of the World. The neglect of this one thing, seems to have been
the great cause of all the Sin and Misery, and consequently the Trouble that is
in the World. The proud Angels left their own Habitation, their Province, and
this was their Fall.

To be short: Carry about no idle Tales: Do not make, nor widen Differences:
Allow not thy self in any Angry Contention: indeed never contend with others,
but who shall do most Good.

And now in a word, to reflect upon what has been discoursed: If Quiet be so
good and desirable, if we have so much reason to seek it, let us take Shame to
our selves, that we have so much neglected, that we have so much opposed so
great a Good, that we have been Enemies to our own and other Men's Peace.

I doubt we have all too much reason to tax our selves of being notoriously
faulty in this Particular. How little have we studied our own Quiet? how have
we disturbed other Men's? And what a cause of Lamentation is it, when we see
Mankind such Troublers every Man of himself, and every Man of his Brother; that
whereas we should be taking all good ways to please and quiet our selves and
others, we are running fast in the ways that lead to Sorrow, but the way of
Peace we will not know!

Let us no longer be so foolishly, so unnaturally wicked, as to be Troublers of
our selves and others; but in all wise and good ways possible, let us do our
utmost, that both we and all other Men may be as quiet here on Earth, as is
compatible to this State; that this may be to us the First Fruits of that
Eternal Sabbatism, that perpetual Rest, which remains for the Peaceable, the
Children and People of God.

OF EDUCATION.
PROVE. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go.
THere is a general, and I doubt a very just Complaint of a most gross, and
almost universal Neglect in the Education of Children. And indeed I fear, if a
Visitation were made of every Family and School in the Land, few in comparison
would be found, who take care of, or have Skill in this great Business.

Those who seem not to be negligent, I would ask them, What Time they bestow,
what Thoughts they lay out on their Children? I would enquire after the Designs
and Methods they have, all the Contrivances and ways they use with them. And I
am afraid those that are thought by others, and think themselves most careful,
would not be able upon such an Enquiry to clear themselves of great Negligence;
they would appear both very unskilful, and very careless.

And yet this thing which is so little regarded, and less understood, is of as
great Moment and Consequence as any one thing; and that both on a public and
private account. And among the other, perhaps there is not a greater and more
general Cause of all Wickedness, and of the Mischiefs consequent upon it, than
the no, or ill Education of Children.

We do, and we have too much cause to complain of In^^delity and Atheism, of
the Profaneness and Debauchery, of the Unsetledness, the Superstition and
Fanaticism, the perverse Schismaticalness, the dull Formality, and great
Corruption of the Age in which we live. One main cause of which, if we look
back, we shall find to have been the want of Care and Skill in the educating of
Children.

I shall consider,

I. The Action that is here required, Train.

II. The Object, a Child.

III. The Specification, in his Way. And then I shall propound some Reasons and
Arguments to persuade us to this Duty.

I. As to the Action, Train: This Word does fully express the Original, which
also is translated Catechize: And it signifies two Things:

1. Instructing or teaching, which is done by Precepts, and by Examples.

2. Initiating, inuring, exercising. Thus Soldiers are trained when they are
exercised in handling of their Arms, in their keeping Rank and File, and in the
doing of those things which they must do when they come to encounter an Enemy.

This is that which the wise Man advises to be done by the Child; let him be
trained. And it is excellent Counsel, much better than if he had said only,
instruct or teach. For, as the disciplined and exercised Soldier is much more
dextrous at the Management of his Arms, than he only, who has been told what he
must do, but has never used to do it; so undoubtedly, he who has been initiated
in his Work, will be far more ready at it, and more disposed to it, than he who
has only been directed what, and persuaded why he should do it, but has never
begun to do it.

We observe a very great distance betwixt our knowing what and why we should
act, and our acting. How frequent is it for Men very well to understand what is
to be done, and yet not to do it?

In many Cases also, Actions are never understood but by acting: The doing of
many Works informs and incites, and enables us more than any other way: Nay,
the very Attempt and Essay at that which we cannot yet do, we all know carries
so much Power along with it, that we are in (...) and by frequent Trials,
enabled to do that well, which we could not do at all when we first attempted
it.

I have the rather taken notice of the force that is in the word train,
because, as I have said, we may in some Cases understand, and not act: and in
some, acting is the best way to understand; I am sure it is always the best
Method to secure and keep that Knowledge, and those Inclinations which we have
to such Actions. In Practicals, the best Knowledge and the strongest
Inclinations are got by Practice: Use inclines Men to repeat the same Actions:
And Custom has always been esteemed a second Nature.

II. I proceed to consider the Object, who it is that is to be thus trained: It
is a Child, i. e. Man whilst he is young* and when he is first capable of this
Instruction and Exercise.

Man is ever to be learning. Cato thought himself never too old to learn: And
every other Man should think the same, but there is very great Advantage of
this being begun betimes. They that make no entrance on a thing in their first
Years, seldom are brought to it afterward; or if they be, it is always with
great Difficulty; and it must be with Damage; for they are hindered from making
progress in some other matters more considerable, whilst they are exercising
^^^^selves in those which they ought to (...) learned whilst they were young.
Be^^des, Men seldom bring those Works to ^^^fection, which they begin whilst
they (...) old; for most of them are such as re^^^re a considerable time for
the doing them. I am sure that is such which we have here mentioned.

III. That in which the Child must be trained, is his Way; so it is in the
Hebrew, which we render, the Way he should go, that is in the course and kind
of his Life and Practice, in what he should do all the days of his Life; let
him begin to walk in that way, let him be initiated in the Work and Business of
his Life; let him begin be^^mes what he should always be doing.

His Way, i. e. in that Practice and Life for which he was made; in the doing
those Works, for which his Nature was designed by his great and wise Creator,
and for which he is, by peculiar Endowments and Abilities, Temper and
Disposition, as well as by his Condition and Circumstances, fitted and
capacitated.

This I take to be the true meaning of that Phrase, His Way, which implies two
things:

1. The Way that is common to all Men, the Way of Man, of every Man, every one
endowed with humane Nature and Facul^ie^*

2. That Way, which is peculiar to this, or that, or the other Man; that for
which, by his Genius, (as we say) by his Temper and Inclination, or by his
external Condition he is most adapted, and fit, and as it were, set apart: That
is by Divines commonly called, our general Calling, this our particular.

That Way which is common to all, and is the Way of every Man, is the doing
those Works, which every one that has the Nature of a Man, is made and
furnished to do. I need not mention those of the Body, which are common to us
with Beasts. But the other, which are more peculiar to Man, and belong as it
were to him, are Knowledge, and Choice, and keeping good Order among all our
Faculties, pursuing the Inclinations we have to our own Perfection and
Happiness; and to help others to be in as good a condition as our selves are,
or would be: To be devout toward God: To be just and honest, true, and
faithful, and charitable to Men: To do that universally, which we think to be
fit and right, which, upon the largest knowledge we can get, we judge to be good:
To do no Evil, and to do all the Good we can possibly: This is the Way of every
Man.

That which is this, or that Man's Way besides, is to be employed in this or
that Trade, according as he is fitted; the Husbandry, Merchandise, Mechanic or
Liberal Arts; the Study of Physic, Law, Divinity, as his own Inclination and
Capacity, and the Opportunity he has to attain to any of these, shall direct.
Tho we cannot read it in the Faces of Children, yet in their Humor and
Carriage we may conjecture what they will be fit for.

Now whosoever takes a survey of the Nature of Man, as he will discover it was
the Contrivance and Work of great Wisdom and Goodness; so from an Observation
of the several Faculties and Capacities, Inclinations and Appetites, Instinct
and Sa^^city of Mankind, he will conclude which is the Way in which he should
go, which is the Way of Man, the Life that is suitable to such a Nature as ours
is: For, he will be fully resolved in this, that it must be the natural
Exercise and Perfection of those Powers, the filling those Capacities, in the
Pursuit of those Inclinations, the Regulation and Satisfaction of those
Appetites, the Observance of those Instincts, and giving heed to such Presages
and Conjectures as the Mind by its Nimbleness and Sagacity makes.

If these be considered, 1. Severally and a part; 2. Jointly, as they are all
united and consisting together, they make up the whole human Nature. As they
consist with, and are in subordination to each other, they will give us a clear
view of the whole Way or Life of Man, all that he was made for by his great
Creator.

That which will help us to a more distinct knowledge of this, will be to
compare our Nature with the Brutish, which is below us, and the Angelic, which
is above us. We partake of both Natures, we have the Faculties and Appetites
both of Angels and of Brutes.

From hence I infer, That if we live wholly as either mere Animals, or as pure
Spirits, we live not agreeably to our Nature and State. We must, on the one
hand, raise up our selves above the low Life of Sensitives; and yet we must not
foar so high as the Life of Spirits divested of Flesh and Blood. That Way is
too low, and this too high; the Way of Man lies in the middle betwixt these
two. We must not sink down into, and yet we must comply with our earthly,
fleshly, animal State.

And indeed here is the great Difficulty, to see that these two Life's do not
clash and interfere, but conspire with, and be serviceable and friendly to each
other, to bring down Heaven to Earth, and to advance Earth to Heaven, as much
as is possible.

This is the Skill, this is Wisdom indeed, that the Soul condescend to the
Condition and Services of this lower Life of Flesh and Sense, and yet not lose,
not forgo its own spiritual Life. To come down from, and yet still to be in
Heaven, whilst we are on Earth: To behave our selves like Men in the Flesh, and
yet at the same time to act as becomes those who are endowed with spiritual
divine Souls; this is the way of Man, in contradistinction to the way or life
of brute Animals.

Quest. But how is this Life to be attained? What must we do, that we may
neither sink below our selves, and become Brutes, nor yet stretch our selves
beyond our Line, and live like the Spirits, which are not in conjunction with
earthly Bodies?

Answ. Let us be in a sincere and constant pursuit of that which is, and, when
we are fittest to judge, we think to be best.

This will be as the Polar Star to direct our Course. If we mind this, we shall
steer safely betwixt the two Rocks; we shall neither depress the Soul, nor
neglect the Body: we shall advance Understanding and Liberty, and all the
rational and higher Faculties. And this will be done without prejudice to
Sense, and the Animal Life and Powers.

If we constantly aim at doing that which is best, which is that to which by
our very Natures we are framed, we shall then make more account of our Soul
than of our Body, more account of Understanding, and Liberty, and Conscience,
than of Sense and Animality; we shall bring the Body into subjection, and keep
the Animal serviceable to the Mind. And when they are once come to this, (which
is the true natural State, and tends to the preservation and perfection of them
both, as well as conduces to that of the World without) then the Interests are
reconciled, they are all one, they combine and conspire together; the Soul
makes much of its good Servant the Body, and the Servant is well-pleased with
the Employment it is put to by such a Master: Neither of them hinder other's
attainment to its just perfection: but on the contrary, the Soul is helped and
furthered by its Conjunction with the Body; and no Faculty of that, but shall
one way or other become an Occasion, and the Matter or Instrument of the Soul's
Use, and thereby of the Enlargement of its Understanding, or Liberty, or
Goodness.

Thus the Animal Life is not only consistent with, but serviceable to the Life
of Knowledge and Liberty, of Wisdom and Virtue: And on the other hand, the
Spiritual Life heightens and invigorates the sensible and animal: It becomes
Health to the Navel, etc.

From all that I have hitherto said, I may conclude, That Man's Way in general,
or the Way in which all and every Man should go, is such an Exercise of his
natural Powers, as either is their Perfection, or has a direct tendency to it,
and is also in order to the perfection of all others, and will bring Honor to
the great Author of them. This in general.

I shall now descend to a somewhat more particular Account of this Way; and
shall mention,

First, The Way of Understanding; when a Man's Reason presides and governs, and
all the other Faculties and Appetites are subject and obedient to it. This is
the truly natural Way; for the Understanding was made to be chief, and all else
in Man to be Inferior and subordinate. Consequently to this, and which is
implied in it, is,

The Way of Knowledge and Truth. These are the Perfections of the Understanding,
and without which it is no more fit to conduct and guide our Appetites, than an
unlighted Candle is to give us light; or a Guide that is ignorant in the Way,
is fit to direct us to our Journey's End. More particularly;

The Way of Wisdom, which is, our propounding to our selves good, and great,
and attainable Ends, and pursuing them in the use of proper, and fit, and
likely Means. This implies not only Knowledge, but Choice, and therefore
contains in it the Will, as well as the Understanding; but yet all this is very
reducible to that which I call the Way of Understanding.

I insist the rather on this, because Understanding is the greatest, highest,
and most proper and peculiar Principle that is in Humane Nature, that which so
remarkably distinguishes betwixt Man and Beast, and betwixt one Man and
another: And because our Works are of no account, if they do not proceed from
this; if they be done without it, they are not (as the Moralists call them)
humane, not Works of Men. And the greater Perfection of the Understanding they
arise from, the greater and better they are.

This then is the first particular Way, the Way of Understanding; when our Will
and all our Inclinations and Appetites, our inferior Powers, are under the
Conduct and Government of true Knowledge, the true Knowledge of Good and Evil,
which is the Principle of Wisdom, which is chiefly seen in preferring the
better Good before the less, and in discerning the reference which one has to
the other.

This Way of Understanding is that which the Sacred Scripture does so often
call on us to walk in, and bids us not be as the Horse, and as the Mule, which
have no Understanding, whose Mouth must be held with Bit and Bridle. That which
a Bridle is, to restrain and turn them hither and thither, that should our
Understanding be to us. And how often is the good Way called the Way of
Understanding? And they that walk not in this Way, are said to be ignorant, and
such as err in their Hearts, and to be foolish.

2dly; I may here also mention the Way of Voluntary Action, the Way of
Self-determination and free Choice. This is also natural to Man, not to be
thrust and pushed on from Causes without; but Things must first approve
themselves to his Understanding, that they are good; and when they appear so to
him, whether he can refuse them or not, I list not here to dispute. All agree,
that a Man can will nothing but under the appearance of Good. And this is
certain, that the Perfection of the Will is, when it is under the guidance and
superintendance of the Understanding, when it can do nothing against the Truth,
but with it, and for it, (if I may borrow that Phrase.)

And this is a great Perfection of our Natures indeed, when our Appetites and
Inclinations are so wholly swayed and determined by Reason and true Knowledge,
that they are never carried to any things which that does not approve; there is
a perfect Agreement, no Clashings, no Oppositions. To walk in this Way, is to
show our selves Men.

But I proceed to more Particulars of these Ways, both of Nature in general,
and of Understanding and Will in particular; and I will name only three.

1. The Way of Religion and Piety toward our God, and our Savior, which in
short is, to believe, and love, and fear, and trust, and obey God above all.
And particularly, to believe, and love, etc. the only begotten Son of God,
according to the Revelation made of him in the Gospel.

2. The Way of Righteousness and Goodness to our Brethren, to all Men: To be
honest and just to every one, in giving him that which is his own, that is,
that which he has a Right unto, either by the Law of Nature and Reason, or by
the Laws of the Country, and Customs of the Place where we live: To do good to
those that have done good to us: To obey our Governors: To honor, i. e. to
observe, and if they need it, to maintain our Patents: To provide for our
Children, that they may live, and live well, and be happy: To deal fairly with
Equals, and to be courteous to Inferiors: To keep Promise with them to whom we
have made it: And to be good, to be benevolent and beneficial to all,
especially to the best, if they be indigent: To desire and endeavor the
Perfection and Happiness of every one in the World; to do good to all Men.

3. The Way of Sobriety, by which I understand such a Regulation and Government
of our selves, in all we do and suffer, as is consistent with the preservation,
and makes for the perfection of all our Faculties; or, if not of all, yet of
the supreme and principal, and of the rest, so far as consists with the
perfection of the higher.

We commonly call that Sobriety, which is the good Government of our selves, in
Eating and Drinking, and some other bodily Pleasures and Passions: And in sum,
when that about which we are conversant, is less considerable than our selves:
which perhaps may imply thus much, that when we are conversant about that which
is more considerable and valuable than we are, then we ought not to have such
regard to our own Preservation and Perfection; but if we could produce any
Effect which would be of greater worth than our selves, we should do it, tho it
were with the lessening, nay, and loss of others.

But when I say thus, I understand that of our selves, which can be hurt, and
lost in the doing of the greatest good: which can never be imagined of the
supreme Faculties, for that is their Perfection.

The Perfection of the Soul is to know, and where it knows fully and
adequately, it knows the Perfection of a thing, and what is in order to that,
and then it wills and is affected, it is pleased with that, and desires and
endeavors it where it is not; the larger and greater the Soul is, the more it
knows, and the more it wills and is pleased with the Perfection of more things.

And if this, if Truth and Goodness, or Knowledge, and Pleasure in the good
State of things, of all things, be the Health, the Strength, the perfection of
the Soul; there is no fear that it can be hurt by these. It cannot be lessened
or impaired, much less lost and destroyed by Truth and Goodness; But on the
contrary, it is raised and perfected, is secured and advanced by them.

Our other ministering and inferior Powers may be lost and destroyed by this,
but not our Governing and Supreme, i. e. the Understanding and Will. Truth and
Goodness are the very Life of the Soul, and as soon may Bodily Life kill the
Body, as those shall hurt the Soul.

Object. But may not this Candle of the Lord waste it self? The hotter and
brighter the Fire burns, is it not the sooner out? And may not the Soul
neglect, and so damage, and at last destroy it self, whilst it is so much taken
up with other Objects? and particularly finding something greater and better
than it self, it may be so very much employed about that other thing, as wholly
to disregard it self?

Again; Seeing is the Perfection of the Eye, but yet by looking on the Sun the
Eye is blinded. And who knows but there may be Objects so transcendently
glorious as to dazzle and put out the Eye of our Mind: there may be so vast a
disproportion betwixt some Objects and these Faculties, that they may stretch
them beyond their natural Tone, and so crack and break them. Scrutator
Majestatis opprimetur a Gloriae.

Besides; Experience tells us, that if the Soul does not reflect and know it
self, and observe its actions, it is Imperfect, and in the way to Ruin.

Answ. 1. All these Instances are of Bodies. Or 2. of the Soul as it depends on
the Body. Or 3. if they be of the Soul considered in it self: yet they will
signify no more than this, that the Soul may be hurt and damaged by the
knowledge of some Truths, or Delight in some Goods, but it will have a present
sense of it; as the Eye is dazzled in looking on the Sun, and so will turn away
it self from that Object.

If my Observation be true, hitherto I never found my Faculties impaired by
more clear and perfect knowledge of any thing, nor by delight in that, which I
had a true knowledge of. But I have found my self worse for imperfect and
obscure Knowledge, and for such delight, as was founded in a Lie, or a Mistake.

Indeed sometimes the Pursuit of clear Knowledge, when it was not at all, or
difficultly attainable, or when it was not of great use; and sometimes the
clear Knowledge I (...) of a thing has been the occasion of detaining me from
such an Employment of my Understanding, or other Faculties, as was more
necessary. So also Delight in, or Endeavor after this or that particular Good,
may have hindered me from doing more or greater Good. But from all this I
observe, that all the prejudice that is done me comes to this, that I am
hindered from more Knowledge, or from delight in, and doing more Good.

Now I shall escape this danger, if I aim at all the Knowledge I am capable of,
and take delight in the Good of all.

And if it so happen, that by this I sacrifice my self to the Common Good, I do
but follow my natural Inclination; and it is much better to perish in obeying,
than to continue in opposing my Nature.

Tully, somewhere says, Life is not so dear, as that Affection of doing Good. I
add, that this is our very Life; and being so, I do not see how we can lose or
hurt our selves in complying with this Inclination. But I must not now pursue
this matter any further.

To return to my main Argument. From all that I have said, in Explication of
what is the Way or Life of Man, it may appear, that that is called his way,
which leads to that for which he was designed, viz. the Perfection, or good
State of himself and others, and the Honor of God, which results from this:
And consequently, that Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness are the Life of
Man. These are the things for which Man was made, for these he has Faculties
which fit, and Appetites which do incline him to them.

All I add farther to this is, That as we have distinguished the way of Man
from that of Brutes, so we must put a considerable Difference betwixt the Way
of a Child and that of a grown Man, and take due Care not to make the Child a
Man too soon.

This may serve for Explication. I proceed now to some Considerations by way of
Argument. And,

1. Let us consider the absolute necessity that every Man should understand his
way of Life, and be exercised in it. This is necessary to his living well, to
his present and to his future Happiness: Nor to his own only, but to other Men's
also; as many as have relation to him, as are near him, are the better or worse
for his being good or bad.

It Is absolutely necessary, that every Man should know and do all that, which
his great Creator designed and made him for; else he is in vain, he will never
attain his End. But that is not all, he will be miserable, he will not only fall
short of God's End, but oppose it. He will be so far from being perfect and
happy in himself, and from contributing to the Perfection and good State of
others, that he will be in a most forlorn Condition himself, and will help to
undo his Fellow Creatures.

2. In an ordinary way, no Man comes to the Knowledge and Practice of what he
should do, unless he be first instructed and exercised in it.

I confess, God has given to Man such a Mind, that it can teach it self in some
Cases; but yet it is so made, that it must be excited, and some way assisted by
either the Inspiration that gives Wisdom, or ly the Communication of Knowledge
from wise Men, or by both; which is indeed the usual way the Divine Providence
takes with us; he instructs us by one another. St. Paul was sent to Ananias,
etc.

Where ever was the Man, that without exercising himself to Godliness, started
up excellently good all on the sudden? Goodness is no Mushroom that grows up in
a Night. It is not so natural, that it will come upon us, as our bodily
Strength and Stature do, while we sleep; but it is the Effect of Pains and
Industry, of Care and Exercise.

By doing, Men come to better Understanding of what they ought to do, and also
acquire a greater Ability and Readiness to do it.

3. There Is no better, no fitter time for Instruction and Exercise, than when
we are young: then we are pliant and tender, as soft Wax, which will easily
receive an Impression. Then we are not prepossessed with Errors and inveterate
Prejudices, we have no ill Customs to lay aside.

Besides; there can be no such fit time of learning how to live, as at the
beginning of Life. It Is a foolish and vain thing to put this off to the last,
as many do, who, when they are near an end of their Life, then are enquiring
how they should live.

And why will Men defer this till many Years of Life be spent? Why should they
be learning how to live, then when they should be living? No, it behooves us to
be instructed how to live, and to exercise our selves as we are taught, as soon
as is possible: for otherwise our Life will pass away unprofitably, at best it
will be to no purpose, if it be not to ill purpose and mischievous.

These things considered, that it is indispensably necessary for every one to
understand his way, and to walk in it; and that no Man ordinarily comes to
understand what he ought to do, and to do it without Instruction and Exercise,
and that the first Time, the young Age is best for these Purposes. I now
proceed to plead with Parents, and all that are appointed, and have taken on
them the Instruction of Children, that they would not neglect this great Trust.
Nay, let me persuade every one of you, who are come to understand this good way
your selves, and to walk in it, that you would be assistant to Children. Instill
good Principles into their tender Minds, set good Examples before them.

1. You that are Parents, consider this is expressly commanded in Scripture.
Under the Mosaic Dispensation, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. These Words which I command thee
shall be in thy Heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to (shall whet them
upon) thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and
when thau walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

This was commanded the Jews by Moses, and less is not required of us by
Christ: Ephesians. and. 4. Ye Fathers provoke not your Children to Wrath, (do not
use the Power you have over them tyrannically, be not cruel, be not over
severe) but bring them up in the Nature and Admonition of the Lord; In the
Instruction and Discipline of Christian Religion.

Besides; the Wisdom of God in Solomon has from the Observation he has made,
commended this Instruction and Discipline of Children to their Parents in many
places; Prove. 29. 17. Correct thy Son, and he will give thee Res. Chap. 23. 13.
Withhold not Correction from the Child; for if thou heatest him with the Rod he
shall not die. Chap. 19. 18. Chasten thy Son while there is hope. Correction
and Chastening is one way of Instruction; and that which to a tender Parent is
most difficult, and that is therefore so often mentioned, because they would be
most prone to neglect it. Thus we find its commanded in the Scriptures, but
that is not all. For,

2. In the same Holy Writings we find Obedience to it highly commended, and
signalized as an Instance of great Goodness and true Religion: And it is
represented as the way wherein a very great Blessing was conveyed: Genesis 18. 17,
18, 19. God said, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I will do, seeing
that Abraham shall become a great and mighty Nation, and all the Nations of the
Earth shall blessed in him? for, I know him, that he will command his Children,
and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
Justice and Judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him.

I beseech you observe how great a Commendation God himself has given here of
this, that Abraham would command his Children and Household after him to keep
the way of the Lord. How well, how kindly does God take this, that he was not
only good and righteous himself, but would take care that his Servants, that
his Children, and those that were to live after him should be so too?

And how is the Righteous God pleased to reward this Practice? He would here
upon discover to Abraham, the great thing he was about to do.

Nay, farther; It seems to be brought in here as a Reason, why all the World
should be blessed in Abraham. And indeed it was the means whereby that Blessing
was conveyed to the World, Abraham's instructing his Children after him, tho at
so great a distance from our Savior, yet had an Influence on his coming among
us. For so, after that God had said, he would command (...) Children, etc. it
is added, that the Lord (...) bring upon Abraham that which he has sp^ken of
him.

Let this Consideration prevail upon us, (...) we see God took such notice of
Abraham and so blessed him for it. Let us not be content to be good alone, but
endeavor that our Children may be so too.

3. Let us consider other Examples, whom we cannot but think our selves bound
to follow.

Joshua 24. 15. Choose ye whom ye will serve, (...) as for me and my House we
will serve the Lord. This good Man will use the Authority which he had as the
Master of his Family, to engage those under him to walk in God's ways: The
Master must according to this Example require his Servants, and the Father his
Children, to serve the Lord.

And it is a remarkable Passage that we ^^^d of, Job 1. 5. When the days of his
Sons ^^^^^ing were gone about, it is said, that Job s^^^ and sanctified them: i
e. required them to fit themselves to join in offering up Sacrifice the next
day: which Sanctification might be by Prayer and Fasting, and by abtaining from
other Enjoyments and Works which might un^it them for that Duty, and r^se up
early in the Morning, (he was earnest^^ set upon it) and offered
Burnt-Offerings according to the number of them all. And why was all this Care
taken? Why? To ^p^ate the Sins which he thought they might have committed. For
Job said, I^ may be they have sinned, and c^^sed God in their Hearts. Not sure,
but conjectured they might have sinned, It may be, etc. He feared that they had
cursed God in their Hearts, Not blasphemed him with their Mouths, he did not
distrust that, if he had, he would have took Cognizance of it probably; for,
that was a Sin to be punished by the Judge, as he speaks of another Sin: But
lest they might have some inward, unseen, irreverend Thoughts of God, he does
all this: And thus, says the Text, Job did continually.

This then was one part of of Job's Righteousness which God took so much notice
of, and for which he had that Testimony from the Judge, that there was nona in
all the Earth like to him, perfect and upright.

We see how this good Man looked on himself as concerned and interested in his
Children; and how he prays and sacrifices, that their secret Sins may be done
away, and calls upon them to join with him: He sanctified them.

Let us look on our selves as concerned in the Sins of our Families: We that
are Governors of them, let it be our Care not only to keep our selves, but our
Servants and Children from Sin: Let us not only repent of our own, but of their
Transgressions, to which perhaps by our Neglects we have been accessory. Let us
not stay till Sins break forth in outward Act, but watch the very first
possible rise of them, and take them at the beginning, and pr^^^^^ their ever
being brought forth; so shall we in this resemble holy Job.

St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 3. 15. that from (...) Child he had known the
Scriptures; his Grandmother Lois, and Mother Eunice, (of whom he speaks, 2 Timothy
1. 5. that Faith (...) in: them) had, it seems, instructed (...) very early in
the Sacred Oracles.

These things were writ for our Example. Let us also instruct our Children in
the Doctrine of Salvation, that Way of Life which is declared to us in the
Gospel. You (...) this was one of the Means that condu red to the making of
Timothy a very good Man, and one whom God thought fit to use in the Government
of his Church.

This leads to another Argument, which is:

4. The vast Benefits which probably will (...) by the Practice. It is a great
Advantage to the Child it self; it will be in all likehood very advantageous to
many others, his or her Family, the Neighborhood in which they live, the
Society, the Church or Kingdom, of which they are Members or Subjects: Much
Good also may thereby redound to the Parent or Instructor, who took the ear of
educating the Child.

The Child it self, by the Blessing of God upon this Method, and his Grace
accompanying it, is made a good and vertuons Man or Woman; and by being thus
early Instructed and exercised in his Duty, con^^nues in the practice of it all
the days of his Life, and after Death, enters into the Happiness and Joy of all
good Men.

Thus the first Instructions are the Seeds of Holiness and immortal Bliss; they
are the first Beginnings of everlasting Happiness; and of which when they come
to be possessed, they will look back on all the Series of Causes that brought
them thither, and will discover, that the Care of their Parents and Instructors
to teach them the good Way, and to engage them to walk in it, was one of the
first and chief.

Every one that will consider, may understand now, how much he owes of all the
Happiness he has and hopes for, to the early Instructions he had from his
Parents: But then we shall see more clearly how all contributed to our
Happiness; we shall then evidently discover, that our Education had a mighty
Influence on it. Whatever Benefits Wife or Husband, Children or Servants,
Neighbors or Strangers, Relations or Friends receive from any one's being good
and virtuous, wise and holy, they are beholden for it in a great measure to the
Care of Parents and Instructers, who saw to their first Education; for in their
first Years was laid the Foundation of all that Virtue and Goodness, which is
afterward built upon it Then were sown the Seeds, which in after-Years grow up
to Maturity, and bring forth those excellent Fruits. The Honesty, the Truth,
the Justice, the Charity, the Humility and Meekness, the Sobriety and
Temperance, the Zeal, the Courage, the Fidelity, the Religion, and whatever
it is that makes Men good and useful, received, if not its very first Beginning,
(for that I suppose to be in the very Nature of Man, which he had from God) yet
very necessary Supplies for its Increase; this Education was, if not the Womb
that bare, yet the Breasts that gave it suck.

And are not the Clemency, the wise and good Government of Princes, and the
Loyalty and Peaceableness of Subjects, much owing to the Care that was taken of
them in their first Time?

Thou that have the Education of a young Prince, one who shall rule over many,
committed to thy Charge, be faithful to thy Trust: for show know thou, but
thou may do that now in the discharge of thy Office, for which Thousands
will rejoice? Nay, let me say, thou know not, how poor and low soever now he
is whom thou instructest, how great a Man he may be; and if thou do thy Duty
wisely and diligently, thou put him in a fair way to gently, so. And if
this by the Divine Providence come to pass, what a Joy will this be to thee, to
reap such an unexpected Fruit of thy Care! That the little Seed which thou
sowedst, is grown up to be a great Tree, and then thy self may rest thy self
under the shadow of it; for so many times it has been. Thou who rejoicest to
see thy Corn, thy Plants grow, and come to perfection, and reapest the Fruits
of them with gladness; how great must that Joy be, which thou will have in
seeing the Child grow up to Wisdom and Virtue, to be a good and a great Man.
And for this I desire you to consider,

1. How many, who have been thus carefully and wisely educated, have come to a
most excellent State; and how naturally this early Instruction and Exercise
tends to bring them to it; what a powerful Efficacy it has on them to make
them good?

2. How few that have wanted it, have ever come to any thing? or at least, how
short have they fallen of what others have been, and themselves might have
been?

Let History, and our own Observation, assure us of the Truth of these two
Particulars, and our Understandings will easily discover the Reason why it
must be so.

1. Consult your own Observation, and let your Experience show you the Truth of
this. Have you not known in your Time many who have been carefully educated,
who have risen from a mean low Condition to a most excellent Estate? They have
come from poor and ignoble Parents, but they have brought both Riches and
Honor into their Families; they have been ad^anced into very high Places in
the State, or have been entrusted with the most sacred Offices in the Church:
And if you enquire into their first Years, you will discern for the most part, if
not always, that Care was taken in their Education, and something was then
instilled into them by Counsel or Example: some little Grain of Mustard Seed
was then sown, which has grown up to be a Tree, and which not only themselves
and Family, but the whole Church or Kingdom sit under its shadow with great
delight, and reap the Fruit of it. View all the Steps by which these Persons
are mounted to such an height above others, and you will find some of the
lowermost were the Instructions of their tender Years. If you will diligently
trace them back to their first setting out, you will observe that their Feet,
when they were very little, went to the House of Instruction. And on the other
hand have you observed those who have not been instructed and discipim'd in
their first Age, to have become faisiously good Men?

Perhaps it will be here said, That there are Instances of those that were well
educated, who proved very bad; and of those of whom no care was taken to
instruct them, who came to be excellent Persons.

To this I reply,

1. That I never said, that Education of Children is all that is required to
make them good Men. We must be careful of the Youth, as well as of the Child.
And all that Care that Parents can possibly take, will not be sufficient, no,
nor the Grace of God besides, without his own concurrence. If therefore when he
comes to be under his own Conduct, and of his own Will to dispose of himself,
and do what he pleases; if he reject the Connsel which has been given, and will
venture himself on his own Inexperience, he cannot escape falling into foolish
and evil Practices.

2. I hope the Instances are not very many, in proportion to those who receive
Benefit by their early Instructions, nor especially to them who for want of it
become bad.

3. We ought to consider, whether they were trained up in that Way they should
go. This is a very material Consideration, because I doubt there is a great and
general Defect in our educating of Youth, in that their Morals are very little
looked to in some famous Schools, insomuch that they have been too ^^ten
Nurseries of Debauchery, instead of answering the great Ends for which they
were appointed.

And as to those who have wanted Education, and yet become famous in their
Generation:

1. I do not say, that this Training is absolutely and universally necessary to
Goodness; but yet it is the ordinary Means, and generally necessary to this
End. God is pleased sometimes to go out of these ordinary ways; but we must not
therefore depart from them.

2. I dare say, the Instances are very rare.

3. We cannot be sure but some good Principles were cast into the Mind whilst
it was tender, and it received impression from them. And I believe, if such Men
that come to Greatness, will recount by what means they came to it, they will
rehearse to you the Saying of a Father, or Grandfather, or Master, the Example
of some whom they took notice of, and that a generous Emulation was stirred up
in them. And,

4. Themselves will own, that however well they do now, they might have done
better, and been greater Men, if they had been fully and skilfully instructed
in their first Years; and they would have attained to more Perfection of
Goodness, they would have done well more easily, at least* they would have been
longer good, and done less Evil than they have. Thus much (...) own Observation
and Experience may have taught us. But for further Confirmation in this Matter,

2. Let us now consider the Times before we lived, and see whether History will
not give Testimony to what I say, and furnish us with abundance of Examples of
such as being well educated, have attained to a most excellent Condition, but
is in a manner destitue of Instances of the other sort, or if there be one or
two, they are recorded as singular Rarities, and are looked on as Prodigies.

The holy Story will plentifully supply us with Examples of the Greatness to
which they have come, who have been carefully educated, and for which the
Divine Providence seems to have prepared them by such an Education.

I take notice, in the first place, of the Sons of that excellent Man, Abraham.
Besides, (what we can not but suppose) that the rest of his Sons were in good
condition, Ishmael was the Father of twelve Princes; And we know how great a
Man Isaac was, and he, undoubtedly, walking in the Steps of his Father*
Abraham, and taking the same care which he had done, in instructing, etc. (...)
two Sons, who were the Fathers of two great People, the Edomites, and the
Israelites.

Moses, whom God raised up to be a Deliverer of his People from their hard
Bondage, and made him a Prince over them, was through the wise and wonderful
Providence prepared and fitted for this high Employment, by the Education which
Pharash's Daughter gave him. And this Education was not to Sensuality or War,
as might be imagined, if we should make a Conjecture from corrupt Times and
vi^ious Courts; but such as might be expected in a Court where wise Men bore
sway, and where Men were promoted according as they excelled in Wisdom, as
appears by Joseph; and accordingly it is said, Acts (...). 2, 2. And Moses was
^^stracte^ in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in Words and in
Deeds.

Such an Education of a young Prince* is like the d^w^ing of a bright Day; it is
a hopeful Beginning, and promises well. Not but that sometimes it proves
otherwise, as it was in Nero, who tho he was excellently instructed by his
Master S^nt^^, yet he became a most in humane Tyrant, but it was after he had
reigned five Years incomparably well, and he is represented by Historians as a
Monster.

I say therefore, tho it come to pass, that one who had been well instituted in
his Youth, may degenerate in his after-Time; yet we observe, that when God
would raise up a mighty Prince for the deliverance of his People, his
Providence makes way for this by his good Education: He was instructed, etc.

I need not mention Samuel, who was brought up at the Feet of Eli, to be a
Priest (...) Prophet of the Lord, and a Judge among the (...).

Nor of David, who very early understood not only the Martial Arts, but had
attained great Skill in Music and Poesy: And if he was instructed in those
Curiosities and Ornaments, we cannot think him deficient in the more substantial
and necessary; I am sure he approved himself to understand his Religion to God,
and his Duty to his Prince.

I must not so much as mention the (...) of the Prophets, wherein young youths
were trained up in such ingenious Ways, as fitted them for the reception of
Divine Revelations; And out of these Schools, for the most part, the Prophets
are supposed to have been taken. Let me give one or two Instances out of the
New Testament, and the rather because it is said, that they shall be all taught
of God; which Expression is so mistaken by some, as that they make it an Excuse
for their own Neglect.

The great Apostle of us Gentiles was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a
learned Rabbi; and the Divine Providence, which had so furnished him with
Learning, after made excellent use of him in the propagation of Christ's Gospel.

Thus Timothy after him was promoted to an high Office in the Church: and he
had been nourished up in the Words of Faith and good Doctrine, and from a Child
had known the Scriptures.

The other Apostles of our Lord, however defective their first Educationn might
have been, yet they had this Want supplied by three Years Conversation with our
Lord; and after he left them, they were miraculously inspired with the Spirit
of Wisdom.

And lastly, which is very considerable, the blessed Jesus himself was subject
to his Parents, and went with them to Jerusalem at twelve Years old, where he
was amongst the Doctors, and asked them Questions: He Is said to grow in Wisdom,
etc. and he grew by those ways of Instruction, which were ordinary: His Parents
directed, the Doctors informed him, by which he has honored, and as it were
consecrated this Way, and has greatly commended it to us all. When the Son of
God himself was trained up in this way, whilst he was young, we should all look
on this Way, as the best Method we can take with our Children And,

After this Example, I shall not need to mention any more (...) this is
sufficient to convince us of the Goodness of this Way, and that it is ordinarily
necessary to fit Men for any high Place.

But if we aim at no more for our Children, than so much Wisdom and Goodness,
as will qualify them to discharge themselves faithfully and honestly in any
ordinary way of Life; yet neither is this to be expected ordinarily, unless
they be instructed, and principled, and exercised to it in their first Age.

Of this we may be further sati^fied, if we take notice how it is with us all
in other Matters. Does any one come to great Skill in his Profession and Trade,
to which he has not been bound Apprentice in his younger Years? Or, if some few
do, yet nevertheless the other is the common way of Men. And we look on the
tender Age, as the proper Time of beginning to learn any thing; and that if we
do not inu^e our Children betimes, they will be in great danger of miscarrying.

And if it be so in all things else, why should it not hold in the matter
before us? is it because Virtue is not difficult? or that Institution and
Exercise, the common way of attaining to other things, are not the means of
acquiring this? Or, is it because we think Children incapable of such
Principles? But none of these are true; and therefore, if we do wisely in
binding those that are young to Trades, putting them betimes into this or that
Employment, which we would have them follow, and come to the Master (...), we
shall also do no less wisely, to bind them out betimes Apprentices to Virtue
and Goodness, which is the Way of them, and of all Men. And if we do not this,
we do not act uniformly, we contradict our selves, and do not that in one Case,
which we approve in all other, tho there be no difference.

I now speak of Education in general, and that which I say is, Let your
Children be taught something or other, that they may be fitting themselves
against they be Men, to be employed in some way that will be beneficial to
themselves, and the Public. That I might the more effectually persuade you to
this, I have appealed to your own Observation, and to ancient History, whether
this be not the only likely way to make good and useful Men; I will now offer
you Reason why it must be so.

Young tender Minds are more apt to receive Impression, and to retain those
that are made them afterward; the Reason of which I take to be this, that they
are more vacant to attend, they are not prepossefs'd with, nor so fixedly busy
about, nor intent on other things; those Impressions that get first possession,
keep it, the Experience of Mankind does attest this. Quo semel est imbuta
recens servabit odorem Testa diu.



And it is semblably in other sorts of Creatures, both Animals and Plants, they
are all, we know, more teachable and more pliant at first than afterward.

This may convince us of the Necessity of teaching them betimes that which we
would have them understand perfectly.

Let me add this, That our Minds come to Knowledge gradually; that there is no
one way of Life, but there are many things to be known before we comprehend it
fully; that this requires Time and Trial, that therefore we should begin early.

But besides Knowledge, Practice is required; and to be doing, is the way to do
well. Now to begin betimes to do what we would do perfectly, is very necessary,
because we shall be sooner accustomed to it, and be kept from accustoming our
selves to other things: For, it is observable, that sewer Actions shall
habituate a Child to any Practice, than a grown Man. It sooner and easier
becomes a Custom, if it be begun in tender Years, than at full Growth; as you
can easily with a hand bend a Plant, when a Tree will not yield to all your
Might.

But this is sufficient to give you a view of the Reason why it is so, which
your own Thoughts may easily trace further.

I will now dismiss this Argument, by which I hope, as many as will attend to
what either themselves observe, or is observed in History, will be persuaded to
look well to the Education of their Children; because according to all
Observation, (and that not without good reason to second it) this is the only
ordinary way to make them good and useful. Would you have your Children come to
good? would you have them useful in their place in some way or other? This is
the only Method in which you can probably expect it; take care of them in their
first Time; see to their Instruction and their Practice in their tender Years.

If we had no such Assurance of the Likelihood of this our timely Care, to
produce such great Effects; yet the very Apprehension, that it is merely
possible for so much Good to come of it, should methinks engage us to make the
Experiment; and we cannot doubt the Possibility, when we have Examples before
our Eyes what has been done. And if this be so, what manner of Parents, what
kind of Men are those* that are not moved with so fair a prospect of so much
Good, of so many and great Benefits, as may come to their Child or Scholar* to
themselves, to their whole Family, the Town and Country where he was born, the
Church and State of which he is a Member?

Would ye not have your Children to be good and useful, to enjoy Wealth and
Honor amongst Men on Earth, and to find Mercy with God at the great Day, and
to be happy for ever? Surely there is none so role of naturel Affection, as not
to desire this? But why then do you not endeavor that it may be thus with
them? Why do you not, as much as in you lies, form them (...) all that Wisdom
and Virtue whilst they are tender, which is so absolutely necessary to f^^th a
Life and State? Do you not desire that they should be a Shelter and Stay for
your old Age, and that you may at your (...) receive Comfort and Joy from
(...)? If you do not, you do not make that provision for your own Content,
which i^ Wise Forecast would put you upon, you (...) wanting to your selves:
And if you (...) and hope to receive Benefit from (...) when they are Men, you
should take (...) care to instruct them in, and inure (...) their Duty while
they are Children. Would you see them rich and great, and (...) it said of
them, that they were great (...) to the Town and Country (...) they lived?
Would you see some of (...) Pos^^rity in Est^^rn for giving wise (...) to the
King, or for being advanced (...) best and most sacred Offices, and (...)
changing them prudently and faithfully? (...) this is desirable to every Man,
and if (...) ^^desire it, why do ye not do what you (...) for attaining it? Why
do ye not sow (...) of Wisdom and Goodness in this (...) when it is first
broke? You know (...) about it may make such an increase as (...) and bring
forth a Thousand fold.

To conclude this; We that are Parents and Instructors, have such a fair
prospect of so much Good that may accrue to our Children, to our selves, to the
Society of which they are Members, by their being wise and good, that if we be
not by this moved to do all we can to make them such, we are neither so good to
them, nor wise for our selves, nor do we study and seek the Public Benefit as
we ought. If this Argument will not prevail, let me offer another.

5. The very great Danger your Children are in, of being foolish and vicious,
mischievous, or useless in this Life, and unhappy in the future.

As I argued before, That all Men that are born into this World are in capacity
of doing great Good, and of being useful and excellent Persons; of glorifying
God, by attaining to that Perfection which he designed them, and by
contributing toward the Welfare of their Fellow Creatures; and of enjoying
that ineffable and unconceivable Bliss, which remains for the Obedient in the
other World: (And the Consideration of this should move any one, that has the
Faith of a Christian, or but the Understanding and Heart of a Man, to give all
the help and assistance he can to his Children, that they may be as good and
happy as they are capable of being; that they may not fall short of that most
excellent Condition, which our great and good Creator intended us all: and
consequently, that they should take great care of instructing and disciplining
them in their first Years.)

So I now engage you to use the same Care, from a Consideration of the great
Dangers in which every one is, that comes into the World.

Man is in such a Condition, that as he may be raised up to Heaven by Wisdom
and Goodness, and be exalted to such a State, that he shall be but very little
lower than the Angels of Glory; so by Folly and Vice, and Neglect of himself,
he may sink so much below his kind, that he may in nothing excel the Brutes;
nay, he may degenerate into a Devil, may hate God, and live in per^^t^al
opposition to Reason, and all the principles of Goodness. He may do no Good,
but much Evil here on Earth, being an Enemy to God and his Creation; and when
he goes from the Earth, he shall go into the Torments of Hell.

This may be the sad Condition of thy Child: and is there not very great danger
it should be his Condition, and that because of that Body of Death, which he
here carries about with him, that fleshly Part, which is so heavy a Weight,
that it depresses the Soul, when it would be on the Wing in purs^it of Truth
and Goodness? How are we (...) to be deceived, and think this part of (...) our
whole, or at least our best selves? Again; What powerful Solicitations do we
meet with from the Enticements of Men? How do they, by specious false
Reasonings, and many great Examples, seduce (...) out of the Way of Holiness?
And how busy is the subtle Serpent to in^inuate his Tentations, wherever he
observes the least disposition, taking all Advantages from our Temper and
Condition, to make us choose to be wicked, and so to make us in^vitably
miserable.

And if this be the Case of all our Children, as certainly it is, that they are
in so very great danger of such dreadful Evils; we shall be most inhumane and
merciles^ to them, if we do not what in us lies to prevent their Ruin. We shall
show our selves stupid, if we do not, as soon as they are capable of
Instruction, principle them against all Vice and Wickedness, by showing them
what is good; engage their Wills to like and choose it, and put them on the
doing it; and by all means to preserve them from Sin, and secure them from the
Snare of the Devil.

It may be, some may not be much concerned whether their Children be good or
great, they may have no desire they should be eminent: But can any of you be
content they should become Beasts? You do not aspire at their doing much Good;
but are you satisfied they should do none, nay, that they should do Evil? You
care not they should be famous for good and brave Actions; but are you willing
they should be infamous Villains, and live and die as Evildoers? And tho you
never once think that your Children should be raised up to the pitch of Angels;
yet surely none of us but should be very fearful they should become Devils.
None of us would be Parents of a Beast, or of a Devil: And yet our Children are
in danger of being such; and if we take no other care of them, but to bring
them into the World, and to maintain the Animal Life, we put them into that
Condition, that they must (without a very extraordinary Assistance of God's
Grace) be such. We have but by this brought them into Danger.

This World is a vash and howling Wilderness: And how merciless would that
Father or Mother be, that should bring a little Child, a young unexperienced
Youth, amongst the both wanton and salvage Beasts, and leave him to shift for
himself? Thus does every Father and Mother, that takes no care to institute
their Children in the Way of Life.

If therefore you be so low-spirited, as not to desire your Children should be
in the best; yet sure none can be willing they should be in the worst state of
which they are capable. If you would not have them holy and happy, as Saints
and Angels; yet neither would you have them without Understaning, as the Horse
and the Mule, nor without Goodness, as the Devil. You would neither have them
wicked, nor miserable; and if you would not, you must take care to instruct and
exercise them betimes in the Way they should go.

Our Savior says of Judas that betrayed him, It were good for him if he had
not been born; It was far more eligible for him never to have been, than to
have committed so great a Wickedness: And is not this the hapless State of many
more? So that they who are, with and under God, the Authors, or rather
Instruments of Life and Being to any, do by this make them liable to great
Misery, as well as capable of great Happiness.

And indeed those Parents, who have done no more for their Children, than to
bring them into the World, and make provision for the Animal Life only, I
question whether by this they have not done more to bring them into great
Misery, than they have contributed toward their Happiness.

6. This leads me to another forcible Motive to take care of their Education,
because if we do not, we shall be accessory to all the Evil they both do and
suffer. It will be Trouble enough to think, we have those sprung from us, who
have been the Authors of great Mischief to others, and fall into uttermost
Ruin themselves, tho our selves had no hand in it. That those that came from,
and are as it were parts of us, are most justly sentenced to endless Torments;
this thought is almost unsupportable to a Parent: But what will it then be to
make this bitter Reflection, All this Ill that my Child has done, and all the
Misery he endures, is the Effect of my Negligence; it is through my faulty
Carelessness, that he was so sinful, and is so wretched?

If the Happiness of Heaven admit of Allays, as it does of Degrees, the
Remembrance that I did not do my utmost to rescue any of my Acquaintance and
Friends from Sin, will give a great damp to the Joy of that State: But that I
should be so grossly negligent of mine own Child, as not to do all I could to
prevent such unsufferable Woes; this must pierce the Soul.

Lastly then, Let all Parents consider what account they will be able to give
of themselves to their Judge, of the Neglect of their Children: When they see
them doomed to everlasting Misery for that Wickedness they fell into for want
of timely Instruction: When God shall say, these my Creatures are lost for ever
through your Heedlesness and Unfaithfulness, because you neglected the
Opportunities you had of principling and exercising them to Virtue and
Godliness, they fell into a vicious Course of Life, and must now eat the bitter
Fruits of it eternally. What will you then answer to your Judges? And with what
face will you look upon those your neglected Children, when they shall say, O
had you but called on us to remember our Creator in the Days of our Youth, we
had then been kept from Iniquity, and now from unconceivable Misery? Had you
but watched us at first, and been careful to engage us to Goodness, we had
lived good Lives on Earth, and now have been happy in Heaven? Consider, I
beseech you, how you will be then affected, and let this make you wise to
prevent that Astonishment and Confusion of Face, which must necessarily
accompany such a Guilt as this.

And that you may be able to know how you will be able to abide the Judgment of
God, I would desire every one of us to summon our own Souls before themselves,
and see what account they are able to give themselves of this most grievous
Omission. What will the guilty Offender say to such Questions as this, which
his awakened Conscience will put to him?

1. Why have thou been so unnatural, as not to desire and endeavor thy Child's
best State? Or, why have thou been so unwise, as to slip the fittest, if not
only Season thou can ever have, to do him the greatest Good? How is it that
thou did not go to the brute Creatures, and learn this of them, who as soon
as ever their young Ones are capable, fail not to show them how they must live?

2. Again; How foolishly have thou acted, and contradicted thy self, in
providing carefully a vast Estate for a Swine to wallow in? for thou have taken
no care to fit him for it, to teach him to use it. And how careful have thou
been of thy young Dogs, that they be made; and of thy Horses, that that they be
managed? But only thy Sons and thy Daughters are not regarded.

3. And then, was it not most fit and equal, that thou who had brought thy
Children into Being, should take all possible Care that they may live well,
and be happy?

4. Thou have done something for them, then thou should either have done
more, or nothing. Better it were for them not to have been, than to be
miserable: They had better never have lived, than fall short of the End of Life.

What Answer can thou make to such Questions as these, which thine own Mind
will put, if thou give it leave to think? Or, how art thou satisfied with thy
self, when such Thoughts as these arise in thy Mind?

And if thou can not stand before thine own Conscience, how will thou appear
before the Tribunal of the Great God?

I conclude this Exhortation. What would you say of a Father and Mother, that
should expose a newborn Infant in a Wilderness full of Salvage Beasts? Would
you not call this most unnatural Inhumanity? It would be so. And it is not
less, but more Inhumanity, to leave the Soul of thy Child untaught,
undisciplined, to be a Prey to that roaring Lion: In the one the bodily Life is
in danger; in the other, the higher Life of the Soul, the Spiritual and
Eternal, is hazarded. Thou who take no care of thy Child's Education,
exposest him to Eternal Death and Misery.

How merciless and unnatural would that Mother be thought, who should deny her
Breasts to the hungry Child, who could see it starve without giving it,
necessary Food? She would deserve to be branded for a Monster. And what shall
we think of those that starve the better and higher Life? That hear the Cries
of the little Soul after Knowledge and Goodness, but turn a deaf Ear to them,
and never once take care to nourish them up to Eternal Life, but suffer them to
faint, and die the worst of Deaths, that of the Soul.

And if Murderers of the lower Life shall be punished so severely: if those
that, when they have wherewith to do it, deny to feed the hungry animal Life,
shall not be able to stand in Judgment before God: how then shall the Murderers
of Souls be avenged? and where shall they appear, that have denied the Bread of
Life to their own Children?

It Is an inhuman thing counted, not to show the Way to an ignorant Traveller:
but O how monstrously unnatural is it, when the Soul of thine own Child is
calling to thee by its Inclination, and its Necessities cry to thee, to show it
its Way of Life; when it stands gazing, and knows not which way to go, that
thou should not by thy Counsel and Example say to it, This is the Way, walk
in it.

The Sum of these Arguments is, That if we will not transgress the express Law
of God; if we think our selves bound to follow the Examples of good Men; if we
will obey God in an Instance where Obedience has procured most singular
Blessing; if either the Sense of what is just and fit, or the Desire of Benefit
and Advantage will prevail with us; if we either love God, or our selves, or
our Children; if we either follow the Inclinations of Nature, or the Directions
of Reason; if we will be concluded either by the common Sense of Mankind, or
the Divine Oracles; if we would secure our Souls from the Guilt of inhuman,
unnatural Cruelty, and our Children from the greatest Misery, We must take care
to train them up betimes in the Way in which they should go.

OF HOSPITALITY. Preached to the Company of Inn-holders.
ROMANS 13. 12. latter part. Given to Hospitality.
THE Occasion of our present Assembly, as I am informed, is to fulfill the Will
of Mrs. Anne Astel, who having bequeathed a yearly Revenue toward the
Maintenance of a Lecturer in the Parish of St. Lawrence Jury, out of good
respect she had to the Worshipful Company of Inn. holders, obliged that her
Lecturer once a Year to preach a Sermon to them: In which she showed her self a
prudently pious and charitable Person, that when she had taken care for the
good Instruction of her own Parish, she would improve and extend her Charity to
others, and make it as diffusive as she could, that others, and particularly
You, to whom she seems to have had particular Good Will, might partake of her
Bounty.

That we might perform the Will of this religious and good Person, we are here
assembled; and that you may receive that Benefit which she piously designed, I
have chosen to discourse of a Text of Scripture, the Consideration of which
will set before you a great part of the particular Duty of Inn-holders, whose
Name this Company bears.

And that I look on as the main Business of Sermons, and such Exercises as
these, to put Men in mind of, and persuade them to the faithful discharge of
their respective Duties; which when in all our several Places, Stations, and
Employments we shall faithfully do, then, and not till then, shall we all be
happy, and Glory shall dwell in our Land.

To make way for what I intend: The Word (...), which the Translators here
render Hospitality, is compounded of two Words, which signify Love of
Strangers; and in its common use, it does not much depart from this
Signification that is imported in the Original.

The more simple word (...) has the same Sense; only leaves us to guess what
Affection or Deportment we should have to Sttangers, which is expressed in the
Compound.

The other word (...), which we here translate given to, more properly
signifies, and in other places is rendered following. It denotes the study of,
and earnest pursuit after a thing. So that the Sense of the Apostle's
Exhortation to the Romans, and to us, and all Men, as well as to them, is, that
they and we should diligently and studiously, with Care and Pains, Earnestness
and Industry, set our selves to exercise Hospitality.

Concerning which I shall endeavor to show three things in general.

First; What that is which is here signified to us by Hospitality.

Secondly; How good and necessary it is. From whence it will appear that there
is an Obligation on all Christians, nay on all Men to practice it.

And having done this, I shall proceed to show that you especially of all Men
are most peculiarly and most strictly bound to be hospitable.

And here I shall discourse of the Benefits that will redound to those that
carefully and conscionably practice this Duty; likewise I will mention some of
those Practices which are notorious Violations of the Laws of Hospitality. And
shall also offer some Directions, which may help to the better Performance of
it.

First, In general; To have such Affections, such inward Dispositions toward
Strangers, as are fit for us to have, is to be hospitable: and to carry and
demean our selves toward them in a becoming manner, is to exercise Hospitality.

This is all that is imported by the word Hospitality, which is originally
Latin; or by the Greek (...), which denotes that inward Affection, or outward
Deportment that should be toward Strangers.

And if the generality of Mankind were asked what that is, they would answer,
that it is to be just and honest, faithful and true in our Dealings with them.
It Is to be civil, courteous, humane, loving, kind in our Disposition and
Carriage. It Is to be inclined and ready to do all Good Offices for them, that
are in our Power, which their Condition calls for, and which they either do,
or; if they understood, would desire: That is, to inform them when they are
ignorant, to rectify their Mistake, to assist them in the Government of their
Passions about those matters with which they are unacquainted. To withhold them
what in us lies, from doing any foolish evil Actions, to which their
Unexperience might betray them. To supply them with those things, of which, by
reason of their Absence from their Acquaintance, they are destitute.

In short, It is to bail and screen them from that Evil, and those Mischiefs,
and Dangers to which, by being Strangers, they are exposed: to secure them from
all that Harm, to which their Condition makes them liable; and to do all that
Good to, and confer those Benefits on them, which, if they were where they are
known, they might expect and would have.

It is to be their Friends, to do them any good Office that they want and we
can do; civilly to converse with them, to advise and counsel, to relieve with
Money or any other way, to entertain them at our Tables, to lodge them; and to
do this with a willing Mind and a cheerful Countenance, which is more than a
Circumstance in this matter; for this hospitable Look (if I may so call it) is
no small part of the Behavior, that is intended in Hospitality.

And tho in our modern use of it, the Word imports no more than an entertaining
a Person with whom I have no great Acquaintance at my Table, and lodging him;
yet anciently it signified all sorts of Civility and Kindness, which is shown
to Stangers.

So that this is the Sum of what I mean by Hospitality, to be kind and
friendly to Strangers. I proceed,

Secondly; To make it appear that this is very good: That is,

1st, It Is fit and becoming. 2dly, It Is profitable and advantageous.
1st, It Is a piece of that good Nature, which so well becomes Man, that it is
called Humanity: and therefore the Ancients call our Kindness to Strangers by
this Name, Humanity; and the defect of this is ever censured by them with this
Expression of Barbarous and Inhumane.

And we have further Reason to think this good Nature, if we consider the
natural and good Principles of our Actions, viz. That we are naturally
compassionate and inclined to relieve those that are in want; that we are
pleased to see others in good State; that we think we ought to do to others, as
we would have them do to us.

These and such like are the Principles of our Actions, and they are
acknowledged by most to be both natural and good. Now, if we will follow these,
we must be good and kind to Strangers; for, we shall consider, they are absent
from their Acquaintance and Friends, and that they want their Help; we shall,
out of the Pleasure we have to see Men in a good Condition, do what in us lies,
to bring them into it; we shall think, if our selves were in the same case they
are, what we should desire of others, and we should do to them, as we desire
they should to us.

2. The holy Scriptures give us full proof of this, and they being an express
Declaration of God's Will, do not only declare, but make a thing fit.

Now in the Bible how expressly is Hospitality enjoined? How often inculcated?
How much commended? And how severely is the very neglect of it censured and
punished?

1. The ancient People of God, the Jews, are in most plain Words commanded to
use Strangers well; not to oppress, no nor to vex them, but to love them as
themselves: Exodus 22. 21. Thou shall neither vex a Stranger, nor oppress him;
for ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt. Exodus 23. 9. Levit. 19. 34. And
thou shall love the Stranger as thy self; for ye were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt. And many other places. And these Commands are backed with a most
forcible moving Reason, viz. that themselves were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt; and they knew the Hearts of Strangers: they are put in Mind of the
Condition they were once in, and what Usage they then wished for from the
Egyptians. And this reasoning supposes they would now deal with others, as
themselves once wished they might be dealt with.

Nor is the Christian Law defective in this: For, as we are here in the Text
exhorted to follow earnestly after Hospitality; so in Heb. 13. 2. we are
cautioned not to forget it; which supposes that Christians are otherways, both
by Nature and the former Revelations, taught to do thus.

2. This is highly commended to us from the greatest Examples. It is recorded
to have been the Practice of Abraham, and of Lot, Men beloved of God, and
famous with us; they were not only honored whilst they lived, but they are
renowned amongst all Posterities.

Genesis 18. 1, 2, 3, to the 11th: In this Story is observable what Abraham did,
and with what Heartiness, and Alacrity, and Diligence he entertained them; how
free he was in it: he asked them not, but they him, this was a Carriage that
became the hearty Goodness of those old Times, and 'twas a Work worthy of, and
suitable to the great Faith of that excellent Man.

In the beginning of the 19th Chapter we have Lot's Hospitality recorded, when
he saw two Strangers he went to meet them, bowed himself with his Face toward
the Ground; addressed to them with all obliging Civility. He would not be
denied, but when they said, they would tarry in the Streets all Night, he
importuned them to come in; and when they were come in, he entertained them
bountifully; he made them a Feast, says the Text.

Nay, in the 10th of Deuteronomy. 28, 29. God himself is said to love the Stranger,
and give him Food and Raiment. But we have far greater proofs of God's Love to
Strangers than these: For Us Gentiles, that were Strangers and Foreigners, has
he visited with his Salvation; to us he has given his Son, and has treated us
with all imaginable Expressions of Kindness and Love, nay beyond all
Imagination.

Now, if this be the Practice of the best Men that ever lived, nay, of God
himself; if this be one of his Titles, that he loves the Stranger, as it was of
the Heathen Jupiter, who was called Jupiter Hospitalie, the Hospitable God, the
God of Strangers: then surely we must conclude Hospitality to be a fit and
becoming thing.

3. The Scriptures show this Practice not only to be good and fit, but
necessary and indispensable; which will appear from the sad Doom that shall
pass upon them who but neglect this. See Mat. 25. 43. I was a Stranger, and ye
took me not in. This was part of their Charge, who are sentenced to everlasting
Flames; that he, that is, the least of our Lord's Disciples, was not taken in
when a Stranger.

He does not say, ye scorned, ye reviled, ye persecuted me when I was a
Stranger; but ye took me not in. Nor is their Fault, that they did not
entertain the Christians they knew, and were acquainted with; but that they did
not receive into their Houses those whom they knew not.

This certainly is a great and necessary Duty, which the Judge of all the World
thinks fit to mention, where he has declared the Process that shall be at the
last Judgment; he has not instanced in many others that we esteem (but several
are not) greater than this.

Thirdly; To the Scriptures, I might add by way of Accumulation, the Testimony
the Heathens have given to this hospitable Temper and Practice, and this both
by their Sayings and their Examples: Which must have the force of a convincing
Argument; for it is so manifestly good and becoming, that by the dim Light of
Nature they could discover it.

Homer in the third Book of his Odysses, brings in Nestor importuning Minerva
and Telemachus, to stay with him. He tells them, they leave him as if he had no
Entertainment for them; or that he could not lodge them: but this he would never
suffer as long as he lived, or kept a Servant, (...), whosoever should come to
his House.

This shows what Hospitality they used, and what they thought of it in those
old Times.

Again, The Thynians and other Nations, which were looked on as barbarous, yet
were famous for their kind Usage of Foreigners, as is observed by Historians.

The Cretians amongst others, are observed by Athenaeus to have two Tables,
which were called (...), i. e. for Strangers.

This was of great account amongst the Romans, who thought it a most inhumane
thing, Vsu Vrbis prohibere Peregrinos, as Tully says.

And indeed nothing was more detestable amongst all the Heathens, than not to
be civil to Strangers. Inhospitalittora, Populus (...), were Appellations of
the worst sound in their Ears.

But I must not now give any account of the manner how this was practiced, and
into how great a Friendship this Kindness to Strangers grew, how sacred a thing
it was; and how the Host and Guest received Tallies, little Monuments of that
Friendship they had contracted, which were delivered from Father to Son. And if
ever this Friendship were violated, they invoked their Jupiter Latialis.

The Romans had such a regard to those Guests that were Friends, that as A.
Gel. lib. 5. cap. 13. in his Description of the Order of Offices, says; after
Parents, and Orphans, and Clients, they were to have the next place, and to be
set before Kindred, whether Consanguinei, or Affines.

And the Jus Hospitii was by all looked upon as a most sacred thing. Tull. 3.
Offic. Cum Tyane Patrensi est mihi quidem Hospitium vetus, quam ego
necessitudinem sancte colendam puto.

This is sufficient to show that Hospitality is a fit and becoming Practice.

Secondly; I now shall show that this Practice is very beneficial, and indeed
so is every thing that, is fit and becoming.

1. It Is beneficial to the kind Host: See the Recompense Abraham and Lot had:
the one had a Child given him in his old Age, the other was rescued out of the
Flames of Sodom. These Blessings were bestowed upon them, upon their kind
Entertainment of Strangers. Some, says the Scripture, in so doing have
entertained Angels unawares; and I doubt not, but great Blessings have been
left behind Guests, that were not Angels.

In the 28th of Acts, ver. 7. Publius is said to have entertained Paul three
days courteously, (...), and this kind Guest in requital healed his
Father-in-Law of a Fever.

But besides all this; He that is a kind Host, does that which most directly
tends to his own Perfection: For, whosoever goes in the ways of Love and
Kindness, is in the Road to Happiness. He, by doing that which is agreeable to
Humane Nature, highly pleases and delights himself: Besides, he takes the best
course that can be, to make a sure Friend: The Kindnesses showed to Strangers
will never be forgotten by them. Now I suppose we all know, that a Friend is
the greatest Treasure on Earth; next to the Goods within, there is nothing in
the World comparable to it.

2. I need not discourse how profitable this is to the Guest or Foreigner; for
it is plain that he is relieved, he is served, he is gratified, he is pleased.

And besides this Service done to private Interests, the Welfare of the Public
is many ways promoted: for good Hospitality encourages Men to go abroad, this
increases Commerce, and gives an Opportunity of making the Good of one Nation
common to others. What an Advantage was the Dispersion of Christians to the
whole World? And what a public Benefit would it be, if the Men of all
Countries were by kind and friendly Treatment invited into all Countries? How
should we grow acquainted, and learn to bear with, if not to like one another
Manners: And this would increase first into Private, and then Public
Friendships.

Enough I think is said to show, that Hospitality is exceeding good. And from
what has been said, appears the great Obligation, under which all Men are, to
be kind to Strangers. I do not say they are all bound to relieve them with
Money; for many are poor and have it not: but I say all ought to be kind, and
express their Kindness in the ways they can, that is, as far as they are able,
and as is consistent with other greater Duties.

All can be hospitable, tho they cannot exercise Hospitality; they can do
something of it, tho not the whole. The poorest Man can have kind Thoughts, and
a benign Disposition toward a Stranger; he can look cheerfully on him, he can
speak and carry civilly toward him: He can perhaps show the way to a wandering
Traveller. The things which he can do, every one should do in this matter: and
all will do it, that have any regard to the Law writ in our Hearts, or to the
Holy Scripture, to what was commanded the Jews by Moses, or enjoined all Men by
Christ Jesus: If they will follow the Examples of good and holy Men, or be
Imitators of God himself; If they will not be worse than Heathens: If they will
receive good to themselves, or be Benefactors to others, and good to the World:
If they will escape the sad Doom to everlasting Misery, and be admitted to
endless Joys, let them follow after Hospitality, and be kind and good to
Strangers.

I have hitherto discoursed of Hospitality in general, and the Obligation under
which all Men are to use it. I now apply my self to you, Gentlemen, who are of
this (in my account) Honorable Company, which was not made a Corporation till
the 6th of Hen. the 8th, as the Historian says. It is to me a wonder, that it
should have no ancienter Date, unless it were because the Necessities of Men of
this Profession were not so many, nor frequent, and so did not so much require
a Provision against them, as in some others they did.

Or else it might be because your own benign and friendly Disposition did as
closely and firmly unite you, as any Charter or Patent could do.

Be the cause what it will, it matters not. To you that either are of this
Employment, or at least think it honorable to bear the Name, and go under the
Character of Innholders, I now address my self, and speak to you all under that
Notion.

I have exhorted all Men to be hospitable, I now call upon you more
particularly, to use Strangers well. I do not, because I hope I need not,
bespeak you to be just and honest. I hope there is not one amongst you, that
would injure, that would rob your Guests, that would not be true to the Trusts
they repose in you, that would take from them more than by the Law of Nations
and Nature, as well as the Custom of this Land, you may challenge as your own.

But not doubting of your Justice and Honesty, I bespeak your Kindness and
Friendship to your Guests. Do not only no ill Offices, but also do all good
ones; be kindly affectionated to them that come into your Houses; express this
good Affection in a benign pleasing Aspect, and courteous civil Language, and
all manner of good Deeds you can do.

If you see your Guest ignorant of the Custom of the Place, inform him. If you
see him viciously inclined, tho it be in a Case where you might be enriched by
his Folly, that is, by Intemperance or the like, yet restrain him, be so bold
as to deny what he calls for, when you see him exceed the Bounds of sober
Cheerfulness. Perhaps he may thank you for putting this Restraint on him
another time; or if he do not, you act like a true Christian Gaius, like an
honest and virtuous Host and Friend.

And as you will do well to restrain such Excesses, and to withhold the Fuel of
Intemperance; so you must take care that your Guests be supplied with all that
Nature wants, and well regulated Desires call for. See that your Provisions be
good, that your Meat and Drink be wholesome and well ordered, that your Lodgings
be easy and accommodate for the Travelers Quiet and safe Repose; and that your
House may be a Shelter, a Harbor, a Sanctuary, a Home to your Guest.

Let your Servants also bo diligent and faithful in their Ministrie^. Let your
Kindness also extend to the Servants of your Guests, if they be attended.

Nay, let it come out of the Chamber, and visit the Stable, that the poor weary
Horse be not neglected. And when you are to receive the Recompense, which the
Law allows for all this Care, do not take the Advantage you have of hoisting up
the Prices of things to the utmost; but according to a moderate Estimate of
matters deal with him; and give him occasion to say, that you have not only
been just, but fair; that you have used him kindly as well as honestly; that
you have not been an Host, but a Friend.

Use your Guest so, that he may not miss his other Acquaintance and Friends;
nor have occasion to complain that he is from home.

If any one should demand of me for what reason he should do this? I think I
might give him full Satisfaction. For,

1. I would tell him that this will be the best and surest way to bring Guests
to his House, and thereby promote his Secular Interest, Men will themselves go
and invite their Friends to the House where they have been well used. But this
is a small matter; For,

2. This is a necessary Exercise of that universal Love and Benevolence, which
is found in every good Man: Wherever Love is, it will be working, as it has
opportunity. And I am sure those of your Prosession have great and frequent
Opportunities of expressing their Humanity and Goodness.

This then is my Plea; You have a fair Opportunity of doing much Good, neglect
it not. Above all, I beseech you take heed lest you turn that into an occasion
of Evil and Mischief, which was intended for Beneficence and good Offices.

3. Your very Calling, and the Nature of your Employment requires you to be
good to Strangers, so that if you be not kind, you are not honest, you are not
what you profess to be.

(1.) Out of an Inclination to this way of Life, it is to be supposed you have
taken it up: or at least you have been bred to it, and profess it; and will you
not do what you seem and pretend, and bear the World in hand you do? this
cannot confist with Justice.

(2.) You are they who are trusted by the Government to entertain: Strangers,
and how can you break this Trust? This is a Trust publicly committed to you,
which therefore you must by no means break.

The Essenes, as Josephus tells us, who were so famous for Hospitality, chose
some excellent Persons to take care of Strangers. You are those choice Persons,
upon whom, by our Constitution this great Care is left. You are by Public
Authority set in this Station; see therefore that you maintain it, that you
discharge so public a Trust.

(3.) Strangers themselves put a Confidence in you, they expect you should have
a care of them, they look for not only just, but fair Dealing; they hope to be
treated friendly and civilly, as well as honestly. And if you do not thus, you
disappoint and deceive them, and so cannot be honest.

(4.) You are publicly allowed some Recompense for this. And since the Law
does not forbid, and your Guests are content to make fair Allowance for what
you do in this kind, it is great Injustice not to deserve it of them.

4. Let me desire you to consider what place you fill up in the World. Now I
look on your Employment thus to have begun.

In the first Ages of the World, when Men were fewer and better than now they
are: I suppose the best and richest to have entertained Strangers freely, and
that they received no Requital, but only some Expressions of Gratitude.

Afterward, when the World was more peopled, as in the days of Abraham, as I
know not but this was become a Trade by that time; so I am sure that those that
were both good and rich, would still continue the ancient free Hospitality;
they would not be deprived of the Pleasure, and other Advantages they had by
Converse with Strangers.

In these latter days, when Men are more numerous, and travel more frequently,
and do not carry their Houses with them, as they did at first: and when Money,
that common Measure of the worth of all things, is so easily carried; and for
these and some such Reasons, it is thought best by all, there should be such
Houses as yours of public Reception; So that now the Care of Strangers by the
confent of Mankind, is even wholly devolved upon you; others, in a manner
discharging themselves of it (though all ought not) for, some in these days are
as Rich, as they were in old times, and if they were but as kind too, they
would entertain strangers still: But however, they all casting this on you,
this Consideration must carry great force in it to engage you to Hospitableness.

As the Hospitals are Places appointed for the Sick, and the Lame, and the
Poor; so your Houses are Hospitals for the Stranger, the Traveller to come
into; yours are (...), as theirs are (...).

You seem to be risen up in the Room, and to fill the places of those ancient
Hosts, Abraham and Lot, and such other great and good Men, whose Houses were
open to all Strangers: Be you therefore Imitators of them. I do not mean that
you should entertain all on free-cost, as they did: that your Conditions will
not suffer; nor would this (according to the best estimate of things I can
make, be for the good of the World: that is, it would be no way to maintain
that Equality, by which Societies subsist.

But this is that I would persuade you to, to be as kind to Strangers as they
were, to do them all the good and friendly Offices within your Power, that any
of them did. Let your Hearts be as large, though your hands cannot be so open;
and by this means you will be the Children of Abraham, if you thus walk in the
Steps of the Faith of Abraham.

Now that the Love more than the Wealth of Men is decreased, and we are grown
more selfish and contracted in our Spirits; now that there is less Generosity in
the World than there was, let me call upon you to emulate the Goodness of old
Times, and to retrieve that ancient Hospitality which is almost lost. Be so
kind and good to your Guests, that they may have no occasion to complain of
these Days, that they are ill for Strangers, nor wish they had lived in those
former Times.

5. And let me also speak to you as Englishmen, and desire you, that you would
use your Guests well and kindly for the honor of your Nation, which by a
French Libeller was censured for Incivility to Foreigners. But I think his
Animadverter observed, that it was only a Remark upon Boys, who being surpised
with some odd uncouth Garb, or ridiculous Carriage, might laugh at it.

Or else perhaps there was not so much Talk and Noise, and Show of
Officiousness* as he had met with in his own Nation.

But to let him pass, I have had this Account from diverse of the Beyond Sea
Inns, especially French, that they exceed us in three things.

1. The Host receives his Guest with more Expressions of Respect, more Civility
of Speech, and courteous Behavior. 2. The Servants and Attendants are more
numerous, and more officious and diligent than ours. 3. That their Reckonings
are more favorable in some Places.
Whether all this be true, I know not, but I desire you to consider, that none
may on such accounts as these blame us, nor desire to travel beyond Sea, rather
than in their own Country. Let Strangers have no just occasion to complain for
such things as these.

6. I do the more earnestly press all this on You, because You have fair
Opportunities, that invite and assist You in being hospitable.

Some Men, who have mind enough to converse with, and be kind to Strangers,
cannot, if they should go out to seek for them, find them. Besides, their
Manner of Living, their House, their Estate, their Employment, will not comport
with it. But it is quite contrary with You, they come home to You, and your Way
of Life makes it necessary for You to see and be with them.

All that I call for more is, That You would be kind and friendly to them;
that, as St. John says to Gaius, whatsoever You do to Brethren or Strangers,
You may do it faithfully and heartily; that You would comply with the fair
Opportunities You have of practicing an excellent Virtue.

OF DOING GOOD UNTO ALL MEN.
GAL. 6. 10. As we have therefore Opportunity, let us do Good unto all Men.
IT is generally confessed that all Men in the World have something to do, a
Business wherein they are to be Employed; and that none ought to live Idly.
Whosoever would do nothing, he affects the greatest violence to Nature that can
be.

It is also agreed that Men ought to do good, for it is more eligible to do
nothing than to do Evil. But what that is, which in general we call Good, to
whom and at what time we ought to do it, this is not so well understood
ordinarily.

A great Part of every Man's Business in the World is with and about Men: And
therefore most of the Duties, which God has enjoined him, relate to them: And
his Happiness no less depends on his Discharge of these Duties than any others.
For, Justice and Charity, Faithfulness and Gratitude are as necessary
Conditions of Eternal Life as the Worship of God.

In the Text we are instructed what our Carriage should be to all Men, and
exhorted to it. And our Instruction is delivered us so short, and yet so full
and plain; and the Exhortation is founded on so clear and strong Reason, that
if we will consider, we cannot but understand our Duty, and if we do, we shall
certainly resolve, that it is good and necessary to practice it.

Therefore. This Particle shewsthe Text to be an Inference or Conclusion drawn
from what was said before. The Coherence of Scripture is very dark in the
Epistles. It is usual in the style of this facred Book to fall from one thing
to another immediately, and as it were accidentally, and without continuation
of a long Discourse: But the reference which this Conclusion has to the Context
seems to be this; The Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter had persuaded the
Galatians to a gentle tender Carriage toward their faulty Brethren, and to
bear one another Burdens: Also to a grateful and liberal Retribution to their
Spiritual Instructors. To enforce these Particulars, he uses an Argument, which
persuades to all sorts of good Actions; Whatsoever, says he, a Man sows, that
shall be also reap; i. e. according as a Man acts, it shall be with him; as his
carriage is now, his condition shall be hereafter, But that they might not lose
their reward, by giving over well-doing, he exhorts them to Constancy. And that
they might not think it long before it come, He tells them, they shall receive
what they expect ((...)) in Gods time, that which Divine Wisdom has set, and is
therefore certain and the best time.

After these Arguments he concludes with the Text. As we have therefore
Opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, especially unto them who are of the
Household of Faith; i. e. Since Men shall be rewarded according to their Works,
and they that continue to do well ((...)) that which is Honorable and Worthy,
Handsome and Becoming, shall not fail of a great Recompense from God, let us do
that which is good and beneficial to Men, to all Men, and especially to
Christians as Opportunity serves. I will briefly gloss on the Words.

Therefore; That which follows is by its own Light known to be good, it is a
Principle, which evinces it is own truth and goodness. However, the Apostle
takes in Arguments from without to enforce it. It Is good to take all ways to
persuade and engage Men to Virtue, to use all Arguments to convince and move
them.

Exhortations to Virtue are as rational and accountable as any other thing.
They are Conclusions drawn from as clear and evident Principles as any. For,
let it be laid down, as it cannot be denied or doubted, that Man is of such a
Nature, and set in such Circumstances to God, and to other Men; And all the
Virtues that were ever commended by the Heathens, and commanded in the Religion
of Christ, will necessarily result.

Man never acts with so much Reason, can never give so good an account of
himself, as when he is in the practice of Virtue in general, particularly Doing
good, etc.

Let us. These words ever imply that something may and ought to be done, no
Exhortation, but supposes that: Wisdom never requires what is in it self
Impossible, nor exhorts them who are utterly Impotent and can do nothing.

Again, Let us. The Apostle is not of their Number, who bind heavy Burdens to
lay on other Men's Shoulders, but themselves will not touch them with one of
their Fingers. He requires nothing of others which he does not himself. He does
that which he enjoins them, and so engages them by his Example as well as his
Counsel.

As we have opportunity. Time and Season are carefully to be observed. Time is
absolutely necessary to every Action, and Season is necessary to the well doing
of it. It is as the Wind and Tide, that makes the Work easier and quicker when
it is with us: We can do more and with less Pains, when we strike in with
Opportunity.

We may be said to have on Opportunity in general, whenever we can do any
thing; more particularly and properly, when we are assisted by such an happy
concurrence of all other External Causes and Circumstances, on which our Action
depends, as we can do it best; i. e. 1st, When that Action is most convenient
and suitable to us in that Condition. 2dly, When it will be done with least
pains and difficulty. And, 3dly, with most certainty, wen our Endeavors will
be most effectual.

A Time, when any Action is the best, or as good as any that can be done, is
the season of that Action; that is (...), an Opportunity simply so called. And
when that action is not only the best that can be done, but can also be best
done at that time, this is not only (...) but (...), a good Opportunity. The
former we find, Heb. 11. 15. the latter, in St. Mat. 26. 16.

All our Actions depend, 1st, on our own Power, the inward Principle from
whence they proceed; 2dly, on the Concurrence of Diverse External Causes, which
make us act with more ease, and in less time, and more surely to effect what we
endeavor. According to this, we may be said to have an Opportunity of doing
good to Men, whenever we can do it, and when we have so much assistance from
External Causes, as that we can best, i. e. with most ease, and quickness and
certainly do what we intend.

As, i. e. When and whilst, as soon and as often as we have Opportunity. Do not
overrun, do not stay behind, but accompany the Season, take the Tide, set up
your Sails when the Wind is with you, lose no time, slip no opportunity; and
whilst that lasts let us continue, up and be doing with the first Light, and
hold on till the Night come when no Man can Work.

Let us do. Let us not only think of doing good, and talk, but do: ((...)) Let
it be our Work, our Business, our Trade, that in which we employ our selves;
the word implies Care and Diligence, and perhaps Pains in acting: The thing to
be done (Good) requires more Power to effect it than Evil does: Very impotent
things can do great Mischiefs, but they must be Powerful that do any great Good.

Besides; We had need thus to work in this Business of doing Good, because we
shall find Difficulty, and meet with Opposition in it. Our corrupted Natures
are very backward to it, it is contrary to the Practice of this degenerate
World. Let us use our Endeavor to do what we can. And let none reflect on the
Wisdom of that Divine Spirit, by which St. Paul writ: nor so deny their own
Sense, as to say they can do nothing, this is but a Plea for Idleness and
Unwillingness to do good, by the same reason they may also say, they cannot
walk, nor speak: For, all our Power, both for the one and the other, is from
God originally. But what is that which we are to do?

Let us do Good, ((...)) i. e. that which is profitable, behooveful,
beneficial, and advantageous: By this Word we are here and every where (when it
is used of Creatures) to understand that which conduces to the Preservation and
Perfection of their Beings and Powers.

When we call any thing good, we refer it always to something or other. Here it
is applied to Men, and we understand by it particularly Wisdom and Virtue,
inward Quiet and Pleasure, Life and Health, and all those Circumstances, which
contribute toward the getting and securing of these Perfections. Briefly, that
which has a tendency to Man's attaining his End, his Perfection and Happiness,
that we call Good. To do Good to Men, is to do those Actions, which tend to
make them as perfect as is possible for them and to bring them into the
happiest Circumstances they can be in.

Unto all Men, i. e. not to our selves only, but to them that partake of our
Nature, ((...)) to A^^. This doubtless means Men. But yet our Kindness to them
is not exclusive of other inferior Animals: The good Mom is merciful to his
Beast. And as the Ointment poured on Aaron' s Head, ran down to the lowest ^^m
of his Garinent; so the Beneficence of a good Man is so diffusive, that it
reaches the lowest parts of the Creations of God, of which (according to Philo)
the High-Priest's Vestment was an Emblem.

Indeed our Goodness (as the Psalmist speaks) extends not unto God, and very
little to Angels, farther than it excites and occasions their greater Joy: But
it may to the Saints that are on Earth, and to all our Brethren, the Sons of
Adam, and to the Cro^tures of a lower kind, which God has made to serve us.

But our Apostle here means Men, all that have rational Souls, and Bodies of
the same Make with our selves, and capable of as great Happiness or Misery. He
requires us to do Good to all these, to exclude none, whether they be
Acquaintance or Strangers, our Contrymen or Foreigners, Friends or Enemies;
all, tho of contrary Persuasions, or of bad Practices; all and every one. We
are to aim at the Happiness of every Man, to endeavor the Perfection and good
State of All.

An unlimited Love, an unconsined Charity is here required; and a selfish, or a
contracted Affection are here excluded; wherever Man is, Love is to be. But
is there no difference to be made? Yes, in case of a Competition of opposite
Interests, some are to be preferred above and before others: So the Apostle
directs in the following Words;

Especially to them who are of the Household of Faith, i. e. who are of the
Household or Family of God by Faith, (as Grotius expounds it) i. e. the Children
and Servants of God, which they are in an especial manner, who believe and obey
the Gospel, the Disciples and Followers of Christ Jesus, whose Life was in
nothing more remarkable, in nothing so imitable by us, as in Benignity, and
Kindness, and universal Charity. They who by Faith obey him, are of the Family
of God, God takes especial care and provides for them; he takes them, as it
were, under his Roof and Harbor: They profess and practice the best Religion
in the World: And although they may be ignorant of, or mistaken in some Matters;
yet they believe and understand so much as makes them deny Ungodliness, and
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World; to love other Men so, as they do to them, as themselves would be don't ^o
by them; and to love and trust in their God, who made, and redeemed, and
sanctifies, and will eternally save them.

Let them be of the Eastern or Western Church, let them dwell in the North or
South, let their Differences be what they will, if they be as I have described,
they are the chief Objects of our Care and Benevollence. We are to do good to
them chiefly, tho not only.

Having thus briefly gloss'd on all the Words, I shall treat chiefly of that
Clause, Let us do Good into All, i. e. to the Community of Mankind, and to all
Particulars.

A Man may be deceived whilst he is contemplating Generals only, unless he
descend to Particulars. An Idea of Human Nature is a lovely thing; no Man
thinks of it, but is pleased with it in general, he has no malice against it:
But we must also consider it particularly, as it is subjected in this or that
Man. A Man may be Aliquis in omnibus, and nullus in singulis, in respect of his
Love, as well as his Knowledge. We must do good to the Generality of Mankind,
but we must also do good to Particulars.

Again; We must be beneficent to this, and that, and the other Man, but yet
always with respect to the rest of Mankind. Our particular Affection must not
exclude our Regard to the Community. On the other side, our loving and doing
good to this, or that, or the other Person, must consist with, and be
determined and bounded by our doing good unto all Men. This is founded on that
received Principle, The greatest Good is to be preferred; and it is a greater
Good which reaches more, than that which belongs to fewer: And caeteris
paribus, that is better which is good to all, than that which is only good to
some.

In treating of this Argument, I shall enquire:

1. What that is which is Good to Man. 2. By what means we can contribute to
it. 3. Free the Apostle's sense from some Difficulties. 4. Offer some
Considerations that may engage us all to the Practice of this great and good
Duty.
1. In answer to our first Enquiry. That in general is Good to Man, which is
either his Perfection, or which has a Tendency to it; that has the Goodness of
the End, this of the Means.

Here we are to consider, that Man is made up of two Natures, of various Powers
and Faculties; that one of these Natures is superior to the other, and some of
these Faculties are subservient to the other: that when we speak of Perfection,
we intend the Perfection of the whole, and have special regard to that which is
principal and supreme, the Soul of Man. For, tho the Body has its Perfections
and Goods, yet if these be not consistent with, and subservient to the Soul,
they are of no account.

We are not therefore so much to consider our lower Appetites, and the State of
the Body in this Discourse, but as it is serviceable to Knowledge and Wisdom, to
a Determination of our selves according to Reason, to the good Government of
our Wills and Affections, and contributes to that Joy and Peace, which is
consequent on Virtue and Goodness. Nor is any State of our Body, or any outward
Condition to be accounted good but evil, which does disserve and hinder us
either in the use of our Understandings, or in the Government of our Wills and
Appetites. If it do not further and promote these things, it is not good to us,
as Men.

I will more particularly speak my meaning in these few Propositions.

1. Man's Perfection consists in a good, i. e. a clear, distinct, full and
quick underderstanding of all those things that are within his Compass:
particularly in the Knowledge of God, and of himself, and of the Rules and
Reasons of his own Actions.

2. In a Will constantly following what is Good. In the Guidance and Government
of his Affections, his Appetite and Inclinations, his Intentions and
Resolutions, and all Principles of Action, according to his best and clearest
Knowledge. Particularly, in the exercise of a natural, rational, hearty
Religion, in a constant and even Fervency of Devotion toward God; also in the
Inclinations, Habits and Practices of Virtue: which refers to Men, all which is
summed up in Love and Goodwill.

3. In that Joy and Peace, that Tranquillity and Satisfaction which is the
Companion of an Understanding so enlightened, and a Will so directed.

4. That is a good State and Temper of Body, which will not obstruct and
hinder, but assist and be instrumental and serviceable to the Soul in all these
things. Natural Life, and Health and Strength, and such like are the Bodies
Goods; which are then good to Man, when they serve the Ends aforesaid, when
they minister to Rellgion and Virtue, to Knowledge and Goodness.

5. Those outward Circumstances, an Estate and Reputation, and such like, are
the best, which most help us to obtain, to secure and use the Perfections
before named; when they tend to increase our Religion toward God, or our
Charity to Men, and minister to our Devotions and Virtue, as a competent
Estate, and a clear Reputation have an Aptitude to do.

All that is good to Man in any respect, must be either subservient, or at least
consistent with this; therefore a Gratification of the sensitive Appetite, if
it prove prejudicial to Virtue and the Soul, is not good, but evil to the Man:
And an Estate may be for hurt to the Owner thereof, as Solomon speaks.

God many times does good to us, when he withholds Estates, or Health, or
Reputation from us. For, thereby he cures us of many Maladies, rids us of many
Vices. And so amongst Men, they that have Power over others, and understand
which are the best Methods to promote their Happiness, do it very often by
inflicting some Penalty, and by debarring them of some Gratification of one or
more of their Appetites.

But we must see that this be not a Cloak for Maliciousness: we must not
pretend that to be a Kindness, which is not; nor say we act from Charity, and
with Intention to make others happy, when we act from Revenge; when
Peevishness, or Malice, are the true Principles of what we do.

We consider Man all this while in his present State, but we are also to
consider him in reference to the future: And in that respect we attribute as
great Perfection to him, as we can suppose him capable of; that he is there
freed from all the Imperfection, under which the best Men labor here, and
delivered from those bad Circumstances, from which the most fortunate Men are
not exempted in this Life.

Thus I have given a short Summary of what is good to Man; and you will see the
Reason in the following Discourse, why I have made such particular and distinct
mention of that which is a subordinate, and that which is a principal and final
Good, of that which is good to a part, and to the whole.

II. I now proceed to show what are those ways in which one Man may do good to
another. They are of two sorts; either such as are mediate, and which by means
of others; or immediate, and by himself are done.

Of the first sort are our hearty Desires and Prayers to God, that he would do
them good; and also when we live so good Lives, as God is pleased to testify
his Acceptance of them, by showing Mercy to our Family, Kindred, or Country.
Thus the Posterity of Abraham obtained great Mercies for his sake. Of this kind
also are our Persuasions and Entreaties with Men on the behalf of others, when
we prevail with others to do them that Good, which our selves could not. To
this also appertains the making of good and true Reports, and giving just, but
fair Characters of Men. When we give any Character of another Man, it must be a
good one, so far as is consistent with Truth and Justice: we must always speak
true, and never ill of any Man, unless it be the best Method to make him wise
and good, or it may be necessary for the public Good, or the Information of
that Man, to whom we are most obliged. This is a way to increase a Man's Power,
and enlarge his Opportunity of doing Good; which I wish that all, who falsely,
or but groundlesly calumniate others, would consider. Let all that needlessly
carry about little Stories of the Miscarriages and Imperfections of their
Brethren, and uncover their Nakedness, only to gratify their own, or their
Companions ill Nature, remember they do a great Mischief.

These are the ways we take to do Men good in, by the Mediation of others. The
other by our selves are these three.

1. Discourse: By this we inform the ignorant, rectify the mistaken, satisfy
the doubtful, compose the unquiet, moderate the vehement, excite the dull,
revive the languishing. In short, by Discourse, we may direct and persuade Men
to be wise and good, we may minister to their Peace and Joy, we may end
Quarrels. I need add no more, because we are all as sensible of the
Beneficialness of a good Tongue, as we are of the Mischievousness of a bad one.

2. The Communication of our Estates, or the use of our Power, or Interest, or
Skill for the Relief of others. By this means, how does the Oppressed rejoice,
and the heart of the Poor sing? The Prisoner triumphs in his Liberty, and the
Poor that he has got an Alms, etc. The

3. is Example; which has a powerful, and a large and lasting Instuence. For
Examples do more particularly, and sensibly instruct, more powerfully convince
and persuade, more strongly incline, and surely engage and determine us to wise
and good Practices than Discourses themselves.

Man does so naturally imitate, that he is very prone to do whatsoever he sees
done; and thus Religion and Virtue may be propagated from one to another, till
it has spread over a Kingdom, nay over the whole World, and may be derived
from one Age and Generation to another.

We and all the World are sensible of excellent Advantages we have received
from the holy and virtuous Examples of those that have lived hundreds,
thousands of Years since.

Thus I have briefly enumerated the general ways, wherein one Man may do good
to another; which I have so particularly done for these Reasons.

1. That we having a true, large and comprehensive Notion of all that is good to
Man, and what we can do to attain it, might not confine our selves to endeavor
after some one particular Good, but might seek the Good of Man in it is greatest
Extent and Latitude; which will give us this Advantage, that we shall never be
unimployed in this good Work, but when we cannot be good to Men in one kind, we
may in another.

Sometimes, when we cannot instruct Men, and rectify their Mistakes
immediately; yet we may innocently divert and please them at present, and make
way for their considering what we shall say another time. By this also we shall
be satisfied, tho we be not doing them that Good we most desire to do; yet if
we desire to do them that which we can do, tho we cannot make them richer, if
we can help to make them contented (which by our Discourse and Example we may)
it may satisfy us. We shall in this case do to them, as Peter and John to the
lame Man that asked Money; they had no Silver nor Gold, but they cured him of
his Lameness: Or tho we cannot make Men wise at present, yet if we can make
them innocently merry, we do them good. That Is the first.

2. That by our distinct Conceptions of the several Orders and Degrees of Good,
we might be kept from turning Good into Evil. How many are there that by their
Ignorance of this intend well, but do ill to Men? And he that is ignorant, that
considers not which are the Goods that are final, and which subordinate; which
are for the whole, and which for the part; which are for the present, and of
short continuance, and which for the future, and for ever, is very prone to
slide into this Miscarriage. Such a Man will please his Child, or Servant, or
Friend, by a fond, and easy, and importune Compliance with his Humor, which is
to gratify him at present, but by this deprives him of those lasting
Advantages, which a Father's Correction, or a Master's Rebuke, or a Friend's
Admonition might have brought. He pleases his Humor, but perhaps ruins both
Soul and Body, and had been much more kind, if he had given wholesome, tho
unpleasing Counsel. That Is the second.

3. I have therefore mentioned these things so particularly, that we might be
instructed to lay out our greatest Care and Pains, and use our utmost Diligence
about that Good which is greatest and best, that we may not spend our selves,
and our Time upon Trifles and Iesser Matters, whilst we neglect those that are
of far greater concernment to them: For, by understanding that Religion and
Virtue, that Knowledge and Goodness are most essential and intrinsecal to the
greatest Happiness of Man, we shall not so much instruct him how to grow rich,
as how to be wise and good; nor shall we be so diligent to cure a bodily
Disease, whilst we neglect his Vices, those Distempers of Mind.

4. And I have therefore considered all the several Ways wherein we can do
Good, that so we might not fail to do all that we can, nor be vainly troubled
that we do no more. It Is but little Good that any Man can do, it is highly
reasonable he should not fail in any of that; and it would be foolish to grieve
he does no more than he is capable of doing, tho this is the Case of some
melancholy and scrupulous Persons.

Thus we see what use to make of what has been already discoursed. But before I
leave this Particular, let me add this, That in all we do for the Advantage of
others, we are to observe three things:

1. Our own Ability, and the Opportunity we shall (probably) have to effect
what we intend: for if our Undertakings be not proportioned to our Power, or
the Assistance of concurrent Causes, we shall not accomplish what we intend, we
shall be defeated of our Purpose, and labor in vain, which we ought to prevent
by all Means.

2. We ought to consider in what degree and order that which we aim at is good,
for the Reasons already mentioned, that if there be a Competition, we may
always (caeteris paribus) prefer that which is best, and may subordinate the
other to that.

3. We must also have a regard to the Necessity, the Number, and the
Valuableness of the Persons to whom we intend well; every Man's Prudence will
serve to direct him by these Intimations, and keep him within the Bounds of
Justice.

All that I will add under this Consideration is, the Rule our Savior has
given, That we should make every Man's Case our own; for naturally Man is not
so apt to consider another as himself. This will both excite us to Diligence,
and make us charitable.

But to conclude this Particular: If any Man ask me, What that is, that every
one can and must do for all and every Man in the World, without exception?

I answer; He may and must pray to God, that they may be good Christians in
this Life, and blessed and happy in the future. We must pray, that (which God
has declared to be his Will) All Men may be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the Truth; i. e. that they may be brought to believe and obey the Gospel, and
so may be made Partakers of everlasting Life and Glory. Our Liturgy also
teaches us to pray, that God would have Mercy upon all Men.

But I need not prove that this is our Duty; surely there is none that owns
himself a Christian, or but a Man, that doubts of this: I therefore take it for
granted, and will infer from this Concession,

1. That every Man in the World ought to desire, that every other Man may be
good and virtuous on Earth, and everlastingly happy in Heaven. If he must pray
for this, that implies he must desire it; and if he do pray to God for it, if
he be hearty and sincere, he does desire it.

2. That every Man ought also to do what he can, to further every other Man's
present Goodness, and thereby his future Happiness. If he be a Man that can
discourse rationally and movingly, he should plainly describe their Duties to
the Ignorant, and passionately exhort the Lazy and Careless to the performance
of them. Or if he has a good Pen, let him deliver these things to Posterity,
which are useful for them to know.

But that which the Unlearned may reach, is to live a religious and an honest
Life, and by this commend the Practice of Holiness to others. And who knows how
far the Influence of one poor Man's Goodness may reach? perhaps to both the
Indies, and the furthest parts of the World. This is the second thing I infer,
our Endeavor.

From which follows by way of Corollary, that we must take care never to do any
thing that interferes with our Endeavor after every other Man's Happiness
hereafter, and his Goodness here. We must never do any thing that is
inconsistent with Men's being good Men in this World, and their Happiness in
that to come.

But that is not all that is implied in our Endeavor, that we do nothing to
oppose and hinder Men from being good and happy: It implies also, that we do
that which is serviceable to the attaining these Ends; and in all dealings with
them, in all we do to and about them, that we help forward their Virtue and
Happiness; that either by more remote or nearer Methods, either by our selves
or others, we contribute to their present Holiness, and their Glory in the Life
to come.

If we do not thus, we are inconsistent with our selves, and our Actions
contradict each other; we are acted by contrary Passions, and the Principles of
our Actions oppose and thwart each other: For, when we desire Men may be good,
and virtuous, and everlastingly happy, this proceeds from Love and Good Will;
but when we design to punish them in their Bodies, or to diminish their
Reputations, or lessen their Estates; unless this be in order to their great
Happiness, and unless we intend to further that in such ways, we do not act
from Charity but Hatred; except such particular Evils be in^licted on them by
us for their Amendment, and with especial regard to their everlasting
Salvation, we are not charitable, but malicious: And if it be so, we are at
variance with our selves; we desire Men may be miserable here, and happy
hereafter, not that thereby they may be so.

I wish that which I have here said, may not be a Sanctuary to
Uncharitableness; and that Men will say, they intend to do Men some greater
Good by the Evils they lay on them. Landlords oppress their Tenants, to make
them more diligent; Masters will be hard, severe, and high to their Servants,
to keep them in their due Observance; Fathers austere to their Children, to
teach them Obedience: One Man will eclipse another Man's Reputation, that he
may not have an opportunity to do so much Mischief as he might, if he was
unsuspected. It Is well if these be not mere Excuses of Passion and ill Nature;
it is well if they think as they say, and if it be as they think, that these be
the best ways to secure Men from those Evils. But I fear, it is too often
Peevishness, and a waspish angry Spirit that evaporates, and is not employed by
Religion, and under the Conduct of Charity, nor designs any Good; or if Good be
intended, I doubt, very often some wiser and better Method might be taken for
the effecting it.

The Apostle tells us of overcoming Evil with Good. I know, the hypocritical
proud Pharisees, those false-hearted Pretenders, were sharply rebuked by our
Savior; and I doubt not but there are such in our Days. Only let us be cautious
we do not over-hastily condemn Men, nor inconsiderately resolve upon the Use of
extreme Remedies, till the Disease seem incurable by any other.

When in some of these Ways we do that which tends to bring Men nearer
Perfection and Happiness, we do them Good.

But I need not be very particular in this, because every Man's Mind will
faithfully suggest to him what is good to and for other Men. No Man that is
inclined to do Good to others, can easily be ignorant or mistaken.

All the Danger is in these two Particulars:

1. That he should only consider a part, and not the whole, or the present
only, without reference to what is future; and so many times may do them Hurt
instead of Good. I have endeavored to prevent this Mistake in my Explication,
where I have determined those Actions to be good to others, which conduce to
the obtaining of their last End, which tend to make them perfect and happy.

2dly; The other is, That he only has regard to one or a few, and neglects
others and more. Now the Text directs us here also, and teaches us to do Good
to all Men, which is a Principle of great Wisdom and Justice; and that Man who
observes it, and has attained to this Disposition, to regard Universality, to
take unto his Thoughts the Concerns of all Men, he will govern himself in his
Carriage to them discreetly. He will be just and impartial in his Dealing; he
will not, out of a too particular respect, neglect a more common public Good;
will not, to serve one or a few, disserve and prejudice, nay, or be mindless of
the Concerns of the Community, of many. He that lives by this Rule, so to do
Good to one Man, as remembering he must do so to all, he will neither be guilty
of Littleness and Contractedness of Mind, nor of Partiality; and he that
escapes these Rocks, he steers his Course well and wisely. And not only so, but
he acts generously and bravely, and so as to deserve Praise. He that designs
the Good of the World, and intends the Welfare of Mankind, and considers
himself as one little part of the great Compages, (as indeed he is) and never
separates his own particular Interests from the Order they have to the rest of
the Universe; this Man, as he apprehends truly, and judges right, and as he
acts both wisely and justly, so he also acts nobly and generously.

Every Man may be useful to another in all these respects, and for all the
purposes I mentioned, and may contribute very much to his Happiness.

He may also in all these ways retard and obstruct the Happiness of others, and
promote their present and future Misery.

We all have experienced the Advantages of Discourse, which (as I have showed)
instructs Ignorance, convinces Mistake, satisfies Doubts, composes Unquietness,
moderates Vehemence, excites Dullness, refreshes Memory; it both directs and
persuades us to Virtue, inclines to Benevolence, assists our Joy, and increases
Pleasure.

And there is none but is sensible what a good Name is, and has been not only
pleased, but also greatly assisted in doing good Offices, by a good Report. I
need not mind any that has lived in the World any time, how instrumental an
evil Tongue may be to the Ruin of others; how by blasting their Reputation, it
obstructs their doing Good; how it may seduce Men into Mistakes and Lies, and
rob them of common Sense; how it may disturb their Peace, and ^ire Men's Minds
with turbulent and hellish Passions.

Again; Good Examples do more effectually, i. e. more sensibly and particularly
teach and instruct, more powerfully convince and persuade, more surely incline,
and engage, and determine us to good Practices, than Discourses themselves.

And nothing has more Influence on us to make us wicked, and to lead us into
Ways of Evil and Mischief, than an ill Example: Nothing does more insinuate
into our Thoughts, and insensibly, but forcibly draw us to wicked Practices.
Nothing more encourages and emboldens Men to Sin, than to see others committing
it. I do not say all, but I am sure much of the Wickedness of the World comes
by Imitation and Example.

And lastly; When a Man does, as Job said he did, deliver the Poor that cries,
the Fatherless, and him that has none to help him; is Eyes to the Blind, and
Feet to the Lame; breaks the Jaws of the Oppressor, and plucks the Spoil out of
his Teeth, etc. Now that they are delivered from their Bondage, or drudging for
necessary Supports of Life, they are vacant for the Employments of their Mind,
and can have time to pursue after greater Goods, and better Enjoyments, and
those which contain more of Happiness.

On the contrary; he that hurts the Body, or spoils the Estate, or abridges the
Liberties of others, how does he hinder and obstruct Men's Happiness, by
diverting them from Attendance on their highest and principal Concerns, to low
Services, and ministering to the Body?

And there is no Considering-Man will doubt, but that a good Man by his holy
and virtuous Life, by his powerful Intercessions with God, does Good not only
to himself, but others; nor to a few, but many; not to the present Age alone,
but Posterity shall call him Blessed.

Thus Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and David, were Blessings to the whole
Nation of the Jews; and not to them only, but the Gentiles also have fared the
better for these Men's Goodness.

This is a short Delineation of the several Particulars, wherein one Man may be
advantaged by another, and of the Ways wherein that can be done.

To conclude this; We must contribute what we can to the greatest Happiness and
Perfection of Man, and do the greatest Good we can; and all other lesser and
inferior Goods must be dispensed and imparted, or withheld by us, according as
either of these will most contribute to his Perfection, to his being wise and
holy, religious and virtuous here, and everlastingly blessed and glorious
hereafter in the future State.

The greater Good is then in this Case to regulate our Actions. Let us so
distribute our Alms, or give our Counsel, or lend our Help to any, as most to
further their Virtue and Happiness. Let us take care, that by such things we do
not set Men at further distance from Heaven; as we do, when we instruct a
wicked Man so as by our Advice he accomplishes his ill Designs; or if we bestow
our Alms on an idle Person, and thereby maintain him in his Sloth.

I add; Let us look that in all we do to others, we still have an eye to their
great Happiness, and intend somewhat more in every Act of ours, than to bestow
on them some present and particular Advantage. Let us aim not only at the
Gratification of an inferior and bodily Appetite, but at the Advantages of the
Soul, of Virtue and Goodness, of present, and of future and everlasting
Happiness. If we keep this still in our Eye, we shall both do more Good, and
more certainly do Good, than otherwise we should.

This then is the Sum; Let us do any Good, every Good, all the Good we can, to
All; still preferring the greater in case of Competition, and subordinating all
the lesser to that which is principal, at least, taking care that they be
consistent with, and never opposite to it.

III. I propounded to remove some Difficulties which lie against our doing Good
to all Men: Two of the greatest I think of, are these:

1. Then we must inflict Evil on none: We must not oppose an Enemy, nor
prosecute an Offender, nor punish a Malefactor, which is altogether unusual,
and indeed impracticable; for there is no living on Earth, if this may not be.

2. If it must be our Business to do Good to all Men, this will take us off
from that Regard to our selves, and our own particular Interests, which it is
both natural and allowable for us to mind; we should rather, as we are
exhorted, study to be quiet, and to do our own Business.

First; I have already in my Explication very much prevented the former of
these Objections: All that I need to say further is, That tho we are enjoined
to do Good to All, yet this does not require we should do no Ill to some; but
rather enforce that on us; where it is the necessary or best Method to further
their Happiness, to make them virtuous and wise, and qualify them for Heaven;
or where it is necessary for procuring the Good of the Community, by securing
the Interests of many or more valuable Persons, or those to whom we are more
obliged upon other accounts, or of any injured Man.

We are not therefore by this Doctrine restrained from prosecuting and
punishing Offenders: only it keeps our Anger and Hatred within their due
Bounds, and requires them not to transgress the Limits which Charity has set;
that is, to do nothing inconsistent with the Goodness of any Man at present,
nor consequently with his everlasting Happiness. We must not punish Body and
Soul too, that belongs only to him that is the Judge of Souls.

We must not do any thing, but what may be, and what we intend to be
serviceable to their Happiness. And not to mention lower and lesser Penalties,
even the Punishment of Death it self, has many times had this good Effect on
them who have suffered it. Many Criminals by being sentenced to Death, have
been brought to a true Remorse for their Sins, who probably had they escaped
the Condemnation of the Judge, had fallen under the Condemnation of God.

So that this Doctrine only tends to moderate our Anger, to direct and restrain
our Hatred, and to set Bounds to our worser Passions; not to extirpate, but to
prune and rectify them, to bring them under the Government of Charity.

Secondly; The other Objection proceeds on a great Mistake, that he that does
Good to All, whose Temper and Principles engage him to such a large
Beneficence, will neglect himself. Whereas,

1. It no way interferes with that natural Principle, but on the contrary,
strengthens it: as will appear, if we consider,

(1.) That he that does Good to all, does Good to himself, for he is one of
that Number; and he has a greater Opportunity of doing Good to himself, than
any other, because he is always with himself, so that a Man's self is not
excluded from his Care.

If it be objected, That himself is not the only Object of his Care and
Kindness: I answer; Nor is this either fit, or just, or reasonable, or natural.
No Man can be the sole and adequate Object of his own Love; he cannot circle in
himself, be his own both Center and Circumference. If he should force himself
to such an unnatural use of himself, he would be very unhappy; if he take
himself off from his Relations to others, he must be miserable.

(2.) Every Man must be first good to himself, that he may be more good to
others. He that would be a Benefactor to other Men, must first be kind to
himself.

(3.) He that is good to others, is best to himself: For,

First; He engages them to make him Returns of Kindness; and these Vicissitudes
of Benefits preserve the Societies of Men, as the natural Life of Man is
preserved by the Circulation of the Blood to and from the Heart. And,

2dly; If they fail to recompense, yet the great God will not; but whatsoever
Good any Man does, he shall receive of the Lord; his Prayers, and all his
Labor of Love shall return into his own Bosom. And besides all this,

3dly; The very doing Good it self, is a Work that is an abundant Recompense to
it self. To do Good, is certainly the highest Pleasure of which the Soul of Man
is capable, as will appear further, when I show the Advantages which will
accrue to us by such an universal Goodness.

So then notwithstanding this Exception from Self-love, we may love
universally, and do Good to all: for, these are two natural Principles, that
agree well together; which seems to be well represented in the natural World.
For (as the Astronomers tell us) the Earth at the same time moves round its own
Axis, and yet makes a Progression in the Ecliptic Circle, in which it always
keeps the same steady Position, in reference to all the circumambient Bodies.
This does represent the Man of a regular Self-love, and an universal Charity:
He moves about his own Center, but yet retains his Relation to the rest of
Mankind, and keeps his Parallelism to the Axe of the Universe, as I may say.
Or, to use a more familiar instance; The Systole and Diastole of the Heart, are
very fit resemblances of a Man's doing good to himself and to others. The
Blood's coming into the Heart, is the motion of Self-love; the flowing of it
out from thence into all the extreme parts of the Body, is his Love and
Beneficence to others, to all Men. This is the motion that keeps Life in the
Body; and the doing Good to a Man's self, and to the rest of the World,
preserves Society, and tends to the Perfection of the Souls of Men.

I have said enough to clear this difficulty, and shown that to do good to all,
is no prejudice to any Man's particular Interests.

To sum up then what has been said by way of Explication. Because of the great
advantages that will certainly accrue to us by such a practice, let us lay out
our selves to procure the greatest good and happiness of every Man in the
World: Not of our selves only, or our Kindred, our particular Acquaintance and
Friends, or of good Men; but of all and every one, of those that are, and those
that are not of our Blood, of Countrymen and Foreigners, of such as think as
we do, and of those that differ from us, of Friends and Enemies, of good Men
and bad.

I intend the Perfection and Happiness, and in order to that, the Virtue and
Goodness of all Men: Do this absolutely, (this is to be universally,
indispensibly observed) and do them all other Good with reference and in order
to this. Inform, Advise, Exhort, Rebuke, Comfort, Please them in your
Discourses, where it will be for their advantage, or where it will not hinder
or obstruct it.

Thus do to all in general, and to every one in particular. And as in case of
Competition, ever the greatest Good is to be preferred; so if a Competition of
Persons be, we are, caeteris paribus, to prefer the most; or if you say the
best, that is true, but that is also because the most are concerned in them:
For a good and a wise Man is a public Benefit, and of more value than numbers
of others that are not so. Doing Good to the most, is also the greatest Good.

Lastly, In all the ways of imparting our Aid toward this, let us ever observe
the Seasons when any Actions will probably contribute most to this Effect, and
when they can best be done by us. This I would have especially observed,
because Actions that are materially good, and where we mean well, are often
spoiled by being mis-timed. As when Men are discoursing of their lawful secular
Occasions, or entertaining each other with pleasant Diversions; then for any to
make mention of things most Sacred and Venerable, this is importune and
impertitent; and here is a good meaning lost by an in observance of Opportunity.

IV. I now proceed to the Arguments which persuade us thus, as we have
opportunity to do good unto all Men.

First, To do thus is very agreeable to Nature. I am of their mind, who think
Nature a trusty Guide, and make this the first and Sum of all their Precepts
and Advices, to follow Nature. I do believe there is not one Command in the
Gospel which is not a Branch from this Root, a Particular under this General.

I need not say that we are not to understand by Nature the Corruptions and
Depravations of it: So many that declaim against Nature, interpret that Phrase,
1 Cor. 2. (...), which should be rendered the animal Man, the Man that lives the
Life of a mere Animal, one that has not the Reason and Understanding of a Man.

By Nature therefore I understand here, 1. Nature in General. 2. Particularly
that part of humane Nature, which is common to Man with inferior Torts of
Beings. 3. That wherein he differs from, and excells them, and agrees with
those that are better.

1. As for Nature in general, it is observable that all Beings do by their
motions and alterations conspire to the preserving of the Universe: that they
do not more endeavor their own Good and Continuance, than the Good of the
Whole. Nay, many times they leave their own proper Tendencies, and seem to
neglect as it were their private Concerns, to promote the more Public and
Universal. This is so obvious to every Observation, and there are so many
Instances of it in both animate and inanimate Bodies, that I need not insist
upon it. I shall only mind you of another almost as common as this; that
Animals of the same kind are loving and helpful to each other, and do not only
associate and herd together, but will also expose themselves to danger for
their mutual Defense, and other good Offices. But I go on further, and more
particularly,

2. To that part of Nature which is in Man, common to him with other Animals,
his Body; how does every Part minister to other, and all of them conspire to
preserve and perfect the whole? How is Nourishment conveyed from one to another
through the whole Body? And when it is thus with it, the Body is in its natural
good State of Health: If it be otherwise, if one Part draw all the Nourishment
to it self, it is then diseased, and this tends to the Dissolution of the
whole, and consequently of that Part it self which does not distribute.

Add to this what the Naturalists have observed, that no Passion is more
agreeable to Man's Body than Love, which is the Principle of doing Good; that
nothing contributes more to his Health, nor is a more certain Argument of it,
than Good Will; that the very Body of Man is never in better State, than when
he is most inclined to do good Offices; And that the Motions which maintain
Life are then most equally vigorous, when we are in the Exercise of Charity and
Compassion.

3. This is no less congruous to the Nature of Man, as distinguished from all
other Animals, it is agreeable to the Mind and Reason of Man. Hear the Sense of
an honest Heathen, which is the Voice of Nature, not of Revelation. Says he to
his Friend. Qui tibi amicus est, scito hunc omnibus amicum esse. Again, Non sum
uni angulo natus, Patria mea est totus hic Mundus. Nor was it only one, but
many of the Philosophers, that called themselves Citizens of the World, not
that they forgot their Native Country, but they remembered their Relation to the
whole: They looked on themselves in the same order to the Universe, which
others do to the Town where they were born and dwell.

Again; Posterorum res ago. He did not content himself to be a Benefactor to
the present Age, but would take care also that those that should be born after,
should receive advantage by his Labors, and so they have. Lucan says of Cato,
and as many as speak of him say the same:

Hi mores, haec dura immota Catonis
Secta fuit, servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi, Patriaeque impendere vitam,
Non sibi sed toti genitum se credere Mundo.
Thus we see Nature taught the very Heathens. And I do the more willingly
insist on this Argument from Nature, because I cannot think that the God of
Nature, being also the Author of our Religion, should make this inconsistent
with that, or destructive of it: And because by this means we shall have a
great assistance both in the understanding of our Duty, and in making us
willing to do it. Had this been duly observed, Men had never sacrificed their
Sons to Moloch. And if this be received, one of the greatest Objections against
our being Religious vanishes.

In general then: If it be natural for the Soul of Man, before it be corrupted
with any of those Passions, that are the offspring of Folly, to observe and be
affected with the welfare and ill State of others, besides it self. If it be
displeased and unquiet, and grieved when it goes ill with them, and joyed and
delighted to see them in good Plight; then it is natural to it, to will and
endeavor their good and welfare.

The Understanding of Man is a large and unlimited kind of thing, it reaches
forth it self to all Beings, and views them; and wherever it sees Good, it
loves and desires the continuance; and when it observes Evil, it is troubled and
wishes it were not, and will endeavor it may not be. And if this be natural to
the Mind of Man, unaltered by wicked Practices, and foolish Passions; then it
is natural to it to do good universally, and then certainly to all Mankind.

Again; it is natural to the Soul of Man to love Pleasure, and to pursue it, and
to be averse from whatsoever displeases it. Now nothing can be the object of
Pleasure but Good: or, if any Evil be, it is only in order to what is Good, and
as it serves that, i. e. as it is good in Reality.

No Man can be delighted to see any Beings in an ill Plight; or if he be, he is
in an unnatural state himself, and his Soul is corrupted.

More particularly and distinctly: If we understand by natural, that which
proceeds from an inward Principle, and which tends to preserve and perfect
Nature in general: and particularly that which is a Conclusion derived from
Principles of Reason and clear Discourses, (for that is natural to Man which is
rational); then I will use this Method to evince, that all this which is here
required, is agreeable to Nature in general, and to humane Nature in Particular.

1st. It Is natural for us to be acting. If we either conform to the rest of the
Beings we live with in the World, or act agreeably to our own Natures, we must
be doing. The best Philosophers assure us, that in the vast Universe there is
not one little Particle that is idle, but the World, and all in it, are in
uncessant motion; though some Bodies that move more slowly and less discernibly
than others, are said to be at rest.

Whether we climb up into Heaven, or dive into the Sea, or dig into the Bowels
of the Earth, we shall find all Beings employed and busy, nothing idle. The
Heavenly Bodies are whirling about perpetually, the Waters cease not to run;
and in the Caverns of the Earth, which might be imagined the dens of Sleep, yet
the Mines are made. And Plants though they move not from, yet in their place they
do, as we understand by their growth. Animals, their very Life and Sense is
Motion; their very make and nature inclines them to Action.

Particularly, Man is endued with so many instruments of Action, and such a
Power and Principle of Motion, that it is very much against his natural
Propension, if he be not in Action. We neither should nor can be idle and
unactive. Whosoever considers the many active Powers in Man, will be of this
Opinion.

It Is also agreeable to Reason, that we should use Diligence, take pains, have
a business: because no great thing can be done without difficulty; without
diligence nothing considerable is ever done, and every thing is done with it.

Besides; We cannot expect to do well without Pains and Care: For though Evil may
come through an Omission and Negligence, yet an Intension of all our Powers, a
vigilance and industry is necessary to our doing Good. Our observation of our
selves will assure us of this, because all Beginnings are difficult, and the
greater any Actions are, the more attention and diligence they require.

2. It Is no less natural for a Man to do Good; for, he can do nothing but that
which he thinks so.

If it be objected, that it is also natural to do Evil. I would answer, that we
do not terminate there, it is only in order to do some Good, and then that Evil
is truly good, does induere rationem boni. Indeed if Man should do Evil
universally, he must destroy himself; but that is unnatural.

3. But is it natural also to do Good to others, to Men? I answer. If it be
natural to do Good to our selves, it is natural also to do so to others,
because we depend on them. We stand in need of others to do us Good, and cannot
live without them. We also wish that all other Men would do us Good, and must
imagine that every other Man desires the same. Besides; we know Men best, and
can therefore do them most Good: They also are of our kind, and are most like
to us of all other Animals; and therefore if we love our selves, we must love
them. Add to all this, that all other Beings within our Compass, they are
capable of greatest Happiness and Misery: and therefore its very reasonable we
should do Good to them, since they may be exalted so high, or depressed so low;
be in so very good, or so very ill a Condition. Inferior Beings deserve not
our Pains to do them Good, since they can neither be happy or unhappy, as Man
can be.

4. And on the same account we must do Good to all Men without Exception. For,

(1.) Some of the Reasons mentioned, hold for all as well as for any.

(2.) We may do some Good in some kind to all (tho it be only in hearty Wishes
and Desires) and we should do all the Good we can. And,

(3.) All the Exceptions that can be made against this, are Arguments for it:
the most material are, that many Men are useless, or evil, or Enemies to us,
and this gives us a further Reason to do Good, because there is greater want of
it.

5. To Christians. It Is natural to love those best, that are best; and such are
Professors and Practicers of the best Religion in the World. Now that this is
natural, and reasonable, appears,

(1.) Because they are public Goods: The World is the better for every honest
Man; his Prayer, his Example, his Counsel are full of Advantages. They
therefore, being better than others, ought principally to be regarded. To do
Good to one Good Man, is a compendious way to do Good to many.

(2.) They will not fail to make Retribution. The Law of Gratitude is deeply
engraven in the Heart of every honest Man: What we do to them therefore will
return into our own Bosom; we shall be the better for the Good we do to them.

(3.) They have many Enemies. Thus it was when this Epistle was writ, and thus
it is to this day. The World hates you, says our Savior. The Reason is clear,
If honest Men have many Enemies, that they should be Friends to one another.

(4.) We have better Opportunities of doing Good to them than to others. They
are more capable of Counsel and Advice; more likely to be inclined and
persuaded to Virtue, more to be influenced by good Example: so our Endeavors
are likely to be more effectual with them; therefore especially we are to do
Good to them. But,

6. Why as we have Opportunity?

(1.) We are weak and insufficient of our selves, and have need of Assistance
from abroad; we shall do well to take in all Aids, to observe the fittest
Season, that what we do, may be to purpose. For, as I have said, we shall do
more, and with less Trouble, and surer Success, when we strike in with
Opportunity.

(2.) Opportunity is both short and uncertain, therefore by no means neglect
it. Our Time is very short; but the time of doing Good is much shorter. Thus I
have summarily represented the Reasonableness and Naturalness of our doing
Good, etc. I shall also show that,

Secondly; This is very ageeable to all true Religion that ever has been, and
is manifestly the great Design of the Christian in particular.

As for Religion in general; It is not (as too many mistake it) merely a System
of Opinions, or a Company of Articles which stay us in Theory and
Contemplation; nor is it a Ritual of Formalities and Ceremonies: It Is no empty
Name, nor useless thing; but that which is really Good, and makes us so; it
makes every one better that has it, better in and to himself, and to his
Relations; better Governors, and better Subjects; better Fathers, and better
Children; better Masters, and better Servants. It makes every one better, both
to himself, and to the World.

The Religion of the Jews (however mistaken by themselves, yet) made good
Provision for an universal Love, when it so often and expressly required a great
Kindness to Strangers, and puts them in mind of their own Condition in Egypt,
and the hard Usage they met with there, Exodus 22. 21.

The very Sabbath, which was for a Sign and a Distinction between the Jews and
other Nations, yet provided also for the Rest of the Strangers. And Exodus 23.
4, 5. they are commanded to do good Offices to their Enemy, in bringing back
his strayed Ox, and in helping his over-burdened Ass.

And certainly whoever considers that Religion, will say that it was never
intended by the wise Author of it to be such an Hedge and Fence of Separation,
as the Pride and ill Nature of its Professors had made it. Do not their holy
Prophets every where recommended unto them Charity and Beneficence? Was not
this ever of more account with God than all Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices? How
did this procure Acceptance for those Offerings? Insomuch that when they were
separated from this, they could not be accepted; Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, etc. To
what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices to me? says the Lord, etc.
Chap. 58. 6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, etc.?
Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self
before the high God? shall I come before him with Burnt-Offerings, etc.? He has
showed thee, O Man, what is Good.

But for our Christian Religion, its manifest Design is, that we should do Good
to all: St. James 1. 27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions. 1 Timothy 1. 5. The End of
the Commandment ((...)) is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience,
and Faith unfeigned. So that God esteems himself most honored, and Men to be
religious in the highest degree, when they are beneficent. More particularly;

1. Christianity takes away all separating and dividing Ceremonies, that were
as Walls of Partition, and so intends the proselyting of all Men without
Distinction: And does not this tend to lay on them the greatest Engagements to
an universal Good Will?

2. It has taken great care to remove all Obstacles of this, and has made it
the necessary Condition of being happy. We must love all Men, and do them good,
tho they be wicked, tho they be our Enemies. Love your Enemies, etc. says our
Savior. And if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Heavenly
Father forgive yours.

3. The Representations the Gospel has made of God and our Savior, whom we are
instructed and obliged to follow, will engage us to do Good universally. Our
Savior went about doing Good; He loved his Enemies to Death, he laid down his
Life for them, he requited the greatest Malice with the greatest Love. God is
described as loving the World, and that with the greatest, truest, heartiest
Love that can be. He does Good unto all, his Sun rises upon the Wicked as well
as the Good.

If then it be our Duty, our Perfection and Happiness, to conform to our
Savior's Example; if by this we come to the utmost that our Natures can reach
to, to be like God, whose Mercy extends to all things: Let us also love and do
Good to Enemies, to Strangers, to all Men.

Were there those among the Heathens, that had only the Light of Nature, and
yet both taught and practiced this Duty of Beneficence in so high a degree? and
shall not we Christians who have the Revelation of the Gospel, we who read of
the eternal Son of God devesting himself of the Glory he had with God before
the World was, and taking our frail Nature into Union with himself, learn and
practice i^ much more? Are we not told what the Blessed Jesus did, and how much
he suffered in Life and Death, and all this, that he might redeem Mankind from
Sin, and Death, and Hell, and make us happy?

Was this the Design and Business of his Life and Death to do the greatest Good
to all Men? Let us make it appear, that we are indeed his Disciples, in that we
carry on the same Design which he did, and follow his Example in doing Good.

This is so necessary a part of Christianity, that if I were to give a
Character of a Christian in short, it should be this, He is one that designs
and does Good unto all Men. Catholic Charity makes a Man a Member of the
Catholic Church. Holding of the Catholic Faith is not so sure a Mark of a
Christian, as living in Universal Love; whosoever does so, is a Christian: he
that does not, is none; no, tho he can repeat his Creed, and think he believes
every Article of it, it is not so material as this universal Inclination of
doing Good: it is not so material in order to our Acceptance with God, what our
Opinions are, as what our Affections and Lives are.

This is final and ultimate in Religion, that which God designed to bring Men
unto by all the Revelations which he has made, and by all his Institutions. All
true Religion that has ever been in the World, has aimed at this, to make Men
better, wiser, and more virtuous; And why is this but in order to Action? And
do we, or can we act only about our selves? If we be better, shall it not be
better for other Men? Can a Man be good to himself singly, and not to Society?
Or, does Religion intend the Good of private Persons, and not of Communities?
Assuredly that which designs to make Men good to themselves, designs to make
them good to others.

That Man is most truly Religious, who gives most Honor to God; and he does
that, who makes the most true and worthy Representation of him to the World;
and he does that, who is universally good and kind: Not he who macerates his
Flesh with Fasting, or wears out his Knees with long and frequent Praying, or
spends the greatest part of his time in Hearing or Reading, or denies himself
the useful and innocent Pleasures of Life and Conversation; that turns Recluse
or Hermit, that goes a long Pilgrimage barefoot, that exposes himself to
pinching Cold, or sco^^hing Heat, that calls for Fire from Heaven upon the
wicked Transgressors of the Law: Not any of these, or others, that pass for the
only Religious Men in the World, make so clear, and true, and becoming a
Representation of God to the World, as that poor Man does, whose only Design it
is to do Good unto all, who makes it his great Business to be innocent and
useful to every one in the World. This Man's Life shall do more, to make other
Men entertain true and honorable Thoughts of God, than all the Devotions and
Fervors of them, who confine their Religion to such Passions and Exercises. Nor
can all Faith and Knowledge have such an effect upon others, to make them
glorify God, as the Life of this good Man who does Good.

Lastly; Nothing can make us more sure of, and fit for the Happiness of Heaven
than this: As nothing can make us more like to God and Christ, and the good
Angels, than this Divine Temper of Love to Mankind; so nothing more fits us
for, nor more assures of their Converse in Heaven. Indeed this seems not so
much a necessary Condition of the Happiness of that State, as an essential
Ingredient in it, and a great part of it. The great Change which I apprehend
will be in Heaven, from what is here on Earth, is this, That our selfish
contracted Love will be enlarged and extended; and that there we shall every
one love all.

By what has been hitherto said, it may appear sufficiently, that nothing
better becomes, or is more worthy of us, either as Men following the Principles
of Nature, or as Christians enlightened by revealed Religion, than to be
universally good. But I shall argue this further by showing, that,

3. To do Good to all Men, etc. is one of those means which are as well
necessary as available to the attaining of all those Ends which Wisdom can
design. It will much conduce to their Accomplishment, and they cannot be
obtained without it.

The Ends which Wisdom aims at are, the good State of a Man's self in
particular, and of the World in general. That Is ill Nature misguided by Folly,
which intends more Evil than Good, or Evil not in order to Good. That which
only designs a particular Good, without regard to the more common, is Subtilty,
Craft, and Selfishness; but only that is Wisdom, which designs the Welfare of
particulars, and the Community too.

It is said of Solomon, that he was a Man of a large Heart, as the Sand on the
Sea. And Wisdom is called (...), a loving Spirit; and is said to have his
Delights with the Sons of Men; Prove. 8. 31. It gives a Man an Aptitude, a
Largeness of Heart, and Greatness of Mind. Now where there is Love, and that
not contracted and pent up in a narrow Soul, it will desire the Welfare of all.

This then being supposed, that Wisdom aims at the good Estate of the Man
himself, and of others, as it is certainly true; and therefore we never say any
Man designs wisely who intends Mischief, but only he who designs Good, or a
particular and less Evil in order to a common and greater Good.

These being the Ends which Wisdom proposes, what more accommodate means can be
chosen for attaining this End, than to do the Good that is within our Power?
Nothing more natural than to be doing that which we wish should be, and that
our Endeavors accompany our Wishes. And tho I cannot say that every particular
Man's Endeavors are necessary to the Welfare of the Public, because the
All-wise Providence has taken care that the Public Good shall not depend on
so great an Uncertainty, as is every single Man's Goodness of himself, yet
whosoever does not cast in his Mite into the public Treasury, he so far
diminishes and takes off from the Public Good. And however, doing Good to
others is absolutely necessary to his own Good State: Tho my Endeavors may not
be necessary for the Good of others, they are for my own.

It remains then that I show in particular, that this is one of those means,
which are both effectual and necessary to the attaining of whatever Wisdom can
aim at, either as to a Man's own particular, or the World in general.

When a Man considers himself thoroughly, he considers both his Reference to
this, and to the future Life. And he that intends wisely for himself, he
principally intends the Welfare of his Soul, the good State of his Mind, and
that his Body may be in a Condition to serve that, and all other things
contributing to the Welfare of both.

Particularly, he proposes to his aim Knowledge, Religion and Virtue,
Tranquillity and Pleasure, Life and Health, a good Name and a competent Estate.
And true Wisdom, that loving Spirit, will design for others as for it self.

Now to do good universally is the best, and a very sure, plain and short way,
both to get and to keep these things both for our selves and others.

First; It is the way to the best Knowledge. For,

1. He that is bent to do all the Good he can to Men, will be diligent to get
Knowledge, that he may be able to inform others. None that considers, but knows
thi^ to be one of the great Excellencies of Man, and that we cannot be more
u^eful to each other, than by communicating useful Truths: For, by this means
we direct the Ignorant, and perhaps erring Travelers; nay, we open the Eyes of
the Blind, we give Light to them that sit in Darkness. In short, by this we lay
the Foundation of Virtue and Peace; and there is no Man but knows this, that
Knowledge is one of the best Gifts that one Man can give or communicate to
another.

He therefore that is resolved to do all the Good he can, will earnestly seek
after that Knowledge, which will be so benesicial to others as well as himself:
and he does not only seek it for the Improvement of his own Mind, but has this
further Inducement to search after it, that he may be more beneficial to other
Men. He does now not only study, as Seneca says, Vt proficiat, sed ut prosit;
not only to better himself, but others also. Nor is he only engaged to study;
but,

2. Is also determined to seek after that Knowledge which is best, which is most
useful, and brings the greatest Benefits with it. He that steers the Course of
his Studies by a design of doing Good, will not spend his time in Trifles and
Curiosities, in idle and empty Speculations, in groundless Conjectures, and
endless Disquisitions. His pursuit is not after any piece of useless Learning;
and all that he counts such, which does not make him wiser or better, which
does not help him to direct his Life, to govern his Passions by Reason and
Virtue, to quiet his Mind, to preserve his Health, and rid him of ill
Circumstances, and be some way useful to other Men. And then,

3. He will be very communicative of what he knows, and there is no better way
to get, to keep, to improve Knowledge, than to communicate it. The liberal Soul
will not, Usurer-like, hoard up Knowledge, and applaud himself, that he knows
such and such matters, of which others are ignorant: No, but he takes a
Pleasure in the Information of others, and heartily endeavors to make them as
wise as himself: and whilst he instructs them, he refreshes his own Notions,
and preserves a Memory of them. And indeed this Furniture of Souls i like that
of Houses, if it be kept close and unused, it grows moldy, and Moth or Rust
corrupt it: whereas if commonly used, and open to common sight, it is preserved.

This is the Sum; An earnest design of doing the Good we can to other Men, will
engage us to seek after Knowledge, after the best and most useful; and when we
have got it, to communicate it to others, and in all these ways increases it in
our selves.

Secondly; To do Good unto all Men, is the way to be truly religious. Religion,
or to have a due regard to God, this is certainly one of the greatest
Perfections of Man's Mind: It Is that wherein we manifestly excel all the
Creatures of this lower World, and is the most spiritual divine Quality in the
Soul of Man. Besides, it is impossible we should be happy without it: for, if
it be necessary to our Happiness, that we think truly of, and be rightly
affected to things in which we are less concerned, it is absolutely necessary
that we have right Apprehensions of, and be^itting Affections to God, who is
offered to our Thoughts so often, and with whom we always are, the Knowledge of
whom is Eternal Life.

For the clearing of this, I will not now show how great a part of Religion
doing Good is, because I have already discoursed that. But I will show what
Influence a Life of universal Love and Goodness must have to make us think well
and truly of God, and live in a due regard to him.

In general therefore, this Life of Benevolence and universal Good Will helps
us to a better, that is, a clearer and more certain and sensible Knowledge of
the Goodness of God, and thereby engages us to love him, and trust in him.

The Man who in his Disposition and Practice is beneficent, he feels this to be
the best State of all others; and consequently will attribute it to him, who is
the best and happiest of all Beings.

He who lays the Foundation of what he believes concerning God in Testimony
only, his Soul may be filled with Doubts, he may question, whether he rightly
understands what he reads or hears; at least, he cannot be so sensibly and
fully assured of it, as he that builds upon his own Sense and Feeling.

Some say, and not without very good Reason, that none can know what God is,
who are not themselves Partakers of the Divine Nature. And the Scripture gives
Countenance to this Opinion, in such Passages as these; Blessed are the pure in
Heart; for they shall see God. Without Holiness no Man shall see God. Which
places imply, that Purity and Holiness (which is a Participation of the Divine
Nature) are the necessary Qualifications of those that shall know God. A Divine
Life is a Prerequisite, a Preparative to Divine Knowledge. And our Savior tells
them, if they will do God's Will, they shall know his Doctrine. A virtuous good
Life is certainly the best Preparation, and does most dispose the Soul to the
Reception of all Truths, but more particularly of that which concerns God, and
spiritual Matters.

This also gives further Credit to that Assertion, That most or all Men's
Opinions of God, are founded in their own Life and Temper. And there is good
reason it should be so: For, generally Men like themselves, and approve of what
they do; and all in their Reasonings attribute that which they think good to
God, who is absolutely so.

Hence it is that the wicked profane Man thinks God like himself, and that he
does not detest, nor will punish Sin, any more than he. Or, if he cannot think
thus of God, as it is strange a Man should; then he thinks there is no God. And
indeed, Observation, as well as Reason, will teach us; that a wicked Life is
the compendious way to Atheism. He that lives ill, either thinks there is no
God, or thinks falsely of him: for, true Knowledge of God, and a vicious Life,
cannot consist any more than Light and Darkness.

Again; Others, Men of severe, austere Humors, and of angry and malicious
Tempers, conceive God to be as they are. And the Man of a benign Mind, he
accounts Love and Goodness the most essential Property of God: which he
therefore does, because his own Sense and Experience, in Conjunction with
Reason and Scripture, and the Consent of other Men, assure him, past all doubt,
that this is the best Temper, and that no Life can be so good as that of Love
and Benignity; and thence he firmly concludes this must be the Nature, the Life
of God himself.

This Sense, as I said, takes away all that Obscurity and those Doubts which
might remain, notwithstanding all that is revealed in Scripture, or discoursed
by Reason, or reported by other Men. For we might suspect that we misunderstood
the Text, or that our Reason were short, being conversant in Divine Matters,
and the Testimony of Men leaves room for doubting; but what we feel, we cannot
doubt.

But the Man of Good Will he cannot in the least question, whether the Life of
Benevolence be not the best, and consequently the Divine Life. And this will
engage him to give God the Worship that is due to him, that is, to love and
trust him. He that knows and feels the Goodness of God, he must love him and
trust in him; and then, and not till then, is God worshipped in the Soul, when
he is loved and trusted in.

Particularly, this Man of universal Good Will, when he views the Creation of
God, and beholds how good he made all Things, and with how great Wisdom he
conducts them all to the end of their Beings, their utmost Perfection and chief
Excellence.

More especially, when he considers in what Condition and Place God has set
Man, to be Lord of this inferior World; how he has given him an Understanding,
in the use of which he may enjoy God and himself, and all things, and may make
his Abode here easy and delightful to him, and may, by the use of his Reason,
and the Government of himself according to the Rules of Virtue, raise himself
above the Calamities of this State, and may serve himself and his Happiness of
all that befalls him; may make the most unhappy Circumstances he can be in,
serviceable to his best Interests. When he considers all these Wonders of
Goodness that appear in the Creation and Providence of God, he adores this
great Benefactor, and praises the great Creator, and Preserver, and Governor
of the World.

And when he further considers those astonishing Passages of Divine Goodness in
the Redemption of the World by Christ, and sees the Good that has come to Men
by that miraculous Incarnation of the Son of God, by his Life and Death, his
Doctrine and his Works; and the great Good that was designed, and how God is
never wanting to do all, that on his part is to be done for the attaining it,
this fills him with Love and Wonder, and makes him break forth in Praises of
the Divine Philanthropy.

And when this good Man is endeavoring the Good and Welfare of others, but
finds his Attempts unsuccessful, and his Power too short, that he cannot do the
Good he desires, then does he send out his earnest Longings to Heaven, that
Almighty Power would supply his Defects, and do that Good to the World, which
he would, but cannot.

God is not by such an one called upon to destroy, but mend the World. He does
not pray for Fire from Heaven, to consume them that oppose him, but for the
good Spirit of God to convince and change them* God is not then worshipped,
when he is invoked to assist bitter Zeal and Anger, and to execute the Designs
of Malice and Cruelty: No, then God is worshipped, and truly represented, when
we seek to him, and depend on him for help in carrying on good and charitable
Designs, in being universally useful and beneficial: For, then we show that we
think him benign and kind, and we do profess by this our Persuasion, that it is
his Design and great Work to do Good to the World. And this is the truest and
most honorable Representation of God, and the best Worship we can give him. No
Fear or Horror is such an Acknowledgment of God, as he will accept and own, or
look on himself as honored, and worthily represented by: No, the Devils
believe and tremble; but they that believe and love, are the true Worshippers,
such as God is pleased with.

In short: Nothing makes a Man so truly Religious, as a through Belief and
Sense of the Goodness of God; and nothing so fully assures him that God is good
in general, and will be so to him in particular, as being himself good and
loving: For this assures him, it is the best Life that can be lived, and must
therefore be the Life of God. And it is natural for all Men to expect to be
dealt with themselves, as they deal with others, and that if they be merciful,
they shall obtain Mercy.

I have shown, that to do Good to all Men, is the way to make Men themselves
Religigious. I add, it is the way to make others so too. This is the way to
adorn the Doctrine of our Savior, to honor our Profession, to make Men
entertain the Gospel heartily, when the Professors of it are universally
beneficent and good; when they see them just and charitable, hospitable and
liberal, and communicative in all good things.

Prayers and Praises, Retirement and Devotion, then are reverenced, when they
go attended with a great retinue of good Works: but when Piety appears alone,
it is no other than a Ghost and Specter that affrights and amazes; and when it
is accompanied with Injustice and Uncharitableness, with Inhumanity and sordid
filthy Avarice, then is it blasphemed and evil spoken of* And Men are afraid to
entertain that Religion which keeps so ill Company. And if these be the Effects
of Praying and Fasting, of Solitariness and Reading, to make Men morose and
ill-natured, and rigorous Exactors of all Punctilio's of Duty, and severe
Punishers of every little Offense, and stingy, selfish and inconversible, they
will ^lee from it.

If they that worship God, have no regard for Men; if that Zeal which flames up
to Heaven, set this lower World on fire, and fill it with Smoke, all Men will
be afraid of it, and use all Arts to quench it.

But on the other hand, when we see Piety toward God, and Charity toward Men,
go hand in hand; when they that say, they love God, love Man also; and they
that live in Communion with the Father and the Son, live also in Fellowship
with their Brethren; when they that ask Pardon of God for their own Faults,
forgive other Men's toward them, and are condescending, and meek, and patient,
and communicative to their Fellow Creatures, as they desire God should be to
them; and because they pray he would be thus to them, are therefore more so to
others: then do they win others to their Profession, by their good
Conversation, and bring in many Proselytes to their Religion.

For, it is not Names and Professions, not Formalities and Shows, not Opinions
and Phrases, not singular Conceits and uncommon Practices, that will commend us
to God, or our Religion to Men: but Good Works and Kindness, to be
communicative and loving: these things will beget in them an Esteem of our
Profession, and give a Luster to the Religion we own.

In this case, Religion is like an excellent Diamond, well set; but in the
other, it is a Diamond in a Dunghill. When Men see and feel our good Works, then
do they glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Thus we see how Religion, and a due regard to God, is promoted by this Temper
of Universal Love and Charity.

Thirdly* To be good to all has a great Influence on us to make us Virtuous.
An universal Benevolence is a Spring from whence all the Streams of Virtue run
forth, which gives them both beginning, and continuance, and increase.

In general, this will make us both active and moderate. It will both engage us
to action, and keep us within due Bounds, that we shall neither do too little
nor too much.

Some of the Principal Causes, why Men do not practice Virtue, are*

1. That they are sluggish and unactive, not quickened by any Affection. Or, 2.
They are overborn with the violent assaults of evil Passions, not governed by
Love, as Anger, etc. Or, 3. Their, Love is particular and confined.
Now where an universal Good Will obtains, it removes all these Obstacles, and,

1. Makes us active and diligent in all ways of doing Good.

2. It regulates all the other Passions, and suffers them not to exceed their
Bounds: that is, they are always made to serve its designs. Both Anger and
Hatred it self are in order to doing Good. And Men that live by this Principle,
do not do any Evil for it self, but as it conduces to some greater Good. And,

3. It sets Love at liberty from those restraints, which by being too
particular, it was under before: And so prevents those numberless Vices and
Immoralities, which arise from a selfish and too contracted Love. I think most
of our Miscarriages in Life proceed from an undue Preference of our selves, and
an unequal considering other Men's Interests; and the way to rid our selves of
them, is to follow the Apostle's Counsel; not only to mind our own things, but
also the things of others, and here, to do good to all Men.

This gives that greatness and largeness of Mind, in which true Generosity and
bravery of Spirit does consist. This Lover of the World, goes on steadily in
his way of well-doing, and is not stopped by Injuries or Affronts, nor reduced
by particular Respects. His mind is not only taken up with his own particular
Concerns, but he has regard to his Brethren, and his Affection makes him call
not only the Disciples of Christ, but all the Sons of Adam by this Name.

And this is Generosity and Nobleness indeed, to pass by Offenses, and pardon
Injuries, and to requite Evil with Good. And is not that a great Mind which
embraces the World in its Arms, and takes the Universe into its Bosom? This is
Divine and God-like.

Particularly, There is scarce any Virtue, but universal Beneficence does one
way or other beget or increase it.

1. No Man can be wise and prudent who does not take into his Consideration the
Community: and he that does and intends the Good of Mankind, steers a Course
directly betwixt Folly and Mischievous Cunning. He is neither amongst those
that have none, or Evil, or but little petty Designs. No, this Man has
proposed to himself one, and that an excellent good and great end, the Good of
Mankind, and he takes the proper fit means for the attaining it, to do as much
as he can. Thus available is doing Good to all, to Prudence. Besides; this
Practice will give a Man a great insight into particular Men's affairs, and an
understanding of many things and circumstances, which is necessary, and will
much contribute to Discretion and prudent Determination. And;

2. Justice is no less beholden to it. It Is impossible that Man should be Just,
who does not intend other Men's Good as well as his own, and all Men's as well as
some, and most to those that are best. But where the Hand that is stretched out
to all, holds the Balance, there probably will be no Deceit in the Weight; it
will not give advantage to one scale wherein his own or Friends concerns are,
but that wherein the Public is, will certainly outweigh with him.

That Man who is bent on doing Good to the World, will be Just; for all
Corruption of Justice is founded on preference of private Respects before the
public Good. Let Men be Publick-spirited, and aim at the good State of the
Community, and they are antidoted against Injustice. Those that regard other
Men's Concerns as well as their own, will not advance themselves upon their
Ruins, nor grasp at all, and leave nothing for their Neighbor, but weigh his
Conveniences as well as their own: and they that consider the Public, and
design the welfare of Mankind, will not violate those Rules, that are so
necessary to Society, and the order of the World.

This Man that carries Mankind in his thoughts, and has Good Will for every
one, cannot be unjust to any, cannot defraud or circumvent, or do any thing
that is mischievous to them, or the Public. He is not biased by self-Interest,
nor will he heap his favors upon his Kindred, whilst Men of greater Merit
starve. I do not say, that he has no regard for his Relations, or that he is
more kind to Strangers than to his Acquaintance and Friends; for that is a
foolish Niceness, and a piece of unnatural Policy, which the Man of universal
Good Will cannot be obnoxious to. But the best and most useful Man, whether
Akin to him or not, shall be preferred by him. He that can be kind to all,
cannot but be just to all.

I cannot better represent this Man, than by those Motions which the late
Astronomers attribute to the Earth; it moves ever both about its own Axis, and
in the Ecliptic Circle, and from hence come the vicissitudes of Day and Night,
Summer and Winter, to the several Inhabitants thereof: Thus the Good Man moves
on his own Axis, and yet round the Ecliptic, aims at the good of the World as
well as his own; and he that does so, cannot be Unjust.

(...) tells us, that the first principle of Justice is, Ne cui quis noceat,
nisi lacessitus injur^^, Not to hurt any Man, except we be before provoked. But
a Beneficent Temper will amplify and enlarge this Rule, or give us a clearer
understanding of it, and add, That not in that ca^e neither, except that will
tend to a greater Good either to him, or me, or the Public. And therefore
Seneca says: Neino prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed (...) peccetur. No
prudent Man inflicts punishment, because Evil is Committed; but that it may not
be committed for the future.

I understand here by Justice also that Equity, which is sometimes opposed to
it in common Speech; but is really the same thing.

3. Where this Principle is entertained and observed, it must necessarily
inspire that Man with Courage and great Valor.

There are two things which ordinarily make the Pusillanimous Valiant. First,
when they are engaged in a good Cause. 2dly, when they are joined with great
Aids. Both these concur here.

1. This Man, that is ever on design of doing Good to the Universe, has a good
Cause, and he knows it. He is assured he is doing well, and that which will
justify it self to every Impartial Considerer. He himself cannot have the
least scruple about what he does; nor can any other Man justly, or with any
color of Reason, tax him, who is on such public Service. He that can say he
is doing Good to the Community, and that this is the business of this Life, he
has prevented all Calumny, and is as blamless as harmless. And when he
considers how clear his own Designs are; how accountable his Actions, this will
make him encounter dangers and difficulties, and assault all opposition that
would hinder him from effecting what he aims at. He thinks with himself, that
if it were his own private concerns only that engaged him, or some particular
Interest that he served, then others might have some Plea to oppose; but when
he intends the Good of Mankind, and in the good Offices he does to particular
Men, is swayed by a respect to the Public, he knows none can have a better, a
more allowable and commendable Employment, Besides this,

2. He has good assurance of Assistance, and he shall be enabled to overcome
the opposition he meets with. He has God, and all the good Beings in the
World, to take his Part; it is the design of infinite Goodness to do Good to
Mankind; it is the Employment of Blessed Angels, to serve the great Interests
of Man's Happiness. The Blessed Jesus, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is
given, was, whilst he was here on Earth, and is, now in the State of his
Exaltation, carrying on the grand design of Man's Happiness. Nay, there is that
in every Man, that is not degenerated into a Devil, that will take part and
join in with him, who is bent to be an universal Benefactor. For, who can set
themselves without reluctance against him, who has none other Design but to do
Good to All? Nay rather, how is he the Object of every Man's Care? how safe is
his Condition?

It is true, there are too many in the World, who are acted by a Spirit of Envy
and Malice, who are selfish and contracted, who regard not others, but
themselves only: But what can these do against God and Nature, and all those
innumerable Ministers of his, that are ready to do the Pleasure of his
Goodness? The Man of general Good Will, if his Eyes be opened, must say, that
more are they that are with him, than those that are against him.

Besides, as I have said, this Principle of universal Beneficence gives such a
Greatness of Mind to him that is acted by it, that he slights, and scorns, and
makes nothing of all the little Difficulties and Dangers that he can conflict
with. His Soul is so taken up with the greatness of his own Design, and is
carried out with so much earnestness in pursuit after it, that all the Things
that might daunt or discourage him, make no Impression of Fear on him at all.

4. This Principle, where it rules, must certainly restrain all Intemperance:
For,

1. It will so much employ and busy a Man, that he cannot be vacant enough for
those Extravagancies. No Man is intemperate, but he is first idle. Now he that
has entertained so universally an active Principle, as this of Good Will to
All, he cannot spare Hours to throw away in intemperate Practices, which he
sees no way conduce to his End. Nay,

2. He will perceive them quite opposite and contrary to his End: For, both
Observation and Reason will tell him, that whosoever indulges himself in excess
of bodily Pleasures, he indisposes, he disables himself from doing Good. He
that has gorged himself with Meat, that has inflamed his Blood with Drinking,
or has wallow'd in any other bodily Pleasures, how careless is he of other
Men's Concerns, indeed of his own, of any thing? They drink Wine in Bowls, and
forget the Afflictions of Joseph. And how impotent and unable is he to do the
good Offices which he may have some desire to do? He has not the use of either
Mind or Body, they are both disabled from discharging their Functions. Nor
indeed is it possible he should; for, by Luxury and Softness, and Excesses of
corporeal Gratifications, the Soul is made careless and inconsiderate,
inordinate in its Desires, and impatient of the least Difficulty and
Opposition; and the Body is rendered weak and feeble through want of Exercise,
and Diseases.

Thus I have shown concerning the four, commonly called Cardinal Virtues, how
they are befriended by this great Principle of doing Good to all. And every one
will understand that Dependence which most of the other Virtues have on it, and
how much it contributes to their Being and Growth.

This Man of universal Good will, how full of Humanity and Courtesy is he even
to Strangers, and those he knows not? What hearty Civility, and real Kindness
does he express to those that oppose his Interests, nay, that intend him
Mischief? How gladly does he pardon Injuries, and receive a repenting Enemy
into his Bosom? How willing, nay, forward is he to lend to the Borrower? to
give to the Indigent? And what he gives is from a liberal Hand, and a bountiful
Mind; no grudging, no sparing appears in his Communications. He is as willing
to take care of the Conveniences, as to relieve the Necessities of others; has
not only so much Charity as to keep them just from starving, but so much as
will engage him to endeavor to make them happy.

And then for the lesser Offices, that are the Graces of Conversation, and make
it pleasant, they derive from the same Original: For he, and he alone, that is
set on doing Good to All, will be affable, and of easy Address by all.

He will not fail in giving all Expressions of Civility that are proper and
natural; for the artificial and excessive, the Effects of Vanity and Hypocrisy,
he uses them not. He has the Civility of a Courtier, and the Heartiness of a
Friend. In short, his Countenance, and Behavior, and Words to all, are such as
you may read in them real Good Will.

I add only two more: This Man is humble and meek.

The true Cause, as well as the Effect and Consequence of most Men's Pride, is,
that they consider few or none besides themselves. The proud Man therefore
loves himself too much, because he loves not other Men at all: Whereas the Man
who lives under the Power of this Principle, he values other Men's Merits as
well as his own, and desires they may have the Praise due to them, and does not
think himself disparaged, when another is commended; or if by Accident that
come to pass, he is not concerned, because it is for the Good of the Man that is
worthy, and of Mankind; and he can be content to sacrifice his own Credit to
the Welfare of other Men, and the Public.

In short, where a Man loves others, he desires that for them, which he does
for himself; and consequently, that they may have the Honor done them which
they deserve, as he would not be debarred of the Praise he merits.

And for Meekness: This Love covers a Multitude of Faults, and so makes those
not to be which are; so far is it from multiplying and magnifying them, from
increasing their Numbers and Aggravations. It does not make Faults where they
are not; or where they are, does not make them worse; does not call a little
Wart, a Wen: but rather where they can be extenuated, lessens them; and
considers which are the Miscarriages of surprised Infirmity, and unwilling
Mistake, and distinguishes between them and others.

Nor is he forward to take Vengeance, or eager to punish, but is a Man of
Long-suffering and Forbearance, and will never punish but when it is the
likeliest and almost only way to Amendment.

I have shown how much the Principle of universal Beneficence conduces to
Knowledge, Religion and Virtue. I now proceed to show, how very available it is
to our acquiring and keeping the rest of those good Things that make up the
Happiness of Man.

And none that considers how essential doing Good is to the Religion of Christ,
and how necessary to the Happiness of Man, will wonder that I In^ist so long on
this Argument; for, tho I had the Tongue of Men and Angels, I could not
sufficiently declare the Excellencies of this Divine Temper.

Fourthly; The next of those good Things I mentioned, which are in the Soul,
are Quiet and Tranquillity, Joy and Pleasure, which I therefore join together
in my Discourse, because they are not often parted in Nature, and their
Opposits go under the same Name of Trouble; and because where they are as they
should be, they qualify one another: For, that is a good and desirable Quiet,
which is in order ^o, and attended with Joy; and that is an allowable Joy,
which does (...) the So^l, and (...) the Mind of Pea^e. Whereas i^ th^se (...)
destroy each other, they are not as they should be; nay, if they do not serve
and befriend each other, they are bla^^abl^ For the Soul may be too much
becalmed, that it cannot move; its (...) may be fr^zen up by a Stoical Apathy,
which will not only rid it of the evil and painful, but de^rive it also of the
good and pleasant Passion^; that which does (...) is very opposite to its
Welfare.

Again, The Mind of Man may be transported with Joy, beyond the Bounds which
Nature and Convenience have set, and so as to indispose it for doing that Good
to it self or others it might do. But when those two concur and consist
together, that is an excellent State indeed; (...) then a gentle Wind fills the
Sails, and does not raise the Waves, the Soul is then active and moderate.

And this State of Joy and Peace is the best State of which Souls are capable;
it is the Crown of all our Works, the natural Reward of our Labors; and if our
Actions be virtuous, it is a sure Reward: It is the End and Consummation of all,
it is the Fruit and Flower that grows on them all.

And now I shall endeavor to show how much the Principle of universal
Goodness, where it is practiced, and become a Temper, contributes to the Quiet
and Pleasure of Souls.

Some of the greatest Causes of our Disquiet are Ma^^ce and Envy, bitter Anger,
and boundless Desires, and Conscience of Evil.

The malic^ous spiteful Man is upon the Wrack, as often as he cannot bring
about his mischievous Designs. He g^ashes his Teeth, when he sees God and
Nature so to shelter and secure the Man against whom he has set himself, that
no Storms he can raise shall light on him.

The Envious is himself in torment, if other Men be not: As often as the Candle
of God, the Su^, shines on, enlightens, and warms his Neighbor, it parches and
burns him; and tho it be pleasant to other Eyes to behold this Light, it makes
his to smart, and puts them out.

The Angry Person is never quiet, is like the troubled Sea, ever casting up
Mire and Dirt. Every Wind causes the Waves to rise, every Word casts him into
Disorders, nay, Silence it self will cause Commotions in him; so that
Contraries have the same effect on this Subject, and his vitiated Palate is
disg^sted both with ^owre and sweet. This is one of the Race of the churlish*
Fool Nabal, of whom we read that he was such a Son of Belial, that he could not
be spoke to.

And if he be desirous of Revenge, how fearful is he to take it? And yet how
impatient till it be had? And how restless when he has it, for fear of a
Re^aliation?

And the Man of immoderate unreasonable Desires, is tormented before they are
accomplished; and when they are, is unsatisfied and disappointed. The
Sensualist his Expectations are great, his Enjoyments next to nothing, and both
full of Trouble; the first of a Delay, the second of a Defeat.

The Ambitious Man is vexed to the Soul, that others do not make that account
of him that he does of himself; that they do not esteem him as much as he would
have them, much more perhaps than he does deserve, and many times, than he
knows he deserves. Tho some, tho many honor him, if any one cast a slight on
him, he cannot bear it. This great little Man, that is so big in Conceit, and
so small in Truth; so little in other Men's Opinions, and so great in his own,
can never be at rest, because there can be no agreement betwixt his Thoughts
and Things, betwixt his and other Men. He does not think of himself as he is,
nor will others think as he does: He can never have his Wishes, and his Desires
are impossible, and can never be accomplished.

And the same or greater is the Trouble of the Covetous; that poor rich Man is
in perpetual Disquiet. He is infinitely sollicitous to get, and as anxious to
keep. He is anxious to have, and fearful to lose; and being racked betwixt
Desire and Fear, he enjoys nothing. He seeks for Riches, when he has them; and
seeks endlesly, because tho he finds what he sought, he knows it not; nor does
he think himself rich, tho he be. And it is all one as to Enjoyment, whether a
Man have a small Estate, or a poor Mind; whether he be poor, or conceit he is
so: therefore is it, that he has, and has not; that he wants what he has.

Thus is he distracted betwixt getting and keeping. And certainly infinite are
the Cares and Anxieties that disquiet these Twopenny Souls. 1 Timothy 6. 10. For
the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some have coveted after,
they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many
Sorrows; (...), transfixerunt. And are not these three the great Incendiaries
of the World, and the Troublers of our Peace, both within and without?

But lastly; The Remorse and Anguish that arises from Conscience of Sin, when
they have at any time been transported by the Rage of Anger, or Madness, or
Envy, or by unsatiable Desires of Esteem, or Wealth, or Pleasure, so as to
imbrue their hands in the Blood of some harmless Abel or Vriah, or take away
honest Naboth's Vineyard: When they have maliciously belied a blameless Joseph,
or some way or other have irreparably and undeservedly injured their innocent
Neighbor; then is it that they feel the sharp Stings of an unquiet Conscience;
then are they frighted with Ghosts and Specters, and lashed with Furies, and
gash'd with the deep Wounds of selfaccusing Thoughts.

And these are certainly the most inward and piercing, the most insupportable
of all the Sorrows of which the Mind of Man is capable.

Now let us see what an Antidote universal Good Will is, to preserve us from
these that are the worst of Diseases. Charity, says the Apostle, envies not;
it is not troubled that Men are so well, but desirous they should be better and
happier than they are. And the Reason of this follows; for us said, She seeks
not her own; that is, not only, nor chiefly, nor in opposition to the Concerns
of all others. The charitable Man will take care to be innocent; none shall
ever be wronged by him, nor shall any suffer, or be worse by what he does,
where that is not necessary to public Good.

Nor, secondly, does he in the first place intend himself; nor does his own
single Interest, in his Esteem, outweigh the Concerns of many, but he always
gives the Verdict for the Community, against a private, tho it be his own
Interest.

Nor, thirdly, does he much less only and wholly design himself; he knows not
how to confine his Thoughts and Desires to so narrow a Compass, but his
Goodness has enlarged his Soul, and stretched it forth as far as there is any
Being. And where Love has taken possession of any Man, it constrains him to
wish well, and do Good to All; so that where this Plant of God's planting
grows, those Roots of Bitterness, Envy and Malice, are plucked up, and cast out.

Where this Divine Temper of Benignity and Beneficence is, Envy and Malice can
have no place. Where a Man is so outed of himself, and all particular and
private Affections and Respects are brought into due Order, and a fit
Compliance with the more public and universal; there is no Foundation for
envious Discontents, or malicious Purposes.

When this Spirit and Power of the blessed Jesus, the Son of God, appears,
those Furies and Fiends, those evil Spirits vanish, and fly away, as the
Shadows of the Night do before the Brightness of the Sun.

Anger, tho it may sometimes by surprise enter into the loving Soul, yet it
cannot stay there. This mighty Power of God, the Spirit of Benignity, commands
these Winds and Storms, and bids them obey, and they are quickly calm and
still, and the Face of the Soul is presently smooth and clear again. This
Cordial soon allay^ the Feverish Heats of that Passion, and quenches the
Violence of a Fire, that was kindled in Hell, and would consume the World.

We read of some Evil-Spirits, that would cast those into the Fire that were
possessed of them: Such is Anger also; it casts into the Fire, and makes them
foam, and tears them in whom it is. But this Power of God, this great Love,
casts it out also. When David, the Love that is after God's own Heart, plays on
his Harp before Saul, the Evil-Spirit will go from him. Thus Goodness eases
the Soul of that Vexation which arises from An

Besides; It suffers no plotting of Revenge, nor Contrivances of retaliating
Evil for Evil; and so prevents some of the greatest and most violent
Disturbances, which we are subject to.

And how accurately well does it bound and moderate those Desires, which, when
they are irregular, are the Causes of so great Disquiet? For, our Love to
others, will make us desire their Honor, as well as our own. And where we love
all, and have an Affection for the Public, we shall desire no more than we
deserve; we shall be unwilling that other Men should be so far imposed on, as
to think us better than indeed we are. We cannot be so unjust, as to expect
Reward without Merit, and Praise where it is not due.

Charity is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13. 4. and therefore frees a Man's Mind from
all the Tortures that ambitious Spirits lie under. This makes a Man not
displeased that other Men are praised, and himself not; nay, tho they have
more, and he less than deserved, yet he is very well satisfied, because his
own, and the Approbation of a few competent Judges, is sufficient to support
him: whereas Men of less Worth, have need of greater Applause to bear up their
Minds, and to bring them into Request, and enable them to do Good.

And how perfectly does this Principle subdue and regulate all the Appetites of
corporeal Pleasure? He that is acted by universal Love, cannot go to a
forbidden Bed; for he will not draw one whom he loves into Sin; he will not
deprive them of the lasting Pleasures of Innocence and Chastity. He will not
violate the Orders of all the Civilized World, which have been from the
beginning of Time, which for the sake of the Public, for Posterity, as well as
the present Generation, ought to be inviolably observed. He will not eat nor
drink more than is good for him, as for other Reasons, so lest others should
want that which is good for them.

Again; This universal Love, by engaging us to do all the Good we can, takes
away all inordinate Love of Money. We shall not now desire more than we can and
will use for the advantage of others, as well as our selves. And when it is
thus with us, we shall not grasp at all we could get, and we shall use what we
do get. And where we are thus minded, we have freed our selves from that
infinite Carking and Anxiety, which an inordinate Desire of Riches causes.

Lastly; This will in many cases prevent the bitterest Remorse for Sins, by
preventing the Sins themselves, as I have showed. For, the good Man will not be
unjust or unfaithful, he cannot oppress or cozen, falsely or needlessly accuse,
will not violate the Chastity, prejudice the Health, much less take away the
Life of any: and thus secures himself from those Terrors of Conscience, which
follow such Wickednesses.

And where we are surprised, and do unwillingly mis-behave our selves toward
God; if we be indeed charitable and loving toward Men, we can then pray that
God would, and hope that he will forgive us as we do them.

Thus I have shown how this universal Beneficence frees us from Trouble and
Unquietness. And now I will briefly show how it brings us Pleasure as well as
Quiet.

By Pleasure I here understand that Joy which is caused in the Soul, by an
Apprehension or Sense of Good. Now, where this Principle is become natural to
us, and we act from it, and according to it, it must necessarily be a Spring of
Delight to us. How pleasant and joyful must the Mind of that Man be, which is
governed by an universal Love? As much Good as there is in the World, so much
cause of Pleasure is there to them. For,

1. He is set at Liberty from contracted Selfishness; every Man is now to him,
as he is to himself, and other Men's Concerns are as his own: so that he now
rejoices in their Welfare, and is heartily glad at the Good which befalls them.
So much is his Joy greater now, than it was when he lived to himself; for then
he was pleased with his own private Advantages, but perhaps repined, or at
least was unconcerned at other Men's; whereas now he is delighted to see it go
well with any Man in the World.

Thus he honestly and innocently enjoys the Good of others, without depriving
them of any; gathers of the Honey-dew, without robbing the Flower of its own
Sweetness. As much Good then as there is, and as he can see in the World (and
there is very much, for the Mercy of God is over all his Works; and he that
will consider things, may discover it) so much cause of Gladness has this good
Man. And then,

2. The infinite Love and Goodness of God, is an inexhaustible Fountain of Joy
to the good Man: For, tho he sees many things much amiss, and a great deal of
Evil in the World; tho he sees poor Man at a great distance from his Happiness,
and the whole World lying in Wickedness: yet he also sees infinite Goodness at
work, and that it has done very much in order to Man's Happiness; and doubts
not but in some ways which he is ignorant of, all the ends of Divine Goodness
will be accomplished at last.

I have showed before, that this Goodness of Temper helps us to an assured
Knowledge of the Goodness of God. We may also refer the two foregoing
Particulars to the Object of Benevolence. If there be so great Pleasure in
loving one or two, or a few, how great is that which arises from an universal
Good Will, a Love to all Men?

Thirdly; The good Man has Pleasure as concerning himself, from his
Beneficence to others: and it is such a Pleasure as has many Advantages above
most others. For,

1. As to its degree, it is both intense and exquisite. 2. As to its kinds; it
is both of Memory, Sense and Hope, as it refers to Good past, present, and to
come. 3. Its Original is from Man himself, in concurrence with God and Nature;
and therefore it is both certain and near. 4. As to its Duration, it is both
continued and lasting. 5. As to its Quality and Effects, it is absolutely Good.
6. In respect of its Objects, it is largely extended and manifold.
1. The Pleasure that arises from a Sense of our Beneficence, is without any
allay or mixture of Pain, and that which is so, is pure and in the highest
degree.

This cannot be said of most other Pleasures, the Price of them is much abated,
by the Pains that accompany them. The more corporeal and gross they are, the
more they have of this Dress. This is a Commendation that almost only belongs
to the Pleasure that arises from virtuous Practices; and yet not any, not all
of the other Virtues, can afford so great a Delight as this, which is both a
Complex of most of them, and the End and Consummation of all. The rest are but
mediate and subordinate Virtues, this is ultimate and final.

When a Man is in the exercise of universal Love, of Charity and Good Will, he
is as good, and as great and happy as he can be, then is all finished.

The greatest Pleasure is in Love: Now when Love is universal, and in exercise,
Pleasure keeps proportion with it, and is as great as it can be; for it is as
large as its Object, and therefore the Pleasure that arises from it must needs
be very great.

The best Faculty is now exercised about its proper Object; and it is generally
said, that all Pleasure consists in the Congruity of the Object and Faculty.

2. Distinguish this Pleasure according to the three Differences of Time which
its Cause has, and we shall find it in all these to be extraordinary.

(1.) For the past. Memory, tho it be but a languishing Sense, and the Ideas
are not near so lively as when they were first impressed; yet the Remembrance of
having done good Offices, gives a very sensible and lively Pleasure; and it is
a great Content to the Soul, when it calls to mind any Acts of Beneficence, and
that it did such Actions for which others were the better.

To remember that I have relieved a Man in his Necessities, or added to his
Conveniences, eased his Pain, or cured his Disease, vindicated his Reputation,
preserved his Life, instructed his Ignorance, removed his Mistakes, satisfied
his Doubts, confirmed his Resolutions, moderated his Affections; the
Remembrance of this, that I have been instrumental in such good Offices, will
be very pleasant.

Indeed a Man is more pleased with a Remembrance of the Good he has done to
others, than of that which he has done himself.

And I am well assured, that when we come to die, it will be a very great
satisfaction, if we can think that none can accuse us for doing them Injury,
and if others will testify that we have been kind and good to them.

(2.) As to the Present. A Man that is in the Exercise of Goodness, has the
pleasant Sensation of the Health and good Plight of his Soul. He feels himself,
his Mind as well as Body, in an excellent State. Some think, that Sense of
Health is the greatest Pleasure of Man; and this is the Pleasure of a double
Health.

(3.) Future. He that feels he has attained to so much, cannot but hope that
what is yet behind shall be added; and that he shall continue in those ways to
the end, which are so infinitely pleasant to him; that he shall ascend to that
Heaven, which is come down to him, and is in him; that is, that he shall
continue the Exercise of that Love in Eternity, which he has begun in Time.
And this he hopes for, because it is very natural, and because this Sense of
the Excellency of his own Goodness and Benignity, assures him that God is good,
and will do good to them that are so.

3. When Man complies with the grand Design of Heaven, i. e. to promote the
Happiness of Mankind, and co-operates with natural Causes, which have a
manifest subserviency to the Good of the Generality, he is then doing Acts of
Kindness and Benignity; and when he does these, he not only refreshes other
Men, but lets in Streams of Pleasure to his own Soul.

And these Pleasures which derive from such a Spring, must be,

(1.) Sure; for they depend on very certain Causes, and such as act naturally,
and almost necessarily. All the Uncertainty arises from his own Mutability; and
yet he is under an Engagement, that is as powerful to determine him as the
Nature of Man is capable of; that is, he perceives a great and sensible
Pleasure in the Exercise of Goodness, and either this will determine him to
such Acts, or nothing can. Whilst Man perseveres in doing Good, his Pleasure
must remain; and he will persevere, whilst he considers God and the World, i.
e. whilst he uses his Reason.

(2.) Near. They are in and from himself, and do not so much depend on Things
without us, but on the Use of our selves Principally. They are always with us;
if we do but reflect on our own Acts, (which we cannot choose but do) we shall
not fail of Pleasure.

4. By reason of its Duration. It is, 1. Continued; 2. Lasting.

(1.) A Pleasure that arises from such certain Causes, and that are so near to
us, must needs be continual, and without interruption. That which is near and
within a Man, must certainly be more taken notice of, than things at a
distance; such are his own Actions, and the Principles of them; he cannot choose
but he must observe them. And as often as he is conscious of this beneficent
Temper, and Acts of Goodness and Kindness, he feels an overflowing Joy in his
Mind. And if that be his Nature to incline him always to do Good, he must always
be sensible of it, that is, his Pleasure must be as interrupted as any thing
can be in the Mind of Man.

(2.) It is also lasting. As long as the Sun is, the Rays will flow from it;
and as long as the Soul continues benign and good, and acts from this
Principle, so long will it continue in this pleasant Sense; for, this is an
inseparable Emanation or Property of a benign Soul.

Other Pleasures that depend on contingent, mutable, external Things, must be
transient and fleeting, and as full of Vicissitude, as the Causes on which they
depend: but these, which flow from that which is incorporeal and incorruptible,
will themselves last for ever. As long as the Fountain springs, these Streams
will not fail: and that will not be dried up, for it is fed by the secret Aids
sent from the inexhaustible Ocean of Goodness in God. And will certainly be one
of the great Pleasures of the other State; for the Soul must lose it self, must
cease to be what now it is, before this Pleasure can cease. It is one of the
greatest and fairest of those Rivers of Pleasure which encompass Paradise,
whose Waters fail not. How unconceivable is the Delight of Souls, when they are
bathing themselves in these Streams? when they are carried on with the greatest
Gales of Good Will to all their Fellow Creatures? How will they be ravished
with their own Countenance, when they behold in it this excellent Grace with
which Love has beautified it? How must they be delighted to feel themselves in
so good a State, in so healthful a Plight?

5. This Pleasure is absolutely good. There are some Pleasures that are
hurtful. The Soul may too much be taken with low and sensual Delights, so as to
neglect those that are higher and better. There are Pleasures of Sin, that are
Baits to catch unwary Souls, and will ensnare them in those Practices which
will make them miserable.

But behold, the Pleasures which arise from Beneficence are absolutely good,
have no mixture of evil, are perfectly innocent, and greatly useful, do no
harm, and much good; for they engage us to repeat those good Works, which bring
us in so great an Income of Bliss. Thus they continue themselves, and that is
the greatest thing I can say of them; for this is that which has not the
Goodness of Means only, but of the End also.

Thus I have shown how certain a Cause of greatest and most exquisite Pleasure,
doing Good must needs be; so as I might hope to engage the greatest Epicureans
to take this Course to be happy.

And now after all this, I dare encounter the Sensualist, who seeks for Delight
from brutish Gratifications; or the malicious angry Man, who expects to have it
from Revenge; or the selfish and contracted Man, who pursues it in ways of
Self-love, and all the Pleasure he has is in doing Good to himself. To all
these I can show greater and better, purer and more lasting Pleasures, in the
Exercise of an universal Love. Here Is Pleasure that will be constantly fresh
and new, no satiety, no clogging.

The Sensualist has the pleasure of a Brute in his Enjoyments; the malicious
Man has the pleasure of Devils; the selfish, of the Sons of Earth: but the Man
of Benignity and unbounded Love, has the delight of those that are
Heaven-born, the Joys of Angels, and partakes of the greatest Pleasure of God
himself, for that undoubtedly is to do good.

I have now shown how much the temper and practice of universal Goodness tends
to make us Knowing, Religious, Virtuous, Quiet and Joyful; which are the
greatest and most desirable Perfections of the Soul of Man. But perhaps some
may set a greater value on things less excellent, and will be more sensible of
what concerns their Body, than their Mind, and of that which is without, than
that which is within them. Now therefore that I may engage such Men also, if it
be possible, to a Life of Beneficence, and that I may fully discover the
manifold Virtues of a benign Nature and Life; I will consider those also that
are of less Importance, which relate to our Body, and Good-name, and Estate,
but yet ought to have some place in our account. And lastly, how Instrumental
this must be to begin, and continue, and confirm Friendships, which in all
these, and the other respects beforementioned, are hugely serviceable to us.

1. Universal Beneficence conduces to long Life. Psalm. 34. 12. David asks this
Question; What Man is he! that desires Life, and loves Days that he may see
Good? Not that he thought there were any that did not; but therefore he
proposes this in form of Question, the better to excite their attention, and to
make us all regard what he would say: which is to direct us what Course to
take, that we may attain our desire, and that is, 1. Keep thy Tongue from Evil,
and thy Lips from speaking Guile. 2. Depart from Evil, and do Good; seek Peace,
and pursue it.

This is the Direction the Scripture gives to preserve Life, and we find this
very passage cited in 1 Pet. 3. 10. And that we may be assured, that by doing
Good is meant Beneficence, see how it is brought in there as an Argument
against rendering Evil for Evil, at the 9th Verse, Not rendering Evil for Evil,
nor Railing for Railing, but contrariwise Blessing, etc. and then follows at
the tenth Verse. For he that will love Life, and see good Days, etc.

Reason and Experience will say the same. There are, we all know, two sorts of
Enemies to Man's Life, one is within, the other without him. Those within are
the Diseases, which as they arise from other causes, so very often (I know not
whether I should say for the most part) arise from disorderly Passions.

I know not any better general Prescription for the preventing or curing those
Diseases, that arise from ill temper of the Blood and other Humors, than to
keep the Mind in a benign disposition and willingness to do good Offices: For
there is a great Sympathy betwixt Soul and Body; and experience and
observation, shows us, that when the Soul is thus affected, it gives and
continues alacrity and briskness to those motions, in which both Life and
Health consist.

And for those that arise from Passions, which are contrary to this universal
good Affection, or proceed from want of it: such as Anger, Malice, Envy, great
Sorrow, and excess of Self-love, or a too particular and contracted Affection;
what ill effects these have on our Bodies, and what Distempers they cause, I
leave it to Observation and Sense to testify.

But we are sure that those sudden changes of Color, trembling of the Flesh,
palpitation of the Heart, stopping of the Breath, Sighing, Inflaming our
Heaviness, distorting of the Face and Eyes, which are so often consequent on
those, are very ill Symptoms. And the best way to prevent them, and all the
dangers they threaten us with, is to preserve in our Minds an Inclination to do
good universally. For this will extirpate Malice, and destroy Envy; it will
moderate Anger, and not suffer us to be Peevish; it will set us at liberty from
a too particular Affection, and ease our Griefs, and thus prevent very many of
those Diseases, which we lie under for want of due regulating our Passions.

Nor will this seem strange, if we consider that Physicians, when they advise a
Method for preserving Health, caution us about our Passions, that they be kept
in order. I have before shown, that to be universally Benevolent, is the best,
and perhaps only way to govern them: and if so, it is evident that it must have
a great Influence on Life, and that which is the Life of Life, without which
Death would be more eligible, Health.

The causes of Man's Death that are without him, are Men, or other things, such
as infectious Vapors in the Air, Famines, the ill Qualities of his Food, or
other such like.

As for Men, Tully tells us, it was the Opinion of one Dicaearchus, that many
more were slain by Men, than died by Diseases, or any other way. The truth of
my Discourse depends not on the certainty of his Conjecture: all that I shall
infer is, that those great numbers that die by the hands of Men, and before
their time come, by this means might have had their Lives lengthened. For, if
the Law of Universal Love were observed by all, then Quarrels and Contentions,
War and Fighting, Stabbing and Poison would have no place.

But there is no better Preservative against infectious Diseases, than the
Virtue and good Disposition of the Mind, of which the Sum is Benignity.
Therefore Histories tell us, that in that lamentable Plague at Athens, which
was so contagious and mortal, yet Socrates escaped, and this was ascribed to
his Virtue and excellent Disposition in general, particularly to his
Temperance, which I have shown how it, as well as all other Virtues, derives
from Universal Love.

One observation will very much assure us of the Truth of what I have said,
wherein I will appeal to the experience of every one; it is this, That an
unwillingness to be doing Good; is for the most part, if not always,
accompanied with indisposition of Body; and that when we enjoy the best Health,
we commonly: feel our selves in the greatest disposition to Beneficence. For
the Soul and Body, as in other matters, so here, mutually operate on each other.

Whence I infer, That as Benignity and Goodness in the Mind, contribute to the
Health of the Body; so the good plight of the Body, inclines the Soul to
Good Will.

And for the other Perfections of the Body, this temper is not unserviceable to
them: for, where it is, it gives a Pleasantness to the Countenance, which no
Power of Art can equal. There is a constant cheerful Air in the Face of that
Man, in whose Heart is the Law of Kindness, which far exceeds the Beauty of
borrowed Colors, or forced and counterfeit Smiles.

And for Strength, this Disposition both gives and continues it. For, though some
other Passions make Men more violent, and impetuous in their assaults; yet not
so constant and durable as this affection. And if this Man should not always so
well assault an Enemy, yet he will better defend himself or Friend, than the
Boisterous, Angry or Malicious Man.

And lastly, which is the very use of it, and (that for which it was designed)
the Body is never so serviceable to the Mind, as when the Soul is acted by Love
and Good Will, for then it is moderately active: So that the Soul needs neither
restrain nor put it forward; whereas in other case, the Body is either dull and
sluggish, or else transported with so great a Violence, that the Soul cannot
regulate its Motions.

2. As to our good Name, this can be no way so advanced as by universal
Beneficence. Nothing so honorable to a Man, as to be a Benefactor. This alone
will give him a good, and great, and lasting Reputation, when nothing without
it can make him truly Honorable. This is that Ointment which embalms a Name to
Posterity, and makes the Memory of the Good Man fresh and sweet, many thousands
of Years after Worms have devoured his Body, and a Prodigal foolish Son spent
his Estate.

This Universal Benefactor is every where extolled and praised. When the Ear
hears him, it blesses him; and when the Eye sees him, it gives witness to him;
the young Men hide themselves when they see him, and the Aged rise up to do him
Reverence, as Job speaks Chapter 29. Verse. 8. And why all this? Because, says he, I
delivered the Poor that cried, the Fatherless, and him that had no helper:
therefore the Blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me.

Was not this it which deified so many amongst the Heathens, and procured them
a Divine Worship after they left this Earth, that by their useful Inventions
and brave Deeds they had been Benefactors to Mankind? Was it not on this
account that Bacchus and Ceres, Minerva and Hercules, and diverse others amongst
them, were esteemed Gods? which Practice of theirs, how vain soever, yet
affords us this Observation, that to be useful to Men, to be a Benefactor to
the World is in the Esteem of Mankind a most Divine and God-like quality, and
therefore most highly Honorable.

For the further eviction of this: Suppose a Man endowed with the Gifts of
Nature, and blessed with the Goods of Fortune, and strict in all Religious
Observances, nay, and punctual in all matters of Justice: yet if he be not
beneficent and a good Man, one that is benign and loving to others, and does
the friendly Offices within his Power, he falls short of that Praise, which
this one single quality will extort from all that see it.

He that has a great Estate, but not an Heart to use it; has abundance of
Wealth, and perhaps himself, but none else is the better for it. He will
neither give to those that want, nor lend to those that would borrow; is not
kind to Neighbors, nor hospitable to Strangers; racks his Tenants, is unequal
to his Servants, and unnatural to his Children; he is so far from being loved
and honored that he is hated and scorned, and the Object of every ones
Indignation.

Common observation tells us, that it is not having much, but the using what we
have, whether much or little, well, which makes us Honorable.

Search the Records of Antiquity, and see if great Possessions alone ever made
their Owners valued whilst they lived, or lamented when they died, or honored
by Posterity.

The same is true of Power, and Interest, and great Places, which are
instrumental to our Honor no other way, than as they give us opportunities of
doing good Offices. For if we through selfishness, or fear and littleness of
Mind, or Idleness, neglect them, and do not do the Good we might, we become
infamous, and stand like a Hollow-Tree in an Orchard, that neither yields Fruit
nor Shadow, nor is of any use, but only cumbers the Ground, and only takes up
the room where another and better might grow.

The Potent Man that does ill to all, yet in some respect has more of Honor
than he that does good to none: for he, tho he be not loved, is feared, which
argues he is considered; but this Man is slighted and contemned: The other has
something of Courage in daring to do ill, but this is a pusillanimous Sneak.
And it is supposed that he who is afraid to do Good, would do Ill, if he durst:
and that it is the same Cowardice which keeps him from doing ill Offices, that
keeps him from doing Good: so that it is not his want of an ill Mind, but of a
stout Heart, that makes him he is not mischievous to all, who is beneficial to
none, when he wants not Opportunity.

So far is Power and Interest from making a Man Honorable, that if it be not in
Conjunction with Benevolence; if it either serves the designs of Malice, or be
not instrumental to Good Will, it will be his Reproach and Infamy.

Farther; Suppose a Man rich with Natures Gifts; let him have a quick and clear
Apprehension, a faithful Memory, a piercing Judgment, a subtle Reason, a fine
Fancy, a nimble Wit, penetrating Sagacity; suppose him also to have attained
great Learning, that he is a Critic in the Tongues, and very skilful and
knowing in all the Arts and Sciences. We Will suppose him also by the experience
he has had, and observations he has made, to have a deep insight into the
management of Affairs, so that he is qualified to give Counsel to a Prince. Let
him also be as well able to speak as he is to think, and have a free and full
Expression, and an easy Eloquence.

Suppose a Man thus accomplished by God and Nature, and his own Industry; yet
if all these Perfections be acted by Malice and ill Nature, they make their
Owner mischievous; if not animated by Love and Benignity, useless. And
whosoever is either not useful, or pernicious and hurtful, cannot be Honorable.

We hate or fear the Mischievous, and we scorn the useless Man, but honor
neither. The Man of designs and contrivance, and subtle devices, if he be
malicious, we fear and flee from him.

The Sons of Knowledge, if they keep it all to themselves, and will not
communicate, we account them useless and insignificant. If they vaunt it out of
Ostentation, and upbraid those that have not had the opportunity to study which
themselves have, we justly censure them for proud Pedants. These endowments or
acquirements will not of themselves entitle a Man to Honor. It is a benign
Disposition, which will use them well and to good purposes, that makes them
commendable, and the Objects of our Praise.

Proceed we farther to a Devotional Temper, that ingageth us to be strict in
Religious Performances. And that hugely becomes Man, to be hearty, and solemn,
and constant in the Worship of God. Yet even this will not procure us Honor,
if not accompanied with Beneficence, and attended by good Works. For, though a
Man sequester hours and days for Praying and Fasting; though he spend much time
in Reading and Contemplation; though he be constant at Church, and much in his
Closet; though he miss not Prayers twice a day, nor Fasting twice a week; tho he
fast as often, and pray as long as the devout Pharisees, yet if, like them, he
devour Widows Houses, and cat the Bread of Orphans; though he tithe Mint and
Cummin, yet if he pass over Truth, and Judgment, and Mercy; if he that is thus
devout toward God, be unjust, or but unkind and uncharitable to Men, we look
on him as an Impostor and a Cheat, we conclude his Devotions to be animal and
formal, and his Religion false, the Religion of the Pharisees, but not that
which he taught, who as he went up into the Mountain to pray, so he went about
doing Good.

We read of Moses, when he came down from the Presence of God, his Face shone,
And we all expect, that Humility and Modesty, that Benignity and Goodness
should appear in the looks and carriages of those that have been in Converse
with God: That they who have beheld the Glory of God, and confessed their own
Vileness, who have praised and sought his Goodness and Mercy, should themselves
be meek and lowly, compassionate and forbearing to their Fellow Creatures.

If they be otherwise, if merciless and cruel, if peevish and froward, if
clamorous and unquiet, if revengeful and malicious, if inhumane and uncivil; we
then think that they do not in good earnest praise that in God, which
themselves do not imitate; nor that they think themselves to need Mercy, who
will not show it to others. For, it is the Sense of all Men, that he who is
truly Religious, who worships God as he ought, will also do good to Men.
Therefore let all show the Truth of their Devotion, by the benignity of their
Temper, and the goodness of their Lives.

Thus we see Religion will not avail to Honor, if separate from Benesicence
and doing Good.

Nay, even Justice it self (though nothing can be commendable without it, though it
lay the Foundation of Praise) yet if not in conjunction with Benignity, it is
not sufficient to entitle a Man to the name of Just. He does Good as far as the
Law requires, but no further; And so we know not whether his Good Works proceed
from Nature and Temper, or from external Motives; whether from Love and a
benign disposition, or from Fear, and because he dares not disobey public
Sanction. For many Men's Justice is to be resolved into their Fear, and neither
their Wisdom, nor their Choice.

Besides; if Justice be not directed and regulated by Goodness, there is no
place for Equity; and that is Justice in name only, but not in reality, which
is parted from Equity.

In sum, It is Benignity and Godness that keeps Justice from degenerating into
Sowrness and Severity, into an inflexible Obstinacy, a rigid adherence to
Letters and Apexes, to Punctilio's, and Forms and Rules, indeed from becoming
the highest Injustice.

Thus that Justice which is so essential to all honorable Actions, is beholden
to Benignity, both for its being, and for its name.

And now I have showed, that those qualities, which when they are instrumental
to Benisicence, so much commend a Man, when they are either not used, or to ill
purposes, they are either matter of Reproach, or add nothing to his Honor.

I will conclude this Particular with this short Appeal. Suppose, on the other
side, a good-natured beneficent Man, stripped of most of those natural and
acquired Perfections and Endowments; he has little, but uses and does good
with that he has; his Understanding is not increased by Learning, nor has he
had much opportunity to improve it by general Observations; but the Knowledge
he has, he impart, and will not fail, where he can, to counsel those that want
it; he can give little Alms, but he throws in his Mites, all he can spare, and
such as he has, his Pains, he will freely bestow.

His Devotions are not pompous, nor solemn, nor long; he cannot set apart hours
for Prayer; but all his time is spent in doing the Good that is within his
Sphere. Though his Goodness reach not to God in Heaven; yet it does to his
Creatures.

He is poor in Estate, but rich in good works; is in low place, and has small
Power, but great Good Will: is ignorant in many, and mistakes in diverse
matters, but is malicious to none; for tho his Knowledge is bounded, his Charity
is unconfined.

His Addresses to God are not taken notice of, but his Visits to his poor
Neighbors cannot be hid.

In short; he that hurts none, and does Good to all; and if he do not do Good,
it is for want of Power and Skill, not of Inclination; this Man is loved and
valued, honored whilst he lives, and after death is remembered and praised.
Whereas the proud and useless Pedant, the Rich, but Covetous Miser, the Man of
great place, that used his Power to do Evil, or did not use it in doing good
Offices, their names shall be forgot, or remembered with scorn and infamy.

Here then is the only way to Honor, to be Beneficent. Would we be esteemed
whilst we live, and paised when we dye? let us do Good. Let our own Works
praise us, and then Men will not be silent.

The Universal Benefactor, as his name is written in Heaven, so it shall be
registered in the Rolls of Fame here on Earth, and both the present and future
Ages will call him Blessed.

3. I will endeavor to show, that to do Good, is the way to make us Rich.

There are too many in the World, who think that Man's Life consists in the
abundance of the things he possesses. To be Rich, is in their account the chief
Good, and the greatest, if not only Happiness. The Objection which they have
against doing Good, is yet unremoved: This they fear, is an expensive practice,
and will waste their Estate; for Beneficence cannot consist with Injustice,
with Fraud or Oppression, with pinching and scraping, and all the sinful,
little sordid Arts they have used to make themselves Rich.

I do not now go about to show them the unreasonableness of their desires; but
supposing Riches to be as good as they imagine, I will endeavor to make it
out, that to do Good is the wisest and likeliest means to attain them, it is a
very probable way to thrive.

This is a Paradox, and therefore I will make it out, 1. by the best Testimony,
2. by Observation. 3. by Argument.

1. By Testimony. Prove. 19. 17. He that gives to the Poor, lends to the
Lord, and that which he gives will he pay him again. God is a sure Play Master:
but perhaps he may not pay in kind, though the words seem to import that he will.
Chapter 11. Verse. 24, 25. speak this more clearly, and are full to our Purpose.
There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth more
than is meet, but it tends to Poverty. The liberal Soul shall be made fat;
and be that waters, shall be watered also himself. In the 24th verse is a
double Paradox, wholly contrary to the Sense of these Men. He tells them, that
some scattering is the way to increase, and some sparing the means to be Poor.
And then in the 25th, he asserts, that Liberality, or a cheerful, free
Communicativeness of what we have, shall be blessed with Plenty.

2. By Observation. Psalm. 37. 25, 26. I have been young, and now am old, yet
did I never see the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread, etc. Both
he and his Children have been kept from Poverty and Want; they have not been
reduced to extremity. The words seem spoken by way of (...), for it follows his
Children are Blessed.

Another Observation is Tullies. He tells us, that the Roman Empire flourished
and was great, whilst they obliged their Associates by Benefits, and their
Senate was a Haven and Refuge to their Provincials: but when they became
Injurious and Cruel, and had no regard to Strangers, they were quickly ruined.
In has clades incidimus, says he, dum metui quam chari esse and diligi
maluimus. Quae si popula Romano injuste imperanti accidere potuerunt, quid
debent putare singuli? This is the Observation of this wise Man, that when they
were good and beneficent to other Nations, they were prserved; when cruel,
unequal and injurious, their Empire was destroyed.

Lastly; I appeal to your own Observation. Call to mind how many we have known,
who have been Just and Charitable, Merciful and Liberal, and Hospitable, who
have by these very means both got and secured their Estates: and how many Men
have we known undone by their Malice, and Anger, and Envy? Nay, their very
closeness and pinching have been the causes why they have not got more, or kept
what they had. And,

3. The reason of this is plain. For,

1. By the good Offices we do to others, we engage them to Returns. Few Men are
so depraved, but they are grateful, and will study retribution: and gratitude
will not only pay back the Principal, but give us it with advantage. It
constrains the Debtor to pay greater Use than the Law will force from him.
Whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, do you do to them, is a truth
that is written in Nature, as well as Scripture. Here Is a Direction to us in our
Converse, whatever dealing we desire from others, we must use to them: and it
supposes, that as we do to them, they will do to us: which is for the most part
true: for, they lie under the double Obligation of Justice, and an Example, and
without great violence to themselves cannot shake it off. And therefore there
is no such sign of a desperate Wickedness, as Ingratitude. If then we do good
to others, we probably shall not fail of a return from them; and such a return
ordinarily, as the Husbandman has of his Seed, Thirty, Sixty, or an Hundred
fold.

2. All Men will love us, they will wish us well, and do us Good. The good, the
beneficent Man has every ones Prayers and good Desires, and every ones
Endeavors for his Welfare: they all desire that he should be happy. No Man
envies his good Fortune, who will use what he has for the Good of others. None
are afraid that he should grow Rich, who will not abuse his Wealth to crush and
oppress, but uses it to relieve his poor Neighbors.

He is not the Object of any ones Indignation; for we all esteem the Man that
does Good with it, worthy of what he has. Men only grudge them their Wealth,
who have no Knowledge nor Will to use it.

Lastly, none will ordinarily hate or be malicious against the Good Man. Who
will, who can harm you, if you be doers of that which is Good? By this means we
are more secured from Enemies, than by Bars, and Locks, and Iron Doors, and
Chests. Take away Envy and Malice, Fears and Jealousies, and we may dwell
safely. Men can have little Temptation to rob us, when they and others are the
better for what we have.

No, it is the selfish Man that catches what he can from others, and will part
with nothing to them; that must fear that will be taken from him, which himself
cannot find in his Heart to give, or lend, or lay out for a public benefit.
Whereas the liberal Man may lie down and sleep without fear* He needs not, he
cannot much fear the Combinations of crafty Men, or the Assaults of the Violent.

But that is not all that doing Good contributes to an Estate; it does not only
keep what we have, but get more. It does as well make Men that they shall be
our Friends, as that they shall not be our Enemies. Our Neighbors will be
ready to do us all kind Offices, and help our Business with Counsel, or Labor,
or Money. And the good Man's Servants (on whose Trust and Diligence Estates
much depend) will not work out of Fear, nor only out of Conscience, but out of
Love; and this will make them more constant, and cheerful, and careful in their
Master's Business, than any other Principle.

Neither he that works for Hire, or because he dare do no other, will be so
diligent, as he that loves his Master. And if he be good, and kind, and equal,
liberal and charitable, he will, he must love him.

I conclude this Particular with that of Tally; Rerum omnium nec aptius est
quicquam ad opes tuendas ac tenendas, quam diligi, nec alienius quam timeri.
Quem metuunt oderunt, quem quisqut odit periisse expetit. Multorum odiis nullae
opes obsistere possunt. There is nothing more fit and suitable to the keeping
and securing of Riches, than to be loved; and nothing more strange and
opposite, than to be feared. He that is feared, is hated withal, and every one
desires the Ruin of him he hates. The greatest Wealth is not sufficient to
give check to the Hatred of many.

3. This Beneficence of Temper will keep us from those Ways whereby Estates are
usually wasted.

There are five Ways that lead Men to Poverty, 1. Idleness. 2. Prodigality. 3.
A Sensual Course. 4. Gaming. 5. Lawsuits.

1. When Men will not be diligent. If their Business will do it self, it may;
but by them it shall not be done. Now the Sluggard, that neglects his Field,
suffers it to be overgrown with Thorns and Briars, what Crop, what Harvest can
he expect? None at all, but as Solomon says, Wa^^ shall come on him suddenly,
and Poverty as an armed Man.

2. When a Man does not give, but throw away; neither considers to whom nor why
he gives, nor what he has. He slatters away his Estate; he spends, merely
because he has no power to keep. To avoid the Extreme of parting with Nothing,
this lavishing Man parts with All.

3. Solomon and Experience say the same, That he who loves Pleasure shall be a
poor Man; He who loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich. The Sons of Appetite,
if they be not born to Estates, never get them, and seldom keep what they have
got to their hands. Certainly this is a great Waster. By means of a Whorish
Woman, says the Wise Man, is a Man brought to a Piece of Bread. Luxury and
Incontinence, Gluttonny and Drunkenness, are very chargeable Sins. How many Men
have eat and drunk up great Estates? And how many have sold their Lands, to
make their Mistresses fine?

4. And who knows not how many have been undone by Gaming? have ventured and
lost great Estates, by trusting to their own Skill and Fortune?

5. And are there not many ruined by Lawsuits? They either are contentious,
and sue others, or unjust, and provoke others (that have no mind to it) to sue
them.

Now the beneficent good Man, he is out of danger of losing his Estate in any
of these Ways: For,

1. He cannot be idle and unactive. He will be laboring for this Reason, that
he may have to give to him that wants. He will overlook his Affairs, and mind
his Shop, or his Field, or wherever his Employment is, because this will
enable him to do Good.

2. Tho he be liberal and charitable, yet not prodigal and profuse. He will
part with what he has freely on a good account, but not on none at all. He is
so bountiful, as to lay out whenever it becomes him; and yet is so frugal
also, as to keep what he has, when it does not misbecome him.

3. He sees how unprofitable it is to himself, to the World, to waste away his
Time and Substance in Eating and Drinking, or any other Sensuality. He finds
these Courses are mischievous to him, and render him useless to other Men.
Because he is bent to do as much Good as he can, he will not rise up early to
drink strong-Drink, nor continue at Night till Wine inflame him.

4. He loves himself too well to lose, and his Neighbor too well to win an
Estate at Cards or Dice. This good Man cannot be so foolish, as to run such a
Hazard as this, to disable himself from doing that Good which he otherwise
might, nor can he take any pleasure to undo his Neighbor.

5. This good Man will neither be so quarrelsom, as to contend with others
where he has not Right; nor yet so unjust, as by detaining their Rights to
engage others to sue him. And when ever he is forced by the Injustice of
others, he does it more to vindicate Justice, and preserve those Rights which
Custom, and the Wisdom of their Forefathers have settled, than upon any private
particular Account.

4thly; The secret Blessing of God goes with the good Man; Providence will and
does concern it self, that such an one should not want the Power to do Good,
who has such a mind to it.

It is by the secret Curse of God upon him, that the Covetous Man puts his
Money into Bags with Holes. He puts it in, but never takes it out, never sees,
never enjoys it. He gets, and loses what he has got. And it is the Blessing of
God that makes the liberal Man's Bread, which he casts upon the Waters, (where
it seems quite lost) after many days to return to him again.

He that takes care of others, God will take care of him; and if he lay aside
his own private Concerns, to serve other Men, the Angels of God will minister
to him.

Thus I have briefly, yet so plainly evinced, that to do Good is the way to be
rich, that I cannot but hope Covetonsness it self will be engaged to
Beneficence.

I now proceed to show how much an universal Beneficence conduces to private
and particular Friendships; and how much, if it obtained in the World, it would
tend to Public Peace.

1. A Friend is certainly the greatest of all external good Things. Nothing so
profitable, nothing so pleasant, nothing so suitable to, and becoming a Man, as
a Friend.

Nothing without him so much contributes to the attaining all his Ends. My
Friend is my Riches, and my Reputation, my Life and Health, my Pleasure and
Delight, my Understanding and Wisdom, the Guide and Conductor of my Life, the
Governor of my Passions, he that moderates my Desires, and subdues mine Anger,
and doubles my Joys; that excites all the good and useful, that restrains and
quells the evil and pernicious Motions of my Mind.

My Friend does me Good, when my self cannot; for, he rectifies my Mistakes,
and allays my Griefs, and unburdens me of all the Loads, which mine own Folly
and Melancholy would bind fast on. Thus he is better to me than my self, he is
more than all the World besides; when I cannot help my self, and when others
will not, he does.

In sum, my Friend is to me both my self, and all the World, nay, my (...)
visible God. I do with my Friend enjoy both Solitude and Company. When I
converse with him, I have both the Secrecy of mine own Breast, and the Ease and
Freedom of Discourse: I speak, and yet have the Security of Silence. When I am
with him, I am retired into mine own Thoughts, and can contemplate without
disturbance; and yet I feel the highest Pleasure, and most ravishing Delights,
that the whole Frame of Nature can yield. The Glories of the Sun are not so
pleasant to behold, as the Face of my Friend; and the most melodious Music
cannot be so grateful to my Ears, as the Voice of the Person who loves me, and
whom I love. He is the Epitome of the whole World, and the liveliest Image of
God himself. He is God and Man in one Person, if I may so say; for he has the
Love and Goodness of God, an infinite Good Will, joined with the Weakness and
Impotency of Man.

I can scarce forbear to go on, and set forth the Excellency and Usefulness of
Friendship, which of all the things in the World, does most conduce to both our
spiritual and bodily Welfare, our present and future greatest Happiness.

But I have said all this, only that I may the more commend this universal
Goodness, which is the best, if not only Means to great and good Friendships.
To do Good to him, is the Sign and Effect of my Love to another, and it is the
sure Cause of his Love to me; and where there is a mutual Love, it will not
long be concealed; and where it is discovered, that is Friendship.

This therefore is the Way to make all Men my Friends, to do Good to All; they
cannot possibly hate their Benefactor. This is the way to extinguish all the
Fires of Hatred, and Glowings of Jealousy, and Flames of Anger; to take away
all those Passions, which are the Ingredients of Enmity. No such sure and
effectual, as well as brave and generous Method to overcome Evil, and conquer
Enmity, as that which the Apostle prescribes by doing Good.

But that is not all; This does not only make it next to impossible for Men to
be our Enemies, when they see we are doing Good to all, and to themselves, as
far as that is consistent with the Public Weal; but it also makes it necessary
that they should be our Friends. So strong are the Obligations of the Laws of
Gratitude, so powerful is Example, that they are constrained to make Returns of
Good Offices, and to retaliate Kindness.

Herein lies the great Power that every Man has to procure himself good Usage
from other Men, by carrying himself well to them; for, it is impossible but they
should love him, who loves them. And I look on it as the best and surest Rule
to be observed by them that would be loved, to love.

I no less admire the Wisdom, than the Justice of that Saying, which has found
such an acceptance, that it has sometimes been entertained in a great Court;
Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, the same do ye to them: For they
are not only obliged, but inclined to it; they ought to do it, and probably
they will: so that it is as full of Counsel, as it is of Equity, and does as
certainly show us what we may expect from other Men, as it strictly requires us
what to do to them.

From this Discourse is clear, That if we love, and do Good to all Men, all Men
will love us, at least it will be so with the Generality: And it is the
likeliest, and perhaps only Course we can take to engage all: for, if Kindness
and Beneficence will not engage their Affections, nothing will.

Thus, by universal Beneficence we take the way to be not only universally well
spoke of, and well thought of, but also well dealt with: for none can resist
the real Charms of this powerful Philter; they must love him that loves them,
and do Good to their Benefactor.

That Is the first Particular, That by doing Good to All, we shall procure an
universal Friendship. There is a common Saying, That an universal Lover is
never a particular Friend: That is not true; for our Savior loved all, and yet
had his particularly beloved Disciple. But we must see that we do not verify
that, That he who is every-body's Friend, is no-body's: Tho I believe, for the
most part, they mean no more by that, than that he is not so much their Friend
as they desire; for they would monopolize and engross his Friendship.

2. This will make Friendships not only large, but hearty; as well intense in
Quality, as extended to many: For, Men will love us in that manner in which we
love them. If our Love be only in Words and Countenance, they will return us
good Looks and good Words again: But if we do not only love them in Word and
Tongue, but in Deed and Truth, as St. John expresses it, they will also love
us heartily, and do us Good; for, by the same measure we mete to them, it shall
be measured to us by them again.

And this is an excellent Effect of this universally beneficent Temper, to make
us Friends to all in general, and hearty to every one in particular.

Men that are destitute of this Principle, their Love is like some Plants, that
either all run up into the Root, or out into Leaf* Here is both Root and Leaf;
their Love is hearty in particular, and yet dilated to the Community.

3. This makes Friendships virtuous and just. No Friendship can be good, nor I
think great, I am sure not certain, that is not founded in Virtue; that is the
Parent, that is the Nurse of true Friendship. This was observed by Heathens
long since. And indeed I can neither expect that he should do me the be^^ Good,
nor yet be faithful, who is not a Man of steady Virtue. And no Man can be my
great Friend, who cannot promote my best Interests, or whom I cannot trust.

Now how necessary universal Good Will is to the Virtue of Friendship, to keep
it within its due Bounds, will appear by what I am now to say.

Every Man is to endeavor to put himself into that Condition, and those
Circumstances, in which he shall do the most and the greatest Good, and
whatever indisposes, disables, hinders him in that, that is evil to him, and
makes him not virtuous.

The great Danger that a Soul void of universal Good Will, is exposed to by
pariticular Friendships, is this, That it will be so confined and ^^^ured, so
(...) and clogged, so restrained and ens^^ved ^o some one Person, that it
cannot be at liberty to help and serve any others and thus that Affection is
monopoliz'd and engrost'd betwixt two or three, which ought to (...) more
common and public.

In short, this Man loves his Friend, and (...) else, But where Goodwill to all
is, that keeps Friendship from degenerating into Partiality and injustice.

For, tho this good Man loves his particular Friend, as much (...) he (...)
loves none else; yet he will not be so kind to one, as to be unjust to the rest
of Men. He may (...) does prefer one before another, (...) yet has not so much
regard to one, that he has none at all to others. He will and may spend most
of his Time and Pains in doing Good there, where he has greatest Obligations,
and best Opportunity, and there is most need; but yet reserves some for others,
for any in the World, to whom he can be serviceable.

In sum, whilst particular Friendship is no prejudice to Humanity, nor hinders
us from doing any more public good Offices to others; whilst it does not take
off our Affections from them, nor take up our Time, and employ us so, as we
cannot serve the Community, it keeps within its own bounds.

The only way to keep it thus, is to be universally beneficent: Endeavor to
get into our Souls a great Good Will to the whole World of Mankind, and then,
particular Friendships will never degenerate into too particular Affection;
that will hold the Balance even betwixt the Interest of other Men, and the
Concerns of my Friend.

When there is a Fault in this particular, Friendship is not to be blamed, but
the Man; nor does he love his Friend too much, but other Men too little.

The way that is ordinarily taken to rectify this Miscarriage, is wrong: for,
when Men love their Friend less, they mend one Fault by another: The right
Course is, to love others more, and not their Friend less; to do good to all
Men, and not to cease doing good to him.

4. This will make Friendships more easy and pleasant than otherwise they would
be: For he that loves but one or a few, in their absence is hugely unquiet and
troubled, but he that has a kindness for all, he ever meets with the Objects
that please him (tho not all alike) and when Necessity parts him from his
dearest Friend, yet he fails not of those on whom he does exercise Benevolence,
and so has both a pleasant and profitable Diversion. And it will prove the
best Remedy against the Trouble of parting with Friends, when we are so
affected, as to do to others (for substance) as we have done to our Friends.

5. This will also make Friendships profitable. When they grow on this Root,
they will bring forth Fruit; when they derive from a Principle of Beneficence,
they will not end in a fruitless Passion: But he that is upon doing Good to all
Men, will certainly not fail to do it to his Friend; it will be his business to
serve him in some or other of his Interests.

6. This is the only probable way to make Friendships lasting. This is a firm
Foundation, and that Friendship which is built on it shall stand fast, tho the
Winds blow, and Storms fall, and Waves beat upon it. When all others, that are
founded only on particular Humors, or Likeness of bodily Temper, nay, on
expectation of Advantages, either Pleasure or Profit, shall fall; this that is
set on the Rock of universal Beneficence, shall continue for ever.

He that loves his Friend in prosecution of, and consistently with that great
Principle of Love to All, he will love him to the end: Whereas he that is a
Friend merely from Humor or Temper, or sense of present Pleasure, or hope of
some future Advantage, will cease to be a Friend, perhaps become an Enemy, when
these change. Tempers alter, and Humors come and go, and whatever is corporeal,
is mutable: Nay, Vice and Mistake are so too; so that we can be sure of nothing
so much as of Virtue and Knowledge

Nothing that is unaccountable, or that is founded in Mistake or Ignorance, can
probably continue long; and such is that Friendship which is inconsistent, not
in conjunction with, nor deriving from universal Good Will.

Thus I have shown generally, what Advantages accrue to the Friendships of
those Men, that live in the observance of this great Law of doing Good to All
Men; for, by this means they are many and hearty, virtuous, and much more easy,
and profitable, and lasting than otherwise.

I proceed, lastly, to show how much the Temper and Practice of Universal
Beneficence tends to Public Peace and Tranquillity. How would most of the
Quarrels in the World cease, if this once obtained? Men would quickly beat
their Swords into Plow^^ares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; they would
unlearn War, and betake themselves to the useful Arts of Peace; if they loved
all Men, they would not then study how to hurt and destroy, but how to help and
serve, and be beneficial to each other.

Let us imagine an Vtopia on this Earth, where it is natural to the Inhabitants
to obey this Law of Love to Mankind, how hardly do any Controversies arise
amongst them? And how easily and quickly are they decided by the Parties
themselves? For, they are not more their own, than they are one another
Advocates. They consider not their own particular Interests, in opposition to
the Public, and the Rules of Justice and Order, wherein the Community is so
much concerned, out of their good will to the World, they will not violate.

If any Case be so difficult that they cannot fathom it, or their own Modesty
make them think they do not; or that they may have more considered their own
Cause than the opposite; how calmly, and with what quiet and composure do they
submit to a Determination by some other? with what indifferency do they hear it
judged against them? Nay, they do not think that is against them, which is for
Justice and other Men.

All their Contentions are friendly, and they are all in a way of Reason; for
they are all of the mind, that of the two ways in which Men contend, one by
Reason, the other by Force, the first only becomes Men, the latter belongs
properly to Brutes.

And for a further Eviction of this, I do appeal to, and dare be concluded by
almost any the most injudicious Men, whether it every Man were upon design of
doing Good to others, to all, there would not be a perfect Peace over the whole
Earth, and Nation would not rise against Nation; much less would the same
People fall out with each other.

If any doubt, let him search the Records of Antiquity; and look back to the
Histories of ancient Times, or let him inform himself of his own, and he will
very soon be satisfied, that Want of a regard to the Concerns of other Men,
has, and ever had the greatest hand in the Breach of Peace.

The great Disturbers of the Quiet of the World, have been either acted by
Malice and Hatred, or by a selfish and contracted Affection, but have ever been
destitute of Good Will to the Generality of Men. By all that we have recorded
of the great Conquerors of the World, we find they were instigated to such
Undertakings, more by a desire of Empire and Greatness, and to enthrone
themselves, than to be Benefactors to others. Certainly, if they had had a
tenderness to the Welfare of other Men, they would never have ransacked the
Goods, and razed the Dwellings, and shed the Blood of so many. But enough in a
Case so plain.

I will only add, and with that will conclude this Particular, That the due
Observance of this excellent Rule, is necessary to the right discharge of those
Employments, on which the Public Peace so much depends, I mean, the Magistracy
and the Ministry.

For the Magistrate, it is a necessary and excellent Qualification of him, both
in his Legislative and Judicative Capacity.

How can he make Laws, that intends not the Good of all them that are Subjects,
since this is essential to a Law, that it aim at the Public Good? And how
unfit is he to judge according to the Laws, who himself has not the same design
with them? He that is acted by Malice and bitter Anger, or that has Love, but
it is confined to a Number, to a Party, how ill is he qualified to be either a
Lawgiver, or a Judge?

Plate, and Tully from him, tell us, That all Governors ought to observe two
Precepts:

1. To intend and refer all to the Public Good, subordinating all private
Respects and particular Interests to that.

2. To have a regard of the whole Community, not of a part only. If we add to
these two,

3. To take most care of the best, most virtuous and useful Men; we have
comprised all that is in my Text: which whosoever observes, can scarce fail of
being an excellent Magistrate, a wise and a good Lawgiver, a just and an equal
Judge.

I say, he that constantly designs and prosecutes, not his own private
Advantages, but the Public Good; nor takes care of only one Party, but of all
the Community; and, lastly, makes best Provision for the best Men, and does
most Good to them that do most Good: he will discharge his Office well; his
Laws will be no tyrannical, arbitrary, unaccountable Impositions, but a gentle
and easy Yoke; his Sentence will be equitable, and his Execution full of
Mildness and Humanity.

And how little cause of Quarrels and Commotions there can be in a State, whose
Governors are thus qualified, we all see. Thus is it where the Magistrates are
bent on doing Good to all, especially to the Best and most Virtuous.

2. This Publick-spiritedness is no less necessary for Ministers, to engage
them to that extraordinary Diligence they must use, to carry them through all
the Opposition and Difficulties they shall certainly meet with in their general
Converse with all sorts, with Men of the meanest Capacities, of lowest Rank,
and greatest Vices, and worst Natures.

Nothing but this Universal Benevolence can fit them for such Converse: Only he
that loves all, will bear with such Conversation as a Minister meets with.

All the Care and Pains he is at, first to find out good, and wholesome, and fit
Truths, and then to deliver them intelligibly and acceptably, must have their
Rise from his great Good Will to Men; and therefore he does thus, because he is
on a design of doing Good to them.

Where the Minister is destitute of this good Temper, he is idle and careless,
and his Discourses useless and insignificant: because he is without Charity, he
is a sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal, and his Carriage foolish and hurtful.

The great Work of Ministers is to teach Religion, so as it may be both known
and done, to make it easy to be understood, and easy to be practiced, etc.

Thus I have endeavored to make plain, that Universal Beneficence is both
available and necessary to all the valuable Interests which Man can propose to
himself, whether he regard the present or the future State; whether he consider
himself and his own particular State, or the Public; whether he be in a
private or a public Capacity, he must strictly observe this Rule of doing Good
to All.

So that if we would be either good or happy in this World, or he that to come;
if we would serve our selves or others; if we would please and honor our God
and Savior, adorn our Profession; if we would have Pleasure in Life, and Peace
in, and Glory after Death; if we would do all we can to make others as good as
we wish they were, we must herein exercise our selves, to do all the Good we
can to all.

If any are idle, and would be doing nothing, I do assure them they shall have
more pleasure in this active Life than in Sleep and Dullness. If any love
themselves only, and do not regard how it goes with others, I do assure them
that this is the best and likeliest way to serve themselves. As many as are of
particular Affections, confined to Kindred, or a Party, or so; let them enlarge
their Love to All, and they will proportionably increase their Pleasure. And if
any are malicious, and love to do Mischief, I undertake to make it appear to
them, that the Pleasures of Love are far greater than those of Revenge: And I
entreat such to leave off to lead the Life of Devils, and live that of Angels.
If Heaven be more desirable than Hell, it is better to love than to hate.

Consider what has been said; and God grant, that we may all in good earnest
set upon the Practice of that most excellent Duty to which we are exhorted.

And let the good Spirit of God inspire the whole World with that Goodness and
Love to one another, and all Men, that so we may both live well here, and be
happy for ever hereafter, for the sake of Jesus Christ.

Now to this Blessed Savior, who has loved us, and washed us in his own
Blood, together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be eternally given all
Honor, Praise, and Glory.

Amen.
FINIS.

