THE Present CONDITION OF THE Muscovite EMPIRE, Till the YEAR 1699.

IN TWO LETTERS: The First from a Gentleman, who was Conversant WITH THE
Muscovite Ambassador in Holland: The Second from a Person of Quality at
VIENNA, Concerning the late Muscovite EMBASSY, His present Czarish Majesty; THE
RUSSIAN EMPIRE; AND GREAT-TARTARY.

WITH THE LIFE Of the Present Emperor of CHINA.

By Father J. BOUVET, Missionary. By the Author of the Ancient and Present
State of Muscovy.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coggan, in the Inner-Temple-Lane. MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
THE Two following Letters, which I have here presented to the Reader, being
lately come to my hands, and containing a short but most exact and authentic
Account of the present Condition of the Muscovite Empire, I thought I could
scarce do more acceptable piece of Service to the Public at this Juncture,
than to communicate them to the Curious. The first Letter was written by a
Gentleman, who being at Amsteldam at the time of that Solemn Muscovite Embassy;
and whilst the Czar was there present, had the Honor to be intimately
acquainted with some of the Musvites of the first Rank there, which gave him
the opportunity to be informed concerning these Matters, which hitherto either
are not at all, or at least, but very confusedly come to our Knowledge. Those
who will seriously reflect upon what this Gentleman has been pleased to tell us
concerning the two. Sieges of Asoph, its true Situation, Advantage and
Strength; concerning the present State of the Muscovite Navy, and their Maritim
Affairs; with several other most Curious Observations, relateing to his Czarish
Majesty's Person, especially since his departure out of England, I suppose,
agree with me in Opinion, that this Account is the most exact, and perhaps also
the mos;t authentic we have had of this kind for many Years before. The second
being an Abstract of several Letters written by a Person of Quality then
Residing at the Imperial Court at Vienna, gives us a faithful Account both of
his own Sentiments and of the whole Imperial Court concerning the present State
of Affairs in Muscovy; with very Curious Observations upon several remarkable
Subjects, relating to the last Peace with the Turks; and the Way by Land
through the Great-Tartary into China.

Any one that will be at the pains to compare the Maps the Geographers have
been pleased to put upon the World formerly, of the North Eastern Parts of
Asia, with this Account, will soon be convinced of their Ignorance, when they
have represented this Part of the World, which is Stocked with vast Numbers of
Inhabitants, and Watered by so many great and fair Rivers, as inhabitable
Forests and Deserts. In the whole, these two Letters may well be considered as
a Supplement of the Ancient and Present State of Muscovy, published at the time
of His Czarish Majesty's being in England; many things of Moment which have
happened since, being inserted here, and related upon the Credit of those
Persons, who had the opportunity of taking the best Information that can be
expected of this kind. I will not pretend to enlarge much upon the Historical
Portraicture, given us by Father Bouvet, of the present Emperor of China,
supposing that his being an Eyewitness of what he relates, and his offering it
to the most Christian King, will be a sufficient Plea, both for his Authority
and Veracity, to the unbiased Reader.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.

WHen I consider the Genius of the Age we live in, which is so much inclined to
call in question every thing that comes from far Remote Places, I have all the
Reason in the World, to fear that these Memories will undergo the same Fate and
will not meet with that favorable interpretation, the faithfulness and
exactness wherewith they are written, might justly Challenge from unqualified
Persons.

But as I have not inserted the least thing, of which I have not either been an
Eyewitness my self, or else have received it my self from unquestionable
hands, so I am apt to flatter my self, that the Reader will look upon this
Relation with another Eye, than is commonly done upon ordinary accounts; I hope
no body will think me so Impudent, as to dare to Present to the most
quick-sighted and greatest Monarch of the World, any thing which is not in all
its circumstances, agreeable to Truth; which must heeds bring upon me the just
Indignation of His Majesty, and at the same time, be a means to forfeit the
Good Opinion of the Greatest Emperor of the Orient.

But whatever the Spirit of Contradiction may be able to invent, to render
these Memoirs suspected to the World. I don't question, but that Truth which is
represented here without Contradiction, in its Genuine Shape, will protect me
both here and in China against all gainsayers; the only thing which I have to
relent at, being, that I have not been able to represent in their full Luster
all such Matters, as must needs be infinitely pleasing to all, who are truly
Zealous for the propagation of the Faith.

BOVVET.

TO THE Most Christian King.
May it please your Majesty.
THE Portraicture which I am taking the Liberty to present at this time to Your
Majesty, is certainly the One of the rarest and most curious that has been
brought from the East. All the Memoirs both of time past, and even of this
Country, can furnish us, but with very few Subjects, which, If I dare presume
to say so, are more worth Your Attention and Cnriosity; I need not say any
thing more than, that it is the Portraicture of a Monarch, who, having the good
Fortune to Resemble Your Majesty in most Respects, enjoys the same Advantages
in reference to his great Station. among the Pagan Princes, which Your Majesty
is possessed of in the Christian World.

The Jesuits, which by Your Majesty have been Employed, as Missionaries into
China some years ago, were not a little surprised to meet at the utmost corner
of the Earth with what they had never seen before but in France, that is to
say, a Prince, who, like Your self, has improved his sublime Genius by that
Greatness of Soul, which alone renders hint worthy of the greatest Empire of
the Universe; who bas the same uncontrouled Power over his Passions, at over
his Subjects, equally Adored by his People and Esteemed by his Neihgbours; who,
as his Glorious Enterprises have been Crowned with Success, so stands more
indebted for it to his own Valor and Conduct, than Fortune; In short, a Prince
in whom are centered most of these great Qualifications requisite to makes an
accomplished Hero, and who would without question be accounted the most
Glorious Monarch upon Earth, if his Reign had not been coincident with that of
Your Majesty.

It must be confessed that hitherto be is so unhappy as to be a Pagan, which
makes him incapable of these most Eminent Prerogatives, without which, all the
other Royal Qualities want the most solid Foundation; yet it may be truly said
of him, that he has made a considerable step toward it by the High Esteem he
has of our Religion, by the Satisfaction he takes in the Conversion of his
Subjects to the Christian Faith, which gives its no small hopes, that in time
by the Grace fo God, be entirely united to the Church.

For, considering what favorable Inclinations God has been pleased to inspire
into his Heart for the Christian Religion, by the means of our Arts and
Sciences we are not beyond hopes, that one day he may prove the Destruction of
the Pagan Idolatry in China; endeavoring in this, as in many other things, to
tread in the footsteps of Your Majesty who have made it Your Chiefest Glory, to
root out Heresy in your Dominions, and to propagate the true Religion throout
all Parts of the World.

Will it not be the greatest Happiness and Glory of Your Majesty's Reign, that
the same Arts and Sciences, which have been brought to the highest pitch of
Protection; by your Encouragement and protection, should be the happy
Instruments of these favorable Inclinations, the present Emperor of China
shows for our Religion; and if the Chinese should be convinced in time of the
Great advantage the Truth of the Gospel has over their vain Philosophy, to
serve as a Means both for the Sovereign and his Subjects, to submit themselves,
notwithstanding all their Self-conceit, (in which they surpass most Nations) to
the forcible truth of the Christian Religion.

These are the hopes which may be conceived from true Historical Portraicture
of this Prince; the only thing I fear, is, that the Pencil of the Painter has
done considerable wrong to the Original. But if all the Lineaments are not so
Nice and Exact as they should be I am sure they are true; and all the Favors
this Monarch has been pleased to heap upon us, have not been Powerful enough to
induce me, to deviate in the least from the Respect due to Your Majesty: and
Truth it self in so Nice a Point, in which the Interest of the Gospel which was
never separated from Yours, is so narrowly concerned.

The Present CONDITION OF THE Muscovite EMPIRE, TILL THE YEAR 1699, In a LETTER
from a Gentleman, who was Conversant with the late Muscovite Ambassadors in
Holland.
SIR,
IN your last you desired me to acquaint you with what I had been able to learn
concerning the present State of Muscovy, during the Stay of that most solemn
Embassy of His Czarish Majesty in this City. I am extremely well pleased, you
have put me in the way of satisfying in some measure your Curiosity, having by
the frequent Conversation with the said Ambassadors, had the opportunity to
inform my self of several Matters of great Consequence, not commonly known in
these Parts. I cannot but be amazed at the strange. Notions the greatest Part
have formed to themselves of the present Condition of the Muscovites, being
prepossessed with an Opinion, that this Monarchy is of so little Consequence in
respect of the other European Kingdoms, as scarce to be worthy taking notice of.

But whoever will take the trouble to make a true insight into the present
Posture of their Affairs, will be forced to confess, that there are few
Kingdoms in Europe, which at this time may be looked upon as a more proper
Object of our Curiosity.

It is not to be denied, but that before the Year 1645, when Czar Alexis
Michaelovitz, (his present Czarish Majesty's Father) came to the Crown, the
Mascovites were much more barbarous, that they cultivated but a very slender
Correspondence, and had but little Commerce with foreign Nations; and that
being ill versed in all manner of Sciences, they were consequently very
ignorant of the Military Art and Discipline, at least as it is practiced now
adays in Europe which was the true Reason of their ill Success in so many
Encounters, and that, though naturally fierce and hardy, they were frequently
worsted by their Enemies, though much interior in Number.

The Czar Alexis Michaelovitz, a Prince of a vast Understanding, and a Great
Politician, having immediately after his Accession to the Throne, investigated
the true Cause of the Disadvantage, the Muscovites lay under at that time, in
respect of other foreign Nations, applied all his Thoughts to remove this
Obstacle; The best Expedient he could pitch upon, was, to draw into his Service
as many foreign Officers as possibly he could, to instruct his Subjects in the
Modern Art of War; And the better to compass his Design, he made use of all the
Politics that could have been invented by the most refined Politician. For
being sensible, that it would be no easy Task to engage a considerable Number
of well qualified foreign Officers into his Service, he insensibly brought them
over to his Party, by the Promises of great Pay, of entire Liberty of
Conscience, of what Religion soever; and by taking them into his Service but
for a little time: all which was very punctually observed on his side. Thus he
put his projected Design in execution, with so extraordinary Success, that
according to the Account given by the Baron of Meyerbergh, who was in the Year
1662, sent by his present Imperial Majesty Leopald, as his Ambassador into
Muscovy, there were among the foreign Officers in the Czar Alexis
Michaelovitz's Service, two Generals, two Marshals de Camp, above a hundred
Colonels, a great Nnmber of Majors; Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns, in
prodigious Numbers, who were all paid very punctually: This Account coming from
a Person, who otherwise seldom speaks well of the Muscovites and their Affairs,
deserves to be particularly taken notice of in this place.

These abovementioned Officers, having made their Levies in diverse parts of the
Country, subject-to the Obedience of the Czars of Muschovy, and brought them
under a regular Martial Disciplines, did afterward in several Encounters with
the Poles and Swedes, give sufficient Proofs, that the Muscovites don't want
Bravery, when they are led on by good and experienced Officers. But, besides
these new Levies, the Czar had always on foot a certain standing Number of old
Troops, not unlike to the Roman Legions; those the Muscovites call Strelitzes,
consisting of forty Thousand Men, under the Command of the Chiefest of the
Nobility of the Empire.

It is further to be observed, that the introducing of a more regular
Discipline among the Muscovite Forces, was not the only Reason which induced
the Czar Alexis Michaelovitz, to entertain so vast a Number of foreign Officers
in his Service, it having been proved by Experience, That the same was in a
great measure, founded upon the Security of the Prince's Person, who before
that time, having committed the whole Management of their standing Forces to
the Nobility, thereby gave them frequent opportunies of abusing their Power in
opposition to the Royal Authority.

This Great Prince died in the Year 1676, much lamented by his People, whose
Darling he was, as having not once, in all his Reign, in the least abused his
Absolute Power, but given them a thousand Demonstrations of his Moderation,
Justice and Piety. It was he, that first changed the face of Affairs of the
Russian Empire, and laid that Foundation, upon which the Greatness of Muscovy
has been built since that time, and which is likely to be brought to
perfection, by the present Grand Czar Peter Alexiovitz.

He left the Succession of the Crown to his eldestt Son, Fedor Alexiovitz, who
reigned but six years, his early Loss was likewise much lamented by his
Subjects, being a very Accomplished Person, and who had given extraordinary
hopes of a Good and Great Prince, having exactly followed his Father's
footsteps, especially in what concerns the foreign Officers, and the
Encouragement of Commerce. He was a great lover of all Sciences, but especially
of the Mathematics, and designed to have all the Houses of the City of Muscon,
new built of Brick, and the Streets paved with Stones, if he had not been
prevented by Death; It was under his Reign, that General Le Fort, of whom I
shall have occasion to speak more anon, entered into the Service of Muscovy. He
was on a sudden, seized by a violent and continual Fever, of which he died in
a few days afte; having before his death appointed his younger Brother Peter,
begotten by second Adventure, his Successor, as judging his own Brother Ivan
(John) who was of a weakly Constitution, incapable of bearing the Burden of so
Great an Empire.

Accordingly Peter Alexiovitz was proclaimed Czar of Muscovy, when he was
scarce eleven years of Age. By the Princess Sophia, Daughter of the deceased
Czar Alexis Michaelovitz, by his first Marriage, being of a very aspirng
Temper, and naturally disposed to Caballing, could not brook to see her own
Brother excluded from the Succession to the Russian Throne; for which Reason,
she set all her Engines at work, to put the Crown upon her Brother Ivan
Alexiovitz, or rather, her own Head. The better to encompass this Design, she
took care to have it spread abroad, that the late Czar Fedor Alexiovitz, her
Brother, had been poisoned by the Physicians, at the Instigation of some of the
Chief Men of the Empire, whose Names were industriously published as the
Anchors and Promoters of so hellish a Crime. Being sensible that nothing could
strengthen her Interest more, than if she, could draw the Strelitzes into her
Party; it was rumored abroad, That a Design was formed against them at Court,
it being resolved, That the Strong Liquor which was to be given at die Czar's
Funeral, should be mixed with Poison.

This succeeded according to the Princesses Expectation, for the Strelitzes
being Enraged by this sudden and unexpected News, ran in a most Furious manner
to the Palace, where they began the Fray with the Slaughter of two of the
Czar's Physicians, the Chief of whom was a Jew by Extraction; the next were
some of the Principal Officers of the Crown, such as were marked out by the
Princess, as being opposite to her Interest. Their Rage did not stop here, but
after they had committed a thousand Insolences and Murders, they assaulted,
and entered the Czar Peter Alexiovitz's Lodgings, where they show many of his
most faithful Officers and Friends of the first Quality, in his presence, and
then proclaimed Prince Ivan Alexiovitz, Grand Czar of Muscovy, in conjunction
with Peter Alexiovitz.

Thus a Calm succeeded the Storm which however lasted not long. For the
Princess Sophia, whose Ambition was not satisfied with seeing her Brother Ivan
mounted upon the Throne, entered into secret Cabals With Fedor (Theodore)
Chikolowitin, the General of the Strelitzes, unto whom she represented, That
she only having made use of her Brother, as a Pretext to put the Crown upon her
own Head, she was willing to make him her Spouse, and Associate in the Empire,
if he would join his Power and Interest with hers; and that it would be no
difficult Matter to compass their Design, the Russian Empire being too heavy a
Burden for the Shoulders of two Infants.

The General of the Strelitzes, not able to resist such powerful Charms, they
left no stone unturned to bring their projected Design to maturity, which was
to be begun with the Death of both the Czars, and would in all humane
probability have succeed according to their wish, if the Plot had not been
timely discovered to Their Majesty's.

The two Czars having all the reason in the World to mistrust the Strelitzes,
retired thereupon to the Convent of Troitza, a strong and well fortified place,
about twelve Leagues distance from the Capital City of Muscow, where Monsieur
Le Fort gave them many signal Proofs of his Bravery and Fidelity. To be short,
they drew the General of the Strelitzers into an Ambush near Troitza, where
being taken, he was carried Prisoner into the Convent, and had his Head cut
off. He was a Person of mean Extraction, who, as he had raised himself to that
height by his own Valor, so he brought himself to a miserable End by his
Treachery; The Princess Sophia was shut up in a Convent, where she is very
narrowly watched.

Quiet being thus recovered in the Government, by removing the Two Chief Heads
of the Rebellion, these Regiments of the Strelitzes, as had showed themselves
most vigorous against the Czars Interest, being divided into many small Bodies,
were sent into several parts of the Country under the Guard of some other
Troops, whose Officers having received secret Instructions to fall upon them at
a certain appointed time, they put their Orders in execution, with so much
Exactness, that very few escaped their Hands.

It was particularly taken notice of at that time, and sook'd upon as a Presage
of the future Grcatness of the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, that, when
several of his nearest Friends were massacred by the Rebellious Strelitzes in
his presence, he did not show the least Alteration in his Countenance, which
struck such an Amazement into the Soldiers, that they durst not presume to
dethrone him, but were contented to proclaim his Brother Ivan his Associate in
the Empire. Those who have known his present Czarish Majesty in his most tender
Age, do unanimously confess, That from his very Infancy, there has been
observed in him a certain Greatness of Soul, and a piercing Wit, much above the
common Rank. He used to be very seldom idle, but always in Action, lively and
brisk, and show a great deal of eagerness to be instructed in all Matters of
Moment, especially in what had any relation to the Manners and Customs or
foreign Nations. He was scarce fifteen years of Age, when he applied himself to
the Study of the Mathematics, his Inclinations tending more particularly to
Navigation, and other Mcchanick Arts, which he looked upon as the most
Instrumental, to promote these Great Designs, he has since put in execution
with a most stupendous Conduct and Prudence.

In the last War betwixt the Turks, the Emperor, Poland and Venice, the Czar
was Engaged in a War against the Chinese, who being, as it was supposed,
encouraged by some Missionaries, had upon very frivolous Pretenses attacked the
Muscovites; but the Czar being resolved not to let slip so favorable an
opportunity to act against the Ottomans, in conjunction with the
beforementioned Christian Princes, he chose rather to abato something of his
Pretensions to procure a lasting Peace betwixt him and the Chinese, He had
also all the Reason imaginable to promise himself a happy issue of this War on
his side, the Turks being at that time by their ill Success, and the many
Battles they had in Hungary; reduced to so low a condition, that they were not
in a capacity to make any considerable resistance; and he looked upon the
Conquest of Asoph as a thing of so much consequence to the Muscovite Empire,
that it ought to be attempted at any rate, especially since the Fortifications
of that place were in so different a Condition, as to give him no small hopes
of succeeding in this Enterprise

Besides, this, the Czar was induced by another motive, which as it was nearer
home, so he looked upon it as the most pressing in relation to his own Person.
He had as yet in fresh memory the rebellious inclinations of his Guards he
Strelitzes and did not question, but that by this War he should find means to
rid himself of them, or at least to repress their Insolence, by augmenting the
number of foreign Officers, well qualified and exercised in the Military Art,
whose Fortunes depending absolutely on him, he might entirely be assured of
their Service and Fidelity. Accordingly it was resolved to make considerable
new Levies to be commanded by foreign Officers whose number was augmented to
eight thousand; and the Troops under their Command being in some time after,
brought by their care under a very regular Discpline in the year 1695. The City
of Asoph and Kasikermeen were both besieged the same time, to render the relief
of Asoph the more difficult to the Enemy, this being the place Chiefly aimed at
by the Muscovites.

Our Geographers do most commonly fix the situation of Asoph to the North of
the River Tanais on the side of the Crim Tartary, whereas its true situation
is to the South, on the side of Circassia, upon a rising ground very near the
Palus Moetis. Neither is this City built upon an Island, as it is represented
in some Maps, neither are any other Islands to be seen thereabouts, either near
the mouth of the River, or in the Palus Moetis it self, as it is likewise
expressed in these Maps, unless it be one very small Isle which lies at the
very mouth of the River Tanais (now adays called the Don) toward the
North-west, very near the Coastt.

About two Leagues above this Fortress, the River Tanais emits a branch which
runs toward the North, in the form of a Semy-circle before it enters the Palus
Moetis, but it is both very narrow and shallow. A good way, beyond this, a
little above the Town, issues forth another Branch, which ruuning likewise to
the North in the form, approaching, to a Semy-circle, divides it self into five
other Branches, just before it disembogues into the Sea. But this Branch is
also of a very slender depth, and the Ground thereabouts, through which those
several Channels pass, very low and Marshy, so, that at high Water when the
Wind blows strong from the South, which drives the Waters from the black Sea,
upon that Coast, all the Country hereabouts lies under Water.

You will, I suppose, be not a little surprised, when I tell you, that the
Muscovites in their Maps put Asoph under the 47th degree of Northern Latitude,
and so do likewise the Turks; whereas in our Map; we find it under the 51
degree, or thereabouts. But, what deserves our particular observation is, That,
our Maps agree exactly with theirs in the situation of that part of the
Country where the Tanais or Don, approaches nearest to the River Wolga, which
both they and we put under the 49th Degree. I can only thus much assure you,
that, the Muscovites, who are generally taken for very ignorant and unpolished,
have composed the most exactest Maps of their own Country in the World, I
having seen some of them my self; and that they exclaim against ours, as very
imperfect in this point.

The City of Asoph was formerly no more than a small Place, fortified only with
one single Wall, after a very irregular manner; its Form approaching to a
Hexagon, two of its opposite sides lying near parallel with the River,
surrounded with many Towers, after the ancient Fashion. About the middle of
that side which is opposite to the West, there was a very large Tower of a
considerable height, round at the bottom, running up like a Pyramid, but flat
on the top; within the body of the Place there was another Retrenchment, which
supplied the place of a Citadel, and was provided always with a good Garrison.
The Turks afterward surrounded the whole with new Fortifications of Earth,
composed of our large and high Bastions, but not very regular, yet is the Ditch
both very broad and deep. Two of these Bastions toward the South-East Side lie
pretty close to one another, for the better defense of the place, in respect of
the nearness of several Hills, which else would command the Town. The third
Bastion to the South-West, is at a great distance from the other two, and the
fourth Bastion toward the West is yet further distant from the third. The
Courtin betwixt thest two last Bastions has in the midst an Obtuse. Angle; the
like has also the Courtin toward the East, which, runs down to the River; and
on the River side it is very well provided with strong Pallisadoes.

Besides this, they had built a little above the Place two strong Towers of
brick-work, and of a quadrangular figure, one on each side of the River,
provided with good store of Cannon, by which means, and a very strong Chain,
they prevented the Donaick Cosacks from passing that way to the black Sea, who
formerly used to take the advantage of the darkness of the Night, when they
went a Pyrating upon, the Turks. This was the condition of Asoph, when the
Muscovites first laid siege to it, in the Year 1695.

It may well seem strange, that the Turks should either so little understand
the advantage of the Situation of this Important Place, or else be so
negligent in providing for its Security, as not to take away all Hopes from the
Muscovites of succeeding in this Enterprise. In my Opinion, it was not only
their highest Interest to have secured a Place of so much Consequence against
any Attempt of this nature, by rendering it Impregnable, but also to have as
much as possibly they could, extend their Conquests on that side, by making
themselves Masters of the Country betwixt the Rivers Don and Wolga, which
thereabouts approach within seven Leagues distance to one another. Besides
which, there are two other Rivers betwixt the Don and the Wolga, one of which
coming from the North East, is pretty large, and discharges it self into the
River Don. The other much lesser coming from the South West, disembogues into
the Wolga. These two Rivers carry their Currents within one League and an half
distance. These two Rivers, are invisible in our. Maps, in lieu of which they
have obtruded upon us a suppositious River, called Camus, which is not to be
found thereabouts. The Ground betwixt these two Rivers is very convenient for
Building of Forts and Fortifications, there being but a few small Rocks, which
may be made passable, and convenient enough for such an Undertaking.

The Turks showed themselves but indifferent Politicians, and who had but a
slender insight in matters of this nature, when they let slip so favorable an
Opportunity of extending their Conquests on that side during the Intestine
Troubles, which harrassed, and almost destroyed the Mustovite Empire in our
Age, at the same time that the Ottomans were in a most flourishing Condition.
If they at that time had joined these two Rivers by a Canal, and strengthened
the same with some Forts; or if they had built but one considerable Fortress
upon the River Wolga, the whole Kingdom of Astracan must of necessity have
fallen into their Hands, by which means it would have been no difficult task
for them to render themselves Masters of the Caspian Lake, or Sea, which is the
Inlett into the Heart of Persia, and at no great distance from the Indies,
Subject to the Great Mogul, and for the rest it is surrounded by a great number
of Petty Tartarian Princes, who might either have been easily Conquered, or at
least brought over to their Party to make them instrumental in the Conquest of
Asia, What would in such a Case have become, of the Muscovites, who would have
been continually alarmed, and harrassed on all sides by an infinite number of
Tartars, by those of the Crimea, of Circassa, Bulgaria, by the Calmuck and
Mogul Tartars, who like a Torrent would have overrun this vast Empire, and
would have rendered the Conquest of all the Circumjacent Countries as cheap and
easy to the Turks, as these Vagabonds formerly did, when they took up Arms
under those Renowned Heroes, Ginghis Khan, and Tamur Lenek.

These, are two things which prevented the Turks from making use of that
critical Juncture to their Advantage. The first was, that they looked upon the
Muscovites as too inconsiderable to stand ever in Competition with them, seeing
they had not Courage enough to accept of the Fortress of Asoph from the
Cossacks, who had taken it by Surprise. The second was, That the were not so
fully satisfied of the Consequence and use of a good Naval Strength, by which
means they might most conveniently have enlarged their Dominions on that side,
and carried the terror of their Arms not only along the Wolga, but also by the
way of the Caspian Sea into the very heart of Asia.

Bat to return to the Siege of Asoph.

The Turks had provided the City of Asoph with great Stores of Ammunition and
Provision, and all other things necessary for a long and vigorous Defense, the
Garrison consisting of ten Thousand chosen Turks and Tartars; notwithstanding
which, the present Czar Peter Atexiovitz, resolved to besiege it in Person. His
Army consisted of one Hundred Thousand Foot, and twenty Thousand Horse, all
chosen Troops, arid among them the whole Body of his Guards, or Strelitzes,
commanded under the Czar, by a great many good and Experienced Generals.

Whilst they were busy in persecting the Lines of Circnmvallation, and
Contravallation, and carrying on the Trenchcs, the Czar ordered a small1 Fort of
four Bastions to be made at some distance above the two abovementioned brick
Towers on the South side of the River, upon a piece of Ground that lies
betwixt, and is encompassed by two small branches which spring out of that
River, and reunite themselves about half ways distance betwixt these Towers
and the City. All the Communication being cut often betwixt the Place and the
Towers by these two branches, it was hot long before the Muscovites made
themselves Masters of them, and it, being judged most expedient to Fortify
that, on the South side of the River, it was immediately put in Execution
accordingly, by surrounding it with three good Bastions, and an Angle on each
of the Courtins on the River side. The Fort was called Calansa.

In the mean while the Trenches were carried on with the utmost Expedition and
Vigor, especially on the South East side of the Place, where the Muscovites
being advanced to the top of the Hills, which in some measure command the Town,
they Fired most furiously out of their Cannon, and threw a prodigious number of
Bombs into the Place, by which means they hoped soon to terrify the Garrison
to come to a Capitulation; but those within consisting of old and well
Disciplined Troops, who were not to be vanquished at a distance, the Trenches
were carried on to the body of the Place, but not without great Slaughter on
the Muscovite side; the Enemies by their frequent and vigorous Sallies
disputing every Inch of Ground with the utmost bravery. The Muscovites were
likewise courageously repulsed in several Attacks before they could lodge
themselves upon one of the bastions, where the Garrison, like desperate Men,
fell upon them with such an incredible Fury, that the Russians after a most
obstinate Defense, were forced to quit it at last, with the loss of a great
number of their Men, especially of the Strelitzes, who, as they were most
exposed, so they bore most commonly the greatest Share in the loss, the Czar
making use of this Opportunity, both to try their Valor, and rid his Hands of
them in a handsome way; though at the same time it must be confessed to his
Immortal Glory, that he was not sparing of his own Person, but exposed himself
to the Enemies Fire as well in the several Attacks that were made, as upon
other occasions, having had several Persons slain by his side in the Sallies
made by the Besieged. The invincible Resolution of the Garrison thus
protracting the Siege beyond all Expectation, the Muscovites began to be in
want both of Ammunition and Provisions, which, together with the approaching
cold and wet Season, obliged them to change the Siege into a Blockade.

But the Disgrace received before Asoph, was in some measure recompensed by the
Conquest of Kasiker mien, a Tartarian City Situated on the South side of the
River Boristhenes, about two Leagues distance from the Black-Sea.

It is encompassed by four strong brick Forts of a quadrangular Figure, and an
equal bigness, adjoining to one another. Three of them lie upon a strait Line,
but the Fourth makes up a right Angle with the Second. The first of these
Quadrangular Forts lies upon the very Bank of the River Borishenes, being
Flancked with several good Towers as well as the two others, which are upon the
same Line. But the fourth exceeds the three others in Strength, being on one
side provided, instead of Towers, with two large, and high Bastions, surrounded
with a good Ditch.

Just opposite to the place you see a small Island in the River Boristhenes,
resembling in form, a Neats Tongue, called in their Language Towan. Upon this
Island the Tartars had erected two Forts of four Bastions each, which on the
upper end of the Island was called Momberethkermenn; as the other on the lower
part was named Muftritkermeen; on the opposite side of the River belonging to
the Crim Tartars, there was also another Fort in all respects like to the other
two, just over against Mombarethkermeen, upon the Bank of the before mentioned
River Boristhenes.

The Army of his Czarish Majesty was chiefly composed of Cossacks, inhabiting
those parts, and who some years before had submitted to the Czar's Obedience.
To facilitate the Siege of Kasikermeen, it was resolved to Attack first the
said Forts, which being done, accordingly they were soon taken by the brave
Cossacks who immediately after laid Siege to the Place itself.

The train Attack was carried on against the Fort with the two bastions, the
Ground thereabouts being most proper for the carrying on of the Trenches, which
were advanced with so much Expedition, that in a short time they carried in by
Assault. The Enemies however got time to retreat into the other Forts, where
having beat a Parley, it was agreed that they should March out of the Place
with their Arms and Baggage, etc.

The Muscovite Army on that side was commanded by the General Czeremetoff, who
having contrary to the Capitulation, connived at some disorders committed by
the Cossacks against the Garrison; his Czarish Majesty was so much dissatisfied
at it, that he showed his Resentment in very hard Terms to the General. He, who
did not expect such a Reprimand, desired thereupon leave from the Czar to lay
down his Commission, which being readily granted him likewise beyond his
expectation, he, afterward repented atleisure. The better to divert himself in
this Melancholy Disposition, he resolved to Travel in Foreign Countries, and
you are not ignorant, how he visited most of the Courts of Italy, and had the
Curiosity to go to the Isle of Maltha, where, as well as in all other Places,
through which he Traveled, he was received with all imaginable Respect due to his
Birth and Merits.

The succeeding Winter was chiefly taken up with vast Preparations for the next
ensuing Campaign, which being to be opened with the Siege of Asoph, great
stores of Ammunition, Bombs, and Provisions were got in readiness for that
Enterprise to prevent the Turks from sending any Relief by Sea; many Galleys
and Brigantines were ordered to be built near the City of Muscow, but especilly
at Veranowitz, a City Situate on the River. Don, about a Hundred Leagues
distant from the Capital City. But what is most remarkable is that the Czar
Peter having a particular curiosity to be present at the building of some of
the biggest Galleys, he caused them to be set upon the Stock, in the River
Ocea, at some small distance from the City of Muscow, they being from thence to
be Transported to Veranowitz, by Land, were so artificially contrived, that
they might be taken to pieces without much trouble, and so be joined together
again at Veranomitz.

To be short, by the great Vigilance of his Czarish Majesty, all things were
got in such forwardness, that there was nothing wanting to put the projected
Design in Execution.

It Is to be observed that the City of Asoph had been kept blocked up during the
whole Winter, and that the Muscovites having maintained their Post all this
while upon the abovementioned Hills, which overlook the Place, they had been so
Industrious in guarding all the Avenues, that the Besieged had not received the
least Supply of Men, or Provisions. To cut off all further hopes of Succors,
it was resolved to open the Campaign very early in the Spring, for which
purpose all the Troops designed for this Expedition, were ordered to March to
their Rendezvous, and from thence strait to the Siege of Asoph, which was begun
by throwing a most prodigious quantity of Bombs into the place, with such
extraordinary Success, that the whole Body of the city was reduced to Ashes,
and Rubbish, and the old Fortifications to one large Stone heap, so that there
was scarce a place left for the Garrison to shelter themselves against the fury
of the Enemies Cannon and Bombs, all being destroyed even to the deepest Vaults
and Caves.

Besides which, the Number of the besieged was reduced to less than two
thousand Men capable of bearing of Arms, both by the furious Attacks made upon
the place in the last years Siege, and the continual firing from the Muscovites
Great Artillery, and throwing in of Bombs; in this; not withstanding which,
they were deaf to any proposals of a surrender, living in hopes of the promised
Succors.

At last it appeared, to their great Joy and Satisfaction, consisting of twelve
Galleys, a great number of Saiques laden with Provisions and Ammunition, and a
good number of fresh Troops, besides fifty thousand Ducats, to be distributed
among those brave Fellows that had so Valiantly defended their Post.

His Czarish Majesty having beforehand received Intelligence of the approach
of this Succors, had caused seven of his largest Galleys, of a hundred foot
length each, besides several lesser, and a great number of Brigantines to pass
that small branch of the Don, which issues forth a little above the Town As the
Water is very shallow in this Channel, so it was not without a great deal of
difficulty, that the largest Galleys could be brought along that way, and would
in all likelihood have scarce succeeded, if the Czar by his Presence and
Encouragement had not animated the Workmen to surpass all Difficulties, which
at last they did, to the no small Astonishment of the besieged.

This Obstacle being happily surrnounted, his Czarish Majesty judged it of very
great consequence for his purpose to plant good Store of Cannon upon the little
Island we have mentioned before, because the Shore being very low, the
Cannon-ball would strike even with the surface of the Water; besides, that the
greatest part of the Isle being covered with Wood, did prevent the Enemy from
discovering the Design.

The same favorable disposition of this Island furnished the Muscovites with
an Opportunity of putting some of their lightest Galleys and Brigantines for a
Reserve, behind the Isle, unperceived by the Enemy, whom, they intended thus to
attack both in Front and Flank, as they passed by that way, which succeeded
according to Expectation.

For, all these Precautions having been taken before the Enemies Fleet came in
sight, some of the biggest Muscovite Galleys, with many Brigantines were sent
out to meet them, making a Show, as if they intended to Engage the Turkish
Fleet; but no sooner were they come within Cannon Shot of one another, but the
Muscovites feigning to dread the Ottomaa Fleet, superior in Number to them,
made a running Fight, making the best of their way toward the Shore, and
posted themselves below the Island. The Turks perceiving the Enemy to fly
before them, and not in the least forewarned of the red that laid behind the
Island, thought themselves, by the small number of the Muscovite Galleys, that
appeared in sight, assured of the Victory.

Flushed with these hopes, they made all the Sail they could to fall in among
the Muscovites, but no sooner were they come within reach of the Cannon from
the Isle, but they received such a warm Salute from thence, that they saw their
Galleys torn to pieces on all sides by the Enemies Cannon, in an insant, with a
great Slaughter of many of their Men. Bur this was only the forerunner of what
was to ensue.

For his Czarish Majesty, who had a watchful eye on all sides, and who was
sometimes upon the Isle, sometimes on board the Fleet of Reserve, that lay
behind, having soon observed the Consternation the Turks were put in by this
unexpected Salute, and willing to improve their Confusion to his Advantage, got
on board in Person one of the lightest Galleys, Manned only with forty Men,
giving the Signal for the rest to follow him with all the Oars they could. Thus
the Enemy found themselves surrounded on all sides by the Muscovites, who
attacked them with great bravery; the Czar himself boarding the Turkish
Admiral, and being successfully, seconded by the rest, the Victory was almost
as soon completed as begun, the Turks being routed so entirely, that not one
Gally escaped, but what was either sunk or taken; and it must be confessed,
That the Czar showed so much Conduct during the whole Action, that no more
could have been expected from the Prudence and Valor of the greatest Captain
of our time.

So complete a Victory soon decided the Destiny of Asoph, for the Garrison, who
had been Spectators of their Loss, being now bereaved of all Hopes of Succors,
demanded a capitulation. In confederation very honorable of their bravery,
they had Conditions granted them, it being comprehended in one of the Articles,
that before their, marching put of the Place, they should surrender to the
Muscovites a certain Officer, who had desearted his Czarish Majesty's Service,
and discovercd what he knew concerning his Designs to the Enemy. The Czar to
recompense the Sea-Officers and others on board his Fleet for their last
Service, and to give them some marks of his Liberality, ordered the Fifty
Thousand Ducats, taken oil board the Turkish Admiral, to be distributed among
them.

Asoph was no sooner surrendered, but the Czar made it appear to all the World,
that he was sufficiently sensible of what Consequence the Conquest of this
Place was to his Affairs. For, the first thing he did, was to give his Orders
for the restoring the Fortifications, and bringing them with all possible
Speed, to a state of Defense; and not content with this, he caused the Ancient
Walls within the Fortifications, for the most part rained by the Bombs, to be
entirely rased, and in lieu thereof, the Foundation was laid of a new City, td
extend to the Fortifications made of Earth.

Those were likewise considerably augmented by the Addition of two new Bastions
in the same places where we mentioned before the two obtuse Angles to have
been. All the ancient Bastions were enlarged, and made regular, according to
our modern Rules of Fortification; each of them being strengthened by a
Half Moon. The Ditch was defended by a good Counterscarp, with a covered way,
from whence was carried a Line up to the top of the Hill, which overlooks the
Town, where a goodly Fore was erected (or the Defense of the Line, and to keep
a Communication with the Place.

All these Precautions, though very considerable in themselves, yet were
thought insufficient in respect of the Accomplishment of his Czarish Majesty's
Design, who was resolved to render Asoph impregnable; as being the main
Frontier place on that side of the Empire. Pursuant to this Design, the
Foundation was laid of a new Fortress, just opposite to Asop, in the marshy
Grounds, which was to have a Communication with that City by a bridge of thirty
Arches to be built over the Marshes. This Design, of which I have seen the
Model, was soon put in Execution, the City which was to be put in the Center of
the place being called St. Peter.

The whole Body of the Fortifications consisted of six Bastions, the two first
facing the River side, with a Half Moon betwixt them. The other two Bastions
lying on each side are at a small distance from the others; but the two
opposite to the North, lie at a much greater distance, defended by three
Half-Moons The whole is surrounded with a double Ditch, and a covered way. The
Ground upon winch this Fortress was built, is raised to that height, as to
command Asoph, and when the Wind blows from the South, the Marshes round about
the Fortress are all under Water, so that there is but one way to approach it
to wit, by the Bridge.

These Fortifications would have been more than sufficient, if His Majesty had
had no other design than to defend his Frontiers, to bridle the trim Tartars,
and to keep the neighbouruing Cosacks inhabiting the Country, near the Don, in
awe, but this Monarch had matters of greater Consequnce in view, which he knew
would in a little time redound to the great benefit of the Empire. His design
was to make use of this place to serve for the convenience of carrying down the
River the Commodities of the product of Muscovy into the Palus Maeotis, and to
transport them by the way of Caffa, and Constantinople, into Italy.

He wisely foresaw that by this means he might introduce, and settle Navigation
in his Dominions, to the great increase of the Wealth of his Subjects, who
thereby would be used to the Sea, so that in time they might render themselves
redoubtable to their Enemies. But to bring this great and noble Design to
Perfection, it was absolutely necessary to put the Muscovite Fleet into such a
Condition, as to be able to coop with the Turks in the Black Sea, and to render
themselves so formidable, that the Enemies might be obliged at the next Peace
to allow them a free Commerce, and the Liberty of their Ports upon those
Coasts, and of Constantinople it self.

By the restoring, and strengthening the Fortifications of Asoph, and laying the
Foundation of the new Fortress of St. Peter, the present Czar had in view three
great Points, each of which, as it tended to the great benefit of the Empire,
so it was sufficient to Eternalize his Memory.

The first was the making of a convenient and safe Harbor, capable to contain
a great Fleet.

The second, the joining of the two Rivers, the Wolga, and Don, by a Canal, fit
to carry Ships of a great bulk.

And Lastly, the building, and equipping of fourscore Men of War, as well
Frigates as Galleys, with a hundred and fifty Brigantines, to make Head against
the Turks, wherever they should attempt to dispute with him the free Commerce
at Sea.

It was found quite impracticable to render Asoph a good Port; for, though the
River Don is the most proper in the World for Shipping betwixt Veranowitz and
Asoph, as being very deep, without any Islands, and its Current very smooth,
being not interrupted by any Sands; but the Mouth. of this River is so full of
Shelves, and choked up with Sands, that at Ebb-Tide there is not above seven
Foot Water, so that those Geographers who have described us the Entrance of
this River as very convenient, and one of the moil famous Ports, have imposed
their own Inventions upon the World for Truth.

It was for this reason His Czarish Majesty ordered the Coast thereabouts to be
founded, being willing to find out a convenient Place to make a Port of, as
near as possibly could be to the City of Asoph. When the Turks formerly used to
send any Ships of a considerable burden to that Town, they were, obliged to
unload near the Entrance of the River Mious, in the Crim Tartary, about five
and twenty Leagues distancc from Asoph, where at Low Water, it is at least
fifteen or sixteen Foot deep.

The Mauscovites sounding along the same Coast, came to a certain Cape at about
seven Leagues disteance from the Don, where, at an Ebb Tide there was twelve
Foot, Water. The Coast was hereabouts very high, and steep, the Ground Sandy,
but so hard that it resembled both in Substance and Hardness a Freestone. To
the East of the Cape there was a small Bay, and at about a Leagues distance
from thence to the West there was a small River, whose Current turned in form
of a Half Moon, round that Point of the Land. The Shore from the bay was of an
easy Ascent.

The Czar having been exactly informed Concerning the convenient Situation of
this Place, ordered a Fort of Five bastions to be erected, and a City to be
built somewhat below it, likewise defended by a good Fortification, betwixt
which and the Bay there was a Plain, through which was to be cut the great
Channel, which was to dissembogue near the Point, of the Land, into the Sea;
and in the midst of this, there was to issue another less Channel toward the
Bay, for the convenience, of Vessels of less burden. I have seen the Model of
the whole Design. The Port is to be, Three Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty
Foot long, and half as broad.

Concerning the Conjunction of the Rivers, Wolga and Don, we have already
mentioned before the advantageous Situation of the, Grounds betwixt the two
Rivers, and the condition of the two lesser ones, which come within a much
nearer distance of one another, so that the whole design being founded upon
very good Grounds, it will succeed in all Probability. For it is proposed to
stop the Waters of these two lesser Rivers, which are to be joined in the Grand
Canal by many Sluices, to bring them to such a height as sha11 be judged
sufficient for the passage of Ships of a considerable burden; there are daily
above twenty Thousand Men Employed to dig the Ground, besides others who are
to bring the whole to Perfection.

As to what relates to the third part to wit, his Navy, it must be confessed
that the Czar made use in this Point of all the foresight and Prudence that
could be e expected from the molst refined Politician. For, being immovable in
his Resolution of ridding his Hands of the Strelitzes, that used to stand under
the Command of the best of the Russian Nobility, he judged not without Reason
that at this Juncture he could not pitch upon a more seasonable and more
glorious Expedient than this, to Employ them in the Service of their Country,
and at the same time to take away from them all opportunities of future
Revolts, Pursuant to this Resolution; he issued his Declaration, wherein he
told them that the Present State of Affairs being such, as required the
Muscovites to appear formidable at Sea, and he being fully convinced, both of
their Valor, and Fidelity, he wished nothing more at this time, than to see
them apply themselves to the Knowledge of Maritime Affairs, to qualify
themselves for the best Commands at Sea. That for this purpose he had taken all
imaginable care to provide a sufficient. number of Sea Officers, Famous for
their Skill in Maritime Affairs, and the managing of Sea Engagements, under
whose Conduct they might be trained up in this Art, and fitted for the highest
Commands. That he being resolved to try the Foundation of the present Glory of
the Russian Monarchy upon its Naval Strength, and rendering himself redoubtable
at Sea, would head them in Person, and show them by his own Example what
Footsteps to tread in. Accordingly it was resolved, that each Subject,
proportionable to his Ability, should contribute to the Equipping, and
maintenance of a certain number of Men of War, the chief Cities of the Empire,
being like wise obliged to bear a proportion in this Tax, By this means His
Majesty Equipped a good Fleet without the least impairing his ordinary Revenue,
and engaged at the same time the Nobility, and chief Men in the Cities to take.
Cognizance of Maritime Affairs, to render themselves capable of the SeaService,
which they were to look upon for the future, as the main and most durable
Establishment of the whole Empire.

These several Projects were no sooner set on foot with the utmost Expedition,
by the most admirable Vigilance, and indefatigable Care of the Czar, put
toward Autumn, he set out on his Journey in order to his return to the Capital
City of Muscow, leaving a great body of his Troops under the Command of the
Generalissimo of his Armies, the Prince Alekis Simoniwitz Schein, near Asoph,
to cover the Workmen that were Employed in bringing the Works projected
thereabouts to Perfection. At his Arrival in the City of Muscow, he was
received with all the Demonstrations of Honor due to a Conqueror, Marching
along the Streets to the Cattle in Triumph, with a great many Chariots laden
with the Spoils of the Enemy, and Prisoners, before him. Among the rest was to
be seen the Officer, who having Deserted the Czar's Service, was surrendered to
the Muscovites, pursuant to the Capitulation before Asoph; had his Hands tied
behind him, and was soon after Executed, as a Terror to others. It is past
Expression, with what loud and joyful Acclamations this public Entry was
Solemnized by the People, who flocked thither from all Parts to adorn the
Triumph of the Conquering Prince. Great were the Rejoicings that were made that
Night all over the City, but the best was reserved till the Winter: when a most
Glorious Firework was let off upon the Ice.

The whole was composed of several Artificial Machines, enclosed in a double
Square, surrounded with Rockets of all sorts and Sizes, which took up a great
space upon the Ice.

His Czarish Majesty took a particular Delight to be among the Engineers, and
had himself a Hand in making the greatest Machine, which was erected in the
very Center of the rest. It was a double Spread Eagle, who with his left Paw
darted Rockets upon an Horrizontal Line at one of the Horns of a Half Moon,
which succecded according to Wish the Fireworks continued all the Night long,
the whole Design of it being laid by His Majesty himself, and drawn with his
own Hand, which he did me the Honor to show me in Person.

Notwithstanding that the whole Empire seemed to take Share in the Glorious
Conquest of their Prince, and that nothing but Feastings, and Rejoicings were
to be seen in all Parts, during the whole Winter; there remained nevertheless,
a certain discontented. Party among the Nobility, who being encouraged by the
secret Cabals of the Princess Sophia; found means, in spite of her
Confinement, to keep an underhand Correspondence with her, for the promoting
their Designs against the Czar's Person. They were so well prepared for the
Undertaking of any Enterprise of this Nature, that there wanted but little Fuel
to kindle the Flame; They Could not brook the Loss of their beloved Strelitzes,
whom they had always looked upon as the Chief Supporters of, their Authority;
which at last made them conceive so implacable a Hatred against the Czar, that
they entered into a Conspiracy against his Life. To put their Design in
execution, they had brought over to their Party four Captains of the first
Regiment of the Strelitzes; but the difficulty was, in what manner the Attempt
was to be made For they looked upon it as impracticable, to declare openly
against a Prince, who, besides that he was much beloved by the People, had at
his devotion a good Number or the best Troops, Commanded by foreign Officers,
who were quartered in and about the City of Muscow, and ready upon all
Occasions to sacrifice their Lives for His Majesty. It was proposed among them,
That the Czar was used to go sometimes abroad with very slender Attendance, and
to appear in the Streets of Muscow without any considerable Retinue; this was
also looked upon as too dangerous, considering the general Love the People bore
to his Person.

After many Debates, it was at last resolved, That considering that Czar, who
takes share in every thing that concerns his Subjects Welfare, was wont to
appear in Person, in case of any Accident of Fire, which frequently happens,
and makes a most terrible Havoc in the City of Muscow, where most of the House
are of Wood; they looked upon this as the most proper Opportunity to encompass
their Design; wherefore it was concluded to set Fire to some Houses in the
nightime, when they did not question to draw the Czar thither, and during the
Confusion, to find means to Assassinate him. The next thing to be done was,
(according to their own Confession) to have joined the Donaick Cossacks with
their Party, to have released the Princess Sophia from her Confinement,
recalled Prince Wassily Galizin out of Siberia, and surrendered the
Administration of the Govevernment into their hands, who were also to restore
the Strelitzes to their ancient Station.

But it pleased Heaven to touch the hearts of two of these four Captains, that
were Engaged in this Conspiracy; their Names were Largon Gilisarof and Gregory
Sileri, who being struck with Remorse at the penetrating of so detestable a
Fact, did throw themselves at His Majesty's feet, ingenuously confessing their
Crimes, and discovering their Accomplices, that very day preceding the Night
which this Tragedy was to be acted.

It was on the 1st day of February, in the year 1697, when His Majesty was
informed concerning this Conspiracy formed against his Life, at the House of
General Le Fort, where he happened to dine that Day, He appeared very little
moved at so surprising a piece of News, but, without any Change in his
Countenance, arose from the Table, and being followed only by a few Persons, in
whom he confided most, he went directly to the House of the Chief of the
Conspirators, whose Name was John Sickler, and elevated by the Czar to the
Dignity of a Counselor of State. When His Majesty came to the House of this
wicked Wretch, he commanded the rest to remain without doors; He himself entered
only with three Gentlemen more, and pretending he had occasion to ask his
Advice in some Matter of Moment, ordered he should follow him; But no sooner
was he come into the Street but he was seized, and immediately carried to
Prison, as were likewise five more that were his Accomplices in the Conspiracy;
to wit, The Boyar Alexis Sekouin, Fedor Puskin, Son of the Boyar, Matfe Puskin,
two Captains of the Strelitzes, and a Donaick Cossack. They all confessed their
Crimes, and being condemned by all the Boyars, were executed on the fifth day
of March, in the Year 1697, in the Great Marketplace, before the Castle.
First, their Arms and Legs were cut off, then they had their Heads severed from
their Bodies. Their Heads were fixed on the top of a Stone Column, erected for
that purpose, and their Arms and Legs struck upon Iron-bars round about it; the
Trunks of their dead Carcasses were left in the Marketplace for eight days
after; till the Scent became so nauseous to the Inhabitants, that, they were
forced to be removed from thence.

It having by Confession of some of the Conspirators been made apparent, That
the Boyar, Ivan Miloslaski was the Chief Head of the Rebellion which happened in
the year 1682, immediately after present Czarish Majesty's Accession to the
Crown, his Body Was disinterr'd, which being found very near entire, without
any considerable decay (though it had lain under ground near twelve Years,)
several Gibbets were erected, on which were hung the Quarters of his Carcass,
which were torn to pieces in an instance by the enraged Multitude.

These several In-lets contrived and carried on against his Czarish Majesty's
Person and Life, are so many instances, to convince the World, how dangerous it
is for a Prince to change the ancient form of a Government, it being
unquestionable, that thereby he must needs draw upon himself the implacable
Hatred of that Party, who arc Sufferers by that Change. But it must also be
confessed, that nothing can be more glorious for a Prince, than to promote the
public Welfare, at the peril of his own Life; which may without the least
Contradiction to truth, be applied to the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, who
had no other Aim in removing the ancient established Guards of the Strelitzes,
from their Station, than the public Tranquillity; knowing this arrogant and
violent body of Troops, to have been the Source of the many Revolts and
Troubles, that have harassed the Russian Empire in our Age.

His Majesty was graciously pleased to pardon such of the Conspirators, as were
not so deeply engaged in the Design against his Life, being now resolved to
begin his Journey into Germany, with all imaginable Expedition. It is to be
taken Notice of, That this Prince had for a considerable time before
premeditated this Journey, but had only suspended his Resolution till he saw
the Success of the Siege of Asoph, not questioning but that he should then be
for some time upon the defensive, till the beforementioned Fortifications, and
other Works, which he had projected, could be brought to perfection.

He was sufficiently sentible, That, considering, the present State of his
Empire was founded, upon the service of his foreign Officers, and a good Naval
strength, whereby he might appear formidable in the black Sea, nothing could
conduce more toward the prompting and improving so great a Design, than, if he
should go hi person to visit some of the Courts of Europe, and especially to
make some considerable stay in Holland. But, as if was absolutely necessary to
appear with a most splendid Equipage and Attendance, besitting the Greatness of
so Potent a Prince, if he would be acknowledged in these Parts through which he
was to pass for the Grand Czar of Muscovy; and as he wisely foresaw that his
Rank would not be a great Obstacle to his Design, which was to see and
penetrate by degrees in such Matters, as he was desirous to be informed of
himself, so he judged it most convenient for his present Purpose, to go in the
Quality of a private Gentleman, under the protection of that most solemn
Embassy, which he then resolved to send, and has since appeared with so much
splendour in several Courts of Europe.

Pursuant to this Resolution, he appointed for his Ambassadors, My Lord Le
Fort, General of His Majesty's Armies, and of the first Regiments or his
Guards, Admiral of his Fleet, and Viceroy of Alovogorod. My Lord Fedor
Alexiovitz, Gollanin, Viceroy of Siberia, and My Lord Procofet Bodgnanovitz,
Wolnitzin, Lord high Chancellor of the Empire.

His Majesty by giving the first Rank in this Embassy to the General Le Fort,
gave the most ample Demonstration that could be, in what Esteem the said
General was with him, in consideration of his passed Great and Signal Services;
and to let the World know, what recompenses he was ready to bestow upon all
(the Foreigners) that deserved well of him, since from a simple Captain, he was
mounted in a short time, to the highest Dignities in the Empire,
notwithstanding the difference of his Religion.

The second Ambassador, is likewise a person of Great Wisdom, and most
excellent parts, well versed in public Negotiations, having been sent twice by
the Czar as his Ambassador Extraordinary into China; and it was he that
Concluded the last Peace betwixt Muscovy and that Empire, He is in great Esteem
with the Grind Czar.

The third Ambassador has been frequently employed with good Success in those
Transactions the Muscovites have been engaged in with the Ottoman Port.

The Czar, before his departure out of Muscovy, found means under a plausible
pretext, to send abroad such as lay under the least Suspicion of raising any
Disturbances in his Absence. It is to be observed, that for several years
before the Czar had sent many of his Subjects, of all Sorts and Qualities, in
whom he observed some extraordinary Qualifications, a traveling in foreign
Parts at his Charges, the better to instrust themselves in several Arts and
Sciences, and to qualify themselves for the Service of their Country, after
their return. He made use of the self-same pretext to rid his hands at this
time, of those whom he suspected to be against his Interest, and inclinable to
foment any ill Designs against him, in his Absence; For some of them were sent
abroad a traveling in far distant Countries, before his departure, the others
who lay under more Suspicion than the rest, were ordered to follow the Embassy.

The Administration of the Government during his Majesty's Absence, was
committed to the Care of the three Princes, Loss Kerilvitz. Alariskin,
Procorofskoi, and Boris Alexiorvit Gallizin.

The first is Uncle to His present Majesty, being the Brother of the Empress
Dowager, his Mother. He is Chief Minister of State.

The second is the Lord Treasurer of the Empire, a person advanced in years and
much esteemed for his great Ability.

The third is his Majesty's Favorite, being likewise Minister of State,
besides many other places, which arc of a great yearly Value to him. He is a
Nephew of the unfortunate Prince Wassily Gallizin, Chief Minister of State, but
since banished into Siberia.

His Majesty gave them most particular Charge of the Prince his only Son, being
then scarce nine years of Age; This young Prince is of a very vigorous
Constitution, Robust, Tall, and well Shaped, having a great resemblance, as
well in his Face as his Natural disposition, to the Czar his Father.

General Gourdon had orders to Encamp with twenty Thousand of the best Troops
near the City of Muscow, to keep a watchful eye, and to be in readiness upon
any occasion, that should offer. This General is a Scotchman by Extraction, who
entered into, the Service of the Czar Alexis Michaelovitz, his present Czarish
Majesty's Farther. He has given eminent Proofs of his Valor and Ability upon
several Occasions, which has deservedly acquired him the Esteem both of his
Czarish Majesty, and the whole Muscovite Nation, notwithstanding he is a Roman
Catholic.

Things being thus disposed, His Majesty left the City of Muscow, Incognito,
with his Ambassadors, who were attended by a most numerous and magnificent
Train. They took the way of Plescow, passed through the Frontiers of Livonia,
Courland and Samegitia, and so arrived safely at Coningsbergh, the Capital City
of the Ducal Prussta, where they were received with a great deal of Splendour by
his Electoral Highness of Brandenbyrgh. In this City, his Czarish Majesty
received the Post-news, by a Messenger sent for that purpose, That the Elector
of Saxony was elected King of Poland; and, that the Cardinal Primat, had
protested against the said Election, under pretext, That die Prince of Conti
was legally chosen. Upon which, immediate orders were dispatched to the
Muscovite Ambassador, then residing in Poland, to maintain the Rights of
Election made to the Elector of Saxony, and to assure him, in behalf of his
Czarish Majesty, That he had sixty thousand Men in readiness, at his Service,
in order to maintain his just Pretensions to the Crown of Poland; and, That
orders were already sent into Muscovy, for the Troops to advance from
Smolensko, toward the Frontiers of Lithuania, to retain that Great Duchy in
his Polish Majesty's Devotion. It is without all question, the fear of so
Powerful an Assistance, had no small Influence over many of the Poles, in the
contrary Interest; it being most evident, that when the Prince of Conti
appeared in person near Dantzick, those of Prussia, though not averse to that
Prince's Interest, durst not declare for him.

After some stay at Coningsbergh, his Czarish Majesty continued his Journey
toward Berlix, the Ordinary Residence of his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh, where he was received with all the possible demonstrations of
Honor and Esteem due to a Prince of so Eminent a Rank. It is most certain,
That the Grand Czar was so well satisfied with his Reception here, and with the
Great Qualifications he discovered in his present Electoral Highness, That he
has declared several times since, that as soon as the young Prince his Son
should be fit to Travel, he would send him to the Court, of Berlix, to tarry
there for some considerable Time.

No sooner had their High and Mightinesses, the States General of the United
Provinces received advice, that this solemn Embassy was on their way toward
their Frontiers, but they sent some Deputies, who were to receive their
Excellencies in the name of the States General upon the Frontiers; and orders
were given not only to defray them at the Charge of the State, but to welcome
them with considerable Presents, and by the discharge of the great Cannon of
all the great Towns through which they passed; their High and Mightinesses
being willing upon so extaordinary an Occasion, to eternalize the Memory of the
Honor, they were going to receive by so solemn an Embassy, the most glorious
that ever was seen; in respect of Personal Apppearance of so great a Monarch,
with whom they were Engaged in a most strict Tie of Friendship and Commerce.
After they had traveled some Leagues in the Territories of the United
Provinces, his Czarish Majesty left the Embassy, that he might with the more
speed reach the City of Amsteldam; and that by traveling thus in Disguise, he
might with the more freedom, and unperceived, take a view of every thing he
thought worth his Curiosity. Accordingly he came to Amsteldam, accompanied only
by two or three Gentlemen, so disguised, as not to be known by any body, where
he lodged, at a Common-Inn for one night only, The next day he went to Sordam,
a large Town on the opposite side of the River of Amsteldam, and about two
Leagues distant, this place being most famous for the great number of
Ship-Wrights and others, who are there employed continually in building of
Ships.

His Majesty immediately after his arrival there, took up with a private
lodgings at a Burgher's House, which lay much out of the way, his aim being to
keep himself from being discovered, as much as Possible could be. His Chief and
first empolyment in this place, was to inform himself in person from the
Work-mens own Mouths, and to be an Eyewitness in what manner they built their
Ships; He bought a small Yacht of about twenty five or thirty Foot long, which
he took a particular Pleasure to steer himself, and to Sail in the Company only
of those three Gentlemen, that attended him up and down the River of Amsteldam
(called the Tey) where his greatest delight was, to make his own Observations,
and to feed his eyes with that most beautiful Prospect of that vast number of
Ships, which not unlike a Forest, lie close together in the Road of that City.

But it was not many days before he was robbed of the Satisfaction of passing
away his time thus undiscovered. For a certain Lock-Smith, who had lived a few
years before in the City of Muscow, happening to take particular. Notice of him
one day, as he passed by, knew him first; and having told some of his Comrades,
the inhabitant flocked in such Numbers about him, when he appeared abroad, that
being tired with the Crowd, he resolved to leave Sordam, sooner than he
intended at first.

This News being come to Ears of the Merchants of Amsteldam, Trading to
Muscovy, some of whom had the Honor to know His Majesty, they immediately went
in a Body to pay him all imaginable Respest, and to pray him to honor them
with his Presence in the City of Amsteldam; where he arrived from Sordam some
days before the Ambassadors, who had received Orders to tarry for some time
there, before they went to the Hague, in order to be Admitted to the public
Audience of Their High and Mightinesses.

In the mean while the Magistrates of Amsteldam took effectual Care to provide
every thing for the Magnificent Reception of the said Embassy, great store of
Cannon being planted upon the Bastions, facing the River Amstell, which way the
Ambassadors were to come. All the young Men of the City mounted on Horseback,
with very splendid Equipages and those of the best Rank and Quality, went to
meet him in their Coaches. The Magistrates deputed some of their Members to
Compliment Their Excellencies at their Landing, which was about a quarter of a
League without the City, whither they were conducted in the Yatchs of the
State, and received with a Discharge of all the Cannon round the Ramparts.

The three Ambassadors wire conducted by the Deputies into the Coach of one of
the Chief Magistrates of the City; the Deputies took their Places in the
second, and the rest of the Coaches were taken up by the Gentlemen of the
Embassy, among whom, as it was reported, was His Czarish Majesty. But first of
all, rid the beforementioned Gentlemen on Horseback, who leading the Van, were
followed by the Trumpets of the State, and these by some Tartars, Armed with
Bows, and some Muscovites on Horseback. After these marched on foot twenty
Pages belonging to Their Excellencies the Ambassadors, very richly Clad, their
Coats being of Scarlet Cloth, covered all over with very rich Gold and Silver
Galloons. These went immediately before the Coach, wherein sat the three
Ambassadors, Guarded on each side by twelve Tall and lusty Fellows, Clothed
in a Slavonian Dress, carrying each a Silver Ax in their hands, and Cimmetars
with Silver Hilts on their Sides. They had red Cloaks over their Cassacques,
trimmed on both sides with large Silver Buttons, and large Plated Loops; all
which together, made a very Glorious and Magnificent Show. These Coaches were
followed by a great many Footmen, likewise clad in red Scarlet Cloth, trimmed
with Silver Galloons. His Excellency the General Le Fort, appeared that day in
an Europian Habit, and the other two Ambassadors, in a Muscovite Dress, but
their Apparel was extremely Rich. Thus they passed in very good order through
the Chiefest Streets of Amsteldam, to the Lodgings prepared for them, where
stood a Company of City Trained-bands in Arms, to render their Reception the
more Magnificent; All the Streets through which they passed, were crowded with
an infinite number of People, who were flocked to the City to be Spectators of
the most solemn Entrance that had been seen there for many years before; and
for several days after, their Excellencies were treated with all the
magnificence imaginable, at the Charge of the City of Amsteldam; all which,
though it amounted to a considerable Sum, nevertheless the Magistrates being
willing upon this Occasion to give the most ample Demonstrations that possible
could be, of their Esteem and Respect for His Czarish Majesty's person, caused
a great Fire-Work to be prepared, representing a Triumphal-Arch, in Honor of
his Majesty.

It was erected upon the River Amstel (which had communicated, its Name to the
Famous City of Amsteldam) in a place where it might be seen at a great
distance, being of great height, and having four Fronts alike to the four
principal Corners of the World; the whole Fabric being of the Corinthian
Order, adorned with the Arms of His Czarish Majesty, with Tritons, Vessels, and
many other Embellishments. The whole Machine was built upon many Flat-bottom'd
Vessels, joined close together, which being covered all over with a Linen
Painted Cloth, the bottom upon which the Fabric was founded, represented at a
distance, a small Island.

This Fire-work being too remote from their Excellencies Lodgings, to be seen
there in its full Perfection, the Magistrates entreated them to go with them to
a noted Tavern of Amsteldam, called the Doclan, where they had the advantage of
being Spectators of the Success of the Fireworks, to their entire
Satisfaction, and were regaled with a most magnificent Collation. His Majesty
being graciously pleased to appear in person at this Feast; it was then the
first time, that I had the opportunity of taking a full view of him, as well as
others, at leisure. He is a very Tall and Lusty Person, Well set, with very
good Features in his Face, and, though there is a great deal Vivacity in his
Eyes, (which are Black and Sprightly) as well as Activity in his whole Air, he
has certain Marks of a Sweet Disposition in his Physiognomy. He is very affable
in Conversation, giving frequent opportunities to be entertained with any thing
that is Curious.

Some Hours after it was Dark, the Fireworks began to Play, with extraordinary
Success, to the Admiration of all the Spectators in General, and His Czarish
Majesty in partiulcar, who could not sufficicntly speak praise in of it, and
declare publicly the Satisfaction he had taken in the whole Entertainment. The
Concourse of People was so. great at this public Rejoicing, that by the
Throng, some of the Iron Rails of the Bridge of the Amstel being broke down, a
great many of those upon the Bridge, fell into to the River, some of whom were
drowned, the rest narrowly escaping with Life, by the help of some Boats that
were near at hand.

But the Deputies of the Admiralty of Amsteldam, bring sensible that they could
give no greater satisfaction to the Czar, than in what related to the knowledge
of Naval Affairs, took effectual care to show his Majesty all their
Storehouses, belonging to the Building and Equipping of their Men of War.

I have it from good Hands, that these Gentlemen who were deputed to attend him
thither, were extremely surprised to see him with so much eagerness enquire
after every thing, that had the least relation to these Affairs, and with how
much Skill and Judgment he would talk and argue concerning these Matters, into
which (as they were persuaded before) he had but a slender Insight.

Some Days after, his Majesty took a Progress to Vtrecht, where he had an
Interview with his Britanick Majesty; this being the first time these two Great
Princes, Eminent for their Virtue and Bravery, met. They Discoursed for several
Hours together, and parted from one another with all the marks of a mutual high
Esteem.

The Ambassadors stayed near two Months at Amsteldam, before they went to the
Hague, in order to their Audience: For his Czarish Majesty being resolved that
they should make their Appearance there with all the Splendour imaginable,
Ordered that the Number of their Domestics should be considerably augmented,
that they should be all new Clothed, and Richer than before. They had also an
addition to their Equipage three of the richest Coaches that could be made,
with so many Sets of very fine Horses.

Every thing being got ready for their Departure to the Hague, they set out on
their Journey, carrying along with them good store of Sables and other rich
Furs, to be Presented to their High and Mightinesses from the Czar their
Master, pursuant to the Custom of most Eastern Nations.

Their Excellencies were received at the Hague, with all the marks of Honor
and Respect due to their High Character, and the Day for their public Audience
being appointed, his Czarish Majesty followed in Person in Disguise, wearing a
plain blew Coat, a large white Perriwig, and white Feather; and being perfectly
well acquainted both with the Person, and extraordinary Merits of the Sieur
Witsen (who is this Year Burgo-Master of Amsteldam) he borrowed his Coach, and
desired him to accompany him thither, Which was performed with so much
dexterity and secrecy by the said Sieur de Witsen, that his Majesty was not
discovered by any body living.

It was in the Month of September of the last Year, when there was the greatest
show of Foreign Ambassadors, that ever was seen at the Hague, occasioned by
the Negotiation of Peace at Reswick, whither most Courts of Europe had sent
their Plenipotentiaries, who all striving to outview one another in
Magnificence, it was no easy matter to add any thing to the Splendour of their
Equipages: Yet his Czarish Majesty being sensible that the Eyes of the World,
would in a most peculiar manner be fixed upon his Embassy; and being invited by
a most commendable Emulation; to maintain upon this, as well as all other
occasions the Glory and Luster of his Eminent Station in the World, as claiming
the Title of an Emperor, and bearing the Imperial Arms, he was fully resolved
that this most Solemn Embassy, honored by his Presence, should bear the marks
of, and be answerable to his Grandeur.

In effect, according to the Testimony of all that were Spectators of this
Solemn Audience, every thing was managed with so much Order, Majesty and
Gravity, and with so much Magnificence, that nothing could be added to the
Luster of this Solemnity, which in all Respects was suitable to his Majesty's
Design and Grandeur.

It is confessed by all hands, that never any Ambassador appeared in a more
Splendid Attire, than the General le Fort, the first Ambassador did that Day;
he was Clad after the Muscovite Fashion, in a long Robe of Cloth of Gold, Lined
with the most precious Sables that ever were seen. This Robe, as well as the
Vest which he wore under it, was covered before with Diamonds of an inestimable
Value, and upon his Bonnet there appeared a large Jewel of Diamonds in the
shape of a Herns Feather, with such luster as dazzled the Eyes of the Beholders:
He harangued their High and Mightinesses id the Russian Tongue, with an Air
altogether Majestic, suitable to the Character he bore upon so Solemn an
Occasion. The two other Ambassadors, who appeared likewise in very Rich
Apparel, made also their Compliments to their High and Mightinesses with a
Majestic Gravity: But that which added the greatest Luster to this Audience,
was, that all the Ambassadors of most Princes in Europe, honored these Men
with their Presence, and his Czarish Majesty had the satisfaction to be an Eye
Witness of all what passed, from a Closet which had a Window opening into the
Audience Room, without being perceived by any body, and returned the next day
privately to Amsteldam, extremely well pleased with his Journey. Neither did
their Excellencies make any long stay at the Hague, they having no other
Matters to propose to the States, but the confirmation of former Treaties.

It is agreed on all hands, that the principal Motive of this Embassy was, that
under the specious Pretense of this Public Solemnity, the Czar might with the
more convenience pass Incognito, through such Places as he intended to visit;
his particular aim in respect to his Journey into Holland, being to have the
opportunity of being undiscovered at Amsteldam, to take, with the more
convenience a full view of such Matters as related to Maritime Affairs, and
without any disturbance, to take People fit for the Sea-Service into his Pay,
and at the same time to supply himself with such Necessaries, as was requisite
for the carrying on his Grand Design.

This sufficiently appeared after his return from the Hague, by his Request to
the Magistrates of Amsteldam, to wit, to choose private Lodgings for himself,
and a few Gentlemen of his Retinue at one end of the City. It must be confessed
the Lodgings were but very indifferent, in respect of the Quality of the Person
that was to Inhabit them; but in regard of their Situation, they were in all
Points agreeable to his Majesty's Intention, they being just adjoining to the
East India House, which lying near a convenient Road for Ships, there was the
most agreeable prospect that could be to the Waterside, of all what passed to
or from Amsteldam.

No sooner hail his Majesty taken possession of these small Lodgings, but he
applied all his Thoughts to the knowledge of two Things: The first was to be
Instructed in all Particulars; which had any relation to the Building and
Equipping of Ships: The second, to learn the manner of Bombarding Places by
Sea, which being a thing he was desirous to be informed of, he spared no pains
to attain to. But as his Genius was always bent to the Mathematics, and as he
had been Instructed most particularly in the Mechanic part of it, which
contains the Fundamental Principles of both: It was yet long before he made
himself Master of these Mysterious Arts; especially, since his desire was such,
as not to rest satisfied with being a looker on, but would lay himself a hand
to the Work sometimes, with a great deal of Pleasure, and finish a piece with
his own Hands, which he did with so much dexterity, that one would have swore
he had been accustomed long ago, to handle the Axe and the Hammer. I have my
self seen two pieces of his own Handiwork; one was a small Frigate of three or
four Foot long, the other a little Windmill.

What else can be gathered from all this, but that his Conduct in relation to
these Matters, is founded upon most profound Reasons of State? It seems evident
to me, that the sole motive of it, is the Glory and Greatness of the Russian
Monarchy; and that by the eagerness he shows upon this occasion, of advancing
the Naval Strength of his Empire, he intends to give the most evident
demonstratons he is able, (to his Nobility and People) that on its due
Establishment, depends the chief Welfare of the Realm; and that by divesting
himself thus of his Royal Dignity for a time, and applying himself in Person to
the Building of Ships, he intends to serve for an Example to invite them to
follow his Footsteps. He is too sensible that the Muscovites are naturally
inclined to Pride and Laziness, and he looked upon it as the best means to
correct those Vices in them, and hinder their further progress among them, if
he by his own Example did encourage them to Labor and Industry.

At his spare Hours, his greatest delight used to be, to take a view Of any
thing that was curious, or worth his observation in private Persons Houses,
where he laid hold of all opportunities, to enter into a familiar Discourse
with them, in so obliging a manner, that the Hollanders, who are extremely
taken with familiar Conversation, were charmed with his franck Behavior; which
had this effect upon them, that it is almost incredible, how many voluntarily
offered themselves to serve him; I having been an Eyewitness my self, that a
great number of able and well deserving Persons could Hot be admitted into the
Service, because the intended Levies were completed in much less time than was
expected.

Not long after the Ambassadors return from the Hague, his Majesty received an
Express from Muscovy, with the agreeable News of a Battle, fought betwixt the
Muscovites, under the Command of the Prince Schein; and the Tartars near Asoph.
The Cham of the Crim Tartary, had in the beginning of the Spring, caused a
great number of Crim Tartars to pass in many small Bodies, and at different
times through Caffa, in order to join them with the Tartars of Circassia; and
especially those Inhabiting near the River Cubance. Knowing that the Muscovite
Army was divided into Vseveral Bodies, the better to cover the Workmen, that
were employed in several Places, in completing the beforementioned
Fortifications, he looked upon this as a fit opportunity to surprise them
unawares: For which purpose, he ordered the Tartars Commanded by Sultan Galga,
to advance with great and speedy Marches toward the Enemy. But the Muscovite
General Schein, having received Intelligence of their approach, had just so
much leisure given him, as to draw together his Troops in an advantageous
place, where he resolved to engage the Enemy. These perceiving themselves
superior in number to the Muscovites, and being encouraged by that pretended
fear of the Muscovite Army, which did not move from their Post, fell with great
fury upon them, and were received with great bravery by the Russians, who were
contented to defend themselves in their Post, till their General perceiving the
first heat of the Tartars spent, attacked them very briskly, put them first
into Confusion, and soon after to the Rout, with a great Slaughter on the
Enemies side, whom they pursued to the River Hagalinek, where many of them were
drowned: This River runs through Circassia, about two Leagues distant from
Asoph. Our Maps put this River to the North on the other side of the River Don,
above thirty Leagues from Asoph

Their Excellencies the Muscovite Ambassadors made public Rejoycings upon this
Occasion, and invited the Magistrates and other Persons of Quality to a
Magnificent Entertainment, where they were diverted, with Dancing, Music,
Fireworks, and all sorts of other Divertisement. His Czarish Majesty was
pleased to appear there in Person, and in so pleasant a Humor, that all the
Guess were extremely satisfied with his Goodness, and at parting, made all the
most sincere Protestations to his Majesty, that they should keep in everlasting
Remembrance, the extraordinary Favor be had been pleased to bestow upon them,
in honoring them with his Presence.

Toward the beginning of the Winter, this Victory was Seconded by the News of
another Advantage, obtain a near the River Borysthenes. For the Crim Tartars in
conjunction with those of Budziack and Oczakow having besieged Kasikermeen, had
carried on their Trenches to the very Counterscarp, and at the same time made
themselves Masters of the Adjacent small Isle of Towam. But a Body of
Muscovites having joined the Cossacks inhabiting those Frentiers, came time
enough to the relief of the Place, forcing the Tartars to abandon the Siege and
the Isle, with a considerable loss on their side. Upon which his Majesty gave
Orders, that the said Island should be strengthened by some regular
Fortifications.

The same Express brought likewise the News, that the new Harbor about, seven
Leagues from Asoph, (of which mention has been made before) was brought to
perfection, the Place being already Inhabited by Ten Thousand Mufcovites, his
Majesty having expressly forbidden any Foreign Nation to settle there. He gave
the Name of Setruchina Tuba to this City. In a little time after, Advice was
also brought his Majesty, that a great number of the Circassian Tarltars
voluntarily submitted to his Obedience; and thereupon being joined by some
Muscovite Troops, they had extended their Conquests into the Crim Tartary, to
the River Mious, about five and twenty Leagues distant from Asoph, where the
Turks formerly used to unload their Ships bound to that Place; and that the
Muscovites were then busy in building a strong Fort near the Mouth of that
River, thereby to make themselves Masters of, and to command that Road.

The Czar having now taken a resolution to pass over into England, before his
departure out of this Country, gave notice of his Intention to his Britanick
Majesty, who immediately sent some Yachts and light Friggots to conduct him
thither. He Embarked with an Attendance only of Twelve or Fifteen Persons,
ordering his Ambassadors to stay behind at Amsteldam, and to buy up good store
of Artillery and Ammunition: And being happily arrived in England, he was
received there with all the Honor and Respect due to so Great a Prince; His
Britanick Majesty offering him for his Residence the Royal Palace, called
Sommerset-House, (which is very Remarkable for its pleasant Situation on the
River Thames,) and a Guard to attend his Person; but the Czar persisting in his
Resolution to pass his time in England, Incognito, he refused to accept of the
King of England's Offers.

After he had received the Compliments from his Majesty and the Royal Family,
and returned the same to them, he spent some time in taking a view of the Two
Houses of Parliament, and what else was worth his Observation at Court; and
then retired at some distance from the City of London. for the convenience of
the Prospect upon the River, from whence he might observe the Workmen, that
were Employed thereabouts in the building of Ships. He stayed above Two Months
in England, during which time, he Employed most of his spare Hours, in viewing
all what was Curious or Remarkable, especially among the best Artists.

Some London Merchants having proposed to his Czarish Majesty, the
Establishment of a new Commerce of Tobacco, to be Transported only by them into
Muscovy, and the other Countries under his Majesty's Obedience, he sent for
Fedor Alexiovitz Gallavin, his Second Ambassador, to Treat with them concerning
this Point at London; The Treaty was brought to a good issue, to the
satisfaction of both Parties; and it has been computed, that the Czar's Yearly
Customs arising from that Commodity, will amount to above a Million of Livres.

But what is worth our particular Observation in this Voyage into England, and
which most of all discovers the main Design of his Czarish Majesty, is, his
Progress to Portsmouth, to be a Spectator of a Sea Engagement betwixt two
English Squadrons, near that Port. I had forgot to tell you before, that the
Hollanders did Entertain him near Amsterdam, with such another Mock-sight,
where a great many Yachts were drawn up in different Lines, to show to his
Czarish Majesty the manner of Engaging one another, and Retiring after an
Engagement at Sea.

His Czarish Majesty having been presented by the King of England, with a very
fine Yatch, Richly Guilt, carrying Thirty Pieces of Cannon, and one of the
nimblest for Sailing in the whole Kingdom; he sent her to Archangle, and he
himself returned, notwithstanding the badness of the Season into, Holland.

In the mean while that their Excellencies were gone back to the Hague, in
Order to take their Audience of Leave from their High and Mightinesses, the
Magistrates of Amsterdam, being sensible, that immediately after their Return,
the Czar would set forforward on his Journey to Vienna, made great preparations
to signalize their Zeal for His Majesty by some fresh marks of Honor: But he
no sooner had notice of their Design, but he sent to desire them to desist,
being willing to leave their City without noise, and undiscovered, after a
Thousand Testimonies of their Esteem and Friendship to his Person, received
both from the Magistrates and other Inhabitants, during the Six Months he had
stayed among them.

He was just upon his departure, when he was surprised by the unwelcome News,
that there had been a Mutiny near the City of Muscow, among some Remainders of
the Strelitzes, but that General Gourdon had soon dispersed them, and taken
most of their Ringleaders Prisoners; who as they have thereby hastened the
entire Ruin of their Party, so they have brought themselves to a miserable
End, having received since that time the due Rewards of their Treachery. For a
great Number of them were Hanged on Gibbets, and many of the Nobility had their
Heads cut off.

You cannot be ignorant of what has passed since his Czarish Majesty's
Departure out of Holland; with what Honor and Respect this Great Prince was
received at the Imperial Court of Vienna; with what extraordinary Splendor and
Magnificence his Embassy appeared there; as likewise, what obliged his Majesty
to return on a sudden into Muscovy. It is also sufficiently known to you, that
he left Procofet Bogdanovitz Wolnizin, as his Ambassador and Plenipotentiary
for the Negotiation of Peace to be set on foot upon the Frontiers of Hungary,
betwixt the Confederate Princes and the Ottoman Port.

His Majesty took the way of Poland in his Return homewards, where he had an
Interview, not far from Lembergh, with his present Polish Majesty, who assured
him, That he was resolved to continue the War against the Turks, unless Peace
might be obtained upon very good Conditions, and especially by the Surrender of
Caminieck to the Poles.

But whatever the issue of this Treaty may be, you will easily grant me, if you
will be pleased to reflect seriously upon what I have told you before, That,
supposing the Czar of Muscovy should not be comprehended in the said Peace, he
is alone capable of waging War against the Turks, and not without hopes of
Success on his side. For his Frontiers being so well provided and strengthened
with good Fortifications on that side where the Turks must attack him; he has
no more to do, than to be upon the Defensive by Land, and in the mean while to
attack them briskly at Sea. And it is more than probable, That this is the
Grand Design of this Prince, who seems to have taken such sure Measures in
respect to the Establishment of his Maritime Affairs, that there is all the
Reason in the World to believe, that he will always Triumph over the Turks at
Sea, who never did any thing Memorable in that Se'rvice; and who according to
all outward Appearance, are less in a Condition than ever to signalize
themselves upon the Watery Element at a time, when their Empire appears in a
declining State.

I will leave it to your own Judgment, whether it would not shake the very
Foundation of the Turkish Monarchy, considering its present tottering
Condition, if the Muscovites should chase the Turks out of the Black-Sea, and
make themselves Masters of their Ports on these Coasts, which from the City of
Caffa, as far as to the mouth of the Borysthenes, must thereby be exposed to
the Mercy of the Muscovites? And it is not improbable that Constantinople it
self might be hardly put to it, or at least run the Hazard of being laid in
Ashes by a Bombardment. What would in such a case, become of the Crim-Tartary,
which being already enclosed on all sides by a good number of strong Fortesses,
must of necessity fall, without making one Blow, into the hands of the
Muscovites, if all Commerce and Correspondence betwixt the Peninsula and
Constantinople should be cut off, by the Muscovites becoming Masters of the
Black-Sea;

Besides, it is to be considered, that as Places are attacked now adays, they
have only Precop and Caffa, which are in a Condition to make some slender
Defense.

But, Sir, being unwilling to tire your Patience with too long a Letter, I will
come to a Conclusion; I must only repeat to you once more, what I have
intimated before, That it was the greatest Oversight the Turks could be guilty
of, not to take all the imaginable Precautions against the Muscovites becoming
Masters of Asoph, who thereby have opened themselves the way into the
Black-Sea, over which the Ottoman Empire always claimed the Sovereignty in a
most peculiar manner. To make some Amends for so unpardonable an Error, the
most likely means they have left, seems to be, to conclude an everlasting Peace
with the Muscovites, thereby to lull them asleep, that they may not lay hold of
this Opportunity of rendering themselves redoubtable in the Black-Sea.

The Ottoman Port might thus reap a considerable Advantage by the Commerce with
Muscovy, by establishing certain Duties to be paid for the passage of Ships
through the Channel leading to Constantinople, in the same manner as it is
practiced in Denmark, where the King of that Name, receives Customs of the
Ships that pass and repass the Sound, in their going to, and coming from the
Baltic.

This appears to me the only most probable Means, to plunge them out of that
Misfortune which they have drawn upon themselves by their own Neglect, it being
allowed by all that have any insight into the present State of Affairs in
Muscovy, That the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, has taken a firm Resolution,
not to rest satisfied, till he has opened this Passage in order to establish a
free Commerce with foreign Nations, and to encourage them to come into his
Ports near the Palus Meotis.

This, Sir, is the present Condition of the Russian Empire, which was formerly
looked upon as most barbarous, but which now bids fair for the Priority with
any in Europe, by reason of the Increase of its Commerce with most Nations of
the World, by the indefatigable Vigilance of their present Monarch, who being
scarce 28 Years of Age; what is it that may not be expected from so Great a
Prince, if God pleases to bless him with a long Life.

For the Wolga is above five hundred Leagues (to reckon from its first Spring)
to the Canal, by which it is joined with the River Don, and this River, from
thence to the City of Asoph, four hundred Leagues more, fit for Ships of good
Burden, and from the Canal of Communication betwixt these two noble Rivers,
there is two hundred Leagues distance to Asoph upon a straight Line, all
extreme good Grounds; Asoph and Astracan being situtuate under the most happy
Climate in the World. The Western side of the River Wolga is very well
inhabited already, and there is no great question, but that the Convenience of
Commerce, and Plenty of the Country, will soon invite some of the Neighboring
vagabond Tartars to follow the footsteps of other more civilized Nations, when
once they are made sensible of the Benefit of an Industrious and settled Life.
This is sufficiently verified by the Example of many of the Asiatick Tartars,
who have by degrees abandoned their vagabond and idle Life, and followed their
Prince into China, where they are become Wealthy by their Traffic; the like
may be said of many of the Crim-Tartars, those of Astracan, Siberia, Dauria,
and other parts subject to the Muscovites.

If we cast our eyes upon that Part of Muscovy, whereabouts the Port of
Archangel is, and consider, that not above an Age ago these Patts were as
little inhabited as any of Muscovy, being low Grounds, and situate under a very
cold Climate; But since the Establishment of Commerce in this Harbor, the
Country all thereabouts is very well stocked with Inhabitants, and many goodly
Towns and Villages.

In the Southern Parts of Muscovy, the Cities of Wologda, Jeresla, Rostof,
Pereslaw, and others owe all their Increase of Wealth to traffic. Add to this
the advantage of Commerce betwixt the Indies, Persia and Muscovy, by the way of
the Caspian Lake or Sea; all which Commodities may for the future be
transported by the newly projected Canal betwixt the two Rivers Wolga and Don,
into all Parts of Europe; what immense Profit and Riches must not by this means
be conveyed into Muscouy! which being already so considerable for its vast
Extent and Advantageous Situation for Trade, may in all probability thereby
become the most Potent and Redoubtable in the World, etc.

Amsteldam, 30th October, School. I am
A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality, Residing at the Imperial Court of VIENNA,
To his Friend in LONDON, Concerning the late Solemn Muscovite Embassy; AND SOME
Other Matters Relating to His Present CZARISH MAJESTY; THE Russian Empire, and
the Great TARTARY.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coggan, in the Inner-Temple-Lane. MDDXCIX.

A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality, Residing at VIENNA, Concerning The present
CONDITION OF THE Muscovite EMPIRE.
AS the late Journey of the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, has been for some
time past, the surprise of all Europe; so I thought I could not make you a more
Seasonable Return at this time, for the Obligation you were pleased to lay upon
me some Months ago, in communicating to me your Observations concerning His
Czarish Majesty's Stay in England and Holland, than to inform you of what has
past since his coming into this Court, and his Return into Muscovy; of which I
have been partly an eyewitness, the rest I stand indebted for the
Correspondence of my Friends, upon, whose Integrity and Judgment, I can fully
rely.

I will not pretend to insist upon the Motives which induced the Czar to Engage
in so Extraordinary an Undertaking, it being agreed on all hands, that as his
Design was to build the Frame of the present Russian Monarchy upon a much more
solid Foundation, than it was in former times, so he judged nothing could more
conduce to obtain this Great End, than if he should take this Opportunity, of
being informed in Person concerning these Maxims, which have rendered some of
the European States, so flourishing in our Age,

For, whereas the Russian Monarchs used to make the Ignorance of their Subjects
the Main Foundation-stone of their Authority; so it is obvious to every
unbyassed Person, that his present Majesty looks upon the Improvements of all
Arts and Sciences, and the Establishment of a regular Discipline, as the Main
Pillars of the Greatness of this Monarchy.

It was in the Prosecution of this Grand Design he appeared, though Incognito,
in England and Holland; and after having satisfied himself in those Matters
which were the Chief Subject of his Curiosity, he resolved to visit likewise
the Imperial Court of Vienna, where he arrived with the Muscovite Embassy,
toward the latter end of June last past.

He had scarce been a few days in this City, when he received Letters from
Asoph, That part of that Garrison, to the Number of betwixt seven and eight
Thousand Men, having received Intelligence, That the Tartars had put a great
Number of their best Horses in the circumjacent Pastures, under the Guard of
three thousand Men, were marched out against them, had defeated the Guard, and
brought near thirty thousand Horses into Asoph.

These Letters were in a few olays after followed by an Express from* Muscovy
with an Account, That the Remainders of the ancient Muscovite Guards (whom they
call Strelitzes) had Mutiny'd, under Pretense of Want of Pay; and that being
joined by some others, were marched toward Muscow, the Capital City of the
whole Empire, with an Intention to Surprise and Ransack the Place. The
Strelitzes; who formerly might be compared to the Janisaries of the Turks, had
given such frequent proofs of their Barbarity and Cruelty against the
Inhabitants of this City, upon such like Occasions, that many of them being
terrified by so unexpected a Revolt in the Czar's Absence, left their
Habitations, and a general Consternation had seized the whole Empire, as
dreading the Effects of the Fury of these Insolent Soldiers.

The Princes Loff Kerilvitz, Nariskin Procorofskoi, and Boris Alexiovitz
Gallizin, who had the Supreme Administration of the Government during the
Czar's Absence, were not wanting in their Duty, to encourage the Inhabitants
both by Words, and their own Example; and that nothing might be wanting on
their side, to reduce this rebellious Crew to their Duty, sent some of the
Nobility, backed by a good number of Troops, to endeavor to appease their
Fury; but they were so far from harkening to the Propositions offered them by
the Deputies of the Governors, that they fired at them, and forced them to
retire to the City.

Thus all fair means proving ineffectual, General Gourdon was sent out with a
good Body of faithful Troops, Commanded for the most part by foreign Officers,
who meeting with the Rebels, as they were advanced within four Leagues of
Muscow, Attacked, and totally Routed them, killing many of them upon the Spot,
and carry the rest Prisoners to the City, where many of them received
afterward the due Reward of their Treachery.

The Czar being over-joyed at the Success of his Arms against these Mutineers,
resolved not only to stay for some time at this Court, but also to continue his
Journey from hence to Vienice, before his Return into Muscovy. I have hinted to
you before, the Chief Motive which induced His Czarish Majesty to undertake so
long and dangerous a Journey; but besides this, there may be alleged another,
having a peculiar Respect to the Imperial Courts. For the Muscovites, having by
the Conquest of Asoph, opened themselves a Gate into the Palus Meotis, and
consequently into the Black-Sea, had all the Reason in the World to promise
themselves the entire Conquest of the Crim-Tartary, and the Tartarian Peninsula
it self, if the War should be carried on but for two years longer by the
Confederates against the Infidels, there being nothing but the Cities of
Precop, Crim and Caffa, places of no great Strength, which could make any
considerable Resistance, and prevent them from making themselves Masters of all
the Coast from Asoph, to the mouth of the River Borysthenes, where they had
already got firm footing, by the Conquest of the Fortress of Kasikermeen, in
the Year 1695, and the Submission of many of the Cossacks upon the Frontiers,
to the Czar's Obedience. His Czarish Majesty, who from the beginning of his War
with the Turks, had had no less in view than the reducing of these Places, and
making himself Master of the Black-Sea, had, before his departure out of
Muscovy, made all the necessary Preparations for the promoting of so Great a
Design. He had not only strengthened the City of Asoph by some new
Fortifications, and erected a strong Fortress at some small distance from
thence, but had caused a new Port to be made for the Convenience of his Navy,
This Great Prince, who perfectly understands the advantageous Situations of his
Dominions for Commerce, (one of the Main Pillars of the Prosperity of the
Commonwealth,) has, ever since his Accession to the Throne, left no stone
unturned, to improve it to the utmost Advantage.

It is to the Muscovites, Europe stands indebted for the Discovery of the Way
by Land into China; and by the frequent Embassy sent by the present Czar into
that Country, the Way through the Great-Tartary is as well or better known to
the Russians, than some Provinces of their own Empire. Several goodly Cities
and Villages have been built for the Convenience of the Muscovite Carevans, And
a vast Tract of Ground has been incorporated with the Russian Empire.

It is incredible of what Consequences the China Trade by Land, is to the
Muscovites, who by the Help of their Sleds drawn by Renes in the Wintertime,
perform this great Journey with much Expedition, Many of the Vagabond Tartars,
incited by the Industry of the Muscovite Merchants trading in these parts, have
quitted their Solitudes, and have settled themselves in Siberia, and some other
Provinces of Muscovy, which were scarce inhabited within these hundred years.
The Communication betwixt Muscovy and some part of the Indies, as well as the
Persian Empire, by help of the Caspian Sea, as it is obvious to every body that
will but cast an Eye upon the Maps, so it is no less advantageous to the
Russians than the China Trade. The Banajans (the most Trading People of all the
Indies) have a very considerable Settlement in the City of Astracan (the
Boundary of Europe and Asia on that side) from whence they furnish Mascovy with
all the most precious Things the Indies afford, and by the continual passage of
Merchants and others, trading from the City of Muscow to Astracan, and other
places upon the Wolga, the Country betwixt the Ocea and Wolga is better stored
with Villages and Inhabitants, than many of the most Fertile Provinces of
Europe.

The Czar Peter Alexiovitz was as well before, as in his late Journey,
sufficiently convinced, that all these Advantages were but imperfect in respect
of what might be hoped for, if by opening his way into the Black Sea, he could
settle a Communication with Italy, and some other provinces of Europe, by which
means the Riches of China, of the Indies and Persia, might be conveyed this
way, to the no small Benefit of the Muscovites.

The Conquest of Asoph had opened him the way to attain this end without any
great difficulty, considering the present declining State of the Ottoman
Empire, and the flourishing Condition of Muscovy, if he could prevail with his
Imperial Majesty to continue the War a few years longer against the Infidels.
It is agreed on all sides, That his Imperial Majesty showed as much inclination
toward continuing the War with the Turks, than the Czar himself, and would
have been as forward as any of the Confederates to second the laudable Zeal of
His Czarish Majesty, if the present conjuncture had not obliged him to prefer
the Interest of his Country before his Inclinations, at a time, when the
Infidels made such considerable Offers to the Confederates for the obtaining a
Truce or Peace.

For, besides that, by the Animosities Reigning in Poland, that King was not in
a Condition to give any considerable diversion to the Turks, the Subjects of
the Hereditary Counries of his Imperial Majesty being exhausted by the heavy
Taxes, requisite for the carrying on so chargeable a War, stood in absolute
need of some Respite to take breath, and the tottering State of the King of
Spain's health, was a sufficient warning to the Imperial Court to be upon their
Guard against France, where vast Preparations were made to back their claim to
that Crown by Force.

These were the true reasons that induced his Imperial Majesty to consent some
Months after, to a Truce of 25 years with the Ottoman Port, wherein the Czar of
Muscovy included; but chose to accept of the same only for two years, for
certain Reasons of (...) I shall have occasion to mention to you anon.

On the 29th day of June, his Czarish Majesty had a private Audience from the
Emperor, and desiring to be Incognito, he was conducted by a pair of
Back-stairs, to the Emperor's Antichamber, where he was received by his
Imperial Majesty in Person at the door; no body was admitted to be present at
this Audience besides the Count Wallenstein, Lord High Chamberlain, and the
Count of Dieterichstein, Master of the Horse to the Emperor; the Czar was
accompanied up Stairs only by the General Le Fort, his first Ambassador, who
supplied the place of an Interpreter betwixt these two Illustrious Personages
at this Interview.

After the first Complements were passed, the Emperor put on his Hat, but
finding that the Czar remained uncovered, he also took off his Hat again, and
remained thus till the Interview, which lasted about half an Hour, was passed.

Some-days after, the Czar took an exact View of the Imperial Armory, Library,
and other Rarities belonging to the Imperial Palace, and the Emperor being
sensible of the Czar's Inclinations toward the Mathematics, sent him a
Present of the choicest Mathematical Instruments that could be found.

He likewise invited the Czar to a very splendid Entertainment, which began
with a most Admirable Consort of Music, and after a Magnificent Collation,
ended with a certain kind of Masquerade, called in Germany, a Wirthshaft,
frequently to be seen in the Courts of the German Princes, where the Master of
the Feast always represents the Person of a Host; no body but persons of the
first Rank of both Sexes being admitted to this Diversion.

In this, each Masker was clad after the Fashion of some different Nation, with
a Lady in an Habit answerable to the same Nation, so that the most remarkable
Nations of the World, being represented by this illustrious Company, adorned
with the Richest Stuffs, and a prodigious quantity of precious Stones, it
afforded a most unusual, but at the same time, most Magnificent and agreeable
Spectacle to the Czar.

To be short, this Court, to show their utmost Respect to so Extraordinary a
Guest, strove to out-vye all the rest which His Majesty had visited before;
There was nothing but Jollity and Feasting to be seen, during his Stay at
Vienna; and among others, the Count of Starenbergh, General of the Emperor's
Armies, signalized himself on this Occasion, having, invited the Czar and his
Ambassadors, with all the Persons of Quality of both Sexes, then at Vienna, to
a most splendid Feast.

The Czar in his Turn, took the opportunity of St. Peter's Day, to Entertain
the Principal Lords and Ladies of the Court, at the Palace of Guntersdorff,
where the Muscovite Ambassadors were lodged; the Emperor solemnized the same
by an Artificial Fire-Work, and a fine Consort of Music.

Toward the latter end of July, the Muscovite Ambassadors had their public
Audience of His Imperial Majesty, which was very splendid, especially in
respect of the rich Presents designed for the Emperor, which consisted in the
most precious Ermines, and Sables, and Cloths of Gold and Silver, born by fifty
Persons, Clad all in black Velvet. They were received at their Entrance into
the outward Court by the Guards in Arms, and after being admitted to the
Audience of the Emperor with the usual Ceremonies, were most splendidly
Treated at Court, and reconducted to their own Palace.

It was but a few days after, when the Czar, having taken a Resolution to go to
Venice, in order, as it was supposed, to concert Matters with that Republic,
how best to annoy the Turks at Sea, he sent some of his Train and Equippage
before. The Venetians were no sooner informed of His Majesty's Resolution, but
they appointed four Procurators of St. Mark, to receive and attend him. They
ordered the necessary Carriages to the Frontiers, and the Palace of Toscari in
the Arsenal, was to be fitted up for his Receiption. But when every body
expected to hear of the Czar's Departure for Venice, great was their Surprise
when they understood, that he had taken his Leave on a sudden of the Emperor,
and was returned with only thirty of his most Trusty Servants, (among whom were
General Le Fort, and Feder Alexiovitz, Gallowin, his two Ambassadors) by the
Way of Polond into Muscovy, leaving Procofet Bog danovitz Wolnitzin, his third
Ambassador at Vienna, as his Plenipotentiary, to manage his Interest at the
approaching Treaty betwixt the Confederates and Turks.

You may easily suppose, that the whole Court was not a little amazed at this
unexpected Change of the Czar's former Resolution, every one judging of the
Matter according to his Opinion, but the Generality attributing it to some
great Commotion in Muscovy, the Truth of which was not confirmed to us, till
some time after.

I told you before, that soon after his Czarish Majesty's arrival at Vienna, he
received the News of a Revolt among the Strelitzes in Muscovy, and of their
Defeat by General Gourdon, which made the Czar take a Resolution to go to
Venice before his Return into Muscovy; but the event has shown since, that they
were not so entirely despersed, but that their Party appeared very formidable,
notwithstanding their last Rour. For by the Confession of some of the Rebels
that were put to the Rack, they were backed in this Enterprise not only by the
Princess Sophia, the present Czar's Sister, but also by a great many of the
Nobility, who had been disgusted at the Czar's Severity against some of their
Kindred, and by a considerable Part of the Army upon the Frontiers of Poland.

The Princess Sophia, with her Adherents, taking the Advantage of the Czar's
Absence, left no stone unturned to insinuate into the People, that he had
over-turn'd the whole Frame of the Ancient Russian Government, by reducing the
Standing Forces of the Strelitzes to so inconsiderable a Number, and depriving
Them of their most ancient Privileges, in lieu of which, he had set over them
a great number of foreign Officers, who were his absolute Favorites, and
Domineered over the Natives at pleasure.

That the Chief aim of his Journey into foreign Parts, was to bring along with
him such a Number of Foreigners, as should be able so entirely to subdue the
ancient Nobility of the Empire, as to be past all hopes of recovering their
former Privileges and Dignity.

There were also some among the Clergy, who being jealous of the Czar's Favor
toward these Foreigners, that were not of the Greek Church, blew up the coals,
clamouring with great Zeal to their Auditors, That their Religion was in most
imminent Danger, by the Encouragement given to Foreigners of another Religion,
who, as they were the Instruments of overturning the ancient Foundation of the
State, so they would in time prove the utter Ruin of their Religion.

To this it was added, That the Czar being at present in far distant Countries,
they could not wish for a more seasonable Opportunity to recover their Loss, by
putting the Government into the hands of the Princess Sophia, which of Right
belonged to her in the Czar's Absence, and which she had managed with so much
Dexterity during her Brother's Minority.

These Insinuations were so prevailing with many, that they had brought over to
their Party, not only the Strelitzes, and other Malcontents of the Nobility,
who were ready at all times to join against the Czar, but also some of the Head
of the Clergy, many of the Chief of the Army, and among them the General that
Commanded upon the Frontiers of Lithuania, as likewise some Lords and Courtiers
of the first Rank, who were, always looked upon as absolutely devoted to the
Czar's Interest.

Notice having been given to the Czar of these Cabals against his Person and
Government, when he was just upon his departure for Venice, this obliged him to
alter his Resolution, being sensible that the surest measures he could take at
such an extraordinary Juncture, were to endeavor to divert by his Royal
Presence, the Storm that threatened the destruction of his Government in his
Absence.

According to this to this Resolution, he took the nearest way through Poland,
with a few of his faithful Friends, and after a Stay of three days at Rava near
Leopold, where he had an Interview with his Polish Majesty about Matters of
great Moment, especially concerning the approaching Treaty with the Turks; he
continued his Journey with so much expedition, that he appeared in Muscovy,
when his Enemies believed him to have been at Venice.

His so unexpected Appearance, as it filled all his faithful Subjects with Joy,
so it struck such a Terror into the Rebellious Party, that being thereby
bereaved of all hopes of Success, they, durst not as much as make any Attempt
to put their projected Design in execution.

His Czarish Majesty having in the mean while, taken a firm Resolution, to
strike at the Root of this Rebellion, and to eradicate Root and Branch this
Factious Crew of the Strelitzes, above two thousand of them were executed in
sight of the Princess Sophia, all the rest being banished into Siberia, and
some other remote Provinces; Mary of the Nobility, of which number were prince
Colorin, and the General Romanodokowski, with several Ladies of Quality, some
Friars, and other Priests of the first Rank, were some Emapal'd, some broken
upon the Wheel, others buried alive.

I don't question but that you will look upon these Transactions of the Czar,
as favoring of too much Severity, both in respect of the Number and Quality of
those on whom these Rigorous Punishments were inflicted; but if you will call
to mind the reiterated Conspiracies, carried on by this Party ever since his
Czarish Majesty's Accession to the Crown, both against his Person and
Government, you will, I am apt to believe, be obliged to own, that what was
done upon this Account by the Czar, was not an Effect of his Natural
Disposition, which is in no wise inclinable to Cruelty, but must be attributed
to the present Urgency of the Affairs of the State, which required, that those
Members, who after all the Lenitives had been made use of in vain, to allay
their malignant Humors, were now to be treated with Corrosives, and such as
were quite degenerated into an incurable Gangrene, must be separated from the
rest, by cutting off the infected Parts.

You cannot be ignorant that since his Majesty's return into Muscovy, a Truce
has been concluded with the Turks for 25 years, in respect of his Imperial
Majesty and the Crown of Poland, but for two years only with his Czarish
Majesty. The Treaty betwixt his Czarish Majesty and the Turkish Sultan, was
signed under the Tents near Carlowitz,, December the 25th, School, by Procofet
Bogdanovitz Wolnitzin, as Plenipotentiary and Ambassador Extraordinary of the
Czar of Muscovy, and Mehemed Rami, and Alexander Mauro Cordati de Scarlati, as
Plenipotentiaries of the Ottoman Port, consisting in these three following
Articles.

1. That by Virtue of this Treaty, a Truce is concluded betwixt these two
Potent Empire for two years, to begin from the 15th day of December, S. N.
School. And that in the mean while, all possible Endeavors shall be used on both
sides, to re-settle a perfect Amity and good Understanding betwixt both
Parties, either by a firm and perpetual Peace, or the prolongation of this
Truce for a longer space of Years.

2. That in the mean time all Acts of Hostility under what Pretense soever,
shall be forborne, and all Animosities laid aside betwixt both Parties.

3. That the Chan of Crim-Tartary shall be comprehended in this Truce, who in
the mean while, shall be obliged to prevent all Excursions on his side. And
effectual Care is to be taken on both sides, that none of the other Tartarian
Hords, or any of the Cossacks, as well those under the Muscovite as Ottoman
Jurisdiction, may commit any Hostilities or Depredations, such of the
beforementioned Tartars or Cossacks (whether Muscovites or Turks) that shall in
any wise violate or act contrary to this Article, being to be exemplary
punished by their respective Sovereigns.

I am apt to imagine, that considering the small Space of Time concluded in
this Treaty for the Truce betwixt these two Potent Princes, it will be looked
upon among you, who live at so great a distance, as a Politic Contrivance of
this Court and that of Poland, to wipe off the Blemish of deserting so Potent
an Ally, who has given so considerable a Diversion to the Turks, during some
Years of this War; but I do not question before I come to the Conclusion of
this Letter, to make it apparent, that as the whole was transacted by his
Czarish Majesty's Orders and good liking, so the same is founded upon a most
solid and refined Reasons of State, on die side of the Muscovites.

I told you before, That the Czar of Muscovy, having by the Conquest of the
City of Asoph, situate so near the Palus Miotis, not only opened his Way into
the Black-Sea, but also to the entire Conquest of the Crim-Tartary, and the
whole Penirsula, as far as to the Borysthenes it self, had all the Reason in
the World, to be desirous of the Continuance of the War against the Turks; and
that this was one of the Chief Motives of his Journey to the Come of Venna.

But his Czarish Majesty being made sufficiently sensible, that at this
juncture of time, the Confederates, without great Prejudice to their own
Interest, could not refuse the Advantageous Propositions offered by the Turks,
he could not pitch upon a better Expedient than this Truce of two years, to
accomplish his Great, Design of either making himself Master of the Black-Sea,
or at least to oblige the Turks to grant his Subjects a free Trade in their
Ports, for the Convenience of Transporting the China, Indian, Persian, and
Russian Commodities into Italy, and other Parts of Europe.

This will be manifest, if we make a due comparison betwixt the present posture
of Affairs, betwixt the Turks and Muscovites on that side. For, not to mention
here the present flourishing State of the Muscovite Empire, and the declining
Condition of the Turks in general, it is most evident, that the Ottomans lie
under no small Disadvantages, in respect of the Muscovites on that side.

The Muscovites by the late Conquests upon the Borysthenes and Palus Miotis, by
the Submission of the Cossacks and Circassian Tartars, by strengthening the old,
and erecting several new Fortresses in these Parts, have so strengthened their
Frontiers thereabouts, that they seem to be inpenetrable, considering the
powerful Succors, they are able to send to the Relief of any place that shall
be attacked by the Turks; the Muscovite Armies by the introduction of a regular
Martial Discipline among them, and the vast Number of well qualified foreign
Officers, who command them, being at least equal, if, not superior to the
Turkish Janisaries themselves, the Flower and Main strength of their Armies,
which also has been reduced to a much less number, by the Misfortunes they have
suffered in the last War against the Christians.

It is furthermore to be considered, that the Turks having hitherto looked upon
the Muscovites as so inconsiderable, that the Crim-Tartary was thought a
sufficient Bulwark against them, their Fortresses and Maritime Towns, though of
the greatest Consequence to them, in respect of maintaining the Dominion of the
Black-Sea, have been neglected; whereas by the Vigilance of his present Czarish
Majesty, the Muscovite Frontiers are in a better State than any of his other
Dominions, by the Addition of several regular Fortifications.

The Naval Strength of Muscovy, though scarce worth mentioning a few years ago,
has by the indefatigable Care of the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, been
established upon so good and firm a Foundation, that the same is incomparably
superior to the Turkish Fleet (which has been battered so often by the
Venetians of late) both in respect of number of Ships, and the goodness of
their Seamen and Commanders, of which last, the Czar has taken a considerable
number into his Service, during his stay in these Parts.

The Treaty betwixt the Christians and Turks being chiefly built upon this
Foundation, that Matters should remain among all Parties in Statuo-quo, his
Czarish Majesty had little prospect of obtaining thy Dominion over the
Black-Sea, or a free Commerce in the Turkish Ports by a long Truce, which would
have given the Turks leisure to recover Breath, and to strengthen their
Fortresses and Maritime Places on that side; whereas two years cannot be judged
in any wise a proportionable time requisite for to put themselves in a State of
defense against so Potent a Neighbor as the Czar of Muscovy is at present; so
that at the expiration of these two years, his Czarish Majesty has all the
Probability on his side to obtain his aim, either by the prolongation of this
Truce, or force of Arms.

That this is his Czarish Majesty's design, seems sufficiently probable to me
from his vast Preparations at Sea, being informed from very good hands, that he
has at Veroniza only near forty stout Men of War, ready to put to Sea, most of
which carry betwixt fifty and sixty Guns besides thirty more which are to be
ready and fit for Service against the next Spring, and a proportionable number
of Great and small Gillies, Manned for the most part with foreign Mariners, very
Expert in the Sea-service. What Force are the Turks able to oppose at this time
against such a Naval Strength, when they have not been able to cope with the
Venetians at Sea in this last War? I am not ignorant that some of our
Politicians in this Court are of Opinion, that when, by the intended* Canal
betwixt the two Rivers, Wolga and Don, a Communication is made with the
Caspian-Sea, the Czar may with more Convenience extend his Conquests that way;
but considering, that the Caspian-Sea has few good Ports, and that the
Muscovite Territories are separated by Land by vast Deserts from Persia, and
that there is a strict Correspondence betwixt these two vast neighboring
Empires, founded upon the Convenience of their mutual Commerce, I see no great
Reason why it may not be more reasonably supposed, that, in case the Turks do
not by granting free Commerce to the Muscovites, after the expiration of this,
two Years Truce, prevent the Storm, his Czarish Majesty should not turn his
Arms, against them, especially in the Black-Sea, where every thing seems to
flatter him with hopes of Success and great Advantages on his side.

I am afraid I have been too tedious in these Reflections, wherefore I would
not tire your Patience, if I had not something to add, before I come to the
Conclusion of this Letter, concerning the Grand-Tartary, and other Northern
Countries, betwixt the River Oby and the Chinese Wall; in the Description of
which, as the ancient Geographers have labored with such ill Success, and
given us their own Inventions for Truth; and the Modern Historians for the most
part, have described us inaccessible Deserts in lieu of a well inhabited
Country; so, I reckon it will not be disagreeable to you, if I give you some
Account of what I have been able to learn concerning this Point, from somld of
the most open-hearted and most ingenious among the Muscovites, during the Stay
of the late Great Embassy in this Court.

I have told you before that the World was beholding to the Muscovites, for the
discovery of the Way by Land through the Great-Tartary into China. For the Way
by Land through India, and the Territories of the Great Mogul, being found
almost impracticable by reason of the vast Deserts; the Inhabitants of Siberia,
after, they had submitted to the Muscovites, furnished them with sufficient
Opportunity to discover the Way into China oh that side. For these People being
encouraged by the Advantages of vending their Sable Martins to the Muscovites
at so excessive a rate, as well as their black Fox-Skins, scarce ever known
before in those Parts, did, to satisfy their Avarice, engage themselves in
those far distant Countries in quest of those Creatures, by which means they
were by degrees, and as it may be said insensibly brought upon those Roads
which lead into China.

After the first discovery of these Roads, the Muscovites did leave no stone
unturned, to make themselves acquainted with the Countries that lie betwixt
them and the Chinese Wall; for which purpose they used, under some pretense or
other, to send frequent Messengers into China, who have taken diverse Roads, and
many times making great Circumferences in their Journeys, they by this means,
in process of Time, made all the discoveries they could wish for. They
discovered besides the Ostiakoi, Bratskoi, and Tungoeses, who have their
Habitations near the Rivers which border upon Siberia, three different sorts of
Tartars, very remarkable for the vast extent of those Countries they are
possessed of; to wit: The Tartars of Bogdoi, the Mongul Tartars, and the
Calmucks.

The first are the same which by the Chinese, are called, the Eastern-Tartars:
Their Country is of a vast extent, enclosed betwixt, the Eastern Seas and the
Rivers Chingala and Yamour. They were the first that many Ages ago, entered
China, but now are Tributaries to that Empire; which makes them much more
civilized than the rest of the Tartars, by reason of their great Commerce with
the Chinese; the Rivers of Yamour and Chingala, affording great store of
Rubies and Pearls, which supply the defect of their Cattle, which is very
small. They are in their Bodies not unlike to the Crim-Tartars, and both their
Language and Characters not unlike the Persian, but they write like the
Chinese, from the top downwards. Though they are not altogether ignorant of
Guns and Gunpowder, yet not being well informed of all the Advantages
belonging to them, they make but seldom use of them, they are Governed by
several Chans.

To the West of these Eastern-Tartars, are those of Mongul, inhabiting a
spacious Country, betwixt the River Yamour, China, Turquestan, and the
Calmucks, from whom they are divided by vast Deserts. They are Governed by
three Princes, who have each of them several other Chans under their
Jurisdiction. They are called by the Chinese, the Western-Tartars, and
acknowledge in some measure, the Authority of the Czars of Muscovy, by reason
of the Neighborhood of Siberia, and some other Countries thereabouts, Subject
to the Muscovite Empire, with whom they keep Traffic in Cattle, of which they
have a great Plenty, this Country being very full of Rivers, good Meadows and
Pastorages. They are unacquainted with the use of Firearms, and inhabit
neither Towns nor Villages.

The Calmuck Tartars possess that vast Tract of Land, which lies betwixt these
Mongal Tartars and the River Wolga, as far as to the Deserts of Astracan; they
are divided into many Hordes, each under the Command of a particular Chan, yet
they acknowledge one Principal Chan, who deduces his Pedigree from the Great
Tamerlan, and keeps a very Noble Court after the Tartarian Manner; They have no
fixed Habitations no more than the Monguls, but live in Tents very Commodiously
contrived As they never, stay long in a place, so they are the quickest in the
World at Encamping and Decamping, which is the reason the Czars of Muscovy seek
for their Alliance, by certain yearly Presents; and these are very ready to
keep a good Correspondence with the Muscovites, for the Convenience of vending
their Horses and Slaves, which they take from the other Neighboring Tartars.
They are all inclining to an Olive color, their Eyes small but sparkling,
their Noses short and somewhat flat. Their Habits are for the most part the
same, being distinguished only from one another, by a Tuft of Silk upon their
round Bonnets, according to the color of the Horde to, whom they belong. They
wear only Sheepskins, sewed together in the nature of Vests, with a Cord round
their Waste, whereon they fasten their Bows and Quivers.

You may easily imagine, that when the Muscovites had once opened their Passage
into those Parts, it was no difficult Task for them, to subdue those inhabiting
near their Frontiers by force of Arms, and by the Terror of their Strength, to
settle a fair Correspondence with the rest; so that following first the Tracts
of the Rivers Oby, Schelinga, Genessai and Yamour, they built several
Fortresses upon the said Rivers, both to secure their Conquests, and for the
more convenient Passage of their Caravans to China.

The last Fortress, which the Muscovites built upon the River Yumour, is called
Albazin, which, as it is not above a Months Journey from Peking, the Capital of
the Chinese Empire, so it proved the occasion of the late War betwixt the
Chinese and Muscovites, which was carried on for some time with equal Vigor
on both sides, till at last, the present Czar Peter Alexiovitz, being made
sensible by Experience of the great Inconveniences that attended this War on
his side, in reference to the vast distance of Frontiers, which are five or six
Months March from the City of Muscow; whereas on the other hand, the Chinese
send their Supplies with much more Ease, and infinite less Charge, by reason of
the nearness of the Eastern-Tartars, their Subjects; and the Czar having at the
same time a strong Inclination to come to a Rupture with the Turks, at a
Juncture when their Affairs were but in an ill posture, resolved to come to an
Accommodation with the Chinese,

The first meeting of the Ambassadors of these two Potent Empires upon the
Frontiers near Albazin, proved unsuccessful, the Chinese, according to their
ancient Customs; insisting upon some Ceremonies, that would not in any wise be
granted by the Museovites; But the second Treaty succeeded according to wish,
the Chinese being forced to abate of their Pride, and to Treat the Muscovite
Ambassadors from that time, with all the Respect due to their Character.

The Muscovites having not till very lately applied themselves to the Sea, it
is no great wonder, if they have not neglected the Passage by Water into China,
by the Way of the Rivers Oby, Genessai, and Yamour; and in lieu thereof, have
left nothing unattempted to open their Passage thither by Land. It Is true, the
Heaps of Ice, which for the greatest part of the Year are to be met with at the
Entrance of the River Oby, the many Waterfalls of the River Genessai, and the
Bulrushes which choke almost up the mouth of the River Yamour, are Obstacles,
which though they might have been surmounted by industrious and expert. Seamen,
yet were so terrifying to the Muscovites, as to bereave them of all hopes of
Success.

And to confess the Truth, considering the Method used by the Russian Merchants
and Caravans, and the good Order taken for their convenient Passge through
these Parts, the same contribute not a little toward mitigating both the
Trouble and Charge of so long a Journey.

They set forward most commonly from the City of Muscow in February, when the
Snow being well beaten, they travel in nineteen or twenty days, as far as
Tobolskoy, the Capital City of Siberia, eight hundred English Miles distant
from the City of Muscow. If it happens to thaw about that time (which is very
seldom) they take the convenience of the Rivers on this and the other side of
the River Oby, by which means they cross the Country till they come to the
Ostiakoi, the first of the Eastern-Tartars, Subject to the Czar of Muscovy. But
if the Frost continue, they go on by Land the same way, where they change their
Horses for Renes or Rain-deers, which carry them with incredible swiftness over
the Snow and Ice to the City of Genessai, built by the Muscovites upon the
River of the fame Name, for the convenience of their Merchants traveling in
those Parts; Here it is they take Vessels which carry them upon the Rivers
Tongusi and Augara, against the Stream, to the Lake of Baikala.

From this Lake, they either take Shipping upon the River Schelinga, as far as
to a City of the same Name, owing likewise its foundation to the Muscovites; or
else proceed in their Way by Land, immediately after they have crossed the
beforementioned Lake, through the Country of the Mongul Tartars, who readily
furnish them with Mules and Dromedaries, to the Confines of China.

But for the better understanding of this Famous Passage by Land, I will
conclude this Letter with giving you the best Account I could get, of several
of the Muscovites here, of the Road lately taken by several Embassy's sent into
China.

They go from Muscow to the Famous Convent of Troitza, about sixty English
Miles; from thence to the City of Peresla, as many Miles from Troitza.

From Peresla, they go to the City of Rostof, sixty Miles from the last, and so
to the City of Jeresla, near a hundred and twenty Miles distant from thence.

From Jeresla, they go to the Great City of Wologda, which lies one hundred and
eighty Miles from the last.

From this place, they continue their Journey to the small City of Tottma, upon
the River Wergno Suchuno, and so to Vstiuga, a considerable Place upon the
River Suchana; from thence to a small City, called Lolowitzgotz, upon the River
Wietzegda, which oxonerates it self in the. River Dwina.

About fifty Miles from thence, they pass through a great Forest above seven
hundred Miles long; after which they come to Kaigorod, a City upon the Famous
River Kama.

From Kaigorod, they proceed to Solokamskoy, a City upon the River Vsolsko,
which thereabouts discharges it self in the River Kama.

Thus they continue their Journey for one hundred and twenty Miles without any
considerable River, till they come to the River Lusowa, where they take
Shipping for stzogorod, a goodly City, near three hundred and fifty Miles
distant from1 Solokamskoy.

From thence they go forward, to Jat, a Town upon the River Ajat, and so by
Romoshora, upon the River Resh, to Newagorod upon the River Newa, the first
Town of Siberia.

From hence they pass through a fertile and well Peopled Country to the Town of
Zudna, situate upon the River Nietza, to the Towns of Niginiskoy, Irbitskoy,
Kirginskoy, Subrorawa and Jalaw, the last of which lies upon the River Tura,
where the River Newa discharges it self into the same.

They continue their Journey from hence to the Town of Krasna, to the City of
Tumeen, and so to the Town of Makoma upon the River Pishina, where it
discharges it self into the River Tura; from thence to the Town of Siltska, at
the confluence of the two Rivers Tura and Tobol, the last being on the right;
which brings them to the City of Tobolskoy, the Capital of Siberia, situate
upon the confluence of the two Rivers, Jotish and Tobol, the last of which has
given her its name.

From Tobolskoy, they continue their Journey through the Towns of Demian and
Samurskoyam, and about two Miles beyond the last, they meet with a Branch of
the Famous River Oby, which brings them to the City of Surguto, and afterward
to the City of Narim, situate upon the Banks of the River Oby.

Here they quit this River, and proceed to the River Kett, which brings them to
the Town of Kettsway.

From hence they go to Makafskoy, and after they have traveled for two days
and nights through a great Forest, they come to the City of Jeneskay, upon the
River Jeneskay, which is both very Navigable, and its Banks inhabited by the
Ostiaki.

After they have continued their Journey for some time upon this River, they
leave it to the Right, and take their way toward the River Tungunsi,
whereabouts are the Habitations of the Tungeses; which they leave again to the
Right, and proceed in their Journey to the City of Ilimskoy, situate on the
River Ilim, the Country thereabouts being pretty well inhabited.

After they have traveled three days and nights through a Forest, they come
to the River Augara, which brings them to the City of Irkuskoy, situate upon
the River.

About thirty Miles from hence is the Lake of Baikala, where the River Augara
has its first rise, being the utmost Boundary of Siberia.

From hence, they continue their Journey through the Towns of Kabaria,
Belsko-Saimcko, and Ostrog-Vdinskoy, in the Province of Dauria, inhabited by,
Tartars, to the City of Jerawena, situate upon a Lake of the same name.

After they have passed this Lake, they are forced to travel through a great
Desert, which is watered however by the River Vda, and at last come to the Lake
called Schacks-Oser, about two Miles over; then they come to the Village of
Plothus, about a Mile from whence the Rivers Sueta and Onna, fall into the
River Ingeda, which from thence forward is called Schilka, and being augmented
by the two Rivers Nertza and Arguna, produces that Famous River, the Yamour.

From hence they go to the City of Nertzinskoy, upon the River Nertza, being
the last Fortress upon these Frontiers belonging to the Muscovites.

Then they travel for near three weeks through Deserts, Forests, and
Boggy-grounds, till they come to Arguna, a small City upon a River of the same
name, and the last Place under the Muscovite Jurisdiction in the Province of
Dauria. Here they meet in their way with the Rivers Derby, Gann, Kailar, and
Saduma, all which discharge themselves into the Arguna, till they come to the
Source of the River Jal, where they meet with, he first Out-gards of the
Chinese, being a very fertile and well peopled Country, inhabited by the
Targutshini, who are Pagans, Subject to China.

Through these they pass to a Village, called Suttigarski, and from thence to
the City of Naun, three Miles distant from the former. From hence they proceed
in their Journey for several days, through another Desert destitute of any
Springs or other Water, till they come to the River Casumur, which discharges
it self in the River Naun.

They pass afterward by the Ruins of a great many Cities, and at three days
Journey from the Famous Chinese Wall, through a Road cut out of the Rocks,
which brings them to the City of Karakaton.

After they have passed the Chinese Wall, the first Place they meet with is the
City of Galgan; not above a Mile within the Wall; from thence they go to
Xantuming Xunguxu, Xangote, and Tunxo to Peking, the Residence of the Emperors
of China.` Being sensible that I have sufficiently tired your Patience, I will
add no more, but in expectation of your next, rest

Sir, Vienna, Feb. 24. 1699. Yours, etc


