THE Doctrine of Particular Unconditionate ELECTION (Before Time.)

Asserted and Proved by God's Word, against the Quakers, Papists, and Arminians.

In Answer to a Challenge given the Author, (by the Quakers) to make good (by
the Scriptures of Truth) the abovesaid Doctrine.

Wherein is evidently discovered, I. That the abovesaid Doctrine, rightly
understood and believed, (with Application to ones self) is the great Enemy of
Sin, both in the Heart and Life of a true Believer; and that which keeps the
Believer from Despair in the deepest Desertion and Temptation. II. That the
Doctrine of Free Will and General Redemption, etc. is an Inlet to, and an
Encourager of Sin; and which leads (in the end) to horrid Despair, under
powerful Awakenings in the natural Conscience of an Unregenerate Man.


For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
Signs and Wonders; insomuch, that (if it were possible) they should deceive the
very Elect,

Mat. 24.24. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence, to make your
Calling and Election sure, etc.

2 Pet. 1.10. By Ja. Barry, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1700.

TO THE Impartial READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Am to inform thee, that in the time of the Popish Government, when Popery
and Quakerism smiled so (amicably) on each other, (as the two Religions (if I
might so call them) which are nearest of Kin of all the Religions (visibly)
professed in these Kingdoms) the People called Quakers sent me a Thrasonical
Challenge in Writing, (which was afterward published in Print) to prove (from
the Scriptures of Truth) the Four Doctrines here following. (1.) The Doctrine
of the Resurrection of this fleshly Body, which Dies and turns to Duft. (2.)
The Doctrine of Justification, by the alone Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
freely imputed. (3.) The Doctrine of Imperfection (in Sanctification) in the
most Mortified Believer, while in this World. (4.) The Doctrine of Particular
Unconditionate Election before Time. All which the Quakers do stiffly (and
peremptorily) deny, as by their Printed Book (against me) does evidently
appear. Their Challenge I was resolved to answer in Print, to let the World see
what Heterodox and Heretical Principles that deluded (and seduced) People, do
hold and teach for true Religion. Besides my Resolution (herein,) I obliged my
self by promise, to my Congregation, that I would (in the Strength of Christ)
prick the Bladder of their Blasphemous Pride, by proving (and making good) by
the Scriptures of Truth, the abovesaid Doctrines. For my Encouragement
(wherein,) my Congregation did (unanimously) stand by me, resolving I should be
at no other Charge (hereabout) but the Studying part. Paper was Bought, the
Printer agreed with; and just as the Press was ready to begin, the Storm came
so suddenly on the Protestants in Dublin, that we were soon scattered asunder.
The Providence of God calling on us, to secure our Lives, instead of Printing
Books. The reason why I have been so long silent in this Cause, is, the want of
that help I had from my Flock in Dublin. If any generous noble Spirited
Christians (who love Christ's Cause better than they do the Mammon of this
World) will step in to my Encouragement, in supplying the room of my absent
Friends, they shall (in a very short time) see the Four Doctrines
abovementioned cleared up and made good from God's Word, (Maugre all the
Jesuitical Craft and Subtilty, whereof that People seem to be Masters) The
reason why I have singled out the last of the four Doctrines, rather than any
of the other three, to discover and confute the Quakers pernicious Heterodoxy
(in the foundation Principles of true Christianity) is twofold.

First, because that in denying and opposing the Doctrine of particular,
unconditionate Election (before time) they do manifestly Rob God of his
Sovereignty and Praise.

Secondly, because of the Natural tendency, which the denial of this Doctrine
of a particular, unconditionate Election (before time) and the holding and
propagating its contrary, (viz.) The Doctrine of Free Will to good (in every
Man) of General Redemption, and a Temporary, Conditional Election, with falling
from Grace; has to encourage Men in Living a licentious, loose Life; and to
necessitate Men's final despair of Salvation, when the Naural Conscience (in
Unregenerate Men) comes to be under powerful Awakenings, for Sin committed
against the Law of God.

That I do the Quakers no wrong, in charging them with Robbing God and
encouraging Men to Live in Sin; as also their laying a Foundation for Men's
despair of ever being saved in their way of Conditional and Temporary Election,
will evidently appear to him who reads and compares with Gods revealed Will,
what is discovered in this small Tract: And in case any noble Spirited
Christians will but encourage the Work (as already hinted) I do not so much as
doubt, but that the Spirit of God will enable me to demonstrate (from Gods own
Word) that the Quakers in denying the Resurrection of the Body, and the
Justification of a Sinner, by the alone Righteousness of the Son of God,
(freely imputed) without any regard had to any Qualifications inhering in the
Person of the Sinner Justified, do deny all sound and saving Religion; And as
touching their Sinless Perfection, (attainable in this Life) whereof they make
such Brags; it shall be made plain, that (herein) they both belie the Spirit of
God, and contradict the experience of all saved Believers, both in Heaven and
Earth.

CHAP. I. Of Election before Time.
GOD did before all Time, by his unchangeable Counsel, most freely,
unchangeably, and from all Eternity, elect and choose unto himself (out of
Lapsed Adam's fallen Posterity) a certain number of Persons, (which can neither
be lessened nor increased) to partake of his special saving Grace to Salvation,
by Jesus Christ his Son, to the Praise of the Glory of his own Grace.

What I have now asserted (for truth,) if God enables me to demonstrate and
make good by Scripture, as (I doubt not) he will, then will it unavoidably
follow, (all the Wit and Malice of Men and Devils cannot overthrow it,) that
God has passed by, and Reprobated others.

In the Proposition now laid down, there are three things to be considered, in
order to a clearing up, and making good the Point in Dispute. First, The Act of
God, and the Objects thereof, which are both held forth and intended in the
Scriptures following, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him. Jo.
15.19. I have chosen you, etc. 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you, etc.

In the Scriptures now quoted, we have God Electing or Choosing, and then the
Objects of his Election or Choice, (viz.) Particular Persons, on whom that
Election of God fixes, (viz.) Some particular Persons.

That God's Act of Election has fixed on some particular Persons, not on all in
general, as the Enemies of Election would fain have it, the following Arguments
will evince.

Arg. 1. If God has made a Promise of Life and Salvation to some particular
Persons only, then has he elected and chosen to himself a certain number of
Persons, to whom alone (excluding all others) that Promise of Grace and
Salvation shall be made good.

But God has made a Promise of Life and Salvation to some particular Persons
only, (excluding all others;) therefore God has elected and chosen to himself
a certain number of Persons, to whom (excluding all others) the Promise of Life
and Salvation shall be made good.

That God has made a Promise of Life and Salvation to some particular Persons
only, (excluding all others) is evident and plain to such as acknowledge the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be of Divine Authority. Genesis 17.7.
And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee,
in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to
thy Seed after thee.

Here the Judicious and Unprejudiced reader may plainly see, that Abraham and
his Seed were particular Persons, distinct from all other Nations and People,
which were round about him: And these it pleased God of his mere Sovereign
Grace, to single out for his own peculiar Use, that they may be a Holy People,
to bear his Name, and to give him a pure and spiritual Worship and Service,
which should be according to his own Holy Institution and Divine Appointment:
And that they may be made Partakers of the promised Inheritance, which was the
sure Possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, of which the promised Land of Canaan,
was but a Type and Shadow.

The People of the Jews was but a small People when God fixed his Love on them,
and called them. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy
God, the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself,
above all people that are upon the face of the earth. The Lord did not set his
love upon you, nor choose you because ye were more in number than any people,
for ye were the fewest of all people, but because the Lord loved you: And
because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, has the
Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and Redeemed you out of the ho^^^ of
Bondmen.

The same Promise which was made to Abraham and his Seed under the Old
Testament Dispensation, is confirmed by the New.

And evident it is, that as God chose and called Abraham under that dark
Dispensation, with whom he entered into a Covenant of Grace; the Benefit of
which was to be of equal extent to himself and his Children, even so many of
them as were the Children of the Premise. So under the Gospel Dispensation God
(who is a free Agent, acting all he does in a way of Sovereignty) saw fit to
make known, by the Gospel, that among the Gentiles also he had a select and
chosen People, on whom he had decreed to conferr the Riches of his free Grace,
through the plenteous Redemption that is in his Son Jesus Christ; and that
pursuant to his own immutable Decree and Purpose, electing and choosing them
before Time began. Acts 2.39. for the Promise is to you and to your Children,
and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Here is that Promise formerly mentioned, which looks at Abraham and his
Children, and also discovers the gracious Design of God, to make a certain
number of the Gentiles actual Partakers of the self-same Grace and Blessing.

The manner of the Apostle's expressing himself, is full of Clearness and
Perspicuity, proving, that the promise of that Grace and Salvation is not
designed for all and singular the Gentile Sinners that then were, or in after
times should be in the Word, but he limits and restrains the Promise to a
certain peculiar number, least Sinners should mistake the Apostle, and
conclude, that because he had laid down an universal Term, saying, And to all
that are afar off, he (by way of Explanation) shows what the Spirit means by
that universal Term, adding even as many as the Lord our God shall call, in
which he plainly shows, and invincibly proves, that none of the Gentile Sinners
shall ever partake of God's special Grace, but such as are (in time)
effectually called out of a State of Nature to a State of Justification and
Sanctification; the which is never granted to any, but in the Right of a
Covenant-promise, which Covenant-promise respects that gracious Act of God,
electing and choosing in Christ his Son, as many of Adam's Posterity, both of
Jews and Gentiles, as his own Sovereignty pleased, according to that of the
Apostle: Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he did praedestinate, them he also called,
and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. And our Savior himself, in Jo. 10.16. designs the Gentiles, whom
God had in his electing Love, given in charge to him, in those Expressions: And
other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must bring; and
they shall hear my voice, etc.

Arg. 2. If among the many thousands of People, who hear the Gospel Preached,
but some (and that very few comparatively) are savingly Converted, receive
Mercy, are Justified and Sanctified, and are made to Persevere in a course of
Faith and Holy Life; then God has elected and chosen only a certain peculiar
number of Men to Life and Salvation.

But among the many thousands of People, who hear the Gospel Preached, but some
only are savingly Converted, receive Mercy, are Justified, are Sanctified, and
do finally Persevere in a course of Faith and Holy Life.

Therefore God has elected and chosen only a certain peculiar number of Men to
Life and Salvation.

There is nothing more evident than that the greatest number, even of those
People, who are outwardly called by the Gospel, do slight and contemn the
Gospel, and the Grace offered therein: Witness that of our Savior, Mat. 20.16.
For many are called, but few are chosen. Luke 14.16, 17, 18, 19. That Parable
of the King, who made a great Supper, to which the King (by his Servants)
invited the Guests, notwithstanding which many of them made blind Excuses, and
shifted it off. By which Practice in the Guests we are to understand, that
great slight and contempt which worldly minded Sinners put on the Lord Jesus
and his great Salvation, (wrought for the Elect) which God offers in the
Gospel, the which they undervalue, preferring the Accommodations of this
perishing World, before that great and precious Salvation.

To this also pertinent is that of Paul, Romans 10.16. But they have not all
obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias says, Lord who has believed our report? Romans
9.27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of the children
of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant only shall be saved.

Now then, if among those many, who are Externally called, and the very many,
who make a Profession, there are but very few who savingly Believe, Repent, and
finally Persevere in a course of Faith and Holy Life; then it is beyond all
Controversy, that those few who so Believe, Repent, etc. are particular
Persons, whom free Grace elected to that state of Believing and Persevering;
and the rest, who were (by far) the greater number, were left to inward
Blindness and hardness of Heart, according to Romans 11.7. What then? Israel has
not obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has obtained it, and
the rest were blinded: According as it is written, God has given them the
spirit of slumber; eyes, that they should not see; and ears, that they should
not hear, unto this day.

Arg. 3. If God has chosen Persons by Name, to be Partakers of Life and
Salvation by Christ his Son, then has he chosen particular Persons.

But God has chosen Persons by Name, to be Partakers of Life and Salvation by
Christ his Son.

Therefore God has chosen particular Persons, etc.

The major Proposition is not questioned; the Minor or Assumption is secured by
the express Testimony of the Spirit. Rev. 13.8. And all that dwell upon the
earth, shall worship the beast, whose names are not written in the Lamb's book
of life. Luke 10.20. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are
subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven.

Philip. 4.3. And I entreat thee also true yoke fellow, help those women which
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my
fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of Life.

Argu. 4. If Jeremiah and Jacob, etc. were particular Persons Chosen and Loved
of God before they were Born, then God did Elect and Choose particular Persons
to Life and Salvation; but Jeremiah and Jacob, etc. were particular Persons,
Chosen and Loved of God before they were Born.

Therefore God did Elect and Choose particular Persons to Life and Salvation.

That Jeremiah and Jacob, etc. were particular Persons, no Man of Sense will
deny; that they were Beloved of God before the natural Birth, the word of God
is full and express. Jer. 1.5. Jer. 31.3. Romans 9.11.

Argu. 5. If God knows his Elect from all others, before he calls them in
Conversion, then has God Elected particular Persons to Life and Salvation.

But God knows his Elect from all others, before he calls them in Conversion.

Therefore God has Elected and Chosen particular Persons to Life and Salvation.

That Gods Praecognition (or foreknowledge joined with his purpose of Grace to
Save his Elect) goes before his actually calling them in effectual Conversion,
is beyond Dispute. Romans 8.29, 30. 2 Timothy 2.19. Jo. 13.18.

Argu. 6. If they who believe in Time, were, before their Believing, ordained
to Eternal Life, then did God Elect and Choose particular Persons unto Life and
Salvation.

But they who believe in time, were, before their Believing, ordained to
Eternal Life.

Therefore God has Elected and Chosen particular Persons unto Life and
Salvation.

That Gods Praeordination of Persons to Life and Salvation, does preceed (or go
before) Believing and Repentance; is plain from Acts 13.48. And as many as were
ordained to Eternal Life Believed. Romans 11. The Election has obtained it. Jo.
10.26. But ye Believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep, as I said unto you.
From which Scriptures it is most plain, that none do, or can (in time) Believe
and reput to Salvation, but such Persons as are theretofore appointed by Gods
gracious purpose.

Argu. 7. If the Term Elect does signify and presuppose a Calling or Choosing
some particular Persons or Things, out from among other Persons or Things, then
has God out of so many, Elected some particular Persons unto Eternal Salvation.

But the Term Elect does signify and presuppose a Calling or Choosing some
particular Persons or Things out from among other Persons or Things.

Therefore, God has out of many, Called and Chosen some particular Persons
unto Eternal Life.

Argu. 8. If the Lord Jesus did lay down his Life but for a certain particular
number of Sinners, then did God Elect and Choose a particular number to Life
and Salvation.

But the Lord Jesus did lay down his Life for a certain particular number of
Sinners.

Therefore God did Elect and Choose a particular number to Life and Salvation.

That the Lord Jesus did lay down his Life for a certain particular number, is
obvious and plain to him that can but Read. Jo. 10.15. As the Father knows
me, even so know I the Father; and I lay down my Life for the Sheep. With this
accords that of Paul to Titus. Chap. ^.14. who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purchase to himself a peculiar People,
Zealous of good Works. Ephesians. 5.25. (...) love your Wives, even as Christ also
Loved the Church, and gave himself for it, etc.

The Sheep of whom Christ speaks, can be understood to be no other but
Believers, even such as Died in the Faith before his Incarnation, with the
Believers of that present day, and all who in time to come were to Believe in
him: And these are the Souls who were by the Father committed to the Pastoral
care and charge of Christ the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, as Sheep are
committed to the care and charge of an under Shepherd.

For these Christ lays down his Life: To these, he (by his Spirit) actually
applys the virtue of his Death: Over these he Watches: And to these only,
(excluding all others) he gives Eternal Life.

That these were given to Christ by the Father, to be redeemed and brought to
Glory, appears from Jo. 6.39.

And this is the Fathers Will which has sent me, That of all which he has
given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the Last Day. Jo.
17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, etc. And Verse 2. As thou have
given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as
thou have given him. Mark this Reader? To as many as thou have given him. This
plainly proves that God did commit to the care and faithfulness of Christ his
Shepherd, a certain particular number to be Justified and Saved by him; and
therefore not all the Race of fallen Mankind, as Papists, Arminians, Quakers,
Free-Willers, etc. vainly teach and hold.

Another Consideration, which is full of clearness, to convince and satisfy
any right in their Minds, That not Adams Posterity in General, (as the
Heretics above named would fain have it) but a certain particular and definite
number were Elected and Chosen by God, and by him given to Christ his Son, to
be Redeemed and Saved; is Christ his refusing to concern himself for any
others, in the discharge of his Office of Intercessor, as appears from Jo.
17.9. I Pray for them, (that is, for the Elect, for whom he had undertaken as
Vedem^^y and Surety) I Pray not for the World, (that is, those of the World,
who were by God left in a Reprobate State and Condition) as is evident from Jo.
17.14. I have given them thy Word, and the World has hated them because they
are not of the World; even as I am not of the World. Here are two distinct
Partys described by Christ, the one is Prayed for, the other is not; the one is
hated, the other hates; the very Practice of the latter denotes the Persons to
be Children of another Father, distinct from those they hate. There is nothing
more discovers Men to be the Children of the Devil, than their hating
Righteousness, and not loving those who appear to be Godly. 1 Jo. 3.10. In this
the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever
does not Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother.

As Love to God, his Truth, and such as bear his Image, is an infallible
Character of an Elect Child of God. Jo. 13.35. 1 Jo. 3.14. 1 Jo. 4.7.

So to hate God, his Truth, and such as bear his Holy Image, is the indelible
Character of a Reprobate designed for Eternal Destruction. 1 Jo. 3.10.

The second thing in the Proposition to be considered, is the End and Design of
God in that Act of his in Electing and Choosing, which is twofold. First, as it
respects the Creatures Elected, viz. that they might partake of the Special
Grace of God here on Earth, and of Eternal Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven,
through Christ his Son, according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he
has Chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that we should be
Holy and without blame before him in Love. 2 These. 2.13. Because God has from
the beginning Chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit and
Belief of the Truth. Verse. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the
obtaining of the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not
appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, with respect to God, Electing, viz. That the Glory of his Sovereign,
Free, and rich Grace, might be Extolled and Praised for ever, according as the
Apostle expresses it in Ephesians. 1.6. To the Praise of the Glory of his Grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved. Verse. 11, 12. In whom also we
have obtained an Inheritance, being predestinate, according to the purpose of
him who works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will; that we
should be to the Praise of his Glory, who first trusted in Christ.

The third thing in the Proposition to be considered, is to take Notice of the
Properties in that Act of God Electing.

Those Properties are in number three. First, God in Electing and Choosing some
Sinners to himself out of the corrupted Mass of fallen Mankind, on whom he
purposed to show Mercy: He did Elect and Choose them most freely; there was
nothing at all in the Objects Elected and Chosen, that could move God wherefore
he should Elect one Sinner more (or sooner) than another; for as fallen into
Sin, and equally obnoxious to the Curse of the Law and the Wrath to come, were
all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, looked on by God, when he fixed his Electing
Love on some, and actually rejected and passed others by, on whom the most High
God, (as an uncontrolable Sovereign) purposed to execute the fierceness of his
Wrath for Sin. The reason or impulsive cause of this Difference, which the
tremendous God saw fit to make between Sinners, equally guilty and obnoxious to
the Curse and Wrath of God, is not to be sought out of God himself. An Example
and lively Instance hereof we have in Romans 9.11. which the Wise God has seen
sit should be recorded, on purpose to stop the mouth of Carnal reason, which is
so wretchedly prone to Question (and Dispute against his Sovereignty over his
Creatures. The Children being not yet Born, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand, not of
Works, but of him that calls. It was said unto her, the Elder shall serve the
Younger. As it is Written. Jacob have I Loved, but Esau have I Hated.

The Wise God foreseeing the purblind Reasonings and Cavillings of Carnal Men's
unsanctified Brains, against the Doctrine of Gods absolute Sovereignty, in
disposing of the Eternal concerns of his rational Creatures, fallen by Sin into
a state and condition of Misery, through their own default; has seen good (for
the vindication of his own Prerogative) to make known to the Sons of Men, (and
that by the unerring Wisdom and unquestionable Authority of so great a Man as
Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles) the reason of Gods Method in
proceeding to Elect some of fallen Mankind, to a state of Life and Salvation
through a Redeemer, and Reprobating others, leaving them for ever to perish in
that Sin and Misery, into which they did (without any constraint) wilfully
plunge themselves, to be no other than his own most free and holy Will, seeing
that he alone is the undoubted Sovereign of the World, who has an indisputable
right to determine what to do with, (or how to dispose of) Sinning Rebels,
without being (any way liable to the controulment of any of his Creatures,
especially such of them as (by Sin) have forfeited their very Being to the
Divine Justice; and who (while in an unreconciled State) are not capable of
knowing him, or of being subject to his Divine Law.

The good Will and Pleasure then of the Blessed God, is the Source and Fountain
whence the great Disparity between the Elect and the Reprobate World does
spring, not any thing in the Creatures themselves, as Arminian Cavillers dream
and conceit it does: This will evidently appear, if the Reader will but (with a
becoming modesty and unprejudiced judgment) read the whole Chapter at length,
and (with fervent Prayer to God for the Wisdom of his Spirit) look narrowly
into, and with sobriety consider the 11th. and the 16th. Verses, where it
plainly appears, that the two conceited Qualifications, of which the Enemies of
Election are usually proud, and which they hold and teach, are the procuring
cause of the Difference between the good and the evil Men on Earth, viz. the
Free Will in Man, and the good Works which unregenerate Men, do but conceit
they do; they are both met with, and equally discarded by God, from having any
room or place among the causes which put God either upon Choosing the Elect or
rejecting the Reprobate. Mark the 11th. Verse. That the purpose of God according
to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. With this
agrees Ephesians. 2 8.9. For by Grace are ye Saved through Faith, and that not of
your selves; it is the Gift of God. Not of Works, least any Man should boast.
And Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according
to his Mercy he has Saved us, etc. Vain unregenerate Man would fain persuade
himself that he is worse than Threadbare Rags of his polluted Morality;
negative and positive is a covering sufficient not only to hide his Ulcerous
and plague Sores of Guilt and Vileness, from the pure and All-seeing Eyes of an
Infinite Majesty, but also to deck and adorn his Soul, so as to bespeak him an
Object sit for a Holy God to behold with delight: Oh horrid delusion! worse
than Frenzy, or Madness it self; this being but a Temporary Malady, which may
(by the use of ordinary means) be helped, but that the Bane and Destruction of
the Immortal Soul, which nothing but the despised Grace of God in Christ can
cure; such miserably deluded Souls will not find it easy to believe, that to
think so highly of their own Qualifications, is the greatest bar or hinderance
which keeps them from Salvation. Read also (with care) Verse. 16, So then, it is
not of him that Wills, nor of him that runs; but of God that shows Mercy.

Let the Adversaries of the Doctrine I am now vindicating, but consider that
Man as fallen into Sin and Misery of his own accord, is the Object of Election
and Reprobation; and let them (if they can) tell or show me how a Natural Man
in his Lapsed, Guilty State, can (possibly) either Will or Act any thing, but
what is (both for matter and manner) most vile and abominable in the sight of
that God, who is Purity and Holiness it self in the Abstract.

And if so, wherefore then should the most Just and Holy God be conceived to
elect Men for that which he can do no other than hate and loath, as the best
Duties of an unregenerate Person, are both contrary to the Nature of God, and
also repugnant to his Just and Holy Law?

When unregenerate Men talk and brag of their Duties and Qualifications, as
that which must recommend them to God, and purchase for them a Right to the
Crown that fades not away they, think, and speak as Men in a midnight Dream,
not understanding what they say, or whereof they affirm; and the head Spring of
this their Boasting of their Qualifications, is the profound Ignorance and
Luciferian Pride, which sways their unrenewed Spirits, having never passed
under the killing Severity of the Law of God, set home on the Conscience by the
Spirit of Bondage, to prepare them for healing by the Lord Jesus Christ.

Until this Work of the Lord pass on the Soul, no Child of Adam can (possibly)
prize the Son of God, or see himself to be utterly undone, till (with the Rich
Man in the Parable) the unquenchable Flames of Hell discover his Misery to him,
Luke 16.23. From what has been observed from the Scriptures now referred to,
plain it is, that God, in Electing some and Reprobating others of Adam's
Posterity, cannot (without Blasphemy) be said to elect or choose any Man to a
state of Life and Glory, for any thing of good, which he foresaw, would be in
the Sinner, fallen into a state of Sin and Misery: And therefore, if there was
nothing of foreseen Good in the Creature elected, for which God had respect to
him more than to another, it must unavoidably follow, that in God electing,
(not in the Sinner elected) is the impulsive or moving Cause, (viz.) His own
Sovereign good Pleasure.

God (as has been already observed) in Electing and Reprobating Men, looks on
them as fallen; and guilty Creatures, who had wrought their own Misery, by
their voluntary breach of his Royal Law. To none of them was the most High (any
way) obliged. He might have sent them all to the same Place and Condition of
the fallen Angels, whose Conduct and Example they followed, in rebelling
against their Holy Sovereign. And which of all the Reprobates (now in Hell)
will it avail, to dispose the Point of God's Sovereignty with him? or to
enquire why or wherefore he has left them in that sad and deplorable Estate of
Sin and Misery? Pertinent to the Business in hand, is that Query which Augustine
puts in his Book of the City of God; Quis fecit Reprobum? says he, Who made
the Reprobate? to which he himself replies, Quis nisi Deus? Who (says he) but
God?

Again he Queries, Quare Deus fecit Reprobrum? Why did God make the Reprobate?
to which he answers, Quia ita voluit: Because (says he) it was his Will.

Again he Queries, Quare Deus voluit Reprobum facere? Why (says he) was it
God's Will to make the Reprobate a Reprobate? He answers the Cavilling Querist
(or Saucy and Pragmatical Enquirer) with that of Paul, Romans 9.20. O Homo tu
quis es, Qui Respondeas Deo? O Man, who art thou that Replyest against God?

If Augustine were now living on Earth, and should Read the Reply which
Grevincovius (that Blaspheming Proud Arminian) made to the Query which Paul put
to the called Corinthian, who excelled in the Gifts of God, 1 Cor. 4.7. For who
makes thee to differ? and what have thou, that thou have not received? to
which Grevincovius most Arrogantly and Blasphemously replies, I my self make my
self to differ. I say, if Augustine were to Read this Arminian's Answer to Paul,
it would not be difficult to guess at what rate Augustine would treat his
Insolency.

If the abused Grace of God changed him not before Death, it is most dreadful
to think, and seriously to consider, how little the Freewil and Learning, of
which he was greatly proud, do now avail him at the Bar of the Great Judge; no
doubt but he finds (in woeful Experience) what an Impar Congressus (or unequal
Match) he is, for the great Jehovah to dispute Matters with. Oh! that Men of
his Spirit and pernicious Principle were Wise, to consider things aright before
they see and feel their Folly in the unquenchable Flames of God's Wrath in Hell.

Let it be farther considered, how express the Spirit of God is in charging on
Adam and all his Offspring (without Exception) the breach of his Law, and (on
that very account) accounting them all guilty Criminals, and unclean Polluted
Sinners, who (by their voluntary Apostasy) have forfeited his Favor and lost
his Blessed Image, wherein the Glory and Happiness of the Rational Creature
consisted, as the Apostle witnesses Romans 3.23. For all have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God. And in ver. 19. Now we know, that what things soever
the Law says, it says to them, who are under the Law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. The conclusion whereof
he sets down in ver. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh
be justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of sin: With Paul
concurrs all the Prophets, and the other Penmen of Holy Scriptures, setting
forth the wretched Condition of all Mankind by the Apostasy of Adam, the
natural and faederal Head of his Children.

The Condition then of all Adam's Posterity being such, as renders every Sinner
Culpable before God, and not only so, but utterly incapable of willing or
acting the least part of that Duty, which God's Law requires to a helping or
recovering himself out of that his Misery. It is most plain and obvious to
every enlightened Understanding, that by the Tenure of the first Adam's
Covenant, all are Born Heirs of the Curse and Wrath of an offended God; and are
(by reason of that Spiritual Impotency, which is inflicted on Adam's Nature as
a Punishment for breaking God's Law) as (altogether) unable to believe in an
Atoning Savior, (when offered by God in the Gospel of his Grace) as they are
to perform the Condition of that Holy Law of God, the Violation and Breach
whereof has Cast and Condemned (at God's Bar) the whole Race of Mankind.

Man's wretchedness and Misery then is of himself, he can truly and justly
blame none for it but himself. Genesis 3.17. Eccles. 7.29. Hos. 13.9.

This granted, it (unavoidably and by necessary consequence) follows, that God
is most Just and Righteous in Sealing (to the day of his Wrath) with the black
Character of Reprobation, that part of Adam's Posterity, on whom he has
(fixedly) resolved to Glorify, that adoreable and tremendous Attribute of his
incensed ^^stice, for breaking his Just and Righteous Law.

And where is the Man, who will undertake to prove God Unjust and Unrighteous,
in case he had dealt with the Elect themselves, as he has done with the
Reprobates, (viz.) Seal them up to the Judgment of the Great Day of his Wrath?
God is Debtor to none of Adam's Children, unless to Damn and Forsake them for
ever, for their (Devillike) Apostasy and Rebellion.

In this adoreable and tremendous Dispensation of his, in Reprobating the
greatest part of Mankind, and electing to himself (out of the failen and
corrupted Mass) some few of Mankind, on whom he purposed to Glorify the Riches
of his Grace, through Christ his Son. He acts toward both, in a way of
absolute Sovereignty, so that as the Reprobates cannot say they have not
merited that Curse and Misery, which is like to be their Portion for ever, so
neither shall the Elect be ever able to attribute their Salvation to any other
Cause, besides the Sovereign free and rich Grace of God, which (had it pleased
God) might have sixth its hold on the Reprobates, making them the Elect, while
they themselves were overlookt and passed by.

For my own part, I must (ingeniously) confess, that I am so far from
reflecting on God, as (any way) Unjust or Partial, for dealing with Adam's
Children as he does, that I am rather astonished to think, that any of Adam's
Apostate Offspring should ever escape that Curse and Wrath, to which they were
all equally Born Heirs apparent. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the children of
wrath, even as others. This, this was the State and Condition of the Elect
themselves, as they are the natural Offspring of Adam: But the Banner of God's
free Grace, and undeserved Love and Pity has been (by the Arm of Divine
Sovereignty) effectually displayed over them, when in their Blood and
Wretchedness, even then when God first laid the Foundation of their Salvation
in Election. According to Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. and Ephesians. 2. to the 10. ver.
Well may every justified believer cry out with Paul, Romans 11.33. (...). Oh the
depth of the Riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out!

In this bottomless Profundity (or Depth) of God's Unsearchableness, the Wit
and corrupt Reason of Unregenerate Men, with all their acquired Parts, are
swallowed up and confounded; by reason whereof it comes to pass, that many
times such as are admired for their great Reason and Learning, will not allow
the Creator of the World that Privilege, which they readily grant to a Man
like themselves, (viz.) To decree or act any thing but what their blind Reason
and perverted Judgment can see a Reason for it. Oh what an Age do we live in!
wherein the Immensity and Unsearchableness of God is (on every occasion of Men's
disputing Principles of Religion) called on to hold up the Hand at the Bar of
those Men's Carnal Reason, who indeed have lost the use of right Reason.

Of such Men I would gladly know, whether they can, (with all their Mother Wit,
decked and adorned with all their Academical Learning,) Fathom the depth of the
Created Ocean, or tell the exact number of the Stars, and what Influence they
have on Humane Bodies? If they can tell how the Soul and Body of man are
United? Or how the Bones grow in the Womb of the Woman with Child? With many
other Secrets in Nature, not only difficult, but even Impossible to be found
out by the Wit and Learning of Adam's Children: Witness the many Learned
Philosophers, wherewith the World abounded, whose Wit and Learning came vastly
short in finding out and tracing the Almighty in his Works of Creation and
Providence: From whence I Argue, A Minore ad Majus, From the Lesser to the
Greater. If all the Mother Wit and acquired Parts and Learning of the Children
of Adam could never find out many Secrets in the Works of Creation and
Providence, how much more impossible is it for them, to find out the Almighty
Creator himself to perfection?

The Query which Zophar the Naamathite put to Job, will never be answered by
any Creatures in Earth or Heaven any other way than in the Negative, Job 11.7.
Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty to
perfection?

And from what Source or Fountain Men's Atheistical and Saucy Reflections on
God, (for making such a difference between Adam's Children, in Saving but few
(in Comparison) and Damning the rest) should spring, I cannot tell, unless from
their profound Ignorance of the Immense and Incomprehensible Perfection of
God's Being, and their not owning and believing his absolute Sovereignty over
his Creatures.

I Appeal to the Conscience of every Savingly Englihtened Man, who Reads this,
whether this wilful and affected Ignorance of God, and their denying his
absolute Sovereignty over his Creatures, be not the very Portal or Door, at
which the horrid Profaneness and matchless Debaucheries of this worst of Ages
(which now lays the Kingdoms open to utter Ruin) have entered the Stage.

This is that which the Devil and his busy Agents (the Romish Jesuits) aimed
at, when (in the late K. J. his Reign) they obtained the King's Royal
Prohibition, forbidding Ministers, both Non. and Con. to meddle (in Preaching)
with the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation. They well knew how Subservient
the keeping the People Ignorant of the Doctrine of Election, would be to open
the Floodgates to Profaneness and Debauchery, and (consequently) prepare
England for a ready Reception of cursed and damning Popery.

The denying the Doctrine of God's Sovereignty, in Electing and Reprobating
Lapsed and Guilty Rebels, and teaching and maintaining, both in Pulpit and
Print, Freewill to good in Unregenerate Men, as also the Doctrine of general
Redemption is a Doctrine which is altogether Unscriptural; and because of Men's
Violence and Peremptoriness in Teaching and Propagating the same, and their
Obstinacy in refusing to receive and submit to the contrary Doctrine, which is
according to the Scriptures and the only Doctrine, which designs the
Destruction of Sin in the Hearts and Lives of true Believers; and the Promoter
of true Holiness: God most Justly punishes such People with a giving them up,
not only to believe the most Nonsensical Lies, (for true Religion) but even to
wallow like Swine in the Mire of the grossest Immoralities, even to an
excelling the very Pagan World.

To illustrate the point I am now defending against the Quakers and Arminians,
viz. That God in Electing some and Reprobating others, does Act therein most
freely, as an absolute Sovereign: Let them give me leave to put this Question
to their Reason and Conscience, (such as it is) suppose that all the several
Parties in the City, who differ in their Mode (or Way) of Worshipping God,
should (in their respective Meetings, instead of Worshipping God) lay all their
Heads, Hearts and Hands together, to contrive and carry on a Plot against the
King and the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, with a full intent to destroy
both the one and the other; to which Plot all the several Parties do (as one
Man) harmoniously and unanimously agree, the Law condemns not only the Practice
(as Traitorous and Treasonable) but Sentences the very Persons (all and
singular) who are proved to have had any hand in such a Plot, to a shameful and
cruel Death.

The Plot comes to be Discovered, upon Discovery, the King, who has the
Executive Power of the Law in his own hand, he considers the matter, and
finding that all these several Parties, (whom he took to be Loyal Subjects) are
turned Rebels; as most evidently appears by the unnatural Plot, lately engaged
in by them all, against both his Person and Government; for which, both he and
they know full well the Law condemns them all alike.

The King, to whom the Executive Power of the Law belongs, according to his
Prerogative, he Nominates two Select Parties out of all the rest, viz. Quakers
and Arminians, to whom he resolves to extend his Favor, in giving to them his
Royal Pardon; the other several Parties (distinct from them) he resolves to
leave them to the Sentence of the Law, to undergo the deserved Penalty thereof,
for that horrid and unnatural Rebellion. I would fain know what the Quakers and
Arminians could object against the King of England, for passing an Act of
Indemnity (or Free Pardon) on the People called Quakers and Arminians, and
leaving all the other Parties to suffer Death.

Seeing that (herein) the King Acts by Prerogative, not according to Desert;
for the Quakers and Arminians deserved Death as well as the rest, who are
excluded out of the Pardon: My reason tells me that the Quakers and Arminians
would be so far from charging the King with Injustice or Partiality, that they
would rather sound forth his Praise, for saying them by his Favor and Mercy,
(no way deserved) whom in strictness of Justice, he might have left to the
Sentence of the Law.

And in case any of the Criminals condemned to Die, should offer to murmur
against the King, for making such a Difference between his (equally) guilty
Subjects, would not the Quaker and the Arminian both Plead the Kings
Prerogative for saving themselves, when at the same time, and by the same
Sovereignty he past by the rest; and shall the King of Kings be Disputed
against and Reflected on for Acting (in matters of the like nature) by his own
undoubted Prerogative.

If any should be so saucy and bold, as to demand a reason why or wherefore the
King of England should leave seven or eight several Parties out of his Royal
Pardon, and extend the Benefit thereof only to two Select Parties, who were
both as liable to Death (by the Law) as the others; the Answer is ready, it is
the Kings Sovereign Will and Pleasure to make the two Select Parties Nominated
in his Pardon, Objects of his Pity and Mercy, and the rest to be the Objects of
his incensed Justice, to undergo that Death and Misery which they (by
Rebeilion) brought upon themselves.

Now in all this, has not the Potter power over the Clay of the same lump, to
make one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor? Romans 9.21.

Reader, I pray consider, that the lump in the place now quoted, intends no
other than Men and Women, whom God (the absolute Sovereign of the World)
Decreed to Create: The making Vessels is Gods Creating Mankind with a purpose
to permit their Fall.

His making one Vessel to Honor, and the other to Dishonor, is Gods Creating
one with a sixed purpose to recover him out of that fallen State, into which he
was to fall, (and that by Sovereign Grace) the other he leaves to Die and
Perish in that wretched State, into which he (of his own default) fell.

In this Procedure God is altogether free; neither can the Creature so left by
God, any way reflect on God, as dealing unjustly or unequally with him; and the
reason is, because God is under no Tie or Obligation to give Grace to that
Creature, who (of his own accord) did abuse and throw away that stock of Grace,
whereby he was rendered capable of keeping the Law of his Maker; and who by the
Instinct of his vitiated and corrupted Nature, does obstinately oppose and
resist the means of Cure, propounded and tendered in the Gospel.

So that the point in Controversy, between me and the Adversaries already
Named, is in this comparison propounded in the Verse last quoted, lively set
forth; from which it is apparent, that the design of the Apostle is to prove
that God (as the undoubted Sovereign of the World) who Acts what him pleases,
and that according to the Counsel of his own most Holy Will, decreed to make
some of the corrupted Mass to be Vessels of Mercy, and of the rest Vessels of
Wrath; and that by Electing some unto himself, upon whom he purposed to bestow
his Love, with all the means tending to fit and prepare those Persons so
Elected and Chosen, for the actual enjoyment of that Love.

Such as a Redeemer, to Die for them; Faith, whereby they should be made
Partakers of that Redeemer, with all the saving Graces of the Spirit, promised
in the Covenant of Grace, with final perseverance in Grace to the end; the rest
(as has been before observed) he left (or passed over) purposing to leave them
in that wretched and deplorable Condition, into which they (causelessly) plunged
themselves.

Neither is God therefore the cause why the Reprobate is Sinful and Wicked, but
his own Will; which being left to its own natural freedom, did most freely and
readily choose that which was by Gods Law forbidden, upon pain of Gods
Displeasure and Curse.

The second Property in Gods Act of Election, is its unchangeableness, and
therefore, most certain it is, that he or she whom God has once purposed to
Love and Save, shall never finally (or totally) fall away from Grace, or
miscarry eternally, Psalm. 33.11. The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the
Thoughts of his Heart to all Generations.

What is Gods Election of some to Life Eternal, (and the means leading thereto)
but the Birth or Product of his own Counsel? Romans 9.11. The purpose of God
according to Election, must stand. And Oh: what an unspeakable cause of
rejoicing is this very Consideration to that Man, or Woman; who find in
themselves the Fruits (or Effects) of the New Birth, to think and believe, that
they (in particular) are chosen to Life Eternal, by him who cannot change that
purpose of his, wherewith he has purposed to Save so poor and miserable a
Sinner, as the effectually called Sinner looks on himself to be.

Neither is the poor weak Believer to doubt, but that those Sins and
Backslideings, both of his Heart and Life, for which he will be but too apt to
fear and conclude, God will at length cast him off, were all perfectly known to
God, even then when he Elected him to Salvation; notwithstanding which, God
fixed his Love and embraced the poor Sinner in the Bosom of his irreversible
Decree, when nothing of Loveliness, (but rather the contrary) appeared to the
Eye of Gods Praecognition (or fore knowledge) in the Soul, so pitched on by his
Decree.

Whom God once loves with that Electing Love, he loves them to the end. Jer.
31.8. Mal. 3.6. Jo. 13.1. Romans 11.29. And as Gods Act in Electing is without
change, so (in the third place) it was from Eternity; though the work of
effectual Calling and Saving Conversion be in time, yet Gods decree and purpose
of bestowing that Grace and Mercy on the Elect Sinner was before time: So
witnesses the Apostle, Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his Works, from the
beginning of the World. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him
before the Foundation of the World. 2 These 2.13. From the beginning has God
chosen you. Rev. 17.8. Whose Names were not written in the Book of Life, from
the Foundation of the World.

The Electing Love of God it is from one Eternity to another, as it did
commence before time; so when time shall be swallowed up of endless Eternity,
this Love of God (to his Elect, and chosen in Christ) will be (and continue)
the same for ever.

And therefore, let that Believer, who feels himself inwardly and frequently
annoyed with those discouraging Fits of fickleness and unconstancy, in walking
with God (in the way of New Obedience) take Sanctuary here by Faith, applying
to himself the sweet Benefits of these Properties of Gods Electing Love,
filling both his Head and Heart with the thoughts and fixed persuasion, that
the Blessed God, who is the Infinite Sovereign of the World, (who Acts all
things which pleases himself, according to the Counsel of his own Will) has
of his own good pleasure chosen him a poor, unworthy, empty, nothing Creature,
to be a Vessel of Mercy, (through Jesus Christ) to the Praise of the Glory of
his own Grace: And that Love, wherewith God has Loved him, it began toward
him before he had an actual Being, yea, before the World was: And as that Love
of God was set on him before time began, so when time it self shall be no more,
that Love of God to him shall still be endless, like God himself. Nothing more
conduces (under God) to Heart Settlement, in the ways of God, then to be well
Verst in Understanding and Believeing, (with application to ones fels) these
Fundamental Principles of Gospel Religion.

And this one thing I desire the Reader to remember, and carefully to observe,
viz. That if there were no other Argument to evince and make good the Truth I
have now asserted, than the Arduous and Elaborate endeavors of Satan and his
busy Agents, both in Preaching and Printing against the Doctrine of Election
and Reprobation, it were sufficient. The Devil and the Pope know full well how
destructive and pernicious to both their Kingdoms, the bringing Sinners to the
Scriptural Knowledge and right Believing this Doctrine will be.

And therefore for preventing hereof, the Doctrine it self must be exposed in
the blackest hue, as a Doctrine which makes Men proud, secure, and careless of
good Works, and which leads Men to loose Living; and in the end to final
Desperation: And as the Doctrine it self is shot at by the Romish and Arminian
Archers, so the most zealous and bold Assertors and Maintainers of it, are set
out in the most odious and black colors, which Envy and Malice it self can
devise; but maugre all the Crast and Envy of Devil and his most subtle and
industrious Tools the Doctrine of particular Election (before time) is plainly
held forth and asserted in the Writings of Moses, the Prophets; and the Holy
Apostles: And in case Divine Providence calls to a suffering Condition for
defense of it, I do not doubt but God has a Sealed number in these Kingdoms,
(known to himself) who will be enabled to Seal the Truth of it with their
dearest Blood.

An Objection or two lies in the way to be answered, before I can proceed to
what remains behind.

Object. 1. The Doctrine of particular Election puffs Men with Pride.

Answ. The contrary to this the Devil himself knows to be true.

For I doubt not but Satan has made his Observations, that none of all Gods
called Children, have more abounded with Humility and self Abasement, than
those who have had the highest assurance of Gods Electing Love: None but these
can rightly admire and adore the Grace and Love of God in Christ Jesus.

To me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given, etc.
cries that great Apostle of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 3.8. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am the chief. 1 Timothy 1.15. For I am the least of the
Apostles, that am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I Persecuted the
Church of God. 1 Cor. 15.9. But by the Grace of God I am what I am. Verse. 10.
It is to be observed, that among all the Apostles, none was more highly
advanced, (in respect of extraordinary Manifestations and Gospel Revelations,
than Paul was; and yet among all the Apostles none more abased: No greater
admirer of Free Grace than he was; and indeed, not only Paul, but others also,
both under the Old Testament and under the New, whom Free Grace singled out to
be Vessels of Mercy: These were still addicted to go out of themselves in a way
of self Abasement, and crying up the Riches of Gods Grace and Mercy every way
free and undeserved by them. And herein I appeal (most freely) to the Personal
Experience of every regenerate Believer, (now Living) whether they do not find
in themselves, that the nearer they come to know and perceive the Love of God
to themselves in particular, the more vile they are in their own esteem; and
the more the Sight and Sense of their own Nothingness grows and abounds, the
more are they inwardly stirred up to Adore and Magnify the Riches of Gods Free
Grace, who has vouchsafed to regard such poor contemptible Worms, as they
judge themselves to be.

Object. 2. The Doctrine of particular Election cuts off the force and strength
of all Threatenings and Warnings which are Recorded in the Scriptures, as a
Curb and Bit, to restrain Men from Sin.

Answ. The ever Blessed and Holy God, who decreed to elect and choose a
particular number to Salvation, has decreed also the means of bringing them to
that End, whereof those Threatenings and Warnings scattered here and there in
God's Word, are a part; the which the good Spirit of God makes (effectually)
useful to work and increase in the Elect, (called to State of Grace) the Filial
and Reverential fear of God; as also to Caution them against all kind of
Declinings in the way of Holy walking with God, in the way of new Obedience to
his Holy Commandments; the which God has revealed in his Word, to be the only
way, in which true Believers must go to an actual Possessing the purchased
Inheritance, according to Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.14.

These Divine Threats and Warnings are (through the saving Influence of the
Spirit of Grace) made a powerful Bit and Curb, to restrain the savingly
Converted from returning (with Approbation and Delight) to former (and
forsaken) Folly, and not only so, but to keep them more close to their Duty in
a Gospel Dependence on Christ, their Mediatorial Head, for all manner of
Supplies, till they come to Glory.

Those Threats and Warnings (if they were ten thousand times more than they
are) will never curb or restrain any Reprobate from loving and liking Sin.

It Is true, that (through the common Operation of the Spirit of God) such
Threats and Warnings may for a time influence a Hypocrite to a keeping him from
the External gross Act of Sin, and a putting him on doing many things which are
(Morally) good in themselves. But Alas! what will this avail, while the State
of the Man is unchanged, and his Heart unrenewed. Sad Instances hereof are
Recorded in God's Word; witness Pharaoh, Exodus 7.4. and Judas Mat. 26.15. Mat.
27.5. with many other Reprobates, whose Names are left on Record in the Book of
God, who were neither restrained from Sin, nor yet kept back from running
headlong to Hell, with this Bit in their Mouths. The Spirit of God (by the Holy
Prophet) gives a full Description of the natural Disposition of wicked
Hypocrites, as touching the Incorrigibleness of their Hearts, in going on in
Sin, not only under God's Rod, but also under his favorable Dispensation,
which (one would think) should win them to Repentance, Jer. 5.3. Rev. 16.9, 10,
11. Esa. 26.10, 11. Romans 2.4, 5.

Object. 3. If I be elected to Life eternal (before time,) I may live as I
list; I need neither to Believe, to Repent, or to use the means of obtaining
Salvation. And though I live after the Flesh, I shall be Saved, being elected.

Answ. To this threadbare Objection (which is commonly in the Mouths of all
Cavillers against the Doctrine of Election) I answer in two Particulars.

First, This Objection does not (in the least) find any Encouragement from the
Doctrine of particular Election (before time,) as will evidently appear by the
Inseparableness of the End, and the means asserted and held forth in the Word
of God, and constantly maintained by the Orthodox against Papists, Arminians,
etc.

He who has elected to Life eternal, he has also elected to the means; such
as, believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, held forth and offered in the Gospel;
Repenting for Sinning against God; advancing in Holiness, and Persevering in
the same to the end: From whence it plainly appears, that he who makes this
Objection, is either wilfully ignorant not (in the least) understanding the
Doctrine of Election, (according to Divine Revelation) or which is
(unspeakably) worse, an affected Caviller and a wicked Subverter of the Gospel.
Suppose I should Query of the Papist, the Arminian, the Quaker, and Freewiller,
(who are all agreed in opposing and decrying the Doctrine of particular
Election before time, and Perseverance to the end, whether they believe that
God has decreed, or absolutely determined in himself) how long he (or they)
shall Live or continue in this World? The Answer will (undoubtedly) be in the
Affirmative, (viz.) That God has decreed (or determined) in himself, how long
he (or they) are to live or continue in this World.

If then (say I) you believe, that God has decreed (in himself) how long you
are to live or continue in this World, what need you to mind any of the
Concerns of this World, for the Support of Humane Life? why will you so
Insatiably covet the perishing Riches, and the transitory Pleasures of the
present World, seeing God has decreed how long you are to live?

The Answer again will be, he that has decreed how long I am to live in this
World, he has also decreed and (in his revealed Will) commanded me to Exercise
my Reason, and my other natural Faculties, in order to precure and make use of
the ordinary means, such as Food, Ravment, Physic, and the like, whereby (in
an ordinary way) the Life and Health of the Body are secured and maintained.
Here (in the Concerns of the Body) they are sharp and witty enough, even to an
out-doing thousands of the Children of God. But in the Concerns of the Soul
they are as Corrupt and Heterodox, as they are sound and rational in the other.

If a Papist or an Arminian should fix his Purpose of Building a House in such
or such a place, it cannot be (rationally) supposed, that he intends to Build
without Materials; therefore my Reason tells me, that in order to accomplish
that his Purpose, he has also purposed to provide all the several Materials
necessary for such a Purpose.

Qui serio vult finem, Media etiam ad finem illum tendentia vult: He who (in
good earnest) wills the end, he also wills the means leading to that end, is a
sure Rule, both in Logic and Divinity. And why these Popish Arminian Cavillers
should not allow it its proper place in the Doctrine of Election (before time,)
I can understand no other Reason for it, than either because God has
Judicially smitten them with blindness of Mind, that they should not be able to
understand or believe this amazing Doctrine of Election before time, or else
because God has left them (as he did Pharaoh) to harden themselves, that they
might, with the greater Acuteness and Stubbornness, oppose and withstand his
Sovereignty, in Electing some and Reprobating others of the same fallen and
corrupted Mass, and that before time.

Secondly, As there can be no Argument more Cogent and Irrefragable, to evince
and prove a Man to be either a Fool or a Madman, than his resolving to expect
the Accomplishment of the end, (such as Building a House or Living in the
World) without the use of the proportionate means leading to such ends; for
there is no Argument which more stongly proves a Man or Woman to be of the
number of Reprobates, than to expect or hope to go to Heaven, in the continued
and approved Neglect of Believing in the Son of God, Repenting of Sin, living a
Holy Life, and Persevering in the same to the end of Life.

Object. 4. The Doctrine of Election before time, does not only encourage to
Sin, but it leads People to final Desparation, for preventing of which, all
imaginable care ought to be taken, to suppress and decry it.

Answ. To this Horrid and Blasphemous Objection I shall (in Christ's strength)
Answer in four Particulars.

And First, I do boldly affirm in the Name of the ever Blessed Trinity, That
this Blasphemous Objection did (originally) spring from that Spirit which
charged the Son of God with casting out Devils by Beelzebub, which (if I
mistake not) is the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, and such as
peremptorily (with allowance and approbation) persist in making and liking the
same, against the Doctrine of Election, so plainly revealed and so positively
asserted by the Holy Ghost; I am not afraid to declare and pronounce them the
Children and Successors of those Pharisees (now in Hell) who vented that
unpardonable Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Mat. 12, 24.32. Let all
Cavilling Adversaries who bring this Objection against the Doctrine of Gods
absolute and free Election (before time) have a care they be not found Ranked
among those mighty Sinners, who in the height of their Wickedness, run
themselves most desperately upon the thick Bosses of the Almighties Buckler.
Job 15.26.

Secondly, If the Doctrine of Election be such a dangerous Doctrine as leads to
Licentiousness, and which (in the end) brings Men to Desparation. I would fain
know how it comes to pass that the Enemies of this Doctrine are such Slaves to
their Brutish Lusts, and why so many of them Die in Despair, when under
powerful Awakenings and common Convictions in their guilty Consciences?

Thirdly, I do with greatest confidence and certain assurance (grounded on the
Word of God, and backed with my own Personal experience) affirm, That as the
right Knowledge and Believing of the Doctrine of Election (before time) with a
particular application thereof to ones self, is the only Doctrine that sets the
Heart of a true Believer against all Sin, and which secures and keeps the
Believer from Desparation in the time of the deepest Desertion, and most
violent Temptation; so the Doctrine of Free Will and general Redemption is a
Doctrine which encourages to Sin, and which necessarily leads to Desparation.

Here two things are to be demonstrated. First, That the Doctrine of Election
(before time) rightly understood, and particularly applied by Faith, is the
only Doctrine which engages the Heart of a sound Believer against all known
Sin, and which fortifys and secures the Believer against Desparation in the
time of the deepest Desertion, and the most violent Temptation.

Secondly, That the Doctrine of Free Will and general Redemption, is a Doctrine
which encourages to Sin, and which (necessarily) leads to Desparation.

The first of these will evidently appear to him that rightly considers and
believes the Particulars following.

First, the Purpose and Design of God the Father (in Electing) which was, That
his Elect and Chosen, who were fallen into Sin and Misery in Adam, their
Natural and Faederal Head, might be delivered, and (by strong hand) rescued out
of that state of Sin and Misery, and made effectual Partakers of that Liberty
and Redemption, purchased by Christ his Son, the Sponsor and Surety of his
Elect.

Secondly, the design of Christ (the Surety and Sponsor of the Elect) in the
whole Work of Mediation, which he undertook to go through for the Elect (which
his Father had chosen in him) which was to purchase for, and (in time) to apply
(actually) to the Elect the saving Benefit of that Freedom and Redemption
purchased by himself.

Thirdly, The design and office of the Holy Ghost, which is to sanctify and
renew the Souls of the Elect in effectual Calling, and to carry on and maintain
the Work of Grace (begun in the Believer) to the end.

Fourthly, The design of the Gospel in revealing and discovering the Mystery of
Gods Love and Grace to his Elect and Chosen, which is, that Believers might (by
virtue of Christ's Death, savingly applied) Dye unto all Sin, and that they
might (by virtue of Christ's Resurrection) walk in newness of Life before God.

Fifthly, The design of Divine Providence toward true Believers, which is, to
purge them from the remains of indwelling Sin more and more, and to make them
more and more to abound in Holy Conformity to Christ their Mystical Head.

All these (as so many Lines in a Center) do meet in the Doctrine of particular
Election, the which when the Believer seriously considers, and (by Faith)
applys to himself, he is so far from being drawn either to Sin or Desparation
thereby, as that he finds the quite contrary in himself, viz. an admirable
Aversion and Repugnancy, to yield consent to the flattering Solicitations of
Sin, and an Anchor hold, which powerfully keeps him from descending into the
Darksom Valley of Desparation, which is (as I may say) the very entrance into
Hell it self.

When the Believer is at any time attacked by Satan, his enticing Instruments,
or by indwelling Corruption, to yield to the motions of Sin, he fetches
Arguments against Sin from the Doctrine of Gods Election thus: Has God from
all Eternity fixed his gracious purpose of Delivering and Rescuing me out of
that state of Sin and Misery, into which the Apostasy of Adam, (my Natural and
Faederal Head) plunged me, and that by choosing out and fixing on his own Son
to be a Surety and Savior to purchase a liberty, and to work out a perfect and
complete Redemption for me; and shall I? can I (with approbation) yield my full
consent to grieve and offend this freely and this dearly Loving God? I cannot
do it, neither can all the Craft and Policy of my Spiritual Enemies ever work
me to a willingness to go back into that state of Spiritual Captivity, under
Sin and Satan, from which the Grace of God (in Election, and effectual Calling)
has set me free.

Secondly, Has Christ the Son of God, (pursuant to his Fathers Holy Decree and
Gracious Purpose, and in compliance with so noble and glorious a Design, as
Redeeming Captive Sinners, and reconciling them to his Father) consented to
become a Mediator for me, to work ou, a work of perfect Redemption for me that
I might be set at liberty from the Laws Curse, from the dominion of Sin, and
the Usurpation and Tyranny of the Devil? and shall I consent to commit Sin
against such Bowels of Mercy and Love? I cannot do it.

Thirdly, Has the Holy Ghost, (who in conjunction with the Father and the Son,
had a Hand in my Election to Eternal Life) vouchsafed to take on him the Office
of a Sanctifier, to Sanctify and Renew the Elect in effectual Calling, and who
has begun in me the Work of Special Sanctification, and will never (finally)
leave me, till he has perfected his Work begun in me; and shall I? can I
willingly grieve and offend that Holy Spirit, by whom I am Sealed to the day of
Redemption? I cannot do it.

Fourthly, Is the Gospel appointed by Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be a Word
of Revelation, to discover to me how the Heart of God, his Christ and Holy
Spirit stood affected toward the Elect, (and toward me in particular) from
Eternity and to endless Eternity; and not only so, but that the same might be a
rule of Direction to me (all my Days) to discover the false ways I am to shun
and avoid, as also the Paths I am to walk in, in order to a pleasing the Holy
Trinity, and coming safe to Heaven; and shall I? can I consent to abuse so
sweet and excellent a Gospel? I cannot do it.

Fifthly, Is the design of Divine Providence (in all its various Dispensations
to the Elect) and to me in particular, to purge Believers from the remains of
indwelling Corruption, and to make them more and more to abound in Holy
Conformity to Christ, their Mystical Head; and shall I abuse it by Sinning
against it, and taking an occasion therefrom to be vain and secure in my
Conversation? I cannot do it.

And as the true Believer is enabled, (being taught and guided by the Holy
Ghost) to fetch Arguments against Sin from the five Sacred Topics now
mentioned; so is he (in like manner) enabled, being savingly influenced by the
Inhabitation of the Holy Ghost in him, to fetch from the above Named Topics,
Arguments to keep him from final Desparation, in the most violent Hurrycane of
Temptation which can attend on a deserted or an afflicted Condition.

To evince and clear up this Truth, (for the comfort and encouragement of the
Poorest Believer, in an Hour of sore Distress, when the Waters of Affliction
reach even to the very Soul, to a sensible endangering the extinguishing the
little Grace lodged in the Soul; let it be seasonably and seriously considered,
that the Believer when he finds Satan, his wicked Instruments, and indwelling
Corruption all conjunctly together, pressing and working his Soul within, to
despair of Mercy and Salvation, he falls on Arguing from the sweet Doctrine of
Gods Election thus; shall I, can I who am secured of Life Eternal by the
Gracious and Unchangeable Decree of the immutable God) despair of Mercy and
Salvation, as Satan, the wicked World, and my own Carnal reason would have me
do? I cannot do it. If it were possible that my finking Soul should drop
(through the very Jaws of Despondency) into Hell it self, from thence would
Gods unchangeable purpose of Grace fetch and deliver it.

Secondly, Shall I, or can I, for when Christ the Son of God has undertaken
(as a Sponsor and Surety) and for whom he has wrought a perfect Reconciliation
by his own Mediatorial Righteousness, in which no Spot or Defect ever was, or
ever shall be found by God, Angels or Men, despair of Mercy and Salvation, as
Devil, wicked Men, and my own Carnal reason would fain persuade me to do? I
cannot do it.

Thirdly, shall I, to and for whom the Holy Ghost is become a Sanctifier and a
Renewer of my Nature, and who (by his saving influential Presence) dwells in
me, never (finally) to leave me till his good work of Grace begun in my Soul in
effectual Calling, be completely perfected) despair of Mercy and Salvation, as
the Devil, wicked Men, and my own Carnal reason would have me do? I can by no
means do it.

Fourthly, Shall I who have all the sweet and precious Promises of the Gospel,
of Gods Love and Grace to comfort and assure me, that God, Christ, and the
Blessed Spirit, will never, never fail or forsake me, despair of Mercy and
Salvation, as mine Enemies would persuade me to do? I cannot do it.

Lastly, Shall I, (who have the Divine Providence engaged for me, to uphold me
to purge out the remains of indwelling Sin in me, and to forward me in
conforming to my Mystical Head Christ, in Holiness, despair of Mercy and
Salvation, as mine Enemies would have me? I not do it. This is the use which a
true Believer makes of the Doctrine of Gods Election (before time) while Faith
(in the Believer) is in its right Exercise; none will stumble at it, (so as
Eternally to Perish) but such as are not (by that Act of Gods Electing Decree)
given to Christ (before time) to be actually Redeemed in time.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Free Will and General Redemption, is a Doctrine
which encourages to Sin, and which (necessarily) leads to Desparation. I shall
offer two things to consideration, for evincing and clearing up this for Truth;
the which I desire the Reader to weigh and consider without prejudice.

First, The use which all unregenerate Men make of the Doctrine of Free Will,
which sad experience teaches, is this: I will turn to God by Repentance, I
will Believe in an Attoning Savior, I will fall on the work of Reformation,
and thereby prevent my perishing by the deserved Judgments of God; when I see
my own time, and when I am thereto disposed; who sees not, (except one
Spiritually Blind) how greatly this Doctrine does encourage to Sin: For (says
my Carnal reason, as often it has while I was in a state of Nature) if I do
not return to God upon his Call and Invitation this Day, this Month, this Year,
I fully purpose and resolve to do it the next; for God has implanted in my
Soul a Principle of Free Will, whereby I am enabled to answer his Call, by
Repenting, Believing and Reforming, the which when I do, (though not at
present) God will have Mercy on me, and I shall be accepted, being secured by
that General Redemption provided for all who so Repent, Believe and Reform.
Woeful and sad experience convinces me, that many, God provoking Follys and
Vanitys of Youth (in my Heart and Life) have been indulged by this deceiving,
cursed Doctrine: Oh! how often has Carnal reason (within me) cried out, when
the common Notions of the Spirit of God has touched my Conscience, to call on
me to convert and turn to God? I will Repent, I will Convert, I will turn to
God to morrow, to morrow: As Augustine confesses of himself, he often put God
off with his Free Will, Cras, Cras; To morrow, to morrow. Till at length he
grew both ashamed and weary of his graceless to morrow, crying out to the
Almighty (in the very hour of his effectual Conversion) Quam Diu Domine Clamabo
Cras, Cras? Quare Non Hodie Domine, etc. How long, O Lord, shall I cry to
morrow, to morrow? Why, O Lord, should I not be Converted this veryday?

And as an Unregenerate Man takes Encouragement from this Principle, to go on
in Sin, so it leads him to Desparation: Of this also my sad Experience has
fully convinced me, as plainly appears by the near approach I made to Hell, (in
my own Apprehensions) while I bordered so near the Confines of final
Desparation, finding in my self how vastly short my Personal Qualifications
came of answering the Laws demand, as a Condition of Life and Salvation. I
found that nothing could possibly quiet or satisfy my wounded, despairing
Conscience, but what does effectually appease and satisfy that Holy God,
against whom I have so many thousands of times offended, which can be nothing
short of an infinite Righteousness; which Righteousness can be had no where but
in Christ God Man, and no way to be had but in a way of Believing, of which
Mystery my blind and perverted Reason was as ignorant as a Beast: And not only
so, but my Heart and Soul were Zealously set against looking for Life and
Salvation in any other way than that of Freewill and general Redemption.

This Principle so every way Quadrating with my Legal Frame of Heart, which was
acted by no other Principle: But do and Live.

Here it might not be amiss or unseasonable (for the relief and encouragement
of a poor tempted Soul, who (as touching this very point of Election) may be
walking in Darkness, having no light of Comfort in his own Spirit) to answer
(or resolve) this needful Question. How shall a poor, bewildred, tempted Soul
come to know, that it self (in particular) was elected of God before time?

To this Question (about which many of God's called ones are not a little
distressed in their own Spirits) I shall answer in three Particulars.

First, The way to know thou art elected before time, is to go about it in a
right way or manner. By this I mean, thou art not to attempt to pry into the
Secret Counsels of the most High, concerning this Matter, knowing that secret
things belong to God, and to none else, until he pleases to reveal them, Deuteronomy.
29.29. Therefore in order to know this Mystery (to thy comfort,) do as thou
would do, if thou were to bring both ends of a Bottom of Thread or Yarn to
meet together, the way is not to begin at that end which is hid in the very
center of the Bottom, but to take the end which is outmost and next to thee;
and by thus doing thou will soon bring both ends to meet, whereas if thou go
about it in any other way, (as by cutting or ravelling the Bottom (to hasten
the work) thou will but fret and vex thy self, and (which is worse) thou will
mar and spoil the work. Do not then attempt (as the Devil and Carnal Reason
would have thee) to climb up to Heaven, to inform thy self of this Matter;
God's Work must be done in the way of his own Appointment; which is, that thou
begin first with thy own Heart. See, examine and search thy own Soul, to find
out whether his Holy Spirit has ever been at work there? The Cause must be
known by its proper Effects, not the Effects by the Cause. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal.
6.4. 2 Pet. 1.10.

Election (the thing thou would fain be resolved about) is the cause (this is
a Secret in God's Breast, which can be known by thee, no other way (ordinarily)
but by its Effects, which are Faith in thy Heart, and Obedience to Christ's
Commands in thy Life and Conversation. If the Spirit of God has called thee to
embrace and close with Christ, held forth in the Gospel; and if the Fruits of
that thy closing with Christ, do discover themselves in thy Life and
Conversation, thou have no Ground or Reason to question thy Election, but what
the Devil and thy Carnal Reason suggest. Acts 13.48. And as many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed. Jo. 10.26. But ye believe not, because ye
are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. In the Scriptures now quoted, Election
(to eternal Life) is held forth as the Cause of Faith and Faith (or believing
in Jesus) as the undoubted Fruit or Effect of Election.

Secondly, Art thou frequently tempted to doubt of, and question thine Election
to eternal Life?

This is an undoubted Argument, that the Devil discerns in thee the Fruits and
Effects of God's electing Love to thy Person, which puts him upon tempting thee
to question and doubt of God's Love to thee.

Where the Devil knows he has the full and quiet Possession of a Sinner, there
he suggests, that the Man is a good Christian: His Faith is a good Faith, and
God is his Father, and that he is elected and shall be Saved, notwithstanding
he lives after the Flesh.

On the contrary, where the Devil sees and discovers the Fruits and Effects of
God's Grace and Love appear, there he pesters the Soul with Infernal
Suggestions and Temptations, to put the Soul on mis-believing, and questioning
the Truth of God's Grace bestowed on the Sinner. Thou art but a painted
Hypocrite, thou art none of God's Elect; it is in vain for thee to hope or
expect to go to Heaven. Thus he dealt with the Believers Redeemer. Mat. 4.3, 6.
If thou be the Son of God, etc.

And if the Adversary has done this to the green Tree, what will he not
attempt to do to the dry? Luke 23.31.

Thirdly, Do thou find thine Heart (fixedly) resolved (come Life, come Death)
to cast thy Soul at the foot of Divine Sovereignty, in the way of Duty,
shunning all known Sin, and pressing after Holiness, resting entirely on the
Grace and Merit of Christ, after Life and Salvation? Thou art to know, for
thine everlasting Comfort and Encouragement, that no Reprobate ever was, or
ever shall be able to do this. Time will discover, that thou art one of God's
Elect; go on in the strength of thy God: Fear not.

CHAP. II. Of Reprobation.
BY what has been discoursed out of the Holy Scriptures, concerning the Act of
God's Election of some to Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, to the praise of
the Glory of his own Grace; it unavoidably (and by necessary consequence)
follows, that the same Sovereign God has Reprobated (or Rejected) the rest,
(not so elected) and that from all Eternity, having decreed never to recover
them by converting Grace, but has fixedly purposed for Sin to Damn them; and
that for the Praise of the Glory of his own Justice. Nothing can be more plain
than that, if God has elected and chosen a certain number out of the whole
corrupted Mass or Lump of fallen Mankind, in whose Salvation he has purposed
to Glorify his Mercy and free Grace by Jesus Christ, then has he refused or
passed by the rest, as will most evidently appear in all the parts of it.

The Decree of Reprobation has in it four parts, to each of which I will speak
as plainly and as briefly as I can.

First, God has refused or rejected some particular Persons, on whom he
purposed never to have Mercy; this is most evident from the Scriptures
following. Jo. 10.26. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I
said unto you. Romans 11.7. But the election has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded. Romans 9.18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens. In which Scriptures it is plain and conspicuous to
every one (savingly) enlightened, that there are two distinct (or differing)
Parties intended or spoken of, some, whom Christ chose to himself, known and
distinguished by the Term, Sheep, and others, whom Christ denis to be so: These
are those intended in Mat. 25.32, 33. termed Goats, opposed to the Sheep of
Christ. Some, whose Understandings were savingly enlightened to know the
glorions Mysteries of the Covenant of Grace, in order to Salvation; and others
not at all enlghtened, but left to abide in that spiritual Darkness and
blindness of Mind, which they brought into the World with them. Some, whom
God's powerful Grace mollified and softened to saving Repentance, in order to
Mercy; and others, whom God sees fit to harden, that is, to leave them to that
Sin of their own, which hardens them.

Secondly, God has from Eternity rejected or refused these.

This is plain from the Scriptures following, Jude 4. There are certain Men
crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this Condemnation. Rev.
17.8. Whose Names were not Written in the Book of Life from the Foundation of
the World. 1 Pet. 2.8. And a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, even to
them which stumble at the Word, being Disobediem, whereunto also they were
appointed. From all which it is manifest, that God did, (as a just Judge)
purpose and decree to give up the Reprobates to the obstinacy of their own
Mind, and their wilful Disobedience against his Son Jesus Christ; that so they
might not only ripen themselves for, but even pull down the Judgments of God
upon themselves.

Thirdly, God has Decreed to Damn these Persons for Sin.

This is plain from the following Scriptures, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself, yea, even the Wicked for the day of Evil. 2 Pet. 2.12.
But these as Natural brute Beasts, made to be taken and Destroyed.

Fourthly, Gods Reprobating some Persons from Eternity, and that in order to
Damn them for Sin, is for the Praise of the Glory of his own Justice.

This is so plain and obvious, that he who runs may Read it. Romans 9.22. What if
God willing to show his Wrath, and to make his power known endured with much
long Suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction.

Against this Doctrine of Election, and Reprobation of particular Persons, the
Quakers, Papists, Arminians, Free-Willers and others, who (in this point) are
all one with them, object several things, out of which I will single out the
chief and most material of their Objections, which to Ignorant and Injudicious
Minds, seem to be of great force against the Doctrines now laid down; to which
I shall give plain and clear Answers from Gods Word, to the end the
Fallaciousness and Deceit of these Men might appear (open faced) to all Men.

Object. 1. They object, that to hold and affirm, that God has from Eternity
Elected and Chosen a particular number to himself out of the corrupted Mass of
fallen Mankind, on whom he decreed (unchangeably) to show Mercy, leaving the
rest with a full purpose never to recover them to Life and Salvation, reflects
on God the highest Cruelty imaginable.

Answ. To this (seeming) plausible Objection, I shall reply in the particulars
following.

First, I have made it evident from Gods own Word, that God has (undeniably)
Elected a certain particular number to himself out of the corrupted Mass of
fallen Mankind, on whom he (unchangeably) decreed to show Mercy, leaving the
rest (not so Elected) in that state of Sin and Misery, into which they
(voluntarily) run themselves.

Secondly, By way of Query; I desire to know by what Scripture (Divine) the
Quakers, or any who are their Abettors in this point, can justify their
bringing in Lies to plead for God; or wherein does it appear that his Truth
stands in need of being upheld by the Figments of their vertiginous Brains.

Job puts such a like Question to his three Friends, who all seemed to take
part with God against himself. Job 13.7. Will you speak wickedly for God, and
talk deceitfully for him? Verse. 8. Will ye accept his Person? Will ye contend
for God? Verse. 9. Is it good that he should search you out? Or as one Man
mocketh another, do ye so mock him?

What do these (Heretical Pretenders to an infallible Spirit) less than mock
God? who (in pretense of making God more Merciful and Pitiful, than he himself
has revealed in his Word he will be, or than the Wicked in Hell will find him
to be) strike at, and (audaciously) dispute against the Justice and Sovereignty
of God.

These Pleaders for. God, they will (forsooth) have God to be so tender,
compassionate and kind, as to love all his Creatures with an equal Love; and
(consequently) that to six his Love on a small and particular number, to whom
his Special Grace and Favor should be extended, and to pass by the greatest
number, on whom to resolve never to show Mercy; is altogether inconsistent with
the tender, kind and merciful Nature of God. Now, whether these Men do not, (in
pretense of Pleading for God) cause (as much as in them lies) both his
Attributes, his Counsels, and his Word, to clash and contradict each other, I
leave to the judicious and unprejudiced Reader to judge.

I demand from John Burnyeats, and the rest of the Quakers, (who joined with
him in challenging me to make out by the Scriptures of Truth, that Doctrine
which I am now defending against them) why or wherefore God was so strict and
severe, as to confine those Angels, which (of their own accord) fell from that
state of Innocence and Blessedness, wherein they were Created to those Chains
of Darkness, wherein they are to be kept to the judgment of the great day? and
that without extending the Benefit of a Redeemer to them; was it because the
Angels were not his Creatures? certainly they will not say so; for without
Dispute the Angels were in their Nature far more Glorious and Excellent
Creatures, than was Adam and his Posterity in their State of Innocence.

Was it because Gods Arm could not reach to help and deliver them? they dare
not say so; neither was it because God had no Bowels of Mercy and Compassion in
him toward his Creatures: This cannot be supposed to be the reason; for
(alas) this, (viz.) the tender and merciful Nature of God to his Creatures (in
general) is the Argument whereby they would overthrow the Doctrine of
particular Election. What is the reason then? did the Angels fall by Sin and
Apostasy? Yes, they cannot deny it, unless they deny the Scriptures to be the
Scriptures of Truth; and were those Angels (all of them) sent forthwith to Hell
for their Apostasy and Rebellion? this they cannot deny. Was not the least Dram
of Mercy shown to one of that numberless number which fell? they dare not
affirm there was, or ever shall be; if they do, it lies at their Door to prove
it.

If then the reason why the Apostate Angels are (eternally) lost, is not
because they stood not related to God as Creatures, nor because the Hand of God
was not strong enough to prevent their sinking into Hell; nor yet because God
wanted Bowels of Mercy and Compassion: The reason then must be, because the
Glorious God did (before time) decree and purpose with himself, not to recover
those Creatures whom he foreknew would causelessly Rebel and Apostatize from
that state of Holiness and Happiness, in which he decreed to make them.

If then the Adversaries I now contend with, will acknowledge God to be Just
and Righteous in leaving the Angels, (which by Transgression fell) so as never
to show them Favor more, I desire to be informed by what Law the Sovereign
Majesty of Heaven can be (justly) charged with Cruelty, for Saving but a small
Remnant of Apostate Adams Offspring, seeing that Adam was (every way) as
voluntary and free in Sinning against God, as were the Angels which fell.

Surely, had it pleased God, he might have cast both Adam and his Children into
the same Lodging with Beelzebub, and his Apostate Train, there to endure (to
endless Eternity) the Torments due to their Rebellion and Disobedience.

And in that God has been pleased to extend Mercy to any of Adams Posterity,
it is mere Grace and Mercy (every way) undeserved, the which he was no way
bound to show to Adam and his Children, any more than he was obliged or bound
to help or commiserate the fallen Angels.

If John Burnyeat, or any of his Friends, (who oppose the Doctrine of
particular Election) can prove (by the Scriptures) that God has given (or is
(by any Law) bound to give) Special Saving Grace to Rebels, who have fallen by
their (causelessly) abufing and loosing the Grace given them in Adam, their
Natural and Faederal Head; any other than what he bestows on his Elect, and
that in the right of Election, I will readily submit and yield the Cause.

Object. 2. The Scriptures of Truth are express and positive in affirming, that
the Salvation discovered and held forth in the Gospel, is designed by God, (and
offered by the Apostle) to all Men (in general) without any distinction or
limitation of Persons; and therefore, to restrain that Salvation to a stinted
number, is most injurious and wicked.

Answ. These Cavilling Objectors do at a very easy rate wrest and pervert the
sense of the Holy Spirit, not knowing what they say, nor whereof they so rashly
affirm, where they meet with universal Terms, from them they infer universal
Principles, witness the Scriptures following, 2 Cor. 5.14.1 Tim. 2.6. Heb. 2.9.
Where the Apostle says that Christ Died for all; and that he gave himself a
Ransom for all Men; and that he tasted Death for every Man: They from hence
infer and strongly conclude, (as they think) that beyond all Peradventure, the
end and design of Gods sending his Son into the World, and the Sons laying down
his Life, was on full purpose that general Redemption might be procured for,
and granted to all and singular the Sons and Daughters of lapsed Adam; and
where the Apostle Peter shows that God is not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3.9. They would fain persuade
themselves and all others, that without any restriction or limitation, the
Sense must be, that God wills not that any Sinner should be Damned.

And so (foolishly) fond are they of the General Redemption, which (from the
fore Cited Scriptures) they highly conceit themselves able to demonstrate and
prove against all Gainsayers, that they (with great care) set down the Terms
All, Every and Any in great Capital Letters, that the Reader might observe and
take notice of them.

That those Universal Terms All, Every and Any, are to be restrained and
limited to a particular and select number only, (which can be no other than
that number which the Scriptures positively affirm, God Elected and Chose to
himself out of the corrupted Mass; as has been above observed) is beyond
contradiction.

The Objection consists of two Members (or Branches) First, the design of God
in preparing and intending Redemption and Salvation for all Men in General.
Secondly, Gods commanding to Preach (or offer) it to all in general, without
exception: On these two mistaken grounds the Quakers and the other Heretics,
who in this point join with them against the Word and Churches of Christ, do
ignorantly and falsely infer that the Benefit of the second Adams Obedience and
Righteousness, is (in Gods imputing and applying it) as extensive, as was the
Disobedience and Rebellion of the first, which (say they) was to all the
Posterity of Adam. The places of Scripture from which they draw this their
Unscriptural Inference, are those of Paul. Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the
offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even so by the
Righteousness of one, the Free Gift came upon all Men unto Justification of
Life. Heb. 2.9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels,
for the suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace
of God should taste Death for every Man.

The ground of these Men's loosing themselves in this Controversy, is their
using Scripture without Reason, and Reason without Scripture; the which whoever
does, will be sure to run himself and his followers into a Labyrinth of dark
and uncertain Interpretations of the most plain Text of Scripture, whence comes
(most commonly) Chymerical and Enthusiastical Notions, which are attended (as
really) with a Satanical Energie, to deceive Earthly Minded People, as the true
Word of God is attended with a Divine Energie and Power, to teach and guide
Gods Elect to the saving knowledge of God in Christ.

Here they seem (to the ignorant and unwary Reader) to have Scripture on their
side, when opposing those who assert and defend the Doctrine of pa^^^^lar
Election against these Univer^^ (...) (viz.) those Scriptures above (...); in
which God seems to have intended the Redemption purchased by his Son, for every
individual Son and Daughter of Adam; and that because the Term set down is
Universal.

But now, these Men inhering in the bare Letter of the Scriptures, and laying
aside the use of Reason, (the which they should make use of in distinguishing
Terms) they themselves, and their poor deluded Proselytes loose the true Sense
of the Scriptures, never looking farther than the bare Letter, never regarding
whether they take the Sense of the Spirit with them, yea or not.

And hence it is, that with such unbridled Licentiousness some Men do with
highest confidence positively affirm, that the Salvation of the Gospel is
purchased and intended for all, and singular the Posterity of the first Adam;
and that an universal offer thereof is (accordingly) made to each Man and
Woman: Whereas (indeed) when the judicious and unprejudiced Reader joins
Scripture and sanctified reason together, accompanied with Self denial, and
sincere and hearty Prayer to Gods Throne of Grace, for the obtaining from God
the true sense of the Scriptures so much boasted of, he will plainly see how
egregiously they are mistaken in both the one and the other; for neither does
God intend the Death of his Son for Salvation to any of Adams Children, save
those whom he Elected, and (from Eternity) Chose in Christ; neither does God
make such an Universal tender of it to all Men, as the Quakers rashly and
boldly affirm he does.

This lies on me to demonstrate and make good against these boasting
Universalists; the which, that I might do to satisfaction of the judicious and
unprejudiced Reader, I shall propound my Argument dilemma-wise, thus: The Terms
All, Any and Every, on which they ground their Unscriptural Assertion, they are
to be taken either in an Universal sense, intending every individual of
Mankind; or else they are to be taken in a limited and restrained sense, as
intending some of all sorts, ranks and degrees of Men indifferently.

If by the Universal Terms above named, some of all sorts, ranks and degrees of
Men indifferently, be to be understood, then the Assertion of the Adversaries
is (manifestly) false, and consequently the Doctrine of particular Election is
true.

If by those Universal Terms all Men and Women without exception be intended,
(as the Adversaries will have it) then must I be allowed to demand of them how
any of Adams Children come to be Damned?

For seeing that God willed that Christ should Redeem all the Children of Adam,
who fell by his Transgression; I would fain know how any created Power can
effect the hindering God of bringing about his own purpose, or frustrate the
end and design of Christ, in laying down his Life; for (undoubtedly) if God
should absolutely will and purpose the Salvation of every individual Son and
Daughter of Adam, it is not to be questioned, but that he being the Elshaddai,
the Mighty God, every way perfect and all sufficient, would find out ways and
means to effect and bring about his own purpose, seeing that he works all
things according to the Counsel of his own most Holy Will: As Paul witnesses,
Ephesians. 1.11.

It is in the Work of Regeneration, as it is in the Work of the first Creation,
(...) Clothes his Word with a creating Power; so that whenever, and wherever
he sends forth that creating Voice of his Mighty Spirit, neither Devil nor
Self, nor any other Enemy or Impediment, whether internal or external, shall
ever be able to give any stop to his intended Work: As the Lord himself tells
his Church, by the Prophet Esa. 43.13. Yea, before the day was, I am he; and
there is none that can deliver out of my Hand: I will work, and who shall let
it? Whom God in Justice and Righteousness will Damn and Sentence to the Flames
of his deserved Wrath for Sin, who can rescue and save them? Whom God in
Sovereign Mercy and Grace purposes to save and deliver, who can hinder or
prevent him? Jo. 10.27. My Sheep (says the Lord Jesus) hear my Voice, and I
know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand. My Father
which gave them me, is stronger than all; and no Man is able to pluck them out
of my Fathers Hand. I and my Father are one.

Here it is plain, that from the invincible Power of God and Christ, the
cortainty of the Life, and Salvation of the Elect, is inferred and proved.

That many of Adams Children are already in Hell, and that many more will be
Lodged there; the Scriptures affirm, and the Quakers cannot deny. How comes
this to pass? seeing God (if we must Believe the Quakers) designed a general
Redemption for all Mankind, and that the Son of God laid down his Life to
Ransom them from the Curse and Wrath of God, due for their Sin, to say that God
willed their Salvation, but that their own Obstinacy and Wickedness hindered
that his Will should be accomplished on them; is (in effect) to say that God
did seriously and efficaciously will and purpose, that all the Children of Adam
should be saved; but indeed the grant est part of Adams Posterity fell by the
Power of Satan, and their own rebellious Will.

Now, whether to think or say, that either the power of the Serpent, or the
corruption in a Sinners Nature, can, or ever did, or shall overturn or prevent
the efficacious Will of God, being accomplished, be not Impious and
Blasphemous; I leave to every impartial and sober Reader to judge.

Thus the first Member (or Branch) of the Objection appears to be rotten and
unsound; neither is the second any better, which affirms that God makes a
general offer of that Salvation to every individual Sinner in the World; the
which if it be true, (as the Quakers affirm) they are highly obliged to show
how it comes to pass that the greatest part of the World (by far) should remain
in Darkness, I mean with respect to the very external means of Salvation; the
which God has seen sit to deny to many Nations in the World; to which also the
very Letter of the Holy Scripture bears witness. A few Instances hereof I lay
down, that the Reader may plainly see, how vain these foolish Beasters are in
their Imaginations, who would fain impose on all, that God does love all the
Children of Adam with an equal Love; and that the offer of his Grace (in
general) is made to all, without any exception or limitation; wherein they
prove themselves as false in their sayings, as they appear vain in their
deluded Imaginations.

They say, and boldly affirm, that the tender of Salvation is made to all
alike; I say, they belie the Spirit of God, (in pretense of pleading for God)
by whose Instinct and immediate Inspiration, they would make the World believe,
they themselves (above all Men) are guided; and not only so, but they
egregiously thwart and contradict the very Letter of the Scripture, which they
seem to own and acknowledge to be Holy, True, and the Rule and Standard of
Trial, of all matters in Religion wherein they and Christians differ.

For satisfaction herein, let the Reader peruse, and with serious consideration
weigh in the balance of Gods Sanctuary what is recorded in Psalm. 147, 19.20.
He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with any Nation: And as for his Judgments, they have not
known them. Praise ye the Lord.

Whether the place (now quoted, does not evidently prove that when God chose
called and settled a Church unto his own peculiar Use and Service, to whom he
gave his Word and Ordinances for a rule of Faith and Holy Obedience) he did not
leave the other Nations of the Earth; (out of whom he chose his People, with a
peculiar Love and Favor) in their Native Darkness and Blindness; is a matter
to be enquired into. That of our Savior in Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but
few chosen. Does also give countenance to the point in hand: He does not say
that all are called, but many: In which Text there are three sorts of Men
offered to consideration. First, some who are not called at all. Secondly, some
who are called with a common or external Call, but not Elected. And thirdly,
some who are called, not only with the common and external Call, but also with
the internal efficacious Call of the Spirit; and that because Elected and
Chosen to Life and Salvation. Now, that these three sorts of People were
equally Beloved of God, and their Salvation equally intended; who but Children
of Darkness and Deceit dare to affirm or believe? That of Paul (also) Acts
14.16. God who in times past suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own way,
Backs and confirms the present Truth: And does not the Account we have by
Travelers, who correspond with the most parts of the World, inform us, that
the greatest part of the Nations have not so much as the Name of Jesus Christ
among them; and even in these Kingdoms, where Popery, Arminianism and Quakerism
prevail: Does not sad experience teach us how deplorable a Condition the
generality of the Kingdoms is in? as touching the saving Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, or the proper means appointed by God, for the saving Discovery of his
justifying Righteousness to the Souls of Men; such as the pure and unmixed Word
of Truth, Read and powerfully Preached to them, for calling them out of
Darkness into the mavelous Light of the Knowledge of God in Christ: For want
of an Orthodox Teaching Ministry, these Kingdoms, (especially England and
Ireland) are near to a Harvest ripeness, ready for the Sickle of Gods
Judgments, through the affected Ignorance of the Lord Jesus Christ, which
reigns in the Minds and Hearts of the greatest part, even of Englands and
Irelands Professors; with the Occult and Spiritual Idolatry of Men's Souls,
whereby the Son of God and his pure Gospal Worship are shut out of Men's Hearts
and Affections, that the Statutes of Omri, and their Carnal secular Interests
might bear the sway. To which I will add, that Deluge of open Debauchery, and
Atheistical Oppression and Profaneness, which like a Land Flood over runs the
Nations; the which, (if not very speedily prevented by those who have the
Reforming Power put into their Hands by God) will pull down (from Heaven) such
sore and desolating Judgments, as will make England with her Hypocritical
formal Professors an abhorring to all Nations. More might be offered to
consideration from Gods Word to the same purpose; as the sad and deplorable
Condition the Ephesians, Philippians, and other Countries were in, before the
Apostles were sent among them.

The Ancestors and Forefathers of whom, God suffered to Live and Die like
Bruits, and worse serving Dumb Idols, those Teachers of Lies, serving diverse
Lusts, Atheists, without the knowledge or hope of God in the World, Ephesians. 2.1,
2, 3. To them God sent no Prophet or Apostle, no Law or Gospel, which should be
a means of Salvation to them, till God sent Paul to their Offspring.

Now, can it (in truth) be said, that God did equally love and will, or design
the Salvation of both the Fathers and their Postery, seeing the means of
Salvation were denied to the Fathers, and freely given to their Posterity?

As touching the Learned (or rather Silly and Impertinent) Question, wherein
the Quakers desire to be resolved, (viz.) What Gospel of glad Tidings it is
which I (and others, who hold the Doctrine of Particular Election) have to
Preach to those, for whom Christ Died not?

Answ. This silly Question is grounded on a false Supposition, that Faith is
required of all Men; the which I never taught, neither do I (now) own to be
true.

For, I do not think or believe, that such as never heard of Christ, or who
never had the means of knowing him, are required to believe, that Christ Died
to Redeem them.

Secondly, They are grossly (if not wilfully) mistaken, in thinking and saying,
that I press on all I Preach to, that it is their Duty to believe, that Jesus
Christ Died for them all, without any Limitation or Restriction. I do not
believe, that those People, to whom the glad Tidings of the Gospel is Preached,
are any of them required absolutely, (and without Restriction) to believe, that
Christ Died to Redeem them. All who ever attended on my Ministry, and who are
able to give a Judgment, they will witness for me, that the scope and drift of
my Preaching, is to convince and awaken Sinners out of their natural State, by
opening up to them, from God's Word, the happy sinless State, wherein God
Created them in Adam, their natural and faederal Representative, how they came
to fall from that Happy State, and what the sad and wretched Effects of that
Fall was to Adam, the Head, and now is to all his Children in their unrenewed
State: This I do (instrumentally) by opening up to Sinners, the Sense and
Design of the Moral Law, which is to discover Sin, and to Damn the
Transgressors of it before God, to let Sinners know how spotless that Obedience
and Righteousness must be, which answers its own Demand, in order to its
justifying them at the Bar of a Holy God. As also how weak and unable it is, to
help a Lapsed Transgressor. It points out and requires Duty, but can afford no
Ability or Strength to do that Duty: And all this, in order to bring Dead
Sinners to a sight and sense of their need of a Redeemer. I labor to make them
sensible, that out of Christ, no Life or Salvation is ever to be expected; and
that until Christ the Son of God be received by a true Faith, they themselves,
with all their threadbare polluted Morality, and all those Advantages, wherein
they bless and count themselves Happy, are all under the Curse of God, and
Living and Dying so; they must (as certainly as God is Just, and his Law Holy)
look to be eternally separated from God and Christ for ever and ever. No
Civility, goodness of natural Temper, no Morality, no Zeal for that which they
take to be the best Religion, no learning or shining Parts, whether natural or
acquired, no Riches or Greatness in this World will ever avail to keep them
back from being (by the Laws powerful Sentence) sent down to Hell.

When I find and perceive, that the Spirit of God has (by the Law set home on
the Conscience) brought the Sinner (with the Prodigal) to a sense of his undone
Condition, when I hear him cry out (not in a rotary and formal customary way,
which (God knows) is too much in use and fashion in this sleepy Hypocritical
Age) in the bitterness of his Soul, Mon and Brethren, what shall I do to be
Saved? I then open up (as God's Messenger) the Mystery of God's Covenant of
Grace held forth in the Gospel, wherein is discovered the Incomprehensible
All Sufficiency of the Lord Jesus Christ, to save and reconcile to God the
greatest and vilest of Sinners. I presently fall on directing and sending the
poor sin-sick wounded Sinner to the Son of God, with his Wounds and
Plague-sores, to be healed, pressing him to believe in the Son of God, out of
whom no Salvation is to be found. Hereto I add the peremptory Command of God
himself, that the poor despairing Soul believe on the Son of God, 1 Jo. 2.23.
Mark 16.16. By these Methods and Ways of God's own appointment, God is pleased
to work saving Conversion and effectual Faith in the Souls of elect Sinners.

To what has been offered out of God's own Word, to prove the Doctrine of
Particular Election before time. I here set down the Judgment of the most
Orthodox Protestant Churches, concerning the same. Not that I think the Word of
God stands in any need of Humane Testimony, to help it out, but rather to show
forth the sweet Harmony which is between the Holy Scriptures and the Saints of
God, (in their Holy and Orthodox Confessions of their Faith) concerning the
present (so much controverted and impugned) Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation before time: As also to shame those (nominal) Protestants, both
Non. and Conformists, who have so apparently turned the back upon their own
Articles of Faith, whereby both the one and the other Party has (not a little)
strengthened the Foundation of the Jesuits hope of bringing England's Neck
(once more) under the Papal Yoke: From which I heartily wish, and sincerely
pray, that God will ever keep us.

I begin with the Church of England. Predestination (to Life) is the
everlasting Purpose of God, whereby (before the Foundations of the World were
laid) he has constantly decreed (by his Counsel secret to us) to deliver from
Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to
bring them (by Christ) to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor.
Wherefore, they which be endued with so excellent a Benefit of God, be called
according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit, working in due season: They (through
Grace) obey the Calling; they be justified freely; they be made Sons of God by
Adoption; they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ;
they walk religiously in good Works; and at length (by God's Mercy) they attain
to everlasting Felicity. See 39 Articles of the Church of England. Article 17th
of Predestination and Election.

Secondly, The Confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster.

By the Decree of God, for the Manifestation of his Glory, some Men and Angels
are predestined to everlasting Life, and others to everlasting Death, 1 Timothy
5.21. Mat. 25.41. Romans 9.22.

These Angels and Men thus Predestined and fore Ordained, are particularly
and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and definite, that it
cannot be either increased or diminshed.

Those of Mankind, that are Predestined unto Life, God, before the Foundation
of the World was laid, according to his eternal and immutable Purpose, and the
secret Counsel and good Pleasure of his Will, has chosen in Christ unto
everlasting Glory, out of his mere free Grace and Love, without any foresight
of Faith, or good Works, or Perseverance in either of them, or any other thing
in the Creature, as Conditions or Causes, moving him thereunto; and all to the
praise of the Glory of his Grace.

As God has appointed the Elect unto Glory, so has he, by the eternal and
most free Purpose of his Will, foreordain'd all the means thereunto, 1 Pet.
1.2. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.10. 2 These. 2.13. Wherefore, they who are Elected,
being fallen in Adam, are Redeemed by Christ, are effectually called unto Faith
in Christ, by his Spirit working in due Season, are Justified, Adopted,
Sanctified, and kept by his Power, through Faith unto Salvation, 1 These. 5.9,
10. Tit. 2.14. Romans 8.10. Ephesians. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.5.

Neither are any other Redeemed by Christ, effectually Called, Justified,
Adopted, Sanctified, and Saved, but the Elect only. Jo. 17.9. Romans 8.28. Jo.
10.26.

The rest (of Mankind) God was pleased, according to the unsearchable Counsel
of his own Will, whereby he extends or withholdeth Mercy as he pleases, for
the Glory of his Sovereign Power (over his Creatures) to pass by, and to ordain
them to Dishonor and Wrath for their Sin, to the praise of his glorious
Justice, Mat. 11.25, 26. Romans 2.12. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Pet. 2.8.

See The Assemblys Confession of Faith, Chap. 3. of the eternal Decree of God.

To this, the Church of Scotland has fully agreed: With this also agrees the
Articles (of Faith) of the Church of Ireland, in Bishop Usher's time. See those
Articles: And Usher's Body of Divinity. Quest. What are the parts of
Predestination? Answ. Election and Reprobation. 1 These. 5.9. Romans 9.13, 22, 23.

Quest. What is Election? Answ. It is the everlasting Predestination or
Fore-appointing of certain Angels and Men unto everlasting Life and
Blessedness, for the praise of his Grace and Goodness, 1 Timothy 5.21. Jo. 15.16.
Romans 9.22, 23. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 9.

Quest. What is Reprobation? Answ. It is the eternal Predestination or
Fore-appointment of certain Angels and Men unto everlasting Dishonor and
Destruction, God (of his own freewill) determining to pass them by, refuse or
cast them off; and (for Sin) to Condemn and Punish them with eternal Death.
Prove. 16.4. Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17, 22. 2 Timothy 2.20. Mat. 25.41. See Usher's
Body of Divinity, page 91, 92.

The Church of France (in the 12th Article of the Confession of her Faith) has
these words, (viz.) We believe that God, out of that Corruption and general
Curse, into which all Men were plunged, does free those whom (in his eternal
and immutable Counsel) he elected of his mere Goodness and Mercy in our Lord
Jesus Christ, without the Consideration of Works, leaving the rest in the same
Corruption and Damnation, to show forth in these his Justice, and in them the
Riches of his Mercy, for none of them are better than others, because God has
separated them, etc.

The Synod of Dort in the 7th Canon does lay down this plain and clear
Definition of Election, thus, (viz.) Election is the unchangeable Purpose of
God, by which, before the Foundation of the World, (according to the free good
pleasure of his Will) of his mere Grace, he has chosen out of all Mankind to
Salvation in Christ, a certain and set number of Men, neither better nor more
worthy than others; but lying in the common Misery with others, and fallen from
original Righteousness, into Sin and Destruction, by their own fault, etc.

And in the 15th Canon of Reprobation they say thus, (viz.) The Holy Scripture
does manifest and commend unto us this eternal and free Grace; especially when
it does farther witness, That not all Men are elected, but that some are not
elected, or are passed by in the eternal Election of God, (viz.) Those whom God
(according to his free just, unreproveable and immutable good Pleasure) decreed
to leave in the common Misery, into which they had cast themselves, by their
own fault, and not to give to them saving Faith, and the Grace of Conversion.

It were (almost) endless to insert all the Confessions and the Judgments of
the Orthodox, (in all Ages) who have held and (with an unshaken Confidence)
maintained to the Death, the very same Faith, concerning the Doctrine of
Election and Reprobation, on whom (with the Penmen of Holy Writ) the frothy
Arminians of the Age we live in; who are more Crafty, than truly Wise, do not
spare to cast the basest Reflections, as if they were no way worthy to compare
with themselves, for either Learning, Parts, or Piety. But whatever others
think, for my part, I am neither afraid nor ashamed to tell them, that the
Advances they are daily making toward the Scorners Seet, in contemning and
undervaluing the bright shining ones gone to Glory; it is to me an invincible
Argument, not only of their being destitute of true saving Grace; but that this
their priding it over the best of Men, is a sure Prognostic of their own
Destruction, when the overflowing Scourge threatened in Esa. 28.15. comes on
England. The Arminian Drugs of Freewill, (in fallen Man) general Redemption,
falling from Grace, with temporary Conditional Election, revived and sown (in
England) by the Jesuits Art, and propagated by too many Preachers of the two
Parties abovementioned, have proved the most successful Expedients, to lay
England open to utter Ruin, that ever those Incendiaries of the World could
devise. And indeed the poisonous Drugs (now mentioned) have so Epidemically
overspread the Nation, that I cannot see how the Land can be cured (in an
ordinary way) any other way, than by the Preachers of both Parties, (who have
imbibed those poisonous Principles, and (by Preaching) conveyed them
(insensibly) into the Heads and Affections of of the People) Vomitting up (by
sound Repentance) those cursed Principles, as some have done their Doctrine of
Passive Obedience and Non resistance, the which had they not done, the Land
(before this time) would (in all probability) have been turned into an
Aceldama, or a Papal Slaughterhouse. Vomitting up, I say, (by sound
Repentance) the cursed Principles above mentioned, and laboring in Preaching
up the Soul-saving Doctrine held forth in the 39 Articles of Q. Elizabeth, and
the Assemblys Confession of Faith, (on which they have so shamefully and
apostatically turned the back) to undeceive the People, who (by their means)
have been so sadly corrupted in their Principles, and (by reason of those
Principles) so wretchedly engulfed in the Quagmire of Debauchery and open
Profaneness.

It will prove their own, and the Nations great Advantage, to endeavor
(seasonably and Cordially) to Retrieve the ground they have lost, by their
modish Compliance with the corrupt and erring Humor of the two last Reigns;
and that by sounding (in their respective Pulpits) a timely Retreat, and
exhorting the People (with them) to a cordial Reception of their Abdicated
Articles of Religion; from which the Infernal Craft of England's Enemies, and
their own supine Incautelousness have drawn them aside. It is (infinitely)
better for such manifest Corrupters of the true Protestant Doctrine, to own
their Errors, and repent of them here, while the Gate of Mercy is open; and all
true Protestants Hearts and Arms are open, ready to receive them, on their
return from the Communion of the worst and most pernicious of the Churches and
poor England's Enemies, than to own and repent of their Errors and
Prevarications in Hell; of which place such Men cannot but know it is said, Ab
infernis nulla Redemptio: There is no Redemption or Returning from Hell. This
the Inhabitants of that place know (Experimentally,) to their endless and
remediless Sorrow and Grief. From which place, should it please the Holy
Sovereign of the World, to send the most Gigantick Disputers, (against the
Doctrine of God's free Election of particular Persons before time) which are
now Tongue-ty'd in that place of Torment, to London, to relate what they know
(by sad Experience) since Death arrested them, they would be forced (I doubt
not) to declare, that no Wit or Parts, (natural or acquired) no Courage or
Magnanimity of Mind, no Morality or personal Qualifications acquirable (by any
of Adam's Children) is, or can be Armor proof against the Vindicative
Proceedings of an Angry and a Sin revenging God against those Papists,
Arminians, Socinians, Freewillers, etc. now in Hell, who (when on Earth) did
bend all their Wit and Learning to run down and ridicule the Doctrine I am now
Vindicating. It will be well for their Successors, (who are yet this side Hell)
if this plain dealing with them prove an occasion of awakening them, and
putting them upon a serious Consideration of the present State they are in, and
the way they walk in, that being savingly convinced, both of the Wretchedness
of the one, and the Destructiveness of the other, they may be driven (by a Holy
Despair of ever being saved in an unregenerate State, and walking in ways of
their own devising) to shelter themselves under the shadow of that Mediatorial
spotless Righteousness of the Son of God, by a sound Faith, and an Evangelical
Repentance, which the Spirit and Word of the ever Blessed God assures me, is
the only way to escape Hell and eternal Ruin, which is all the harm I dare to
wish them, and the greatest Enemies I have now Living.

I conclude my Treatise with an Apologetical Reply to, etc.

An Apologetical Reply to the Slanderous Charge given in against me, to some of
the London Ministers, by that Malecontent Party, which (Schismatically)
separated from the Church in C. whereof I was the (then) Lawful Pastor.
THE Charge was, That I was a Man of an Independent Judgment, a great Enemy to
Mr. Baxter, declaring, that Mr. Baxter is Damned in Hell, a Man who (openly)
declared, that Christ has but two or three true and faithful Ministers, (in
and about London) who Preach Christ in Truth, and who bid a public Challenge
to Mr. Williams (and all the Baxterians,) to dispute certain Positions held and
asserted by Mr. Baxter, and such as go his way, and (to add no more) one who is
an universal Decryer of all the Duties of Holiness in a Christians Life and
Conversation, crying out, (in the Pulpit) Away with your Holiness, to Hell with
your Duties and personal Qualifications.

This Charge consists of five branches or parts, to each of which I will speak
as distinctly as I can, and that with as great Seriousness and regard to
Conscience, as if I were to make the present Defense at the Bar of the Great
Judge.

I begin with the first, (viz.) My being an Independent, I have this to say for
my self, first, the Congregational way (of Church Government) is the Principle
which (according to my present light) I apprehend to be nearest to the Platform
of Gospel-Churches, planted by the Apostles, which to own and practice, I am
(fully) convinced, is my Duty: For which, I humbly hope and charitably believe,
none of my Brethren of the Presbyterian Persuasion dare to censure or blame me,
until I can see, that I am herein mistaken and out of the way.

Secondly, As touching my Judgment (herein) I do affirm, (and that in truth)
God knows I lie not, I honestly and fairly acquainted my (now) Reproachers,
what I was in my Judgment, (as to this very Point) when they first discovered
an Inclination to call me to take the Pastoral Charge of their Souls: About
this, they and I had several (occasional) Discourses Pro. and Con. for and
against it; and in conclusion they (with the rest of the Covenanters with God,
in a Church way) did own themselves fully convinced, that the Congregational
way (of Church Government) was (most certainly) the way of the Gospel; and as
such, they freely closed with me. If what I have now asserted be denied, I
shall (by Authentic Testimonies) make the same good to their Faces.

I come to the second Branch of the Charge, (viz.) My being a great Enemy to
Mr. Baxter, etc.

In answer whereto, I possitively affirm, that I never (in my Life) had any
Prejudice against Mr. Baxter, save only to dislike and caution my Flock against
some Notions of his, wherein I conceived him to be Heterodox in the Foundation
Principle of Justification. I told my Auditory, as plainly as I could speak,
that in mentioning Mr. Baxter's Name, my design was not to meddle in Judging
him, as touching his Eternal State, only what of Corruption I found in his
Books, I judged it my Duty to take notice thereof, and to caution my Hearers
(who had his Books) to beware of such Notions. And what I did herein, I did it
(God and my Conscience knows) in Faithfulness to Christ, and the Souls of those
committed to my Pastoral Charge by the Great Shepherd of the Sheep.

But to say, that Mr. Baxter was Damned (in Hell,) I abhor the very hearing or
thoughts of such a thing; neither dares any one living (except a cauteriz'd and
brazen faced Sinner) to charge such a Slander on me; so far was I from uttering
such an uncharitable (I may say Infernal) Expression, that I plainly spoke the
contrary, (as my Judgment of him) declaring, that I hoped Mr. Baxter was with
Christ in Glory; and that I dare to think, no otherwise. As for what of
Corruption, which is mixed with his Writings, I told my Auditory, I looked on
that as a part of the Wood, Hay and Stubble intended by the Apostle in 1 Cor.
3.12. of which Mr. Baxter will (I doubt not) suffer the Loss in the Great day,
though he (himself) be saved, he holding Christ the Foundation, firm and
steadfast to the end, as (in Charity) I hope he did.

The third Branch of the charge is, that I affirmed, that Christ had but two or
three right Gospel Ministers, who Preach Christ (truly) in and about London.

To this I answer in the Negative, viz. That I never thought or spoke such a
thing, either in or out of the Pulpit in all my Life.

The occasion of this Slander was this, I was (in a Sermon) bewailing the small
number of right Gospel Preachers; at which time, and on which occasion, I said,
that a great many Preached up the Pope: That (...) that Man of Sin. Others
(said I) Preach up the National Hierarchy, and its Interest; instead of the
Kingdom of Christ. Others there be (said I) who Preach up Moses, and obedience
to his do, and live, in the room of Christ's Mediatorial spotless Righteousness,
for Justification and Life; so that (in comparison) it is (undeniably) true,
that Christ has but few who Preach him and his immaculate Righteousness, as
the only Meritorious and procuring cause of Justification and Salvation. This
is what I said (then) and truly I see but small reason to think or say
otherwise: I question not, but the Orthodox (in and about London) will readily
Harmonize with me herein: But that I did limit the true Ministers of Christ to
any certain (definite) number; or that I mentioned any Ministers Names (by way
of distinction) I utterly deny. And I have very good reason to judge it no
breach of the Law of Charity, to believe that the secret design of the
Reporters hereof, was to incense and provoke the Spirits of Godly Ministers,
and their respective Congregations against me. And (hereby) to prepare them for
a more facil and ready reception of the other black and scandalous Reproaches,
which were to be brought on the Stage, on purpose to do my business; as one of
their Confederates was heard to say he would do. I come to the fourth Branch of
the Charge, which is, That I should bid a public challenge to Mr. Williams,
(and the rest of Mr. Baxters followers) to Dispute certain Positions held (and
asserted) by Mr. Baxter, and those who go his way.

To which I reply, That this is as true as the rest, and did (I am very sure)
proceed from the same lying Spirit which Coined and Forged their other lying
Stories against me; the design whereof, was not only to corroborate that their
Design (in its Foundation) but also to draw over Mr. Williams (and others, whom
they knew to be impatient to hear any Opposition given to any Notions of Mr.
Baxters) to them; to help and encourage them to break that Church, whereof
themselves were an Essential part, and to force my flight from my Station in C.
to which their own Electing Voice called me.

The occasion of this Slander was thus, I did one day (in Preaching) lay down
this Position, viz. That an Elect Sinner is (in effectual Calling) freely
justified from all charge of Sin, both Original and Actual, by the alone
Mediatorial Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, freely imputed by God; and
that without any regard had to any Conditions performed by, or Qualifications
inhering in the Person of the Sinner, (as con Causes with Christ in
Justification) This (said I) is a truth so clearly laid down and asserted in
the Gospel, and so backed with the witness of Gods Spirit (in the Hearts of all
assured Believers) that all the Disputers in the World, (who oppose the same)
will never be able to overthrow it, be their Wit and Parts never so sharp and
admired. And whether I be mistaken (herein) I freely appeal to the Judgment and
Determination of all Orthodox Protestants; who (in the point of Justification)
are not more or less tainted with the Ropish, Arminian Leaven of Free Will and
General Redemption.

But to bid a challenge to Mr. Williams, (or any others) to dispute matters of
Controversy in Religion; I do (most solemnly) profess, I never spoke such a
thing, either in or out of the Pulpit.

The fifth and last Branch of the black Charge brought in against me, was, That
I am an Universal Docryer of all Religious Duties in the Life and Conversation
of a Christian: Crying out (in the Pulpit) away with your Holiness, etc.

The design of my Accusers (in this) was to represent and expose me as a rank
Antinamian, and so I should prove, were the Accusation true.

But to let all (who read this) see withwhat a virulent and malicious Spirit
the Contriver and Presenter of this black Charge, (against me) was Acted; I
(here) sincerely and conscientiously set down the very Words I spoke, from
which, the occasion was taken to represent me in such black Colors. The thing
was thus, the Subject I was then upon, leading me to discover the sad and
deplorable Condition the Poor Sinner is in (while in a state of Unregeneracy) I
had these Expressions, (whose design and tendency was to awaken and convince
the Sinner of his Misery by Nature) by way of observation, viz. That where God
sets the Law on work in the Conscience of an unconverted Sinner, it will (like
the Avenger of Blood) pursue the Guilty Sinner, till it either drive the Sinner
to Christ, (the only City of Refuge) or till the Sinner he Lodged in Hell.

To bring the matter home more particularly and closely, to an awakened
Conscience, laboring (with Adam) to cover the Sinner with the Fig Leaves of
Self-rightcousness, (both Negative and Possitive) thereby to be justified and
saved: I addressed my self to this Sinner, in these words, Thou convinced
(Rebel) Sinner! who art now under the Laws Arrest, and sinking under the heavy
weight of thy Sins, hoping to relieve and lick thy self whole with thy
Conditions and Qualifications, as if there by thou could make amends to the
offended Justice of God, for all thy Violations of his Righteous Law, know, and
consider it thou must, that the Just and Righteous Law of God. (whose terrible
Sentence (in thy guilty Conscience) thou art now striving to fly and shun in
this way of Works) it is like a strict Creditor, who will not accept (for
Payments) any Coin, which appears short and deficients either in Quantity or
Quality: It will not hear of a Sinner's being justified by any Works; but such
as are exactly Commensurate to its own Just and Holy Demands. Now (said I)
either see that thy Conditions and Qualifications (whereunto thou trustest for
Life and Salvation) be spotless, and exactly commensurate to the Law's Demand,
or in case they be not, then away with thy Fig-leaf Holiness, to Hell with thy
Duties and personal Qualifications. Look to the Lord Jesus Christ, (by an Eye
of Faith) cast thy weary sinking Soul on him for Life and Salvation, or thou will Perish eternally, Jo. 3.36. Jo. 8.24. This is what I said (then,) Christ
knows I Lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.

When I have to do with believing Christians, I press them to the Duties of
practical Holiness and good Works, as if they were to be justified and saved by
them. But still, with this seasonable Caution, that Believers do never join
their Works of Sanctification with Christ's justifying Righteousness in the
Work of Justification.

Besides the black Charge brought against me, to which I have spoken by way of
Apology, mine Accusers (the better to palliate their own black and horrid.
Crimes) charge me with Defectiveness in my Life and Conversation, as not
practicing what I Preach. To this I reply in four Particulars.

First, By way of Concession (or Grant) my Life and Conversation is not
according to my Preaching; in a sense I own it, I do (humbly) acknowledge,
(with shame and grief) that I find my self vastly short of that Perfection (in
Sanctification) which (in Preaching) I press (as Duty) on my self and others;
and the Searcher of Hearts best knows of how great a Concern it is to me, to
reflect on the vast Disparity which I (sensibly) perceive is between what I am,
and what I ought to be in point of Conformity to Christ, in Life and
Conversation, which lays me under an indispensible necessity of subscribing to
that Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor. I know and approve better things,
but follow or incline to things which are worse: And to that of Paul, Romans
7.24. (...), O wretched man that I am, etc.

Secondly, By way of Negation, if my Accusers intend and mean, that I give my
self up to a course of dissolute and loose Living, or that I allow my self in
the approved Practice of any Immorality, which is incompatible with a
Regenerate State, or which is Inconsistent with a Holy Possession; I absolutely
(through special Grace) deny the Charge, and do bid my Invidious Bespatterers
(and all such as do (uncharitably) credit such malicious Reports of me) a fair
and sober Challenge, to make good such a Charge against me, by any Authentic
Witness, which is not known to be prejudiced against me, (if not one or more of
them) who have plotted to overthrow my Reputation and Ministry.

Thirdly, If short coming in living up to what I Preach and Profess, be a
sufficient Warrant for Church Members, to prevaricate and run away, (like
Children of Belial) throwing off the Yoke of Duty, (in the Church;) I would
gladly know how it is possible for any Churches to be kept up on Earth,
considering that the Instruments, by whose Ministry God sees fit to gather and
Build up Churches, to fit them for Glory, are frail Men, not sinless Spirits.

For my own part, albeit I am far from pleading for any Sin, (though but the
least Infirmity) whereof either I my self, or any other know me Guilty. I must
needs say, that I never yet could find, that ever God the Father (in the Old
Testament,) or Christ his Son (in the New,) did call or send any to be Prophets
or Apostles, who were exempt or free from personal Failings; or who were ever
able to live up (perfectly) to the Doctrine they Preached to others: Yea, it is
most evident, (to any intelligent Reader) that a considerable part of the Canon
of Holy Scripture is Occupant about discovering, acknowledging and bewailing
the sinful Miscarriages and short comings of the Penmen thereof, as the
Learned and Godly well know.

Fourthly, and Lastly, Supposing that my Brethren knew and could prove me
guilty of as great Falls as ever any pardoned Sinner fell into; is it not the
duty of Church Members, to endeavor my Recovery, by coming to me in the Spirit
of Meekness, and Brotherly Love, to call on me, and to stir me up to Repentance
and Reformation? knowing than the Holiest of Saints, (even those of the highest
Seize in Grace) while in the Body, are Obnoxious to the sprest
Temptations; and by reason thereof (and the remains of indwelling Corruption)
are liable to the sorest falls thereby.

The Word of God proves, that so to do is the undoubted Duty of Church Members
one toward another, Lev. 19.17. Mat. 18.15. Gal. 6.1. But this my Schismatical
Brethren never did to me, though never so earnestly Courted, and lovingly
Entreated thereto; and that both in and out of the Pulpit: As can be
sufficiently proved if need be.

Satan and his plotting Agents knew (fullwell) that the old Trade, Report, and
we will report it, Jer. 20.10. was the most likely and effectual way to
accomplish their ungodly Design, which was to unchurch the Church, and (for
future) to render my Ministry useless: In order whereto the Pastor must first
be attackt, according to Zach. 13.7. Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered.

This Apology I thought not only Expedient, but my Duty to publish, for the
true Information of those, (especially Dissenting Ministers) who have (from the
Character given them of me, by those I here intend) sucked in Prejudice against
my Name and Ministry.

And to occasion their (seriously) considering, how (every way) unbecoming the
Gospel it is, for one Christian (especially such as are called to Sacred
Office) to be open Eared, and of too credulous a Temper, in listening to, and
improving (to the great Prejudice of those, whom the Law of Charity commands
them to love) any Reports, which looks like a Design to blacken or stain the
Reputation of a Brother, especially a poor Stranger, who (for Christ and the
Gospel) has lost his All; and who (for witnessing against the spreading Errors
of the times) is surrounded and besieged with Enemies of all sorts. To frown
on, and carry it strange to such, will neither please God, credit Religion, or
help to make a dying Bed easy and comfortable, Exodus 22.21. Deuteronomy. 10.19. Mat.
7.12. Colos. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.

Obsequium Amicos, veritas Odium parit.

Flattery begets Friends, speaking Truth causes Enemies. Compare Esa. 30.10.
with Amos 5.10.

FINIS.

