Britannicus His Pill TO CVRE MALIGNANCY, OR Frenzy, now reigning amongst
diverse English Protestants, which will not see the danger that their Religion
and Liberties now lie in:

BEING The whole Progress of the Adversaries long, and continued Plots,
briefly laid open, and discovered; whereby the archest Malignant will be either
convinced, or condemned, and the weakest of the well-affected sufficiently
strengthened and encouraged with all vigor to proceed with the Parliament in
the defense of Religion and Liberty.

Published by Authority.

London Printed for Robert White, 1644.

Britannicus his Pill to cure Malignancy.
I will begin with His Majesty's Reign, A strange Wife is prepared, which
according to the Scripture is a dangerous Preparative for a strange God, surely
they will turn their hearts after their Gods, 1 Kin. 11. 2. This groundwork
being laid, they endeavor to persuade the King by fraud and subtlety to bring
in Popery and Slavery, for the effecting whereof, observe first the design of
the bringing in the German Horse, the Billiting of Soldiers, the frequent and
untimely breaking and disolving Parliaments, setting before his Majesty the
example of France and his broken Parliaments in full power as an object of
Emulation: Then the Bishops and their Episcopal Creatures have publicly
preached, and in their discourse and writing endeavored to maintain that
opinion and argument, That all we have is the Kings, and he ought to do what he
pleases; as if God made all the world for a few Kings, and not for the people,
and persuaded Him that Parliaments and Puritans were His Majesty's chiefest
enemies: Moreover look what endeavors have been used by the Bishops to cheat
us of our Religion by degrees and pauses; to set up Popery at one time would
have made too great a noise, but with a gentle hand, and to do it so as it
might steal upon us insensibly, The destructi^e way.
and should devour us, but we should neither know nor see; To have suspended all
Orthodox preachers at once, that would have been too conspicuous, but by
degrees; First to suspend all Lectures, as an order of Vagrants not to be
tolerated in the Church. Next forbid all Pastors preaching in their own
Churches in week days: Then inhibit preaching on the Lords day in the
afternoon, under pretense of advance of Catechis^e; soon after forbid all
Praying but in the words of the Canon. After this the Communion Table must be
The ^dstructive way.
rayled in; soon after it must be set in Altar Posture, Then all must be
compelled to come and kneel before it or not receive the Sacrament, then it
must be cried up as Sanctum Sanctorum, and that all men's faces must be toward
it in Prayer: Secondly to press the Examples and practices of some as a great
means to bring on the rest, to dazzle the eyes of the less judicious people of
the Kingdom, as my Lord Archbishop, or Bishop bow versus Altar, the Lords of
the must honorable Order of the Garter at their instalment bow toward the
Altar, His Majesty's Chapel is thus and thus adorned: Thirdly an Edict for
Recreation up on the Lords day is procured, and it must be read by the
Ministers: Fourthly to Cast all out of the Ministry that will not be punctual
and full Conformists to the old Ceremonies, Fifthly inioyning a fardell of new
and unheard of Ceremonies and injunctions: Sixthly Prayers must be made and
Proclamations read against our brethren the Scots: lastly the new and
unparelled oath for Episcopacy: Thus you see how by degrees, stratagems and
Engines they indeavored to work out those Arch-heriticks as they called all
good and godly Ministers out of the Ministry, As it was sometimes said to
Eliah. 1 Kings 19. him that escapes the sword of Hazaell, shall Iehu slay, and
him that escapes the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay; so had they said, him
that escapes the dint of the Ceremonies, shall the book of sports slay, and
him that escapes the book of sports, shall the Proclamations slay, and him
that escapes the Proclamations, shall the Oath slay: The chiefest and greatest
fomenters and promoters of these s^cessive Stratagems we all know, neither can
any Malignants or Atheists deny but the Late Earl of Strafford and the
Archbishop of Canterbury were the two great engines of this work, and what
manner of favorites both of them were at Court, and what interests they had in
His Majesty and the Queen is apparent enough, and by the events it does too
notoriously appear: The Archbishop was he that held Correspondency with Rome,
as by several Letters may appear, and to whom the Cardinals Cap from Rome
was sent, and he that indeavored to be papa alterius orbis, This is he that
altered the oath to be taken by the King at His Coronation, and indeavored to
overthrow and annihilate Magna Charta, and to bring in Tyranny and Popery, as
by these and several other Articles which are proved against him in the house
of Peers, by which his design is sufficiently apparent what he intended, for
which it is hoped he shall receive suddenly his just reward.

Since these private designs was discovered, and the War against the Scots
became frustrate, then brake out the Irish in Rebellion, who are now esteemed
his Majesty's best and faithful Subjects; although it is apparent that the
Irish Nation, bears not only an inveterat hatred to the British Nation and
our Religion, but even to the very beasts and Plants of the English by their
cruel torments and massacres of two hundred thousand Protestants, and the
wastes and spoils made upon the English Plants and Cattle, as by several
Depositions taken upon Oath does, and may appear; and in their general
discourse, they say they have, and had the Kings Commission for what they have
done, or do, and the horses, or other Cattle they took away from the
Protestants there, they marked with the Queens mark, and usually called
themselves the Queens soldiers: You may remember the Oath they have taken,
with all their power to uphold and maintain the free exercise of the Roman
Catholic Faith and Religion, and to obey and ratify all the Orders and
Decrees made, and to be made by the supreme Council of the Confederate
Catholics: you may likewise take notice that thousands of Proclamations and
Declarations, how speedily and quickly they were read against the Scots, but
when the Irish Rebellion broke out first, it was a long time, near two months
before any Proclamation could be obtained against them, though often pressed
and desired by the Parliament, and when obtained, the Printer of the
Proclamation by special command must print but forty, such favor, such
countenance had that barbarous and most horrid Rebellion: Remember also
General Munro writ, that about a year since the Earl of Antrim being going
over out of England into Ireland, was taken at Sea, and about him was found
several papours and instructions, whereby it does plainly appear (as he
writes) that the design was to root out, and wholly extirpate the Protestant
Religion in all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, since
which time the Earl of Antrim escaped, and is now preferred to be a great
Officer in Ireland, and since made a Marquisse: Moreover the Generals of the
Irish forces in Vlster did offer to my Lord Munro the Parliaments General
there, to appeal to the King, which of them had the truest Commission, and
which his Majesty would aver to be his best and most faithful Subjects, and
according to such his Majesty's determinations, to quit or hold their
employment, if my Lord Munro would promise the same, to stand to such his
Majesty's determination: And further, none can deny but the Irish papists
Commissioners were the persons extraordinarily favored and countenanced at
their late being at Oxford, and their bloody and unheard of cruelties passed
over with a painted peace, and seeming Cessation, and the Protestant
Commissioners then there also at the same time, were slighted and neglected;
will not this, and many other passages make it clear, that the war was raised
here in England, to hinder this Kingdom from sending any supplies of men,
money, arms, and ammunition into Ireland, against the Irish Rebels: Then
consider the Kings coming to the Parliament (as supposed by the Queens
persuasion) to accuse the five Members of high Treason, was not here the great
and most dangerous beginning of these wars in this Nation, which if the five
Members had been delivered up, you may soon conjecture what Acts of Parliament
would have passed even the next day, to the greater slavery and misery of this
Nation, then by the thoughts of man can be imagined, but by the providence of
God they were protected by the worthy Citizens of this famous City of London,
and we hope will be protected by each other, until their foes be subdued unto
them.

Next the Kings going to York to raise a guard to defend his Person, then his
going to see Hull, the great Magazine of the Kingdom: Then the Queen she
pretends to go over into Holland to see her daughter, when indeed she intended
nothing more then to bring over Arms and Ammunition, though it were with the
sale of the Crown Jewels. Besides his Majesty tells you at first, no Papist
must come nigh his person, and were exempted out of the Warrants for putting
the Commission of Array in execution: but soon after they were allowed to buy
Arms for their defense, contrary to the known Laws of the Land, and were then
desired to send their horses, and his Majesty would set Protestant Riders upon
them, and now behold who more employed in places of Trust, and countenanced by
honors and preferments, and esteemed his best Subjects, kept for Reserves in
most dangerous Assaults and employments, and whose Counsels at Court more
prevalent, predominant, and over ruling then the Papists, and Irish Rebels, who
work together, with, and for the Spanish Faction in that Court.

See how active the Queen is for promoting her Cause, and what power and
interests she has with his Majesty, and his Counsels, which cannot be
expressed in words, and what dependence she has to Rome, and all the Priests
and Jesuits both in Foreign Nations, and in England, consider also what
Motives and prayers have been made amongst all the Roman Catholics all over
Christendom, for the good success of the Kings Armies, also I could go back
and tell you of the poisonning of Marquis Hamilton, etc. the Popes Nuntioes
residing here, and if Windebanke and others of their Orders, and Warrants in
favor of Priests and Jesuits, and also their intended Massacre against the
chiefest Pillars of Scotland, the Marquis of Argile, the Earl of Lowden, and
Earl of Leven and many others when the King was in Scotland, the very same day
the Rebellion in Ireland brake forth.

Consider also the Subtle engagements of diverse of the children of the
Palatinate in this war against the Parliament and Kingdom, a design of the
Jesuits, fetched from Hell, to make an inveterate hatred in this Kingdom to
that family, thereby if it were possible, to take away all hopes of ever
recovering the Palatinate again for the right owners.

Look upon the persons that side with the King in this war, if not for the
most part, almost generally Papists, Bishops, and their adherents,
Monopolizers, delinquents to the State, beggarly Gentry of this Kingdom, and of
the better sort of Nobles, and Gentlemen, terrified and frighted with the Lions
Skin, and Foxes Cunning, some gained with terror, others with hope of honor,
and preferment; this has much increased that party amongst the Gentry, and
none but know that his Majesty's Storehouse of Common Soldiers, he raises
from the dark corners of the Land, where ignorance, blindness, and
Libertinisme is prdominant and a pious godly ministry very scarcely to be
heard of, where the Lords day is known by a few Common Prayers in the morning,
and by dancing, drinking, and rioting about a May Pole in the afternoon.

I have now traced and touched upon some of the heads of those abuses and
false pretenses, and black engines which our enemies have wrought withal to
Cozen, and cheat us of our Religion, and Liberties, and any understanding man
by this discourse may easily discern Popery, and Slavery was intended: And now
courteous Reader, since so many stratagems and Traps have been laid to ensnare
thy Conscience, and to bereave thee of thy Religion and Liberty, and fully laid
open by the blessing of God, in this fixed Parliament, who have labored well
nigh four years against Mountains of dangers and difficulties, and have also
cased you of many burdens of shipmony, High Commission Court, Monopolizers,
and have set thee at Liberty from the Iron Yoke of Bishops, and their
Hierarchy, and dependants, and are striving, and wrestling to settle the in
thee true Protestant Religion, in the purity thereof, to be governed by Laws,
and not by Horses, and Garrisons, as in other Nations: nor according to the
fancy, and will of the Prince or his favorite, and also indeavoring to save
three Kingdoms from a dying, and sad Condition they are now in, which will
best appear, and be discerned when the present Wars is over, when we shall
enjoy what we now so much contend for: Therefore my advice is, that every man
that loves his Religion or Liberty, to use his utmost, in their Prayers, in
their purses, and persons, to uphold the Spirits of such as faithfully stand
for theirs, and the Kingdoms good, to their calling in Parliament, though some
of their Members be turned Apostats, and rotten, being tossed, and shaken away,
with the anger of the King, or enticed away by preferments, or such like
vanities; are these things worth the Religion and Liberty of the Nation? In a
word I dare boldly say, that man which does not cordially uphold, and defend
Parliaments in times of try all, does as much as in him lies, to destroy the
same, and then I appeal to every man's conscience; If in destroying
Parliaments, thou do not as much, as in thou lie, destroy Religion and
Liberty of the Kingdom, which God grant we may never live to see.

FINIS.

