A DETECTION Of the ACTIONS OF MARY Queen of Scots, CONCERNING The Murder of
Her HUSBAND, and Her Conspiracy, Adultery, and pretended Marriage with the Earl
BOTHWEL.

And a Defense of the True LORDS, Maintainers of the KING'S Majesty's Action
and Authority.

Written in Latin by G. BUCHANAN.

Translated into Scotch. And now made English.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Ianeway, in Queen's Head-Ally,
near Paternoster Row. 1689.

To the Reader.
I Think it necessary, for the Reader's better understanding the following
History, to acquaint him that James the Fifth, having lost his two Sons (both
in one Week) a little before he was slain at Flodden-Field, left no other Heir,
but Mary, a Child of four days old, which he never had seen. This Child was
accepted, and at five years of Age (the Scots seeing they were likely to make
better Merchandise of her in France than with us in England, tho we then
proffered high) sent her into France, and at Twelve married her to the Dolphin,
afterward Francis the First, who at two Years left her a Widow, and so she
returned to Scotland, where she found her Mother weltring in her Cruelties, (a
Guise) and wasting and gathering with all her might. She being removed, the
Queen came to be Master of her self, and soon after in a Gayety took Henry Lord
Darley, Son to the Earl of Lenox, one of the goodliest Personages accounted of
his time, to her Husband. But it seems her first flames being allaied, there
was one David Rize either had been, or was grown more into Favor, so that the
King grew every day discountenanced; And whereas before in the Coins (as many
of them I have seen, comparing the Years) it was in the end of one Year,
Henricus and Maria, etc. it was in the beginning of the other, Maria and
Henricus, etc. And instead of receiving the Honor of a King, he was sent away
from the Court without either Train or Necessaries. This with other
Informations of the Queens Carriages, and the Encouragement of some of the
Nobility brought him back to Edinburgh, where finding David in the Queens
Company, snatched him out of her Presence, (giving her some words of Comfort
and Assurance, for she was then great with Child) and with some of his
Assistance sent him into another Life.

This Minion being gone, Bothwel came into Favor, and that how swiftly and
powerfully you may perceive by the Letters annexed to the Discourse: but her
hate to her Husband was so exasperated, that both her and Bothwel's Malice and
Wits, made his Destruction their chief aim. Her Carriage to him grew every day
more and more strange, she augmented her Neglect, in so much that at the
Christning of that Son, who was after a Plague to this Nation, he was not
suffered to receive the least Honors or Addresses.

She being again at liberty then thought to bestir her self about the
compassing of Revenge; Poison was attempted, but the strength of his Youth
overcame it; which the accursed Woman seeing, flattered him into Agreement, and
presently lulled him into Credulity; so that he came again to Edinburgh, and
was lodged in a little House near the Palace, but out of all hearing. Hither
she brought her own rich Bed, and frequently visited him with all shows of
Affection. But one Sunday Night, she discovered her self, and fetching a deep
Sigh, O, says she, this time twelve Month was David Rize slain. This it seems
came from her heart; for within a few days, the unfortunate young Man, as an
Inferiae to the Ghost of a Fiddler, was strangled in his Bed, the House blown
up, and his Body thrown out into the Garden, the Queens rich Bed being a day or
two before removed.

Now was she at liberty for Bothwel, but there was one Obstacle, he had a Wife
already, but she poor Woman must be forced to sue out a Divorce, which was
procured in eight days. So that now the way was smooth, and an Ambassador with
fine penned Instructions sent to the King of France, to give an account of her
new marriage. But all this could not still the Cries of the People, whose
impatience, grief, and rage at that time (particulars whereof I have seen in an
authentic Scotch Diurnal of that date) was such, that Bothwel was forced to
suborn some People to accuse him; but he having Creatures enough, few daring to
witness, and many Judges of his party, was acquitted. But at last the honest
part of the Nobility, sensible of those miscarriages, made a Head, broke
Bothwel's Forces, put him to flight, took her Prisoner, and made her resign up
the Government to her Son, (all this before the said Ambassador who was sent
into France, had had his first Audience) then a Child in the Cradle, known
afterward by the name of James the Sixth.

This is as much as I can say will give light to the Book that follows. 'Twas
written by the most excellent Pen of that Age, a Man, as Sir Philip Sidney
justly calls him, of a piercing Wit, consummate Learning, and careful
Observation of things, which made him known to the greatest Princes of his
Time, and dear to his own. This made him Schoolmaster to his King, who
employed him in the weightiest Transactions at home and abroad, made him Keeper
of the Privy Seal of Scotland (tho he never sought himself, nor could withdraw
from the ancient Parcimony and Frugality, he dying very poor.) So that it is
not to be supposed that a Person so well qualified for knowledge in these
things, and of a Reputation so untouched, would have adventured to divulge
matters of this nature, in a place where most men might have called him Liar.
But certainly, both in his History, which he dedicated to the Son, and in this
Piece, which be penned in the name of the Lords, if there were any fault, it
was too broad. And tho worthy Master Cambden in his Annals tells us, He wished,
he might have wiped out all that he had writ against Mary Queen of Scots with
his Blood, yet when I consider the Times he writ in, and the general silence of
it among the Scots, and the disgrace that Buchanan died in when King James came
to maturity; methinks I cannot give so much credit in this to that famous
Historian, as in other things, though he might mendacium dicere, not mentiri.

And tho Caussin in his Holy Court, make her a Heroine, nay, a Saint: and
Strada in his De Bello Belgico, digresses to celebrate her with immoderate
praises, yet certainly any man, that would guide his historical faith aright,
will much rather choose to believe men either Actors in a Business, or
neighbors to it, and such as receive assurance from their eyes, than men that
are remote, and such as are necessitated to see through the false or broken
light of Information; especially Persons hid in Cells, and excluded from
Business, absolutely devoted to a Religion, to which she was an Appuy, and
absolute Enemy to that Power under which she received just Sentence and
Execution. To say nothing that the Religious especially those that seek to grow
into the repute of the World by carnal ways, think themselves highly advanced
by a long Bead-roll of Martyrs, be their pretenses never so slight, or their
Persous themselves never so much deserving an Anathema.

Farewell.
A DETECTION Of the ACTIONS of MARY QUEEN of SCOTS.
WHereas of things judicially determined within a Dominion, to have an Account
demanded by Strangers, is to such as are not subject to Foreign Jurisdiction,
both strange; and also for the strangeness, displeasant. To us, above all
other, it ought to be most grievous, who are driven to this Strait of
Necessity, that whose Faults we desire to cover, their Lives we are forced to
accuse, unless we our selves will be accounted the most wicked Persons that
live. But a great part of this Grief is relieved by your Equity (most excellent
Queen* who take it no less displeasantly to see your Kinswoman, than we to see
our Queen thus, in speech of all Men, to be so dishonourably reported of; who
also are for your part no less desirous to understand the Truth, than we for
ours to avoid Slander. Therefore we will knit up the Matter as briefly as
possibly may be; and declare it with such shortness, as we may rather seem to
have lightly run over the chief Points, than to have largely expressed them;
beginning at the Queen's first Inconstancy. For, as in making of her Marriage,
her Lightness was very headlong and rash, so suddenly followed either inward
Repentance, or, at least, outward Tokens of Change of her Affection, without
any Causes appearing: For whereas the King, in former time, was not only
neglected, but also unworthily used; at length began open Hatred to break out
against him, especially in that Winter when he went to Peble with a small
Train, even too mean for a private Man; not being sent* thither a-Hawking, but
commanded away into a Corner, far from Council, or Knowledge of public
Affairs. Neither is it necessary to put in Writing those things, which as they
were then as a Spectacle, noted of all Men's Eyes, so now, as a fresh Image,
they remain imprinted in all Men's Hearts. And though this were the beginning
of all the Evils that followed; yet, at the first their Practices were secret,
so as not only the common People; but also such as were right familiar, and
present at the doing of many matters, could not understand thoroughly, what
thing the Queen then chiefly intended.

At the last, about the Month of April, in the Year 1566, when the Queen was
returned from Dunbar to Edinburgh, and was lodged in the Castle; she kept there
till the time of her Travail of Child. After her Deliverance, immediately the
secret Counsels of the intended Mischief began to break out; the effect whereof
was this, to dispatch away the King by one means or other howsoever, and to
marry with Bothwel. And that her self should not be touched with suspicion of
the Murder; she began secretly, by little, and little, to sow Seeds of
Dissension between the King and the Lords that were then at Court, still more
and more Insflaming them, to bring the Matter to deadly Feud. And if at any
time, she espied the Suspicions of the one against the other to languish,
immediately, with new Reports to both Parties, she whetted them on again to
fresh Displeasures, persuading the Nobility against the King, and the King
against the Nobility, that each intended others Destruction. And she thought
nothing so long as to see the Matter come to Strokes, not caring whether of
them obtained the Victory; for she accounted the Loss on either side for her
Advantage, as hoping thereby to advance forward one Degree nearer to that which
she intended. Finally, in short time she so filled their Hearts with mutual
Jealousies one against another, that there was not a Man of any Reputation in
the Court; but was driven to this Necessity, either with Dishonor, to yield to
Rumors feigned against him, or to euter into Combat with the Reporters, or to
withdraw him home. And though we shall pass over the rest, having desire to
haste to the chief Point of the Matter; yet this one notable slanderous
Practice at that time, is not to be omitted. For on a time when the King had
been in talk with the Queen, till the Night was far spent; the Sum, in a manner
of all her Cummunication, was, That almost all the Nobility had conspired his
Death, and were devising how to dispatch him. After the King's Departure from
her, she sent forthwith for the Earl of Murray her Brother, who after was
Regent, with this Message, That the Matter was heinous, and necessarily
requiring his Presence without delay. He being awaked out of sound Sleep in
great Fear, cast a Nightgown over his Shirt, and as he was half naked, ran to
her in haste. To him then she used even the like Talk, as she had before to the
King, informing him that the King boiled in such deadly Hatred against him; and
took it so displeasantly, that he stood so highly in her Grace, that he was
fully determined, so soon as any possible Opportunity served, to murder him.
So, as much as in her lay, she left no Means unassay'd to set them together by
the Ears, and without all doubt had done it indeed, if it had not been God's
good Pleasure to deliver the innocent Persons from so perilous Treasons, and
to disclose her wicked Treachery.

When this Attempt failed her, she assailed the young and unexperienced
Gentleman with a new subtle Practice. She earnestly labored with him, That
while she was great with Child, he should The Queen offers to be Bawd to her
own Husband.
choose him some young Gentlewoman, whereof there was great store, whose Company
he might use in the mean time. She promised him her assent and furtherance with
Pardon and Leave to commit the Offense. She named to him the Earl of Murray's
Wife; not for that she esteemed that most noble Lady most apt for such a
Villainy, but because she thought by that way to be revenged of three Enemies
at once, the King, the Earl, and his Wife, and therewithal to win a Color and
Cause of Divorce, to make empty Bed-room for Bothwel. After she was delivered
of Child, though she courteously entertained all other; yet as often as Word was
brought her that the King was come to see her, both she and her Company so
framed their Speech and Countenance, as if they seemed to fear nothing more,
than that the King should not perceive that they loathed him, and that his
Coming and Presence was displeasant to them all. On the other side Bothwel
alone was all in all, he alone was Governor of all her Counsels, and all her
Affairs. And so desirous was the Queen to have her hearty Affection toward him
understood of all Men, that if any Suit were to be made toward her, there was
no way of speeding for any Man, but by Bothwel to obtain it.

Not long after her Deliverance* on a Day very early, accompanied with very few
that were privy of her Counsel, she went down to the Waterside, at the Place
called the New Haven; and while all marvelled whither she went in such haste;
she suddenly entered into a Ship, there prepared for her, which Ship was
provided by Will. Blacater, Edm. Blacater, Leonard Robertson, and Tho. Diokson,
Bothwel's Servants, and famous Robbers, and Pirates. With this Train of
Thieves, all honest Men wondering at it, she betook her self to Sea, taking not
any other with her, no not of her Gentlemen, nor necessary Attendants for
common Honesty. In Aloe Castle where the Ship arrived, how she behaved her
self, I had rather every Man should with himself imagine it, than hear me
declare it. This one thing I dare affirm, that in all her Words and Doings, she
never kept any regard, I will not say of Queen-like-Majesty, but not of
Matron-like-Modesty. The King, when he heard of this sudden Departure of the
Queen, followed after with all the haste that he possibly could by Land, and
there overtook her, in purpose, and hoping there to be in her Company, and to
enjoy the mutual loving Fellowship of Marriage. But how lovingly he was
received of her, both all they that were present, and such as have heard them
report it, can well remember. For being scarcely suffered to tarry there a few
Hours, while his Men and Horses baited, he was enforced to get him away in
haste again, on Pain of further Peril. As for her self, she pastimed there
certain Days, if not in Princely Magnificence; yet in more than Princely, or
rather Unprincely Licentiousness. There went she a hunting, once at the River
of Magat, another time at the Forest of Glenartue. There how coily; yea, how
lostily and disdainfully she behaved her self to the King, What need it be
rehearsed; for the thing was openly done in all Men's Sight, and continues
imprinted in all Men's Memories.

When she was returned to Edinburgh, she took not her Lodging in her own
Palace; but in a private House next adjoining to John Balfours. Thence she
removed into another House, where the yearly Court, which they call the
Exchequer, was then kept: For this House was larger, and had pleasant Gardens
to it, and next to the Garden all along, a solitary vacant Room. But there was
another Matter, which more than all these things allured her thither. There
dwelt hard by one David Chambers, Bothwel's Servant, whose Backdoor adjoined
to the Garden of the Queen's Lodging. The rest, who guesseth not; for the Queen
herself confessed the Matter, both to many other; and also, namely to the
Regent and his Mother. But she laid all the blame upon my Lady Rerese, a Woman
of most vile Unchastity, who had sometime been one of Bothwel's Harlots; and
then was one of the chief of the Queen's Privy Chamber. By this Woman, who now
in her Age had from the Gain of Whoredom, betaken her self to the Craft of
Baudry, was the Queen, as her self said, betrayed. For Bothwel was brought
through the Garden into the Queen's Chamber, and there forced her against her
Will, Forsooth. But how much against her Will, Dame Rerese betrayed her, time,
the Mother of Truth, has disclosed. For within few days after, the Queen
intending, as I suppose, to requite Force with Force, and to ravish him again,
sent Dame Rerese (who had her self also before made Trial of the Man's
Strength) to bring him Captive unto her Highness. The Queen with Margaret
Carwood, a Woman privy to all her Secrets, did let her down by a String over an
old Wall into the next Garden. But in such Warlike Affairs, all things cannot
ever be so well foreseen; but that some incommodious Chance may overthwartly
happen. Behold, the String suddenly broke, and down with a great Noise fell
Dame Rerese, a Woman very heavy, both by unwieldy Age, and massy Substance. But
she, an old beaten Soldier, nothing dismayed with the Darkness of the Night,
the height of the Wall, nor with the suddenness of the Fall, up she gets,
and running to Bothwel's Chamber, she gat the Door open; and out of his Bed,
even out of his Wives Arms, half a sleep, half naked, she forceably brings the
Manto the Queen. This Manner and Circumstances of the Deed, not only the most
Part of them that then were with the Queen have confessed; but also George
Daglish, Bothwel's Chamberlain, a little before he was executed, plainly
declared the same, which his Confession still remains upon Record.

In the mean time, the King being commanded out of sight, and with Injuries and
Miseries banished from her, kept himself close, with a few of his Servants at
Sterline. For alas! what should he else do? He could not creep into any piece
of Grace with the Queen; nor could get so much as to maintain his daily
necessary Expenses, to maintain his few Servants and Horses: And finally, with
Brawlings, lightly rising from every small Trifle, and by Quarrels usually
picked, he was chased out of her Presence; yet, his Heart, obstinately fixed in
loving her, could not be restrained; but he must needs come back to Edinburgh,
on purpose, with all kind of serviceable Humbleness, to get some entry into her
former Favor, and to recover the kind Society of Marriage. Who once again
being with most dishonorable Disdain excluded, returned from whence he came,
there to bewail his woeful Miseries, as in a solitary Desert.

Within few days after, when the Queen determined to go to Iedworth, to the
Assizes there to be holden, about the beginning of October, Bothwel making his
Journey into Liddesdale. There behaving himself neither according to the Place
whereto he was called, nor according to his Nobili^y of Race and Estimation, he
was wounded by a poor Thief, that was himself ready to die, and carried into
the Castle, called the Hermitage, with great uncertainty of his Recovery. When
News hereof was brought to Borthwick to the Queen, she flingeth away in haste
like a mad Woman by great Journeys in Post, in the sharp time of Winter, first,
to Melrose, and then to Iedworth. There though she heard sure News of his Life;
yet her Affection, impatient of delay, could not temper it self; but needs she
must bewray her outrageous Lust, and in an inconvenient time of the Year,
despising all Discommodities of the Way and Weather, and all Dangers of
Thieves, she betook herself headlong to her Journey, with such a Company, as no
Man of any honest Degree would have adventured his Life, and his Goods among
them. Thence she returned again to Iedworth, and with most earnest Care and
Diligence, provideth and prepares all things to remove Bothwel thither. When
he was once brought thither, their Company and familiar Haunt together, was
such as was smally agreeing with both their Honors. There, whether it were by
their Nightly and daily Travels, dishonorable to themselves, and infamous
among the People; or by some secret Providence of God, the Queen fell into such
a sore and dangerous Sickness, that scarcely there remained any Hope of her
Life.

When the King heard thereof, he hasted in Post to Iedworth, to visit the
Queen, to comfort her in her Weakness, and by all the gentle Services that he
possibly could, to declare his Affection and hearty Desire to do her Pleasure.
So far was it off, that his Lodging and things necessary, were provided for him
against his coming (as were wont to be for mean Persons) that he found not any
one Token toward him of a Friendly Mind. But this was a Point of most
barbarous Inhumanity used against him, that the Nobility, and all the Officers
of the Court that were present, were specially forbidden to do him any
Reverence at all at his coming, nor to yield him their Lodging, nor to harbor
him so much as for one Night. And whereas the Queen suspected that the Earl of
Murray, which afterward was Regent, would show him Courtesy, she practiced
with his Wife to go home in haste, and feign her self sick, and keep her Bed,
that at least by this Color, under Pretense of her Sickness, the King might be
shut out of Doors. Being thus denied all Duties of civil Kindness, the next Day
with great Grief of Heart, he returned to his old solitary Corner. In the mean
time, while the King in that want of all things, and forsaken of all Friends,
scarce with begging finds Room in a Cottage; Bothwel, out of the House where
he was lodged before, as it were in Triumph over the King, was gloriously
removed in sight of the People into the Queen's own Lodging, and there laid in
a lower Parlour, directly under the Chamber where the Queen her self lay sick.
There, while they both were yet feeble and unhealed, she of her Disease, and he
of his Wound, the Queen being very weak of her Body, yet visited him daily. And
when they were both a little recovered, and their Strengths not yet fully
settled, they returned to their old Pastime again, and that so openly, as they
seemed to fear nothing more, than lest their Wickedness should be unknown.

About the fifth day of November, being removed from Iedworth, to a Town called
Calco; there she received Letters from the King, which when she had read in
presence of the Regent, the Earl of Huntley, and the Secretary; she cast a
pitious look, and miserably tormented her self, as if she would have
immediately fallen down again into her former sickness; and she plainly and
expressly protested, That unless she might by some means or other be dispatched
of the King, she should never have one good day: And if by no other way she
could attain it, rather than she would abide to live in such sorrow, she would
slay her self.

Within few days after, while in her return through Marchland she lay at
Coldingham, Dame Rerese passed through the Watch, and was known, and let go.
What Company she had, and whither she went at that time of the night, it was
not unknown to the Queen. From thence, about the end of November, she came to
Cragmillar, a Castle about two miles from Edinburgh; there, in presence of the
Earl of Murray (who afterward was Regent, and now is himself also slain) and
of the Earls of Huntley and Argyle, and the Secretary, she fell into her said
former Discourse; and also added the most commodious way, as she thought, how
it might be brought to pass, that is to sue a Divorce against the King: And she
doubted not but that it might be easily obtained, Cousin Germans.
forasmuch as they were the one to the other in such degree of Consanguinity,
as by the Popes Law might not marry together, especially (which was easy for
her to do) the Bull being conveyed away, whereby the same Law was dispensed
with. Here when one had cast a doubt, That if she should go that way to work,
their Son should be made a Bastard, being born out of lawful Wedlock, especialy
since neither of his Parents were ignorant of the causes whereby the Marriage
should be void. When she had tossed this Answer a while in her mind, and knew
that he said truth, and that she durst not as yet disclose her purpose to make
away her Son, she gave over that device of Divorce; and yet from that day
forward, she never ceased to pursue her intention of murdering the King, as may
easily be perceived by that which followed.

The King being returned from Sterline to Cragmillar, when he hoped to have
found her more gentle toward him, and her displeasure by process of time
somewhat appeased, he so found no token of change of her affection, that he was
not allowed any thing for his daily sustenance, unless he kept him still at
Sterline; which thing exceedingly increased the Peoples suspicion, otherwise of
it self already enough inclined to that Judgment, of the unchaste Company of
the Queen with Bothwel.

About the beginning of December, when there were Ambassadors come out of
France and England, to the Christening of the King that now is; that Bothwel
might be seen gorgeously arrayed among the Nobility, she her self laid out the
Money to buy him Apparel, and some she bought her self of the Merchants for
him; and she so applied her self with such diligence in overseeing the making
thereof, as if she had been, I will not say his Wife, but even his Servant. In
the mean time, her lawful Husband at the Christning of his own Child, not only
wanted all her Maintenance for his necessary Expenses, but also was commanded
not once to come in the Ambassadour's sight; his ordinary Servants were removed
from him; the Nobility were enjoined not once to attend on him, nor to do him
Honor, nor in a manner to know him; the foreign Ambassadors were warned not
to talk with him, whenas the most part of the day they were in the Castle where
he was.

The young Gentleman, thus contemptuously and unkindly used, fell in such
despair, that he departed from Sterline and went to Glascow to his Father: At
his departure, the Queen still pursued him with her wonted hatred, all his
Silver Plate, wherewith he was served from his Marriage till that day, she took
it away every whit, and appointed Pewter in the stead thereof: But let this
serve only to prove her contempt of him; the rest that followed are evident
Arguments of outrageous Cruelty and unappeasable Hatred. Before he had passed a
mile from Sterline, all the parts of his Body were taken with such a sore ach,
as it might easily appear, that the same proceeded not of the force of any
sickness, but by plain treachery: The tokens of which treachery, certain black
pimples, so soon as he was come to Glascow, brake out over his whole Body, with
so great ach and such pain throughout all his Limbs, that he lingered out his
life with very small hope of escape; and yet all this while, the Queen would
not suffer so much as a Physician once to come at him.

After the Ceremonies of the Christening were ended, she practiced with her
Brother the Earl of Murray, that when he should go to conduct the Earl of
Bedford, the Queen of England's Ambassador, to St. Andrews, he should require
Bothwel also to bear him Company, who indeed freely promised so to do; howbeit,
both he and the Queen, the Deviser of that Dissimulation, thought nothing less,
as the success showed: For so soon as the King was gone to Glascow, and the
rest toward St. Andrews, she, with her Bothwel, got her to Drumen, and from
thence to Tylebarn: In which Houses, they so passed the time about eight days,
in every corner, and in familiar haunting together, as all (saving themselves
alone, that had thrown away all shame) were highly offended with their contempt
and vile regard of public Fame, seeing them now not once to seek to cover
their filthy Wickedness.

When about the beginning of January, they were returned to Sterline, she began
to find fault with the House wherein her Son was nursed, as incommodious,
because it stood in a cold and moist place, dangerous for bringing the Child to
a Rheum: But it shall easily appear, that this was done for other purpose,
forasmuch as all these Faults that she pretended, were not in that House; but
were, indeed, in the other House, to which the Child was removed; being set in
a low place, being a very Marsh. The Child being scarcely above six Months old,
in the deep of a sharp Winter, was conveyed to Edinburgh: There, because the
first Attempt prevailed not, and the force of the Poison was overcome by
strength of Nature; yet, that, at length, she might bring forth that wherewith
she had so long travailed, she enters into new Devices for the Murder of the
King.

Her self goes to Glascow; she pretends the Cause of her Journey to be, to
see the King alive, whose Death she had continually gaped for the whole Month
before: But what was, indeed, the true Cause of that Journey, each Man may
plainly perceive by her Letters to Bothwel. Being now out of Care of her Son,
whom she had in her own Ward, bending her self to the Slaughter of her Husband,
to Glascow she goes, accompanied with the Hamiltons, and other the King's
natural Enemies.

Bothwel (as it was agreed on between them before) provideth all things ready,
that were needful to accomplish that heinous Act: First of all, an House not
commodious for a sick Man, nor comely for a King; for it was both torn and
ruinous, and had stood empty, without any Dweller, for diverse Years before; in
a place of small Resort, between the old fallen Walls of two Churches, near a
few Almshouses for poor Beggars. And that no commodious Means for committing
that Mischief might be wanting, there was a Postern-door in the Town-wall, hard
by the House, whereby they easily might pass away into the Fields. In choosing
of the place, she would needs have it thought, that they had respect to the
wholsomness thereof: And to avoid Suspicion, that this was a feigned Pretense,
her self, the two Nights next before the Day of the Murder, lay there, in a
lower Room, under the King's Chamber. And as she did curiously put off the
Shows of Suspicion from her self, so the Execution of the Slaughter she was
content to have committed to others.

About three Days before the King was slain, she practiced to set her Brother
Robert and him at deadly Enmity; making account, that it should be Gain to her,
which soever of them both had perished. For Matter to ground their Dissension,
she made Rehearsal of the Speech that the King had had with her concerning her
Brother. And when they both so grew in Talk, as the one seemed to charge the
other with the Lie, at last they were, in a manner, come from Words, to Blows.
But while they were both laying their Hands on their Weapons, the Queen,
feigning as though she had been marvellously afraid of that which she so
earnestly desired, calls the Earl of Murray, her other Brother, to the
parting; to this intent, that she might either presently bring him in danger to
be slain himself, or, in time to come, to bear the Blame of such Mischief as
then might have happened. When this Way the Success fell not out as she
desired, she devised a new Way to transferr the Suspicion from her self. While
the Earl of Murray did willingly keep himself from the Court, and had
reasonable Excuse for his Absence, for that his Wife being near her Time, was,
besides that, always very sick, at the same time there was an Ambassador come
from the Duke of Savoy. This the Queen took for a convenient Color to send for
her Brother: But the true Cause of her sending for him was, that she had a
desire to throw the Suspicion of the King's Murder upon him, and upon the Earl
Moreton; and therewithal also, at once, to procure the Destruction of those
two, being Men acceptable to the Peril, and likewise Adversaries to her
Practice, who intended to set up a Tyrannical Government. But God's good
Clemency, that had often before delivered the Earl of Murray from many Treasons
of his Enemies, did then also manifestly succor him; for upon the Sunday,
which was the 9th Day of February, when he was going to Church, to hear a
Sermon, a Letter was brought him, that his Wife was delivered before her Time,
and in very small hope of Life. When he, being dismayed at this sudden News,
desired leave of the Queen to depart, she answered, That if the Cause were so,
it were a superfluous Journey for him to go to her, being not able to do her
any Good in her Sickness. But he being still the more importunate, she prayed
him, That he would yet tarry but that one Night, and take his Journey the next
Day to his Wife. But the Mercy of God now, as at many other times, did deliver
that innocent Gentleman from the present Peril, and also took away the Occasion
of Slander against him for the time to come. Howbeit, for all this, though
there were no Cause of Suspicion, yet he escaped not free from Slander; for
Huntley and Bothwel, though they could not justly charge him, yet labored by
infamous Libels, which they spread abroad, to distain him with the most foul
Spot of that shameful Act. And whereas the Murder was committed after
Midnight, they had, before Day light, caused (by special fore-appointed
Messengers) Rumors to be spread in England, that the Earls of Murray and
Moreton were Actors of that Slaughter. But that Rumor, so soon as the Light of
the Truth once brake forth, suddenly vanished away, as other Falsehoods are
commonly wont to do.

When all things were ready prepared for performing this cruel Fact, and yet
all Occasions cut off to divert the Blame thereof, the Partners of the
Conspiracy, fearing lest long Delay should either bring some Impement to their
Purpose, or disclose their Counsels, determined to dispatch it in all haste.
The Queen therefore, for Manners sake, after Supper, goes up to the King's
Lodging: There, being determined to show him all the Tokens of reconciled Good
Will, she spent certain Hours in his Company, with Countenance and Talk much
more familiar than she had used in six or seven Months before. At the Coming in
of Paris, she broke off her Talk, and prepared to depart. This Paris was a
young Man, born in France, and had lived certain Years in the Houses of Bothwel
and Seton, and afterward with the Queen. Whereas the other Keys of that Lodging
were in custody of the King's Servants, Paris, by feigning certain fond and
slender Causes, had in keeping the Keys which Bothwel kept back, of the
Back-Gate, and the Postern. He was in special Trust with Bothwel and the Queen,
touching their secret Affairs. His Coming (as it was before agreed among them)
was a Watchword, that all was ready for the Matter. As soon as the Queen saw
him, she rose up immediately; and feigning another Cause to depart, she said,
Alas! I have much offended toward Sebastian this Day, that I appeared not in a
Mask at his Marriage. This Sebastian was an Arvernois, a Man in great Favor
with the Queen, for his Cunning in Music, and his merry Jesting, and was
married the same Day. The King thus left, in a manner alone, in a desolate
place, the Queen departs, accompanied with the Earls of Argyle, Huntley and
Cassiles, that attended upon her. After that she was come into her Chamber,
after Midnight, she was in long Talk with Bothwel, none being present but the
Captain of her Guard. And when he also withdrew himself, Bothwel was there left
alone, without other Company; and shortly after, retired into his own Chamber.
He changed his Apparel, because he would be unknown of such as met him; and put
on a loose Cloak, such as the Swartrytters wear; and so went forward, through
the Watch, to execute his intended traitorous Fact. The whole Order of the
doing thereof may be easily understood by their Confessions, which were put to
death for it.

Bothwel, after the Deed was ended that he went about, returned; and, as if he
had been ignorant of all that was done, he got him to bed. The Queen in the
mean time, in great Expectation of the Success, how finely she played her part
(as she thought) it is marvel to tell; for she not once stirred at the Noise of
the Fall of the House, which shook the whole Town; nor at the fearful Outcries
that followed, and confused Cries of the People (for I think there happened to
her not any new thing unlooked for) till Bothwel, feigning himself afraid, rose
again out of his Bed, and came to her, with the Earls of Argyle, Huntley and
Athole; and with the Wives of the Earls of Athole and Murray, and with the
Secretary. There, while the monstrous Chance was in telling, while every one
wondered at the thing, that the King's Lodging was, even from the very
Foundation, blown up into the Air, and the King himself slain. In this
Amazedness, and confused Fear of all sorts of Persons, only that same Heroical
Heart of the Queen maintained it self so far from casting her self down into
base Lamentations and Tears, unbeseeming the Royal Name, Blood and Estate, that
she matched, or rather far surmounted all Credit of the Constancy of any in
former times. This also proceeded of the same Nobility of Courage, that she set
out the greater part of them that were about her, to enquire out the manner of
the doing; and commanded the Soldiers that watched, to follow; and she her self
settled her self to rest, with a Countenance so quiet, and Mind so untroubled,
that she sweetly slept till the next Day at Noon. But lest she should appear
void of all Naturalness at the Death of her Husband, by little and little, at
length she kept her close, and proclaimed a Mourning, not long to endure.

The Common People, not certainly knowing whether she laughed or lamented, were
divided into sundry Imaginations, since it was perilous dealing with the
disguising of the Court; either in knowing it, to seem to mock it; or in not
cunningly dissembling, to seem to know it. While some talked of one sort, some
of another, in the mean time, of any Enquiry to be had of the Murder, there
was no mention made at all. At length, the Day following, in the Afternoon,
when both Shame and Fear constrained them thereto, Bothwel, the principal Doer
of the vile Act, with certain others that were privy to the same, assembled
together, with the Earl of Argyle, for that he is, by Inheritance, the Justice
to deal with Crimes punishable by Death. First, As though they had been utterly
ignorant of all that ever was done, they begin to wonder at the strangeness of
the matter, such as never was heard of, and incredible. Then they begin a
little to be busy about their Enquiry; they sent for a few poor, silly Women,
that dwelt thereabout; which poor Souls, standing in doubt, whether it were
better for them to tell, or hold their peace, though they daintily tempered
their Speech, yet, when they had blabbed out somewhat more than the Judges
looked for, they were dismissed again, as Fools that had but indiscreetly
prated; for their Testimonies, though they touched some Folks shrewdly, yet
they were such as they might easily set light by. Then were called and examined
the King's Servants, that were of his Household, such as were left undestroyed
by that cruel Chance: They denied that they had the Keys in keeping. Being
examined who had them, they said, The Queen. So the Enquiry (for Manners sake)
was adjourned, but, indeed suppressed, for fear, lest if they proceeded
further, the Secrets of the Court might happen to be disclosed. Yet, lest the
Matter should seem not to be regarded, out goes a Proclamation, with Rewards
promised to him that could give Information of it. But who durst accuse the
Queen? Or (which was, in a manner, more perilous) Who durst detect Bothwel of
such an horrible Offense; especially, when he himself was both Doer, Judge,
Enquirer and Examiner? Yet this Fear, which stopped the Mouth of every Man in
particular, could not restrain the whole Multitude in general; for both by
Books set out, and by Pictures, and by Cries in the dark Night, it was so
handled, that the Doers of that mischievous Fact might easily understand, that
those Secrets of theirs were come abroad. And when every Man was now out of
doubt, who did the Murder, and who gave furtherance unto it, the more that
they labored to keep their own Names undisclosed, so much the more the
People's Grudge (being restrained) brake out the more openly. Though they took
upon them, as if they regarded not these things, yet sometimes the Rumors so
inwardly pricked them to the quick, that they could by no means hide their
Anger. Therefore, discontinuing their searching for the King's Death, they
begin a new Enquiry, far more earnest, against the Authors of Books, and the
Slanders of Bothwel, as they themselves termed them. These Examinations were so
rigorously put in Execution, as neither Money nor Labor of Men nor Horses, was
spared about it. All the Painters were called together; all that earned their
Living by Writing, were assembled, to judge of the Pictures and Books that had
been set out. And if any Painter had not, of his own Accord confessed, that it
was he of whose Work they enquired, another that was not guilty thereof, but
touched a little with a slight Suspicion, had suffered for it. There was
published a Proclamation agreeable with the manner of the Inquisition, wherein
it was made Death, not only to set out any such Matter; but also to read it,
being set out by another. But these Persons, that with threatening of Death
practiced to stop the Speech of the People; yet not satisfied with the most
cruel Murder of the King, ceased not their Hatred against him when he was dead.
All his Goods, Armor, Horses, Apparel, and other Furniture of his House, the
Queen divided, some to them that slew him, and some to his Father's ancient
deadly Foes, as if they had, upon Attainder, come to her by Forfeiture, and his
Father's Tenants, as though they had been also Part of her conquered Booty, she
so scraped, till she brought them in a manner to extreme Beggary.

But this was a strange Example of Cruelty, and such as never was heard of
before, that as she had satisfied her Heart with his Slaughter; so she would
needs feed her Eyes with the Sight of his Body slain. For she long beheld, not
only without Grief, but also with greedy Eyes, his dead Corpse, the goodliest
Corpse of any Gentleman that ever lived in this Age And then suddenly, without
any Funeral Honor, in the Night time, by common Carriers of dead Bodies, upon
a vile Bier, she caused him to be buried hard by David Rizo. When these doings
were known abroad, and that the Indignation of the People had overcome the
Threatenings of Penalties, and the Frankness of Sorrow surmounted Fear, by
little and little she began to set her Face, and with counterfeiting of
Mourning, she labored to appease the Hearts of the grudging People. For where
the ancient manner has been for Queens, after the Death of their Husbands, by
the space of forty Days, not only to forbear the Company of Men; but also from
looking on the open Light, she attempted a disguised manner of Mourning. But
the Mirth of Heart far passing the feigned Sorrow, she shut the Doors indeed;
but she set open the Windows, and within four days she threw away her wailing
Weed, and began to behold both Sun and open Sky again. But this one thing fell
very overthwartly. For when Henry Killegree was come from the Queen of England
to comfort her, as the manner is, this Gentleman Strangers hap was to mar the
Play, and unvizor all the disguising. For when he was, by the Queen's
Commandment come to the Court, though he being an old Courtier, and a good
discreet Gentleman, did nothing hastily; yet he came in so unseasonably, ever
the Stage was prepared and furnished, that he found the Windows open, the
Candles not yet lighted, and all the Provision for the Play out of Order. When
of the forty Days that are appointed for the Mourning, scarce twelve were yet
fully past, and the counterfeiting would not frame half handsomely, and to
disclose her true Affections so soon, she was somewhat ashamed; at length
taking Heart of Grace unto her, and neglecting such Trifles, she comes to her
own Biass, and openly shows her own natural Conditions. She posteth to
Seton's House, with a very few, and those not all of the saddest Company. There
Bothwel, though it seemed, that for the great Favor he then had in Court, and
for the Nobility of his Birth, and other respects of Honor, he should have
been, next after the Queen, most honorably received, yet was lodged in a
Chamber hard by the Kitchen. Howbeit the same was a Place not altogether unfit
to assuage their Sorrows, for it was directly under the Queen's Chamber: And if
any sudden qualm of Grief should have happened to come over her Heart, there
was a pair of Stairs, though somewhat narrow, yet wide enough for Bothwel to
get up to comfort her.

In the mean time, after the Rumor hereof was spread into France, Mounsieur de
Croc, who had often before been Ambassador in Scotland, came in suddenly upon
them, God wot full unseasonably. By his Advice she returned to Edinburgh, out
of that Den which even as far as France was infamous. But in Seton's House were
so many commodious Opportunities for her Purpose, that howsoever her good Name
were thereby impaired, needs she must go thither again. There were Counsels
holden of the great Affairs of the Realm. The end of the Consultation was, that
Bothwel should be arraigned of the Murder, and acquitted by Judges thereto
chosen for the Purpose, and constrained. It was concluded, That the meaner sort
of the Judges might with Favor and fair Promises be led, and the rest of the
greater and graver sort (whom for Fashions Sake they were driven to call to the
Matter) might be drawn with Fear to acquit him. For beside Libels thereof
commonly thrown abroad; the King's Father the Earl of Lenox did openly accuse
Author of the Murder.

The Assembly of the States in Parliament was at hand, which was to be holden
the thirteenth of April, before which Day they would needs have the Arraignment
dispatched. That great haste was the Cause, why in that Proceeding and Trial
nothing has been done according to the Form of Law, nothing in Order, nothing
after the ancient Usage. There ought to have been public Summons of the
Accusers, the next of the Kin, the Wife, the Father, and the Son, either to be
present themselves, or to send their Proctors. The Law also gave them time of
forty Days. But here the Father was commanded to come within thirteen Days, and
that without any Assembly of his Friends, with his own Household Retinue only,
which by Reason of his great Poverty, was now brought to a few: While in the
mean time, Bothwel with great Bands of Men, daily mustered about the Town. And
because he verily believed that in so assured Peril, no Man would take upon him
to be his Accuser, he grew to such a Negligence, and such Contempt of Law and
judicial Proceedings, that the Indictment was framed of a Murder supposed to be
done the ninth Day of February, when indeed the King was slain the tenth Day.
In choosing and refusing of the Judges, the like Severity was used; for the
Murderers themselves made the Choice of the Judges, when there was no Man to
take Exception against them. The Earl of Cassiles, willing rather to pay his
Amercement, as the manner is, than to be a Judge in the Matter, when he had
stood in it a while, and would not appear at the Queen's Request and Menacing;
yea, though she sent her Ring for Credit both of her earnest Prayer and
Threatening; at length, constrained with Fear of Exile and Punishment, he
yielded. There sat the Judges, not chosen to judge, but picked out to acquit:
The Cause proceeded without any Adversary. A Trial in a Matter of Life and
Death, when there was never an Accuser, but suborned by the Party accused; so
as a Man might well think it not the Trial of a Cause in a Court, but the
playing of an Interlude upon a Stage.

In all this fearlesness of all things, yet behold, I pray you, of what force
is the Testimony of Conscience on either side: Suddenly, unlooked for, there
starteth up a young Man of the Earl of Lenox's House, in whom the Respect of
Duty vanquished the Fear of Danger: This young Man made an open Protestation,
That the same Assembly of Judges was not lawful, because in their Proceeding,
there was nothing done according to Law nor Order. At this Saying, the Judges
were all stricken in such a fear, that they all, by and by, with one accord,
made Protestation, with proviso, That it should not hereafter be prejudicial to
them, in that they acquitted a Prisoner whom no Man accused, and that they had
acquitted him of a Murder alleged to be committed the Ninth day of February,
when the King was slain the Tenth day. This is that same noble Trial and
Judgment, whereby Bothwel was not cleansed of the Crime, but as it were washed
with Sowters Blacking, and so more comely prepared to go a Wooing to wed the
Queen, and so to become a Husband to her greater shame, than when he was before
an Adulterer. To make up yet the full perfection and increase of this jolly
Acquittal, there was set up a Writing in the most notorious Place of the Court,
that though Bothwel had by just Trial and Judgment been lawfully cleared and
acquitted of the Murder, whereof he had been falsely accused, yet for more
manifest declaration of his Innocence to the whole World, he was ready to try
it in Combat, if any Man of good Fame, and a Gentleman born, would charge him
with the Murder of the King.

The next day after, there was one that set up a Bill in open place, and
offered to accept the Combat, so that there might for the Battle be such a
place appointed, wherein the party might safely without fear disclose his Name.

While Matters and Men's Affections were in this stir, the Parliament assembled;
there, after they had for eight days together, in manner done nothing but
treated of reversing the Judgment, whereby the Earl of Huntley's Father had
been attainted of Treason, and for restoring the Son to his Father's
Possessions and Honors: There were also certain plausible things granted to
please the People, and especially for the Church; namely, the repealing of
certain Laws of Popish Tyranny, made for punishing of such as durst once mutter
against the Decrees of the Sea of Rome. Though these things were acceptable
among the Commonalty, yet there remained one thing which no less vexed the
Queen, than offended the People; that is to say, her companying with Bothwel,
not altogether so openly as she would fain have had it; and yet not so
secretly, but that the People perceived it; for that all Men's eyes were gazing
upon them. For whereas Bothwel had a Wife of his own, and to tarry for a
Divorce, was thought an overlong delay; and in the mean time, the Queen could
neither openly avow to have him, nor secretly enjoy him, and yet in no wise
could be without him; some shift, though not an honest one, yet a shift,
forsooth, must be devised: And when they could not think upon a better, it
seemed to them a mavelous sine invention, god wot, that Bothwel should ravish
and take away the Queen by force, and so save her Honor: So within a few days
after, as the Queen was returning from Sterline, Bothwel forceably took her by
the way, and carried her to Dunbar; whether with her Will, or against her Will,
every Man may easily perceive by her own Letters, that she wrote to him by the
way, as she was in her Journey. But howsoever it were, that the wrong of the
Ravishment might be defaced with honest color of Marriage, Bothwel's Wife was
compelled in two Courts to sue a Divorce against her Husband.

Before Judges delegate, appointed by the Queen's Authority to have
Jurisdiction in such Causes, the Wife accuses the Husband of Adultery, which
with them was a just cause of Divorce, before Popish Judges, who indeed by Law
were forbidden, yet by special Dispensation of the Bishop of St. Andrews, were
for the hearing of this Cause only permitted; Bothwel was accused, that before
his Marriage with his Wife, he had committed Fornication with his Wife's near
Kinswoman; howbeit, all this while they kept close the Pope's Bull, by which
the same offense was dispensed with. The Divorce was posted forward without any
slackness either in the Witnesses, or in the Judges: Within the space of ten
days, the matter was taken in hand, began, and intended, joined unto, tried,
and judged before both the Companies of Judges: When the Sentence of Divorce
was given, and sent to Dunbar, Bothwel by and by assembled together from all
parts, all his Friends, his Servants, and Retainers, to convey to Edinburgh the
Queen, who would then needs take upon her to be a Prisoner.

When that they were thus gathered together, the most part of them in Armor,
by the way, as they were conducting the Queen, many of them were suddenly
stricken in some fear, lest in time to come, they might be charged for holding
the Queen as Prisoner; and although there were no other evidence, yet this one
thing would be proof enough against them, That in time of Peace they were found
about her. While they were in this doubt, in the midst of their Journey, they
all threw away their Lances, and in more peaceable array, at least in show,
they conveyed her to the Castle of Edinburgh, which Castle was also at that
time at Bothwel's Commandment; there she tarried with Bothwel, while the Banes
were publishing. Then she came down out of the Castle into the Town, to the
common Assembly of the Judges, and there pronounced her self to be free at her
own liberty: And so at length, within eight days, she finished that
unmatrimonial Matrimony, all good Men so far detesting, or at least grudgingly
fore-judging the unlucky end thereof; that Monsieur de Croc, the French King's
Ambassador, a Man very well affectioned to the Queen, one of the Faction of
the House of Guise, and sojourning very near to the place, though he were
earnestly required, yet he thought he could not with his Honor be present at
the Feast.

These things were done about the Twenty fifth of May, in the year of our Lord
1597. The Twenty fifth day of June following, Bothwel being either dismayed with
a guilty Conscience of the vile Fact, or sent away by the Queen, she came her
self to the Lords of the Realm, who earnestly required the public
King-Murderer to be brought forth to due execution. What has been done since,
pertains not much to this present matter; and though my Speech have been,
perhaps, longer than you looked for, yet I plainly perceive in my self, that
while I seek to make an end of my Tale, I have omitted, and many things for
haste I have but lightly touched, and nothing have I, according to the
heinousness of the Offense, fully expressed.

An Oration, with a Declaration of the Evidence against MARY the Scottish
Queen; wherein is by necessary Arguments plainly proved, That she was guilty
and privy of the said Murder.
SEeing these things are by Writings and Witnesses so probable, and stick so
fast imprinted in the knowledge of all the People, that such as would have them
most hidden, cannot deny them: What place is here left for cunning, or what
need can be of diligence, to prove or reprove a thing so plain and evident? For
all things are so clear, so manifest, and so mutually knit together, each part
to strengthen other, that there is named of foreign Probations; and all things
so fully witnessed, that there is no necessity of other Arguments: For if any
will ask me, as in other matters is used to be asked, the Causes of so foul a
fact, I might also likewise ask of him, since the Time, the Place, the Deed, and
the Author is sufficiently known, to what purpose is it to stand upon searching
the Causes, or to enquire by what Means it was achieved? Again, when there be
extent so many Causes of Hatred, and so many Tokens thereof, which do offer
themselves to knowledge, as may well be able to bring even things uncertain to
be believed, surely so far-fetched an explication of the Act committed, may
right well seem superfluous. Nevertheless, forasmuch as so great is the
Impudence of the vile Offenders in denying, and so confident the Boldness of
impudent Persons in lying, let us assay to see with what Weapons Truth is able
to defend Innocence, against those wicked Monsters. If then they demand the
cause of so heinous a Deed, I answer, It was unappeasable Hatred. I demand of
them again, If they can deny that such Hatred was, or that the same Hatred was
so great, as without Blood could not be satisfied? If they deny that such
Hatred was, then let them answer me, Why she, a young Woman, Rich, Noble, and
finally a Queen, thrust away from her, in a manner, the young Gentleman into
exile, he being beautiful, near of her kin, of the Blood Royal, and (that which
is greatest) entirely loving her, in the deep of sharp Winter, into places
neither fruitful of things necessary, nor replenished with Inhabitants, and
commonly perilous being haunted with Thieves? Why sent she him away into
desert and craggy Mountains, without provision, into open perils, and in a
manner without any Company? What could she more have done, if she had most
deadly hated him, and covenanted to have him dispatched? But I trow she feared
no such thing; but that voidness of Fear, I construe to be a note of most
obstinate Hatred, especially since she both knew the places, and was not
ignorant of the dangers. That Husband therefore, to whom she was but lately
married, against the Liking of her Subjects, against the Will of their Friends
on both sides, without whom she could not endure, whom she scarcely durst
suffer out of her sight, him, I say, she thrusts forth to uncertain death,
and most certain perils.

Will ye ask of me the Causes of the change of her Affection? What if I say, I
knew them not? It suffices for my purpose to prove that she hated him. What if
I ask again, why she so extremely loved the young Man whom she never saw
before? why she so hastily married him, and so unmeasurable honored him? Such
are the natures of some Women, especially such as cannot brook the Greatness of
their own good Fortune: They have vehement Affections both ways; they love with
excess, and hate without measure; and to what side soever they bend, they are
not governed by advised Reason, but carried by violent Motion. I could, out of
the Monuments of Antiquity, rehearse innumerable Examples, but of her self, I
had rather believe her self.

Call to mind that part of her Letters to Bothwel, wherein she makes her self
Medea, that is, a Woman that neither in love nor hatred can keep any mean. I
could also allege other Causes of her hatred, although indeed not reasonable
Causes, yet such as are able to shove forward, and to push headlong an
outrageous Heart, which is not able to govern it self.

But herein I will forbear: And if her self will suffer me, howsoever she has
deserved of her Subjects, yet so much as the common Cause will permit, I will
spare her Honor; yea, I will spare it more than the Cause will allow me.

Therefore I omit her other Causes of Hatred, and return to this, that she
hated, and not meanly hated him.

Will you see also another Proof of her Hatred? The tender Wife, forsooth, so
loving and fond of him, when she could not do him the Duty of a Wife, offers
to do him the Service of a Bawd: She made choice of her own Brother's Wife, to
put to him in her place.

What shall we think to be the Cause of this so sudden Change? She that, of
late, gapingly sought for every small Breath of Suspicion against her Husband;
and where true Causes were not to be found, she invented such as were
manifestly false: And this she curiously did, not when she loved him, but when
she had begun to hate him: And while she was fishing for Occasions to be
divorced from him, even she, I say, of her own accord, offers him a Lover,
declares her own Contentation therewith, and promises her Furtherance.

What can we imagine to be the Cause hereof? Was it to please her Husband? No,
for she hated him: And although she loved him, yet such manner of doing, in a
Woman, is uncredible. Was it, that he, knowing himself likewise guilty of
Adultery on his part, might the more willingly bear with a Partner in use of
his Wife? No, for he bare with all per-force, against his Will. Was it to find
Cause of Divorce, and so to drive him to leave his Bed empty for Bothwel? Yea,
that was it, indeed, that she sought for; but yet not that alone, for in this
Woman you must imagine no single Mischief. She hated the Earl Murray's Wife,
even with such Hatred as all unhonest Persons hate the honest. The differences
of their two Fames much vexed her; and therewithal also she coveted to set the
good Lady's Husband and the King together by the Ears, and so rid her self of
two Troubles at once.

Thus you see how many, and how great things she practiced, to dispatch with
one Labor: Her Paramour's Enemy, the Bridler of her Licentiousness, and her
own hated Husband, she hops to rid all at once; while by such sundry sorts of
wicked Doings, she makes haste to her most wicked Wedding.

To what end tended that fearful hasty Calling for the Earl Murray, at
Midnight? Could she not tarry till Daylight? What was the Occasion of so
sudden Fear? The good Woman, God wot, careful for the Concord of the Nobility,
dearly loving her Brother, and most dearly loving her Husband, was afraid,
forsooth, lest her Brother should in the Night have been assaulted by the King,
whom she her self had disarmed. Disarmed! said I? Yea, she had disfurnished him
of all convenient Company for his Estate, and made him to be shaken up with a
Woman's Scolding, and that by one of her own Train; one who was past all Shame,
and of prostitute Unchastity.

She feared much, lest the young Man, destitute of Friends, beset with all
sorts of Miseries, should make Assault in the Nightime. Upon what Person? The
Queen's Brother, a Man of great Reputation and Power, and in highest Favor
with all Estates. And where should he have assaulted him? In a most strong
Castle; whereupon, the Deed being done, neither was Way for him to slay, nor
Means of Refuge to the Queen's Mercy. For what Cause should he assail him?
There was no Enmity between them, but such as she had sowed. What say you, if
she coveted that thing most, which she most feigned her self to fear? For, to
what purpose else sent she for her Brother, to come to her in the Nightime,
unarmed? Why did she not advise him of this one thing, at least; that because
he was to pass by, and hard by the King's Door, he should, in any wise, put on
his Armor? Why did she not, either fore-warn him of the Danger, or deferr the
Calling of him till the next Morning? No, no; she had a more subtle Purpose in
hand. She had but newly sent the King, inflamed (as she hoped) with Hatred of
the Earl Murray: So thought she it not unlikely, but that the King, kindled
with fresh Displeasure, rash by Fervor of Youth, lightly believing her by
Excess of Love, would have adventured to slay his supposed Enemy, naked,
unaccompanied and unarmed. So sent she the King, raging in Anger, to commit the
Slaughter; and practiced to draw the Earl Murray naked, unaccompanied,
unwarned, to be suddenly trapp'd in Treason. This was her Meaning, this was
her Desire; but wicked Counsels, how subtle soever they be, are not always
prosperous.

What meant this, that after her Deliverance of Child, at which time other
Women do chiefly comfort themselves in the Lovingness of their Husbands; and
confess, that they find some Ease of Pain by sight of them; she, at the same
time, drives her Husband away? What else shall we say she meant thereby, but,
as the Poet says, for pure Love, God wot, she shut him out of Doors: But this
tender Creature, that either shuts out her Husband, or, as soon as he is
come, chaseth him away again; whose Stomach turned at the sight of him, who is
suddenly taken with Pangs at his presence; when she was in the Pinnace,
amongst Pirates and Thieves, she could abide at the Poop, and be content to
handle the boisterous Cables. Now ask I whom she loved, and whom she hated? For
that, at Aloe, she drove away the cumbersome Interrupter of her Pastime; that
again, when he came to her at Edinburgh, she rejected him, I blame her not. I
am content to believe, she did it not for Hate to her Husband, but for her
Fancy's sake. That again, at Iedworth, she suffered him not to come at her, let
it be born withal; for, not without Cause, she feared, lest the force of her
Sickness would increase at sight of him, whose Death she so earnestly desired.
That she gave special Commandment, that no Man should lodge him, no Man should
relieve him with Meat or Drink, that she, in a manner, forbad him the use of
Fire and Water: This is, undoubtedly, a Token of outrageous Hatred: But it
seems, she feared the very Infection of her Husband, if he were in any place
near her. That she sent him back, from Cragmillar, to Sterline, I complain not;
but that she bereaved him of all his Necessaries, that she took him from his
Servants, that she abated the Allowance of his Expenses, that she alienated the
Nobility from him, that she forbad Strangers the Sight of him, and (as much as
in her lay) took from him, even while he lived, the Use of Heaven, Earth and
Air; this, I say, I know not what to call it; Unnaturalness, Hatred, barbarous
Fierceness, or outrageous Cruelty! That when he went from Sterline, she took
away all his Plate, let it be pardoned; for what need had he of Silver, that
carried with him present Death in his Bosom? But this I beseech you to
consider; what great Indignation of all Men it has kindled, that when the
King, poor Soul, made hard shift to live in Desolation, Sorrow and Beggary;
whilst that Bothwel, like an Ape in Purple, was triumphantly showed to the
Ambassadors of Foreign Nations; even that same Partner of her Husband's Bed,
not so much for the Love of himself, as for Despite of her Husband, was
carried abroad, set out with all kind of Ornaments; even that adulterous
Partner, I say, that neither in Birth, nor in Beauty, nor in any honest
Quality, was in any wise comparable with her disdained Husband. Now let them
deny that here were Tokens of Hatred.

But how great, and how unappeasable this Hatred was, even by this ye may
gather: Her Husband so often shut out, so often sent away with Despite, driven to
extreme Poverty, banished into a desolate Corner, far from the Court, far from
the Presence of Men, spoiled of his Servants and Houshold-furniture, bereaved,
in a manner, of his daily necessary Sustenance; yet by no Injuries can be
shaken from her, by no fear of Death can be withdrawn; but with Serviceableness
and Patience he assayeth, if not to overcome, yet, at least, somewhat to
assuage the violent Cruelty of her unkind Courage. In the mean time, what does
this good, gentle Wife, this merciful Queen, that is, at the beholding of Men's
Miseries, so kind and pitiful? Neither is she once moved with the loving
Doings, nor with the wretched Plight, nor with the miserable Wofulness of her
Husband, nor appeased by Time, nor satisfied with Torments; but rather, with
his Serviceableness she is irritated, with his humble Prayers she is more
inflamed, and at every time of his Coming she devises some new Increase of
spightful Dishonor; wherein, when she had spent the uttermost of all her
Force, Wit, and Bitterness of Nature; when she saw the poor young Gentleman,
neither to give over by fainting, being oppressed with Poverty; and though he
were despised of all Men, and so often thrown into open Perils, neither to
despair, nor otherwise, more cruelly, to make away himself; at length, as it
were glutted with the sight of his Miseries and Torments, she determined
presently to rid him of his Calamities, her self of Irksomness, and her
Adulterer from Fear; and so by certain special Persons thereto appointed, she
caused him to be poisoned, that being absent from her, he might so die with
less Suspicion. But of the Poison I will say more in another Place.

When this Practice framed not fully to her Desire, she goes her self to
Glascow, that whom being absent she could not kill, she might her self in
Presence satisfy both her cruel Heart, and her Eyes with sight of his present
Miseries. And as if her self alone were not sufficient to execute the cruel
tormenting of him, she brings into his Sight Ministers of her heinous doings,
and his ancient natural Enemies, and with these Outrages travailed to vex his
Soul at his last Breath. But wherefore gather we Arguments, as in a doubtful
Case, when she her self will not suffer us to doubt at all? She, the Queen her
self, I say, openly protested, not to her Lover in Bed, not amongst her
Confederates in secret Chambers, nor before few and mean Persons of Estate, apt
to Flattery, constrained by Poverty, or of Purpose affectioned; she her self, I
say, openly confessed, That she could not live one good Day, if she were not
rid of the King, and that not once, nor unadvisedly; but in Presence of those
Personages, whom she used to call to Council in the weightiest Affairs. For it
cannot be said unadvisedly slipped from her, that was so often spoken, in so
many, so far distant Places, with Tears always added, to move Credit, before
Men notable, both for their Nobility, Weath, and Wisdom, and wherein she
declared her own Opinion, practiced to win their Assent, and hearkened for
their Advices. But be it that she forged all these things, be it that her Tears
were feigned, let them not believe it that heard it; let the greatness of the
Outrage make the Report uncredible. I my self also would gladly be one of that
Number, to think these things uttered by her, rather to groap the Minds of
others, than that she her self so thought in her Heart, if it were not so, that
the thing it self confirms the Report, that the Outrageousness of the doings
far surmounteth all Bitterness of Utterance.

When he was preparing to depart from Glascow, she caused Poison to be given
him. You will ask, by whom? In what Manner? What kind of Poisons? Where had she
it? Ask you these Questions? As though wicked Princes ever wanted Ministers of
their wicked Treacheries. But still you press me perhaps, and still you ask me
who be these Ministers? First, that poisoned he was, it is certainly known: For
though the Shamelesness of Men would not stick to deny a thing so manifest; yet
the kind of Disease, strange, unknown to the People, unacquainted with
Physicians, especially such as had not been in Italy and Spain, black Pimples
breaking out over all his Body, grievous Aches in all his Limbs, and
intolerable stink disclosed it. If this Cause were to be pleaded before grave
Cato the Censor, all this were easy for us to prove before him that was
persuaded, that there is no Adulteress, but the same is also a Poisoner. Need
we seek for a more substantial Witness than Cato, every of whose Sentences
Antiquity esteemed as so many Oracles. Shall we not in a manifest thing believe
him whose Credit has in things doubtful so often prevailed? Lo here a Man of
singular Uprightness, and of most notable Faithfulness and Credit, bears
Witness against a Woman burning in Hatred of her Husband, and in Love with an
Adulterer, and in both these Diseases of corrupt Affections unbridled,
untemperable by her Estate, raging by her Power, and indulgently following the
Wantonness of her Wealth. But let us omit old and discussed things, and let us
sever the Credit of inconstant Multitudes from the case of Princes. Let us in
so great a matter admit no Witness, in whom either his Estate may be suspected,
or his Manners may be blamed. What Witnesses then shall we use? For by this
Condition, we may bring forth none under the Royal Degree of a King or a Queen.

But such vile Acts are not wont to be committed by Noble and good Men, but by
lewd and wicked Ministers. Howbeit that herein also the most precise may be
satisfied, go to, let us bring forth a Royal Witness. Read her own Letter; her
Letter (I say) written with her own Hand. What mean these Words? He is not much
deformed, and yet he has received much. Whereof has he received much? The
thing it self, the Disease, the Pimples, the Savor do tell you. Even that much
he received, that brought Deformity, Forsooth, very Poison. But her Letters
name not Poison. This is sufficient for me, that it is there said, that though
he received much, he is not much deformed, or, though he be not much deformed,
yet he received much. What means this Word yet? What else but this, That
whatsoever it was that he received, the same was the Cause of his Deformity,
which though it were much, yet was it not so much as to work such Deformity as
was desired. But be it, it were not Poison, What then was it else? You can find
nothing that can with Convenience of Reason be named in Place of it. Finally,
whatsoever it be that is meant by this Word much, it is such, as she her self,
in so secret and familiar a Letter, dare not call by the right Name. Yea, and
though we would shift it off by cavillous Expounding; yet she her self will not
suffer us. Compare that which went before with that which follows, and by her
Device and Purpose for time to come, ye shall easily understand, what it is
that she has done in time past. First, she says, it is needful, that he be
purged; then she determines to carry him to Cragmillar, where both the
Physicians, and (which is more dangerous than any Physician) she her self may
be present. Finally, she asks Council of Bothwel, whether he can devise any
secreter way by Medicine, than that at Cragmillar, and after a Bath. See how
all things hang together. He has received much, he must be purged, and at
Cragmillar; that is, in a desolate Corner, in a Place, by Reason of small
Resort, very apt for a Mischief to be committed. And Medicine he must use, and
what, forsooth? Even the same whereof he had before received much. How shall
that appear? She will have the manner of ministering the Medicine to be secret.
If it be to heal him, what needs that Secrecy? Why is it not administered
openly, in a known and Populous Place? Now he is eased of his Sickness, lusty
and healthy, why is he purged in an unusual manner, and in an uninhabited
Corner? But perhaps it was a strange kind of Disease, it had need of strange
Remedies. What Physicians then called she to Counsel? To whom is this Charge
committed to seek out a new Medicine and curing for the King? Forsooth, to the
King's Enemy, to the Queen's Adulterer, the vilest of all two-footed Beasts,
whose House was in France defamed for poisoning, and whose Servants were there
for the same Cause, some tortured, some imprisoned, and all suspected. When was
he appointed to receive this Noble Medicine? Either at his Bathing, where he
should wash alone, or after his Bathing, where he should sup alone. So,
forsooth, are Medicines accustomed to be provided by Enemies, in a secret
Place, without Witnesses. That therefore while an Adulterer, an Adulteress, and
the Partner of his Wives Body, curiously prepares, and secretly ministers;
what Medicine this is, let every Man with himself weigh and consider. By this
time, I suppose, you see the Hatred of the Queen, how unappeaseable, how
outrageously cruel, how obstinate it was against her Husband, whom she thrust
among Thieves, whom she practiced to match in Feud and Battle with the Nobility
and with her Brethren, who were both naked and poor, laden with Despights,
vexed with Railings, assailed with Poison, she drove him away into a solitary
Corner, there to die with the extremest Torment. Now let us proceed to the
other Causes.

This Hatred it self was of it self sufficient to prick her forward to her
Enemies Slaughter, often sought, once attempted, and almost achieved. Yet was
there besides, a stronger Enforcement, it self able to inflame her Hatred, I
mean the Love wherewith she intemperately fansied Bothwel: Which Love,
whosoever saw not, and yet has seen him, will perhaps think it incredible. For
what was there in him, that was of a Woman of any honest Countenance to be
desired? Was there any Gift of Eloquence? Or Grace of Beauty? Or Virtue of
Mind, garnished with the Benefits, which we call, of Fortune? As for his
Eloquence and Beauty, we need not say much, since they that have seen him can
well remember both his Countenance, his Gate, and the whole Form of his Body
how gay it was: They that have heard him, are not ignorant of his rude
Utterance and Blockishness. But you will say, he was in executing Attempts,
wise and politic; in adventuring of Perils, hardy and valiant, in free giving,
liberal; in use of Pleasures, temperate. For Wisdom, even they that be most
affectionate unto him, dare not charge him with it. Of Valiantness indeed he
labored to win some Estimation; but among Horsemen, on a swift Steed well
mounted, well provided for his own safety, a Beholder of other Men's Fighting,
sometime hardly chasing them that fled, but his Face toward him near at Hand,
he never durst abide. Will ye have an Example of his excellent Valiantness? Of
a Thief, a notable Coward, whom being yielded, and unawares he had deadly
wounded, he was thrown down to the Ground, hurt, bruised with dry Strokes, and
had been quite slain; if the poor Thief's Strength, being ready to die, had not
failed him. I could rehearse his glorious, vain Braggeries in France, I could
tell of his last fearful Flight as far as to Denmark. But I had rather rub up
the Remembrance of that Day, when the Queen forsaking him, came to the Nobility
that protested to revenge the Slaughter of the King. The Armies stood ready in
Array, Bothwel in Number of Men was equal, in Place had the Advantage: There
stood before him, to be his Reward being Vanquisher, a Queen much fansying, and
entirely loving him; a Kingdom, Wealth, and Honor, for him, and his Posterity;
moreover, Impunity for his Offenses past, extreme Liberty to do what he list
for time to come; Ability to advance his Friends, and be revenged of his
Enemies; and on the other side, if he were vanquished, Dishonor, Poverty, and
Banishment; Finally, all things, that thereafter happened or hereafter may
happen, were then before his Eyes. There were also present beside the two
Armies, Beholders and Witnesses of each Man's Valiantness and Cowardice, the
Queen, the Price of the Battle, and Mounsteur de Croc, the Ambassador of
France. Now you look to hear how this Magnifical Boaster of Valiantness did
acquit himself. First, being mounted upon an excellent Horse, he came bravely
forth before the Army. There the Man, forsooth, very sparing of his
Country-mens Blood and lavish of his own, calls for one to try it with him by
Combat, Man to Man. And when there were many on the other side of honorable
Birth and Estates, that offered to accept the Combat, by and by, his violent
Heat cooled, and his glorious Speech quailed: and had it not been that the
Queen, as it were some God, out of a Gin in a Tragedy, had by her Authority
taken up the Matter, and forbidden her pretty venereous Pidgeon to give Battle,
he had failed to find, not only a mean, but also an honest Color to refuse to
fight. And so the Combat was interrupted; yet in the joined Battle, he behaved
himself so valiantly, forsooth, the first Man, almost at the Beginning, and
alone, he ran his way, and so at length drew the rest of his Part to slay after
him.

But for his Defaults in Martial Feats, perhaps the Man was supplied with Civil
Virtues: Alas! what were they? or what Virtues could be looked for in him? A
Man for the most part brought up in the Bishop Murray's Palace, to wit, a most
wicked corrupt House, in Drunkenness and Whoredoms, amongst most vile Ministers
of dissolute misorder. After that he was grown toward Man's estate, at Dice
and among Harlots, he so wasted a most goodly large Revenue of his Inheritance,
that (as the Poet says) At his need he had not left wherewith to buy him a
Halter to hang himself. He, I say, that defiled not only other Men's Houses with
Cuckoldry, but also his own with incestuous Villainy.

This Man therefore, when I say to have been beloved of the Queen, and not only
loved, but also outrageously and intemperately loved; they that know it not,
will peradventure think that I tell wonders. But some Men perhaps will say, Was
there none other in all the Troop of the Youth of Nobility beside him, more
worthy to be beloved? Certainly there were very many: And one there was, in all
things that were wont to allure Love, of all other most excellent, even her own
Husband. What was it then that joined so unequal Love, and so far against
Reason? If I shall say it was likeness of Conditions, I shall name a likely
cause of Love, though to some Men perchance, it may seem an untrue cause of
their Love; neither am I willing to enter into that Discourse; neither do I
affirm the Rumors spread of her in France, in time of her first Marriage;
howbeit, the Wickednesses of the rest of her Life, make some proof that they
rose not all of nothing; and many things that have been noised of her since her
return into Scotland, I have no mind to believe; as for my part I am content
they be buried in forgetfulness, or if that cannot be, let them be taken for
false and feigned: Neither is it necessary over curiously to examine Causes in
Love, which is usually so carried with a rash violent motion of a muddy and
troubled Mind, that for the most part it ends in madness; which if ye labor
to govern by discreet Advice, ye do nothing else but as if ye should endeavor
to be mad with Reason. But yet here there want no Causes, for there was in them
both a Likeness, if not of Beauty, nor outward things, nor of Virtues, yet of
most extreme Vices. She a young Woman, suddenly advanced to the highest Degree
of Authority, when she had never seen with her Eyes, heard with her Ears, nor
considered in her Heart the form of a Kingdom governed by Law, and thereto was
furnished with the untemperate Counsels of her Kinsmen, who themselves
practiced to set up a Tyrannous Rule in France, endeavored to draw Right,
Equity, Laws, and Customs of Ancestors to her only beck and pleasure.

Of this immoderate desire, there burst out from her many times, many words
disclosing it; this she studied day and night. But against this Desire, there
withstood the Custom of the Country, the Laws and Statutes, and principally the
Consent of the Nobility, who remaining safe, she could never attain it. To the
end therefore that she might be able violently to atchieve it, she determined
by force to remove all that stood in her way; but she wist not well by what
means or by whose help to attempt it.

Fraud was the way to work it, for otherwise it was not possible to be
obtained: For this purpose therefore Bothwel only seemed the fittest Man, a Man
in extreme poverty, doubtful whether he were more vile or wicked; and who
between factions of sundry Religions, despising both sides, counterfeited a
love of them both: He, when he had once before offered the Hamilton's his
service to murder the Earl Murray, gave thereby a likelihood, that upon hope of
greater gain, he would not stick to adventure some greater Enterprise, being
one whom the Ruin of his own decayed Family, pricked forward headlong to
mischief, and whom no respect of Godliness or Honesty restrained from
ungracious Actions. As for excessive and immoderate use of Lechery, be therein
no less sought to be famous, than other Men do shun Dishonor and Infamy. She
therefore, a Woman greedily coveting untempered Authority, who esteemed the
Laws her Prison, and the Bridle of Justice her Bondage, when she saw in her
Husband not mettle enough to trouble the State, she picked out a Man for her
purpose, who neither had Wealth to lose, nor Fame to be stained, even such an
one as she might easily overthrow again, if she should once grow weary of him;
such a one as she might easily snare his Incontinence, with wanton Allurements,
satisfy his need with Money, and bind his Assuredness to her with a guilty
Conscience and Confederate in Mischiefs: These be the Fountains of that same,
not unmeasurable, but mad Love, in famous Adultery, and vile Parricide,
wherewith, as with a Pledge, that bloody Marriage was plighted. These therefore
were the causes of enterprizing that heinous Act, to wit, unappeasable Hatred
of her Husband, and intemperate Love of her Adulterer. There was moreover a
hope, that the Crime might be diverted from them to other, and the execution
for it might be laid upon the poor Lives of their Enemies, and that Men most
guiltless of the fault, might be thrust in their place, as Sacrifices to
appease the Peoples displeasure; if not, to what end then served that Battle,
which was almost begun to be fought between the King and the Lord Robert her
Brother? To what end tended those Seeds of Discord that were scattered between
the King and the Nobility? Wherefore did she so curiously entreat the Earl
Murray to stay with her the day before the Murder was committed? or what cause
was there to send for him? There was an Ambassador come out of Savoy; For what
cause? surely it must needs be a great Cause, and such as could not be ended
without the assembly of the Nobility: no, god wot; the Ambassador of Savoy
being bidden too late to the Christening, came when all was ended, not for
Ambassador to the Christening, but as one sent to excuse the neglecting of
doing that Kindness, when both he liked not to send so far for so small a
matter; and he was somewhat ashamed to have failed in presence, when the
Frenchmen and Englishmen had already done it. For the more honorable
dismissing of him, the Earl Murray was sent for, and that with sundry
Messengers, to come from his Wife that lay a dying: What need was there then of
his presence? To draw him to be a party in Conspiracy of the Slaughter? Why,
was it never attempted before? Thought they it best at the last point, at the
very instant when the Murder should be committed, to join him to their
Fellowship, as a light Man, inconstant, and shifting his Purposes at every
moment of time; infamous in his former Life, and not well assured in his
present Estate? No, there is none of these things that they yet dare say of
him. Seeing then they cannot imagine a false Cause to stay him, what was the
true cause indeed, every Man may easily gather; even the same that caused first
the Earl of Athole, and afterward him to depart from the Court; the same that
so brought him in danger of Death; the same that had slandered him with false
Rumors scattered in England; the same that persecuted him with infamous Libels
of the Murderers themselves; the same that made him to choose rather to go into
Banishment, than to remain in Court among Ruffians Weapons, with great peril of
his Life.

But what avails this Equity of the Cause before Hearers, either utterly
ignorant of the matter how it was done, or of themselves disfavouring this
part, are envious, or apt to be carried away with feigned Rumors, which esteem
the Slanders of most lewd light Persons, for true Testimonies, and give credit
to these Men, who boasting, at home, that they are able to do what they list,
yet neither dare commit their Cause to the Sentence of the Judges, nor were
able to defend themselves in Battle: And as by a guilty Conscience of Offenses
they feared Judgment, so by Rage, grown of their Guiltiness, they run headlong
to Battle, and from Battle run cowardly away: And now again, when standing upon
the Advantage that they have both in number and wealth, they scorn the Wisdom
of their Adversaries, and despise their Power in comparison of their own; yet
distrusting to prevail by true Manhood, they fall to Robbery, and turn their
ungracious Minds to Slandering, Cavelling, and Lying, whom but yet for the good
will that I bear to my Countrymen, I would advise to cease from this folly, or
fury, or disease of evil speaking, lest in time to come, when Truth shall shine
out, they shut up and stop with hatred of them those Persons Ears to their
Petitions, whom now they fill and load with false Rumors, for there will not
always be place for forgiveness, but as Darkness at the Sun shining, so Lies at
the Light of Truth must vanish away.

As for the commodious means for committing that vile fact, and the hope of
hiding it, I need not to pursue the declaring of them in many words, since both
the easiness to do it, the opportunities of places, and all advancements of
occasions and seasons were in their own power: And to hide the Fact, what
needed they, when they feared no punishment although it were published? For
what Punishment could they fear in so strong a Conspiracy, when both the force
of Laws, whereof themselves were Governors, was utterly extinguished, and the
Minds of the most part of Men were either snared with partnership of the
mischievous Fact, or carried with Hope, or Forestalled with Rewards, or
discouraged and bridled with Fear of so great a Power on the other part? But
how soever this be, yet it will be good to see thoroughly both the order of the
doing, the unadvisedness, inconstancy, and end of their Devices: For thereby
shall ye perceive, that there wanted not desire to hide the Fact, but that the
fury of a distracted Mind, overthrew all the Order of their Counsels,; while
sometime, as desirous to beguile public Fame, they endeavored to keep close
their intended Mischief, yet they dealt therein so openly, as careless of their
Estimation; they seemed to make small account how Men judged of their Doings:
For at his preparing to go to Glascow, the Poison was given him secretly, and
they thought they had sufficiently well provided that he should in his absence
from them, be consumed with pining sickness: But the rest of their Dealings
toward him, were so cruelly handled, that though his Disease should have
happened to be natural, yet it would have been suspected for poisoning: For he
her Husband, the Father of her only and firstborn Child; the Father, I say, of
that Son, whose Christening was solemnized with that great Pomp and Glory,
being escaped away, in a manner, naked out of his House flaming in fire,
tormented by the way with grievous pain, when he lay at Glascow, of a dangerous
sickness, likely to die: What did his excellent good Wife the while? What did
she? At the first news of it, did she haste to him in post? Does she with her
Presence, with her friendly familiar Speech, or with her loving Countenance
comfort him in sickness? When she cannot stay him in Life, comes she to
receive his last Breath? Closes she his Eyes at his dying? Does she the other
kind Duties of honest Matrons? No: But she that had now let him escape, to go
and die, and hoped that he could not linger out his unhappy Life much longer,
she goes a quite contrary way, into another Country, in progress; and, with
her fair Adonis, she visits Noble-men's Houses, and staineth the Houses that
harbored them, with the Spots of their Unchastities; and just about the time
of her Husband's Death (as she guessed by the strength and working of the
Poison) she returns to Sterline. When the Matter wrought not so fast as she
expected, for the Strength of his Youth had wrestled with the Soreness of his
Pain, lest she should seem to have altogether forsaken her Duty, she daily
prepares to go to Glascow, but never goes. At the last, disappointed of the
Hope that she had conceived in her Heart, she takes her self to other Devices.
She comes to Edinburgh, and there calls to Counsel her Adulterer, and a few
other, privy of those Secrets: There they decree, that in any wise the King
must be slain; yet were they not fully advised, with what kind of Death he
should be murdered; which may easily be gathered by her Letter, wherein she
partly compares her self to Medea, a bloody Woman, and a poisoning Witch: Also
by another of her Letters, wherein she asks Advice about the Poisoning of
him. The King, who had already tasted of her lovely Cup, doubting whether he
were better any more to believe her flattering Speeches or to fear the
shrewdness of her Nature; though sometimes he despaired not of her
Reconciliation, yet was evermore fearful and suspicious; but when he saw that
neither his Life nor his Death were in his Power, he was constrained to purse
up his passed Injuries, to dissemble his present Fear, and to feign himself
some Hopes for time to come. So was he led out, not as a Husband, but carried
out as a Coarse; or rather, drawn, as it were, to the Shambles. The Queen,
gloriously showing her self in pompous manner, goes before, in Triumph over
the young Gentleman, vexed with all kind of Miseries, tormented with Poison,
entrapped with Treasons, and drawn to Execution. There follows after the
triumphant Carr, the ancient Enemies to his Father's House, brought thither on
purpose, that they also might feed their Eyes with that woeful Spectacle; and
whose Death, at hand, they looked for, they might in the mean time take
pleasure of the Sorrow of his Heart. And that no Ceremony of solemn Sacrifices
might be wanting, John Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews, was present, as
their Priest; a Man before defiled with all kind of Wicked^ess, pampered with
the Spoils and Murders of his Countrymen, an old Conqueror of many murdering
Victories. The People, all along the Way, looking pitiously, showed a
Foretelling of no good Luck to come: The Queen's Companions could neither tell
their Sadness, nor hide their Gladness, when the heinous Outrage of the vile
Fact intended held their unmeasurable Joy in suspense, upon expectation of the
Success. Thus led they him to Edinburgh, not into the Queen's Palace. Why so?
Lest the Infection of the pestilent Disease, forsooth, might hurt her young
Son: As though they that be poisoned, were also to be shunned, for fear of
Infection. But the truer Cause was this, lest his Presence should trouble them,
in interrupting their free enjoying their Pleasures, and their Consultations
about his Murder. Whither then is he led? Into the most desolate part of the
Town, some time inhabited, while the Popish Priests Kingdom lasted; but for
certain Years past, without any Dweller; in such an House as, of it self, would
have fallen down, if it had not been botched up for the time, to serve the turn
of this Night's Sacrifice. Why was this place chiefly chosen? They pretended
the wholsomness of the Air. O good God! Going about to murder her Husband,
seeks she for a wholesome Air? To what use? Not to preserve his Life, but to
reserve his Body to Torment. Here to tend her wisely diligent Attendance, and
her last Care of her Husband's Life, she fears lest he should, by Preventing
Death, be delivered from pain; she would fain have him feel himself die. But
let us see what manner of wholsomness of Air it is* Is it among dead Men's
Graves, to seek the preserving of Life? For hard by there were the Ruins of two
Churches; on the East side, a Monastery of Dominick Friars; on the West, a
Church of our Lady; which, for the desolateness of the place, is called, The
Church in the Field; on the South Side, the Town-Wall, and in the same, for
commodious passage every way, is a Postern door; on the North side are a few
Beggars Cottages, ready to fall, which some time served for Stews for certain
Priests and Monks; the name of which place does plainly disclose the form and
nature thereof, for it is commonly called Thieves Lane. There is never another
House near, but the Hamilton's House, which is about a Stone's cast distant;
and that also stood void. Thither removes the Archbishop of St. Andrews, who
always before was used to lodge in the most populous parts of the Town: He also
watched all that Night that the King was slain. Now I beseech you, since you
cannot with your Eyes, yet, at least, with your Minds, behold an House, lately
of old Priests, among Graves, between the Ruins of two Temples; it self also
ruinous, near to the Thieves haunt, and it self a Receiver of Thieves; not far
from the Fort and Garrison of his Enemies, that stood right over against the
Door; by which, if any Man should flee out, he could not escape their
traitorous Ambushment. The very shape of this place, when you consider it in
your Mind, when you hear of the Ruins of Churches, Graves of dead Men, lurking
Corners of Thieves, Brothel-houses of Harlots; does not, I say, not the House
only, but also every part near about it, seem to proclaim Mischief and
Treachery? Seems here a King to have gone into an House for Lodging, or to be
thrust into a Den of Thieves? Was not that desolate Wasteness, that uninhabited
place, able of it self to put simple Men in fear, to make wiser Men suspicious,
and to give wicked Men shrewd Occasions? What meant his Enemies unwonted Repair
into those Parts, and watching all Night, in a manner, hard at his Gate? Why
chose he now this place for his Lodging, against his former usage? The House,
ye will say, was empty, and his Brother's House, and near to the King's
Lodging. It was empty long before; Why lodged you never there before? Why
forsook you the populous places in the Heart of the City, and nearness to the
Court; and thrust your self into a desolate Corner? What Profit, what
Commodity, what Pleasure herein respect you? Was it your meaning, that you
being one that ever had been a greedy Coveter of popular Fame, and Catcher of
Courtiers with Baits of good Cheer, now would, of your own accord, go hide your
self in a blind Hole, out of all Company and Resort? That you, rather
overwhelmed than laden with plenty of Benefices, went thither to delight your
Heart in the Ruin of Temples? But be it that your coming thither was but by
Chance, and that you had some Causes to go thither; though not true, yet
somewhat likely.

What meant your unwonted watching all Night? What meant the fearful murmuring
of your Servants that Night, whom yet, in that public Tumult, you commanded,
not once to stir out of Doors? But what Cause had they to go out? Was it to
have Understanding of the Matter, whereof your self were an Author and Deviser?
No; for, out of your own Watchtower, you heard with your Ears the Noise of the
Ruin; you saw the Smoke and Ashes with your Eyes, you drunk up the Joy thereof
in your Heart, and the Savor, or the Gunpowder, you, in a manner, snuffed up
at your Nose. Perhaps you meant to send out some to receive them that fled; but
you saw no Man flee; and therefore the Lights that were seen out of the highest
part of your House, all the Night long, were, as upon the lucky ending of the
thing that you looked for, even then suddenly put out.

But let us return to the King. They thought it not enough to have set open the
Postern in the Wall, to let in Thieves thereat; nor to have set an Ambush
before the Door, that none should escape; but also they kept with themselves
the Keys of two Doors; the one of the lower Room, where they had undermined the
Wall, and filled the holes with Gunpowder; and the other of the upper Room,
that the Murderers might come to the King, in his Bed: Then of those few
Servants that he had, they withdrew the greater number, being such as were
before set about him; not so much to do him Service, as to be Spies of his
Secrets, and carry News to the Queen. The last that was left, one Alexander
Durain, when he could find no reasonable Excuse to depart, was thrust out by
the Queen her self: She, in the mean time, meaning not to fail in playing her
part, while Bothwel is in preparing the tragical Stage for the Murder, daily
visits the King. His Heart, passioned with Love, sometimes she comfort
with sweet Promises, sometimes she vexes with Brawlings, and still keeps his
Wit occupied with Suspicions, and rightly represents in Action, the Poet's
Fable; wherein is feigned, that Prometheus's Liver, daily growing to invent new
Torments, is daily knawn and preyed upon by an Eagle: For, after the very same
manner, sometimes she cherishes and refreshes the silly young Gentleman, to
no other End, but that he may have Life remaining, to suffer more Sorrows.

Now, I beseech you every one, think with your selves, upon the fresh doing of
the Fact, how Men's Hearts were moved; when, even now, these things cannot be
heard reported, without Indignation. There was provided by the most wicked Man
in the World, by his Enemy, by his Wife's Adulterer, an House, in a manner,
severed from all Concourse of People; fitter for a Slaughterhouse, than for
Man's Dwelling: It is provided for a young Gentleman, unprovident by Youth,
easy to be trapped in Treason by Love, spoiled of his Servants, forsaken of
his Friends: An House (I say) torn, solitary on every side; not also unclose,
but open to pass through, the Keys thereof in his Enemies Custody, no Man left
within but a young Man not yet recovered of Sickness, and an old Man feeble by
Age, and two Strangers unacquainted with the Places, Matter and Persons; no Man
dwelling near, but his Enemies and Thieves. But as for danger of Thieves, the
good fore-casting Woman had well provided; for she had left him nothing to
allure a Thief withal: And as for his Enemies, she had appointed them to be but
Lookers on, and not Part-players in this Tragedy; but the Glory of the Fact she
reserved to her self and Bothwel.

What, in the mean time, does the Queen's great Carefulness? What means her
unwonted Resort? What her malicious, and not obsequious Diligence? She visits
him daily, she prolongeth her Talk with him many Hours together, two Nights she
rests in a lower Chamber under him (if guilty Conscience of most heinous
Doings can, from Torments of Furies, suffer that outrageous Heart to rest at
all.) She feared much, lest, if the lower place of the House were left empty,
the noise of the Underminers working, and of the Bringers in of the Powder,
should bring some of the Servants into some suspicion of Treachery. Beside, she
had a mind to see the thing done her self, rather than to commit it to the
Trust of any other. She had a desire to take a Foretaste of the Joy to come;
and when she could not with her Ears, yet, at least with her Heart, to conceive
aforehand the Fire, the Smoke, the Powder, the Crack of the House falling, the
fearful Trouble, the Tumult, the confused Dismayedness of the Doers, the
Thieves, and the People. All things thus prepared for that doleful Night, then
enters she into the last Care of her good Fame: she endeavors to divert
all Suspicions from her, she goes to her Husband, she kisseth him, she gives
him a Ring for Pledge of her Love, she talks with him more lovingly than she
was wont to do, and promises more largely, she feigneth that she had great
Care of his Health, and yet her companying whither Adulterer she surceaseth not.

They that more nearly noted these things, prognosticated no good thing to
come. For how much the greater Tokens that the Queen showed of reconciled
Affection, so much the more Cruelty did every Man in his Heart fore conceive of
all her Intentions. For else whence comes that sudden Change, so great Care
for him, whom she had poisoned the Month before, whom even lately she not only
wished dead, but desired to see him die, whose Death she set her Brother, yea,
both her Brethren to procure; and she, like a Master of Mischief, thrust forth
the King to fight, and her self in the mean time prepared for his Burial? Not
past a few Months before, she her self was desirous to die, because she loathed
to see the King alive. Whence comes now this sudden Care of his Health? I
looked she should say, she was reconciled to him. Were you reconciled to your
Husband, whom you sent away into that Desert, that Camp of Furies, as the Poet
calls it? For whom, among Brothel houses of Harlots, among Beggars Cottages,
among Thieves lurking-holes, you prepared a House so open to pass through, that
you left therein more Entries than Men to shut them? you that allured and
assembled Russians to his Slaughter, and Thieves to his Spoil? You that drove
away his Servants that should have defended his Life? You that thrust him out
naked, alone, unarmed, among Thieves, in danger to be slain? When in all this
miserable State of your Husband, your Adulterer in the mean time dwelt in your
Palace, daily haunted your Chamber, Day and Night all Doors were open for him,
whilst your poor Husband, debarred all Company of the Nobility, his Servants
forbidden to come at him, or sent away from him, was forsaken and thrust away
into a solitary Desert, for a mocking Stock, and I would to God, it had been
for a mocking Stock only? Of his other Servants I enquire not. I do not
curiously question why they went away, why they then especially forsook the
King, when he chiefly needed their Help and Service; when he was newly
recovered; When he began to go abroad, and had no other Company. Of Alexander
Durain I cannot keep Silence, whom you had for his Keeper, and your Spy. What
was there for him to espy? Was there any thing for him to bring News of, to an
honest Matron, loving to her Husband, faithful in Wedlock, and fearful of a
Partner of his Love? Feared she, lest he, a young Gentleman, beautiful, and a
King, should cast wanton Eyes upon some other Woman in her Absence? No, God
wot; for that was it that she most desired; for she her self had practiced to
allure him thereto before, she her self had offered him the Occasions, and of
her self showed him the means. This was it that most grieved her, while she was
seeking Causes of Divorce, that she could not find in him so much as any
slender Suspicion of Adultery. Why then were Spies set about him to watch him?
Was it not that none of the Nobility, none of his Servants, nor any Stranger at
all should come at him, that no Man should speak with him, that might disclose
the Treason, and forewarn him of his Danger? This same very Alexander, how
carefully she saves, when she goes about to kill her Husband? How late she
sends him away, when the rest were gone, even at the very Point of her
Husband's Death, when she had now no more need of Espials? For the day before
the Murder was committed, there was none of the Ministers that were privy to
her secret Councils left behind, but only Alexander. He, when he saw that
Night, no less doleful than shameful, to approach, prepares, as himself
thought a fine subtle Excuse to be absent, so as rather Chance might seem to
have driven him out, than he himself willing to have forsaken his Master. He
puts Fire in his own Bed straw, and when the Flame spread further, he made
an outcry, and threw his Bedding, half singed, out of the King's Chamber. But
the next day, when that Excuse served not so handsomely as he desired, for that
in the Queen's hearing, the King very sweetly entreated him not to leave him
alone that Night, and also desired him to lie with himself, as he had often
used to do, for the King entirely loved him above all the rest; Alexander in
Perplexity, wanting what to answer, added to his first Excuse, Fear of
Sickness; and pretended, that for commodious taking of Physic for his Health,
he would lie in the Town. When this would not yet serve him, the Queen added
her Authority, and told the King, That he did not well to keep the young Man
with him against the Order of his Health; and therewithal she turned to
Alexander, and bade him go where was best for him: And forthwith, as soon as
the Word was spoken, he went his Way. I will not here precisely trace out all
the Footings of these wicked doings; neither will I curiously enquire, whether
that former Day's Fire were happened by Casualty, or kindled by Fraud. Neither
will I ask why he that had so often been received to lie in the King's own Bed,
does now this only Night especially refuse it. Let us suppose that Sickness was
the Cause thereof. This only one thing I ask, what kind of Sickness it was,
that came upon him at that very instant, and before Morning left him again,
without any Physicians help; and whereof, neither before, nor since, nor at
that present, there ever appeared any Token? But I trust, though he hold his
Peace, ye all sufficiently understand it. In the Man guilty in Conscience of
the mischievous Intention, Fear of Death overcame Regard of Duty, Had it not
been that Alexander, before time a Spy, and Talebearer, now a Forsaker and
Betrayer of his Master, was joined to her in Privity of all these wicked
doings, would not the Queen, so cruel in all the rest, have found in her Heart
to bestow that one Sacrifice upon her Husbands Funerals? While these things
were in doing, the Night was far past, and my Lady Rerese, a lusty, valiant
Souldieress, before Sign given, comes forth into the Field, out of Array;
abroad she goes, gets her to Horseback, and though she were somewhat
afraid, as one that foreknew the Storm to come; yet she sat still upon her
Horse, tarrying for the Queen, but yet a good pretty way from the House. In the
mean time Paris comes. Then the Communication brake, and they rose to depart.
For, by and by, upon sight of him came to her Remembrance that heinous Offense,
that without great Propitiations could not be purged, forsooth; that the Queen
had not danced at the Wedding-feast of Sebastion the Minstrel and vile Jester;
that she sat by her Husband, who had not yet fully recovered his Health; that
at the Banquet of her Domestical Parasite, she had not played the dancing Skit.
A matter surely worthy of Excuse. But what should she else do? She must needs
go, as soon as she saw Paris; for so it was agreed, and somewhat must needs be
pretended. How happened it that the other Nights before, when she went away
earlier, she made no Excuse at all, and now her Departure about Midnight, must
needs have an Excuse alleged? But be it so, Could she remember no better
Excuse than Sebastians Wedding? No, no, I say to the contrary; that if she had
left the Wedding of her own natural Body, or her Sister, to visit her Husband,
though but a little crazed, she had had a just Excuse before all Men so to do.
What if she had done the same Kindness for the King, being not her Husband, or
for any other of the Nobility. Is Sebastian's Wedding of such a Value, that a
Masking Dance thereat is to be preferred before a Wife's Duty and Love? But
surely in this curious excusing and pretended Sorrow of neglected Duty,
somewhat lies hidden; and yet not so hidden, but that it appears through the
Closure:

This overmuch Preciseness of Diligence, excusing where no need is, has some
Suspicion of some secret Mischief that you are loath to have disclosed, and the
Slightness of the Excuse, increases the Suspicion, especially when there were
other Matters enough that she might better have alleged I but let us admit the
Excuse, since the Queen her self has thought it reasonable. Whither then goes
she? Straight into her Chamber. What does she next? Wearied with the Days
Travel, and the Nights watching, goes she to Bed? No, but she falls to
talking with Bothwel, first, almost alone, and afterward alone altogether. What
Talk the had, the Matter it self declares. For Bothwel, after that he had put
off, his Cloths, as if he would have gone to Bed, by and by puts on other
Apparel, going to do the Deed, he would not be known. I like well the Man's
Policy. But his Way was to go through the Watch. Here I marvel at his Madness.
But Men's Wits beset with Guiltiness of Mischiefs, do commonly bewray
themselves by their own Inconstancy; and blind to all other things, do see only
that which they have bent their Mind unto. What he did, the King's Death, his
own running away, the Confession of the guilty Persons, and other things that
followed the Murder, do declare. After the great Uproar in the Town about it,
he, as one utterly ignorant of all, returns through the same Watch to Bed.
When Noise of the Ruin had filled all Men's Ears, and the Crack of it had
shaken all the Houses, only the Queen, intentive to Expectation of the Chance,
and broad awake, hears nothing at all, and Bothwel hears nothing. O
mavelous Deafness! All other throughout the Town, as many as were awake, were
afraid, and as many as slep'd were awaked. At the last Bothwel rises again,
and in the self same Interlude, by suddenly shifting from the Poet, becomes a
Messenger, he runs to the Queen, and thither resorteth many others also that
lodged in the Palace. To some the Matter seemed true, to some feigned, to some
mavelous. What does the Queen the whilst? What should she do? She temperately
brooded good Luck, she rests sweetly till the next Day at Noon. Yet the Day
following, to observe Decorum and comely Convenience in her Part, without
marring the Play, she counterfeiteth a Mourning, which yet neither her
Joyfulness dwelling withal in Heart, suffers long to be feigned, nor Shame
permits to be wholly neglected. These things thus lying open before your
Eyes, thus palpable with Hands, thus fast imprinted in Men's Ears and
Knowledge, stand we yet enquiring for the Author of the Murder, as though it
were doubtful? But ye say, the Queen denies it. What denies she? Forsooth,
that she did the Murder: As though there were so great a difference, if one
should be the Author or the Executioner; yet he commands it, and commits it.
She gave her Council, her Furtherance, her Power and Authority to the doing of
it. Neither is the Cause unknown why she did it, even that the same filthy
Marriage with Bothwel might be accomplished. Though all with Arguments, and so
many Witnesses of them that were privy to it, failed; yet by her own Testimony,
by her own Letters, it must needs be confessed: And though all other things
wanted, these things that followed the Murder, do plainly declare the Doer;
namely, that at the slaughter of her Husband, she sorrowed not, but quietly
rested, as after a gay Enterprise well achieved; that she mourned not, but in
manner openly joyed; that she could abide not only to look upon his dead Body,
but also greedily beheld it; that she secretly in the night buried him without
funeral Pomp, or rather hid him like a Thief; for that same so inconstant
Counterfeiting or Mourning did plainly bewray it self: For what meant that
removing to Seton's? Why shunned she the Towns Resort, and Peoples Eyes? Was it
because she was ashamed to Mourn openly, or because she could not well cloak
her Joy, or secretly to give her self all to Sorrow? No; for at Seton's she
threw away all her disguised personage of Mourning; she went daily into the
Fields amongst Russians; and not only resorted to her former Customs, but also
affected to exercise manly pastimes, and that among Men, and openly: So lightly
she despised the Opinion and Speech of her Country. But I beshrew that same
Killegree, and that same Monsieur de Croc, that came upon her so unseasonably,
and showed to others her counterfeited Person unvizor'd; for had not they been,
many things that were done, might have been denied; many things might have been
handsomely feigned, and much the matter might have been helped by forged
Rumors.

But they will say, There was a solemn Enquiry for the Murder: forsooth, by
Bothwel himself principally, and by some other that then labored, and yet at
this day do labor to deliver the Persons guilty thereof, from punishment of
Law, and do now plainly show what they then secretly meant. But with what
diligence, with what security was that Enquiry handled? A few poor Souls, the
next dwelling-Neighbours to the King's Lodging being called, neither durst tell
what they had seen and heard; and if they touched any thing near the matter,
either they were with fear put to silence, or despised as of no Credit: The
wiser sort of them durst not offend Bothwel that sat among the Judges. One or
two of the King's Servants that escaped the mischance, were examined which way
the Murderers came in? Forsooth, say they, we had not the Keys. Who then had
them? It was answered, that the Queen had them: So began the Secrets of the
Court to break out; then was that Enquiry adjourned, and never recontinued.
What can be more severe and upright than this Enquiry? And yet they prevailed
nothing, by it; for what the Examiners would have had kept secret, that the
People cried out openly; that which they suppressed, burst forth; and that
which they cloaked in secret, it breaks out into broad light. But there was a
Proclamation set forth, with pardon of the Fact, and promise of Reward to him
that would utter it. Why, who had been so mad, that he durst in so manifest
peril of his Life, bear Witness, or give Information against the Judges
themselves, in whose power lay his Life and Death? It was likely, forsooth,
that they which had murdered a King, would spare him that should disclose the
Murderer; especially when all Men saw that the Enquiry of the King's Slaughter
was quite omitted, and the other Enquiry severely pursued concerning Books
accusing the Slaughter. What manner of Judgment it was whereby Bothwel was
quitted, you have heard; forsooth, by himself procured, the Judges by himself
chosen, the Accusers by himself suborned, lawful Accusers forbidden to be
present, unless they would yield their Throats to their Enemies Weapons; the
Assize appointed neither to a day, according to the Law of the Land, nor after
the manner of the Country, nor to enquire of the Murder of the King, but of
such a Murder as was alleged to be committed the day before that the King was
slain. Here when Bothwel by his Friendship and Power, and the Queen by Prayer
and Threatening travailed with the Judges, do you now expect what Sentence Men
chosen against Law, and against the Custom of the Land have pronounced? In
their Judgment, they touched the matter nothing at all; only this they have
declared, That it was no lawful Judgment in this; that with a special
Protestation they provided, That it should not be prejudicial to them in time
to come. Then, that all Men might understand what it was that they sought by
Sword, Fire, and Poison, they jumble up Marriages; one is Divorced, another is
Coupled, and that in such posting speed, as they might scant have hasted to
furnish a Triumph of some Noble Victory: Yet that in these unlawful Weddings
some show of lawful Order might be observed, the goodly Banes were openly
proclaimed; for publishing whereof, though the Minister of the Church was
threatened with Death, if he did it not, yet at the time of his publishing,
himself openly protested, That he knew Cause of Exception, why that Marriage
was not lawful. But in such a Multitude assembled, how few were they that knew
it not? Since all could remember well that Bothwel had then alive two Wives
already not yet Divorced, and the third neither lawfully Married, nor orderly
Divorced. But that was not it that was intended, to observe the Ceremonies of
lawful Order, but (as they do use in Interludes) they provided a certain show,
or disguised counterfeiting of common usage: For he that has often broken all
Humane Laws, and has cast away all Conscience and Religion could easily
neglect the Course of God's Law.

Now I suppose I have briefly declared (in respect of the greatness of the
matter) and yet perhaps in more words than needed (the plainness of the profes
considered) of what purpose, by what counsel, and upon what hope, that heinous
murder was attempted, with what cruelty it was executed, by what tokens,
advertisements, testimonies, and letters of the Queen her self the whole matter
is proved, and so plainly proved, that it may be as openly seen, as if it lay
before your eyes: yet will I show forth the testimony of the whole people,
which I think worthy not to be neglected. For several men do commonly deceive,
and are deceived by others, but no man deceives all men, nor is deceived by
all. This testimony of the people is this. When at the Queens going abroad
among the people, the greatest part of the Commons were wont to make
Acclamations, wishing her well; and happily with such Speeches as either Love
enforces, or Flattery inventeth: now at her going after the Kings slaughter to
the Castle, through the chief and most populous Street of the Town, there was
all the way a sad glooming silence. And when any woman alone of the multitude
had cried, God save the Queen, another by and by so cried out, as all men might
hear her; So be it to every one as they have deserved.

Albeit these things were thus done as I have declared, yet there are some that
stick not to say that the Queen was not only hardly, but also cruelly dealt
with, that after so detestable a fact, she was removed from her Regency: and
when they could not deny the fact, they complained of the punishment. I do not
think there will be any man so shameless, to think that so horrible a fact
ought to have no punishment at all. But if they complain of the grievousness of
the penalty, I fear lest to all good men, we may seem not to have done so
gently and temperately, as loosly and negligently, that have laid so light a
penalty upon an offense so heinous, and such as was never heard of before. For
what can be bone cruelly against the author of so outrageous a deed, wherein
all laws of God and man are violated, despised, and in a manner wholly
extinguished? Every several offense has his punishment both by God and man
appointed: and as there be certain degrees of evil deeds, so are there also
increases in the quantities of punishments. If one have killed a man, it is a
deed of it self very heinous. What if he have killed his familiar friend? what
if his father? what if in one soul fact he has joined all these offenses
together? surely of such a one, neither can his life suffice for imposing, nor
his body for bearing, nor the Judges policy for inventing pain enough for him.
Which of these faults is not comprised in this offense? I omit the mean common
matters, the murdering of a young gentleman, an innocent, her countryman, her
kinsman, her familiar, her Cousin-german. Let us also excuse the fact, if it be
possible. She unadvisedly, a young Woman, angry, offended, and one of great
innocence of life till this time, has slain a lewd young man, an adulterer, an
unkind husband, and a cruel King.

If not any one, but all these respects together, were in this matter, they
ought not to avail to shift off all punishment, but to raise some pity of the
case. But what say you that none of these things can so much as be falsely
pretended? The fact it self, of it self is odious: in a woman, it is monstrous:
in a wife not only excessively loved, but also most zealously honored, it is
uncredible: and being committed against him whose age craved pardon, whose
hearty affection required love, whose nighness of kindred asked reverence,
whose innocence might have deserved favor, upon that young man I say, in whom
there is not so much as alleged any just cause of offense, thus to execute and
spend, yea, to exceed all torments due to all offenses, in what degree of
cruelty shall we account it? But let these things avail in other persons to
raise hatred, to bring punishment, and to make examples to posterity: But in
this case let us bear much with her youth, much with her Nobility, much with
the name of a Princess. As for mine own part, I am not one that thinks it
always good to use extreme strictness of law, no not in private, mean, and
common persons. But in a most heinous misdeed, to dissolve all force of law,
and where is no measure of ill doing, there to descend beneath all measure in
punishing, were the way to the undoing of all laws, and the overthrow of all
humane society. But in this one horrible Act is such a hotchpotch of all
abominable doings, such an eagerness of all outrageous cruelties, such a
forgetfulness of all natural affection, as nothing more can be feigned or
imagined. I omit all former matters. I will not curiously enquire upon Princes
doings, I will not weigh them by the common beam, I will not restrain them to
common degrees of duties. If there be any thing that without great offense may
be passed over, I will gladly leave it unspoken of; If there be any thing that
may receive excuse, either by respect of age, or of womankind, yea or of
unadvisedness, I will not urge it. And to pass over all the rest, two heinous
offenses there be, that neither according to their greatness be fully
expressed, nor according to their outrage be sufficiently punished, I mean the
violating of Matrimony, and of Royal Majesty. For Matrimony (as the Apostle
says) does truly contain a great mystery. For as being observed, it
compriseth within it all inferior kinds of duties, so being broken, it
overthrows them all. Whosoever has misused his father, seems to have cast out
of his heart all natural reverence: but for the husbands sake one shall leave
both Father and Mother. Of all other duties, the degrees, or like observances,
either are not at all in brute creatures, or not so plain to be discerned: but
of matrimonial love, there is almost no living creature that has not some
feeling. This mystery therefore whosoever not only violateth, but also despises,
he does not only overthrow all the foundations of humane fellowship, but, as
much as in him lies, dissolveth and confounds all order of nature. Whosoever
(I do not say) hurts the KING, that is the true Image of God in earth, but
slays him with strange and unwonted sort of cruelty, so as the untemperate
and uncredible outragiousness is not contented with simple torment, seems he
not, as much as in him lies, to have a desire to pull God out of Heaven? What
refuge have they then left themselves to mercy, that in satisfying their lust
of unjust hatred, have exceeded, not only all measure of cruelty, but also all
likelihood, that it can be credible.

But they will say, we ought to bear with, and spare her Nobility, Dignity and
age. Be it so, if she have spared him in whom all these respects were greater,
or at least equal; let the majesty of Royal name avail her. How much it ought
to avail to her preserving, her self has showed the example. May we commit our
safety to her, who a Sister, has butcherly slaughtered her Brother, a Wife her
Husband, a Queen her King? May we commit our safety to her, whom never shame
restrained from unchastity, womankind from cruelty, nor religion from impiety?
Shall we bear with her age, sex and unadvisedness, that without all just causes
of hatred, despised all these things in her Kinsman, her King, her Husband? She
that has sought such execution of her wrongful wrath, what shall we think she
will do being provoked by reproaches to men not knit to her by kindred, subject
to her pleasure, not matched with her in equal fellowship of life, but yielded
to her governance, and enthralled to her tormenting cruelty? when rage for
interrupting her pleasure, and outrage of nature, strengthened with armor of
licentious Power shall ragingly triumph upon the Goods and Blood of poor
Subjects? What is then the fault whereof we are accused? What cruelty have we
showed? That a woman raging without measure and modesty, and abusing, to all
her Subjects destruction, the force of her Power, that she had received for
their safety, we have kept under governance of her kinsmen and well-willing
friends: and whom by right, we might for her heinous deeds have executed, her
we have touched with no other punishment, but only restrained her from doing
more mischief. For we deprived her not of Liberty, but of unbridled
licentiousness of evil doing. Wherein we more fear among all good men, the
blame of too much lenity, than among evil men the slander of cruelty.

These were the causes that moved the Queen to this matter. Bothwel also had
his reasons, which not a little troubled his mind. For when that same infamous
acquital rather increased, than abated the suspicion, and the matter could not
be always kept close, he flees to his last refuge, to obtain of the Queen a
pardon of all his offenses. But when by the law of the land in such Charters of
pardon, the greatest offense must be expreslly mentioned, and the rest it
sufficed to include in general words, and expressly to confess, the murder of
the King seemed to stand neither with his honor, nor with his safety: he was
driven of necessity either to invent or commit some other crime, either more
grievous, or at the least as heinous, under which the slaughter of the King
might lurk in shadow of general words unexpressed. They could devise none other
but the same counterfeit ravishment of the Queen, whereby both the Queen
provided for enjoying her pleasure, and Bothwel, for his safety.

MEmorandum, that in the Castle of Edinburgh, there was left by the Earl
Bothwel, before his fleeing away, and was sent for by one George Daglish his
servant, who was taken by the Earl Moreton, one small gilt Coffer, not fully a
foot long, being garnished in sundry places with the Roman letter F. under a
Kings Crown, wherein where certain Letters and writings well known, and by
oaths to be affirmed, to have been written with the Queen of Scots own hand to
the Earl Bothwel.

Beside those Writings, there was also extant a Writing written in Roman hand
in French, to be avowed to be written by the said Queen of Scots her self,
being a promise of Marriage to the said Bothwel: which writing being without
date, and though some words therein seem to the contrary, yet is upon credible
grounds supposed to have been made and written by her before the death of her
Husband. The tenor whereof thus begins. Nous Marie par le grace de Dieu, etc.

We Mary by the Grace of God, etc.



There is also another writing in Scottish, avowed to be wholly written by the
Earl Huntley, dated the fifth of April, 1567. containing a form of Contract of
Marriage betwixt the said Queen and Earl Bothwel, subscribed Mary, which is to
be avowed to be the proper hand of the said Queen; and underneath it, James
Earl Bothwel, which also is to be avowed to be the proper hand of the said Earl
Bothwel, at which time he was commonly defamed of the King's slaughter, and not
cleansed or acquit thereof before the thirteenth of April following. The tenor
of which contract here ensues. AT Seyton, the fifth of April, in the year of
God. 1567. The right Excellent, right High and Mighty Princess Mary, by the
grace of God Queen of Scots, considering the place and estate wherein Almighty
God has constituted her Highness, and how by the decease of the King her
Husband, her Majesty is now destitute of a husband, living solitary in the
state of Widowhood; in the which kind of life her Majesty most willingly would
continue, if the will of her Realm and Subjects would permit it. But on the
other part, considering the inconveniences may follow, and the necessity which
the Realm has, that her Majesty be coupled with an Husband, her Highness has
inclination to Marry. And seeing what incommodity may come to this Realm, in
case her Majesty should join in Marriage with any Foreign Prince of a strange
Nation, her Highness has thought rather better to yield unto one of her own
Subjects. Amongst whom, her Majesty finds none more able, nor endued with
better qualities than the right Noble, and her dear Cousin James, Earl Bothwel,
etc. Of whose thankful and true service, her Highness in all times bypast has
had large proof, and infallible experience. And seeing not only the same good
mind constantly persevering in him, but with that an inward affection, and
hearty love toward her Majesty, her Highness amongst the rest, has made her
choice of him. And therefore in the presence of the Eternal God faithfully, and
in the word of a Prince, by these presents takes the said James Earl Bothwel as
her lawful Husband. And promises and obliges her Highness, that as soon as the
Process of divorse intended betwixt the said Earl Bothwel and Dame Jane Gordon,
now his pretended Spouse, be ended by the order of the Laws, her Majesty shall
God willing thereafter shortly Marry, and take the said Earl to her Husband,
and complete the band of Matrimony with him in the face of Holy Church. And
shall never Marry any other Husband but him only Item to the Duke of Norfolk,
etc.
during his life time. And as her Majesty of her gracious humanity, and proper
motive, without deserving of the said Earl, has thus inclined her favor and
affection toward him, he humbly, and reverently acknowledging the same,
according to his bounden duty, and being as free and able to make promise of
Marriage, in respect of the said Process of divorce intended for diverse
reasonable causes, and that his said pretended Spouse has thereunto consented,
he presently takes her Majesty as his Lawful Spouse in the presence of God. And
promises and obliges him, as he will answer to God, and upon his fidelity and
Honor, that in all diligence possible, he shall prosecute and set forward the
said Process of divorce already begun and intended betwixt him and the said
Dame Jane Gordon his pretended Spouse, unto the final end of a Decree and
Declaration therein. And incontinent thereafter, at her Majesty's good will and
pleasure, and when her Highness thinks convenient, shall complete and Solemnize
in face of Holy Church the said band of Matrimony with her Majesty, and love,
Honor, and serve her Highness, according to the place and Honor that it has
pleased her Majesty to accept him unto, and never to have any other to his Wife
during her Majesty's life time. In faith and witnessing whereof, her Highness,
and the said Earl have subscribed this present faithful promise, with their
hands, as follows, Day, Year and place aforsaid, before these witnesses;
George, Earl Huntly, and Master Thomas Hepburn, Parson of Old-Hanstock, etc.

Sic subscribetur, MARY R.
James Earl Bothwel.



Here note, that this Contract was made the fifth of April, within eight weeks
after the Murder of the King, which was slain the tenth of February before.
Also it was made seven days before that Bothwel was acquitted by corrupt
judgment of the said Murder.

Also it appears by the words of the Contract if self, that it was made
before sentence of Divorce between Bothwel and his former Wife. And also in
very truth was made before any suit of Divorce, intended or begun between him
and his former Wife, though some words in this Contract seem to say otherwise.
Which is thus proved. For this Contract is dated the fifth of April, and it
plainly appears by the judicial acts before the two several Ecclesiastical
ordinary Judges, wherein is contained the whole Process of the Divorce between
the said Earl, and Dame Jane Gordon his Wife, that one of the same Processes,
was intended and begun the 26 day of April, and the other the 27 day.

Also there are extent the Records of the Justices Court holden at Edinburgh
the said 12 day of April, some copies whereof have been exemplified and signed
with the hand of John Bellenden Clerk of the Court, among which is the
Endictment of Bothwel. The tenor of which Records, with the Assise and verdict
do here follow. CUria Iusticiariae S. D. N. Reginae, tenta and inchoata in
praetoris de Edinburgh duodecimo die mensis Aprilis, Anno 1567. per nobilem and
potentem Dominum Archibaldum Comitem Ergadiae, Dominum Campbel and Lorne
Iustitiarium generalem ejusdem S. D. N. Reginae, totius Regni sui ubilibet
constitutum Sen. vocatum, and curia legitime affirmata.



IN the which Court, appeared personally in Judgment, Mr. John Spens of Condie,
and Robert Creycghton of Chock, Advocates to our Sovereign Lady, in her name,
and there the said Mr. John Spens produced our Sovereign Ladies Letter execute
and indorsed, together with the Endictment; of the which Letters, indorsing
thereof, and Endictment, the Tenors hereafter follow, that is to say, MARY, by
the Grace of God, Queen of Scots, to our trusty and well beloved, William
Purwes, Mr. Lawson, and Gawine Ramsey, Messengers, our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally specially constituted, Greeting. Forasmuch as it is
humbly meant and showed unto us, by our trusty and beloved Clerks and
Counselors, Mr. John Spens of Condie, and Robert Creycghton of Chock, our
Advocates: that whereas they are informed that our trusty Cousin and
Counselor, Matthew Earl of Lenox, Father to the King our dearest Spouse, has
delated James Earl Bothwel, Lord Halis and Creycghton, etc. and certain others,
of the Treasonable, cruel, odious, and abominable slaughter and Murder of his
Grace, committed upon the ninth day of February last past, under silence of the
night, within his lodging, for the time, within our Bower of Edinburgh, near
the Church in the Field, upon provision, set purpose, and forethought Felony.
And has declared unto us the suspicion had of the said Earl and others, as
committers of the said odious, cruel and abominable deed. Whereto we being most
earnestly bent, minded, and willing to have trial taken therein, by order of
Justice, with all diligence and expedition possible, have with advice of the
Lords of our secret Council, and also of the humble desire of the said Earl
Bothwel, made in our and their presence, who offers himself willing to
undergo the Trial of a condign Assise, according to the Laws of our Realm for
declaring of this part, have ordained a Court of Justice, to be set and holden
in the Tol-booth of Edinburgh, the 12 day of April next ensuing, for executing
of Justice upon the said Earl, and otherwise, for the cruel, odious, foul, and
abominable crime and offense: as is more at large contained in an Act made in
the Books of our secret Council thereupon.

Our will therefore is, and we Charge you strictly, and command, that
immediately, at the sight of these our letters, ye go, and in our name and
Authority, warn the said Matthew Earl of Lenox, personally, or at his dwelling
place, and all other our liege People having or pretending to have interest in
the said matter by open Proclamation at the Market-crosses of our Burrows of
Edinburgh, Dunbarton, Glascow, Lanerk, and other places needful, to appear
before our Justice, or his deputies, in our Tol-booth of Edinburgh, the said
12. day of April next ensuing, to pursue and concur with us in the said action:
with certification to them, that if they fail, that our Justice or his
Deputies, will proceed and do Justice in the said matter the said day,
conformable to the Laws and Constitutions of our Realm, without any longer
delay or continuation: and that ye summon an Assise to this end, every person
under the pain of forty Pounds, as ye will answer to us thereupon. The which to
do, we commit to you, jointly and severally, our full power by these our
Letters, delivering them by you duly to be executed, and indorsed again to the
bearer.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the 27 of March, in the 25 year of our
Reign. 1567. Ex deliberatione Dominorum Concilii Reg. Sic subscribitur, MARY.

Indorsments of the said Letters.
UPon the 29 day of March, in the year of God 1567. I William Purwes messenger,
one of the Sheriffs in that part within constituted, past at command of these
our Sovereign Ladies Letters, and in her Graces Name and Authority, warned
Matthew Earl of Lennox, and all other her Majesty's lieges having or pretending
to have interess in the matter within specified, by open Proclamation at the
Market-cross of the Borough of Edinburgh, to appear before the Justice or his
Deputies in the Tol-booth of Edinburgh the 12 day of April next ensuing, to
pursue and concur with our said Sovereign Lady in the action within mentioned,
with certification as is within expressed, after the form and tenor of these
Letters, whereof I affixed one copy upon the said Market-cross. This I did
before these witnesses, John Anderson and David Lant, with diverse others. And
for more witnessing to this my execution and indorsment, my Signet is affixed.

UPon the last day of March, the first and second days of April, in the year of
God above written; I Gowine Ramsy Messenger, one of the Sheriffs in that part
within constituted, past at commandment of these our Sovereign Ladies Letters,
and in her Graces Name and Authority, warned the said Matthew Earl of Lennox,
at his dwelling places in Glascow and Dunbarton respectively, because I
searched, and sought, and could not apprehend him personally, and all other her
Majesty's lieges* having and pretending to have Interest to pursue in the
matter herein expressed, by Proclamation at the Market-Crosses of the Buroughs
of Glascow, Dunbarton, and Lanerk* for to appear before the Justice or his
Deputies in the said Tol-booth of Edinburgh, the said twelfth day of April next
to come, to pursue and concur with our said Sovereign Lady in the action within
written, with certification, as is within mentioned, after the form and tenor
of these Letters, whereof affixed one copy upon every one of the said
Market-Crosses. This I did before these Witnesses, George Herbesoun, Nicholas
Andro, Robert Letrik, Messenger, William Smollet, David Robertson, James
Smollet, John Hammelton, James Bannatine, and Robert Hammelton, with diverse
others. And for more witnessing hereof, my signet is affixed; Subscribed with
my hand,

Gawin Ramsy, Messenger.

UPon the first day of April. The year of God 1567. I William Lawson,
Messenger, Sheriff in that part within constituted, past at command of these
our Sovereign Ladies Letters, to the Market-Cross of Perth, and there by open
Proclamation lawfully warned Matthew Earl of Lennox, and all others our
Sovereign Ladies Leiges, having, or pretending to have interess to pursue James
Earl Bothwel, Lord Halis, and Creyghton, etc. and certain others, for the cruel
slaughter and murder of the King's Grace, and affixed one Copy upon the said
Crosses, after the form and tenor of these Letters. And this I did before these
Witnesses, James Marschel, Alex. Borthuike, and John Anderson, Messengers, with
diverse others. And for the more witnessing of this my Execution and Indorsment,
I have subscribed this with my hand,

Will. Lawson, Messenger.

The Indictment.
JAmes Earl Bothwell, Lord Halis, and Creyghton, etc. You are Indicted for
acting part of the cruel, odious, treasonable and abominable Slaughter and
Murder of the late, the right Excellent, right high and mighty Prince, the
King's Grace, dearest Spouse, for the time, to our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, under silence of Night, in his own Lodging, besides the Church in the
Field within this Burrow, he being taking the Nights rest, treasonably raising
fire within the same, with a great quantity of Powder; through force of the
which, the said whole Lodging was raised, and blown in the Air; and the said
late King was murdered treasonably and most cruelly slain and destroyed by you
therein upon set purpose, provision, and forethought Felony. And this you did
upon the Ninth day of February last past, under silence of the Night, as
abovesaid; as is notoriously known, the which you cannot deny.



UPon the which Production of the aforesaid Letters executed, indorsed and
Indicted, the said Advocate asked an Act of Court and Instruments, and desired
of the Justice Process agreeable thereto.

The said Letters being openly read in Judgment, with the Indorsments thereof,
the Justice by virtue of the same, caused to be called the said James Earl
Bothwell, as Defendant on the one part, and Matthew Earl of Lenox, and all
others our Sovereign Ladies Liege People, having or pretending to pursue in the
said matter, to appear before him in this Court of Justice, to pursue and
defend according to the Law.

Immediately after there appeared in Judgment, the said James Earl Bothwell,
and entered personally, and then made choice of Mr. David Borthuik of Luchthil,
and Mr. Edmund Hay to be Prelocutors for him, who also appeared personally in
Judgment, and were admitted by the Justice to that effect.

There also appeared Mr. Henry Kinrof, alleging to be Proctor for Andrew
Master of Errole, and produced in Judgment the Writing and Protestation under
written, desiring the same to be registered and inserted in the Books of
Adjournal, the tenor whereof follows.

The same day appeared Mr. Henry Kinrof Proctor for Andrew Master of Errole,
Constable of Scotland, and alleged that the Constables for the time, of this
Realm, has been at all times by past only Judges competent to all such Persons
as have been accused criminally, for committing of Slaughter, Murder, or of
Blood drawing near to the Princes Chamber, or within four Miles of the same.
And therefore the said Master now being Constable of this Realm, ought and
should be the competent Judge to James Earl Bothwell, and others his alleged
Accomplices called this day, and to be accused for acting any part of the
alleged Cruelty, treasonable slaughter of the late Henry King of Scots. And in
case Archibald Earl of Argyle, as Chief Justice of this Realm, or his Deputies
proceed in the said Cause, the said Master Henry Proctor aforesaid protests
solemnly, that the same proceeding therein, shall in no wise hurt, nor
prejudice the said Constable in his Office, Rights, title of Rights, Interests,
Jurisdiction, or Investment thereof in any sort, but that he may use and
exercise his said Jurisdiction in all such Cases in times coming, conform to
his Investment of the said Office, and use of Cognoscing used by his
Predecessors, and before him in like Causes. All which time he makes it known,
either by Investment or other ways sufficiently him to have Jurisdiction in
such Causes. And desires the same Protestation to be inserted in the Book of
Adjournal, and admit it under Protestation, that he affirm not the Lord Justice
Jurisdiction in any sort in proceeding in the said matter.

The Justice, being advised with the said Alledgeance and Protestation, found
by Interlocutor, and ordained that Process should be laid by him in this
matter, notwithstanding the same, in respect that nothing was shown by the said
Mr. Henry, to verify the Contents of the said Alledgeance and Protestation.
Whereupon the said Earl Brothwell asked a Note of Court and Instrument.

The said Matthew Earl of Lenox, and others our Sovereign Ladies Lieges, having
or pretending to have Interest to pursue in the said matter, being oftentimes
called, to have appeared and concurred with the said Advocates, in pursuing of
the said Action, Robert Cunningham appeared, alleging him Servant to the said
Matthew Earl of Lenox, and produced the Writing under written, which he
subscribed with his hand in Judgment; as he that had power to use the same, and
protested it, and desired to conform thereto in all points. Of the which
Writing the tenor follows. MY Lords, I am come here, sent by my Master my Lord
of Lenox, to declare the cause of his absence this day, and with his power as
the same bears. The cause of his absence is the shortness of time; and that he
is denied of his Friends and Servants, who should have accompanied him to his
honor and security of his life, in respect of the greatness of his Party, and
he having assistance of no Friends but only himself. And therefore his L.
commanded me to desire a sufficient Day, according to the weight of the Cause,
therefore he may keep the same. And if your L. will proceed at this present, I
protest that I may without any displeasure of any man, use these things
committed to my Charge by my Lord my Master: Whereof I take a Document.

Item, I protest, that if the Persons who pass upon Assize and Inquest of these
Persons that shall enter on pannal this day, clear the said Persons of the
Murder of the King, that it shall be wilful Error and not Ignorance, by reason
that it is notoriously known those Persons to be the Murderers of the King, as
my Lord my Master alleges, upon the which Protestation I require a Document.

Sic Subscribitur. ROBERT CUNNINGHAM.



Upon the Production of the which Writing and Protestation, the said Robert
asked Acts and Instruments.

The Justice, being advised with the aforesaid Writing and Protestation
produced, and used by the said Robert Cunningham in respect of the Letters and
Writings sent to our Sovereign by the said Matthew Earl of Lenox, produced it,
and read it in a Court, whereof the Copies are under written. By the which
Letters and Writings, the said Earl of Lenox desired a short and summary
Process to be deduced in the said matter, and also of the Act and Ordinance of
the Lords of the secret Council granted thereupon, and such like in respect of
the earnest insisting of the Advocates, desiring Process and right Suit of the
said Earl Bothwel's earnest Petition and Desire of a Trial to be had in the
said matter, with the Advice of the Lords and Barons assessors present, and by
an Interlocutor, that Process should be deduced in the said Action this day,
according to the Laws of this Realm, notwithstanding the Writing and
Protestation produced by the said Robert Cunningham, and likewise admit him to
concur and assist the said Advocates in the pursuance of the said Action, if he
pleased. Here follows the Copies of the Letters and Writings sent to the
Queens Majesty, by the said Earl of Lenox.
I Render most humble thanks unto your Majesty for your Gracious and
Comfortable Letter, which I received the 24th day of this instant. And whereas
I perceive by the same, that it is your Majesty's pleasure to remit the Trial
of this late odious Act to the time of a Parliament. May it please your
Majesty, although I am assured your Highness thinks the time as long as I do till
the matter be tried, and the Authors of the Deed condignly punished; yet I
shall humbly crave your Majesty's pardon in troubling your Highness so often
therein as I do, for the matter touches me so near, I beseech your Majesty,
most humbly to accept this my simple Advice in good part, as follows: Which is,
that whereas the time is long to the Parliament, this matter not being a
Parliament matter, but of such weight and validity, which ought rather to be
with all expedition and diligence sought out and punished, to the Example of
the whole World, as I know your Majesty's Wisdom considers the same far more
than my Wits can comprehend, yet forasmuch as I hear of certain Tickets that
have been put on the Tol-booth Door of Edinburgh, answering your Majesty's
first and second Proclamations, which mentions in special, the names of certain
Persons, devisers of the cruel Murder, I shall therefore most humbly beseech
Your Majesty, for the love of God, the Honor of your Majesty, your Realm, and
the Weal and Tranquillity thereof, that it would please your Majesty forthwith,
not only to apprehend and put in sure keeping the Persons named in the said
Tickets, but also with diligence, to assemble your Majesty's Nobility, and then
by open Proclamation, to admonish and require the Writers of the said Tickets
to appear according to the effect thereof; at the which time, if they do not,
your Majesty, may by advice of your Nobility and Council, relieve and set at
liberty the Persons named in the Ticket aforesaid. So shall your Majesty do an
honorable and godly Act in bringing the matter to such a narrow paint as either
the matter shall appear plainly before your Majesty, to the punishment of those
who have been the Authors of this cruel Deed, or else the said Tickets found
vain in their selves, and the Persons which are slandered to be exonerated and
set at liberty at your Majesty's pleasure. So I commit your Majesty to the
Pretection of Almighty God, to preserve you in Health, and most happy Reign. Of
Howstoun the 26th Day of February.

MAy it please your Majesty, where your Highness in your last Letter writes to
me, that if there be any Names in the Tickets, that were affixt upon the
Tolbooth Door of Edinburgh, that I think worthy to suffer a Trial for the
Murder of the King your Majesty's Husband, upon my Advertisement, your Majesty
shoud proceed to the Cognition taken, as may stand with the Laws of this Realm,
and being found culpable, shall see the punishment as rigorously executed as
the weight of the Crime deserves. May it please your Majesty, since the receipt
of your Highnesses Letter, I have still looked that some of the bloody
Murderers should have been openly known ere now. And seeing they are not yet,
I cannot find in my heart to conceal the matter any longer, but let your
Majesty understand the names of them whom I greatly suspect, that is to say;
the Earl Bothwel, Mr. James Balfor, and Gilbert Balfor his Brother, Mr. David
Chamer, Blackmaster, John Spens, Senior Francis, Bastian, John the Burdeavix,
and Joseph David's Brother. Which Persons I most entirely and humbly beseech
your Majesty, that according to my former Petition unto your Highness, it will
please, not only to apprehend and put in sure keeping, but as with diligence to
assemble your Majesty's whole Nobility and Council, and then to take such
perfect order of the aforementioned Persons, that they may be justly tried, as I
doubt not but in so doing the Spirit of God shall work in the said matter, that
the truth shall be known. So shall your Majesty do a most godly and honorable
Act, for your self being the Party as you are, a great Satisfaction it shall be
to all that belongs unto him that is gone, who was so dear unto your Highness.
And now, not doubting but your Majesty will take order in the matter according
to the weight of the Cause, which I most humbly beseech, I commit your Majesty
to the Protection of the Almighty God, who preserve you in Health, long Life,
and most happy Reign. Of Howstoun this Seventeenth of March.

Assizes.
Andro Earl of Rothes, George Earl of Caithnes, Gilbert Earl of Cassillis, Lord
John Hamilton, Commander of Arbroycht, Son to the Lord Duke. James Lord Rosse,
Robert Lord Sunple, John Maxwell Lord Hereif, Laurence Lord Oliphant, John
Master of Forvess, John Gordon of Lothinware, Robert Lord Boyd, James Cokbourn
of Launton, John Somervile of Cambusnethan, Mowbray of Bern Buxal, Ogilby of
Boyn.




THe forenamed Persons of Assize being chosen, admitted and sworn in Judgment,
as the use is. And therefore the said Earl Bothwell being accused by the said
Dictate of the Crime aforesaid, and the same being denied by him, and referred
to the deliverance of the said Assize, they removed out of the said Court, and
all together convened, and after long reasoning had by them upon the same
Dictate and Points thereof, they and eke one of them for thems^^ves voted,
delivered, and acquit the said James Earl Bothwell of act and ^^rt of the said
slaughter of the King, and Points of the said Dictate.

And since the said George Earl of Caithnes, Chancellor of the said Assizes in
his and their Names asked Instruments, that neither the said Advocates, nor the
said Robert Cunningham as have had Commission of my Lord of Lenox, nor no other
brought into them any Writing, Token, or Verification, whereby the Dictate
above written might be forfeit, nor the said Assize persuaded to deliver any
otherwise, than is above written. Nor yet was the said Dictate sworn, nor no
Party, except the said Advocates, competent to pursue the same, and therefore
in respect that they delivered according to their knowledge, protests that they
should incur no wilful Error in any wise hereafter. Which Instrument and
Protestation immediately after the re-entry of the said Earl of Caithnes
Chancellor, and one part of the named of the said Persons of Assize in the said
Court of Justiciary, before the Pronunciation of their Deliverance aforesaid at
the desire of the said Earl of Caithnes was openly read in Judgment. And
thereupon he of new asked Acts and Instruments, and protests in manner above
expressed. EXtractum de libro Actorum Adjournalis S. D. N. Regina* Per me
Ioannem Bellencen de Auchnoule militem, clericum justiciariae ejusdem
generalem. Sub meis signo and subscriptione mannalibus.

Joannes Bellenden Clericus Iusticiariae.



Note, That at the same time Protestation was made by George Earl of Caithnes,
Chancellor of the said Assize, that the said Dictate or Indictment was not in
this point true, viz. in alleging the Murder to be committed the 9th day of
February, for that indeed the Murder was committed the next day being the 10th
Day in the Morning, at two hours after Midnight, which in Law was and ought to
be truly accounted the 10th Day, and so the Acquittal that way but cavillingly
defended.

The Writings and Letters found in the said Casket, which are avowed to be
written with the Scottish Queens own hand. Certain French Sonnets written by
the Queen of Scots to Bothwell, before her marriage with him, and (as it is
said) while her Husband lived; but certainly before his Divorce from his Wife,
as the words themselves show, before whom she here prefers her self in
deserving to be beloved of Bothwell.
O Dieux ayez de moy compassion,
Et m' enseignez quelle preuve certain
Ie puis donner qui ne luy semble vain
De mon amor and ferme affection.
Las! n' est il pas ja en possession
Du corpse, du coeur qui ne refuse pain
Ny dishonneur, en la vie uncertain,
Offense de parents, ne pire affliction?
Pour luy tous mes ames j' estimemoins que rien,
Et de mes ennemis je veux esperer bien.
IN ay hazard pour luy and nom and conscience:
Ie veux pour luy au monde renoncer:
Ie veux mourir pour luy auancer.
Eve rest il plus pour prouver ma constance?
Enter ses mains and en son plein pouveir
Ie metz mon filz, mon honneur, and may vie,
Mon pais, mes subjectz mon ame assubjectie
Est tout a luy, and n'ay autoe vaulloir
Pour mon object que sans le decovoir
Suiure je veux malgre toute l' envy
Qu' issir en peult, Car je n' autre e vie
Que de ma foy, luy fair appercevoir
Que pour tempeste ou bonnace qui face.
Iamais ne veux changer demeure ou place.
Brief je feray de ma foy tell preuve,
Qu' il cognoistra sans fainte ma constance,
Non parmes pleurs ou fainte obeyssance,
Comme autres ont fait, mais par diverse espreuve.
Elle pour son honneur vous doibt obeyssance
Moy vous obeyssant in in puis recevoir blasme,
N' estat, a mo regret, comme elle vostre femme.
Et si n' aura pour tant an ce point preeminence.
Pour son profit elle use de constance,
Carce n'est peu d'honneur d'estre de voz biens dame
Et moy pour vois aimer j' en puis recevoir blasme
Et ne luy veux beder en toute l' observance
Elle de vostre mal n' a l' apprehension
Moy je n'ay null repos tant je crains l' appearance
Par l'aduis des parentz, elle eut vestre accointance
Moy maugre tous les mines vous port affection
Et de sa loyaute prenez ferme asseurance.
Par vous mon coeur and par vostre alliance
Elle a remis sa maison en honneur
Elle a jovy par vous la grandeur
Don't tous les siens n' ayent null asseurance
De vous mon bien elle a eu la constance,
Et a gaigne pour un temps vostre coeur,
Par vous elle a eu plaissren bon heur,
Et pour vous a receu honneur and reverence,
Et n' a per lu sin on la jovissance
D' un fascheux sot qu' elle aymoit cherement,
Ie ne la playns d' aymer donc ardamment,
Celuy qui n' a en sens, ny en vaillance,
En beauty, en bonte. ny en constance
Point de second. Ie vis en ceste foy.
Quant vous l' amioz, elle usoit de freideur.
Sy vous souffriez, pour s' amor passion
Qui vient d' aymer de trop d' affection,
Son doig monstroit, la tristesse de coeur
N' ayant plisir de vostre grand ardeur
En ses habitz, monstroit sans fiction
Qu' ellen' avoit paour qu' imperfection
^eust l' effacer horse de ce loyal coeur.
De vostre mort je ne vis la pea^u
Que meritoit tell Mary and seigneur.
Comme de vous elle a eu tout son bien
Et n' a prise ny jamais estime
Un si grand heur si non puis qu' il n' est sien
Et maintenant dit l' avoir tant aim.
Et maintenant elle commence a voir
Qu' olle estoit bien de mauvais jugement
De n' estimer l' amor d' un tell amant
Et voudroit bien mon amy decevoir
Par les escriptz tout sardez de scavoir
Qui pourtant n' est en son esprit croissant
Ains emprunte de quelque autheur luissant.
A faint tresbien un envoy sans l' avoir
Et toutesfois ses parolles sardez,
Ses pleurs, ses plaincts remplis de fictions,
Et ses bauts cris and lamentatious,
Ont tant gaigne qui par vous sont gardez,
Ses lettres escriptes ausquelles vous donnez soy
Et si l' aymez and croyez plus que moy.
Vous la croyez, las! trop je l' appercoy
Et vous doutez, de ma ferme constance,
O mon seul bien and mon seul esperience,
Et ne vous puis je asseurer de ma foy
Vous m'estimez ledger que je voy,
Et si n' avez en moy null asseurance,
Et soupconnez mon coeur sans appearance,
Vous deffiant a trop grand tort de moy.
Vous ignorez l' amor que je vous port,
Vous soupconnex qu' autre amor me transporte,
Vous estimez mes parolles du vent,
Vous depeignez de cire mon las coeur,
Vous me pensez femme sans jugement.
Et tout cela augmente mou ardeur.
Mon amor croist and plus en plus croistra
Tant que je viuray, and tiendray a grandheur.
Tant seulement d' avoir part en ce coeur
Verse qui en fin mon amor persistra
Si tres a clair que jamais n' en en doutra.
Pour luy je veux rechercher la grandeur,
Et feray tant qu' en vray cognoistra,
Que je n' ay bien, heur, ne contentement,
Qu' a l' obeyr and servir loyaument.
Pour luy jattend toute bonne fortune.
Pour luy je veux garder sante and vie.
Pour luy tout uertu de suiure j' ay envy,
Ee sans changer me trouvera tout' une.
Pour luy aussi je jette maintes larmes.
Premier quand il se fist de ce corpse possesseur,
Du quel alors il n' avoit pas le coeur.
Puis me donna un autre dur alarm,
Quand il versa de son sang mainte dragme,
Don't de grief il me vint laisser doleur*
Qui m' en pensa oster la vie, and frayeur
De perdre las! le seul rempar qui m' arm.
Pour luy depuis jay mesprise l' honneur
Ce qui nous peult seul pourvoir de bonheur.
Pour luy j' ay hazard grandeur and conscience.
Pour luy tous mes parentz j' ay quite, and amiss,
Et tous autres respectz sont apart mis,
Brief de vous seul je cherche l' alliance.
De vous je dis seul soustein de ma vie
Tant seulement je cherche m' asseurer,
Et si ose de moy tant presumer
De vous gaigner maugre toute l' envy.
Car c' est le seul desir de vostre chere amie,
De vous servir and loyaument aymer,
Et tous malheurs moins que rien estimer,
Et vostre volonte de lamien ne sujure.
Vous cognostrez avecques obeyssance
De mon loyal devoir n' omittant lascience
A quoy je estudieray pour tousiours vous complaire
Sans aymer rien que vous, soubz la subjection*
De qui je veux sans nulle fiction
Viure and mourir and a ce j' obtempere.
Mon coeur, mon sang, mon ame, and mon soucy
Las, vous m' avez promis qu' aurons ce plaisir
De deviser avecques vous a loysir*
Toute la nuict, ou je languis jey,
Ayant le coeur d' extreme paour transy,
Pour voir absent le but de mon deslr
Crainte d' ouhlier un coup me vient a saisir:
Et l' autre fois je crains que rendurcie
Soit contra moy vostre amiable coeur
Par quelque dit d' un meschant ramporteur.
Un autre fois je crains quelque aventure
Qui par chemin detourne mon amant,
Par un fascheux and nouveau accident.
Dieu detourne toute malheureux augure.
Ne vous voyant selon qu' avez promis
IN ay mis la main au papier pour escrire
D'un different que je voulu transcrire.
Ie ne scay pas qael sera vostre aduis
Mais Ie scay bien qui mieux aymer scaura,
Vous diriez bien que plus y gaignera.
O Goddess have of me Compassion,
And show what certain Proof
I may give, which shall not seem to him vain,
Of my Love and fervent Affection.
He alas, is he not already in possession
Of my Body, of Heart, that refuses no pain?
Nor Dishonor in this life uncertain,
Offense of Friends, nor worse affliction,
For him I esteem all my Friends less than nothing,
And I will have good hope of my enemies.
I have put in hazard for him both Fame and Conscience,
I will for his sake renounce the World,
I will die to set him forward.
What remains to give proof of my Conscience?
In his hands and in his full power,
I put my Son, my Honor, and my Life,
My Country, my Subjects, my Soul, all subdued
To him, and has none other will
For my scope, which without deceit,
I will follow in spite of all Envy
That may ensue: for I have no other desire,
But to make him perceive my faithfulness,
For storm or fair weather that may come,
Never will it change Dwelling, or Place.
Shortly I shall give of my truth such proof,
That he shall know my Constancy without fiction,
Not by my Weeping, or feigued Obedience,
As other have done: but by other experience.
She for her Honor owes you Obedience:
I in obeying you may receive Dishonor,
Not being (to my Displensure) your Wife as she
And yet in this point she shall have no Pre-eminence.
For it is no little Honor to be Mistress of your Goods,
And I for loving of you may receive blame,
And I will not be overcome by her in loyal Observance.
She has no apprehension of your Evil,
I fear so all appearing evil that I can have no rest,
She had your acquaintance by consent of her Friends,
I against all their Will have born you Affection,
And not the less (my Heart) you doubt of my Constancy,
And of her Faithfulness you have firm assurance.
By you (my Heart) and by your alliance
She has restored her House unto Honor,
By you she is become to that Greatness,
Of which her Friends had never assurance,
Of you (my Wealth) she got the Acquaintance,
And has conquered the same time your Heart.
By you she has Pleasure and good luck,
And by you has received Honor and Reverence,
And has not lost but the enjoying
Of one unpleasant Fool which she loved dearly.
Then I moan her not to love ardently
Him that has none in Wit, in Manhood,
In Beauty, in Bounty, in Truth, nor in Constancy,
Any second: I live in the belief.
When you loved her she used coldness,
If you suffer for her love passion.
That comes of too great Affection of life,
Her Sadness shows the Dolor of her Heart,
Taking no pleasure of your vehement Burning,
In her clothing she shows unfeignedly,
That she had no fear, that Imperfection
Could deface her out of that true heart.
I did not see in her the Fear of your Death,
That was worthy of such a Husband and Lord.
Shortly she has of you all her Wealth.
And has never weighed nor esteemed
On so great hap, but since it was not hers,
And now she says that she loves him so well.
And now she begins to see,
That she was of very evil Judgment,
To esteem the Love of such a Lover,
And would fain deceive my Love.
By Writings and painted Learning,
Which not the less did not breed in her brain,
But borrowed from some feat Author,
To feign one Story and have none.
And for all that her painted Words,
Her Tears, her Plaints full of dissimulation,
And her high Cries and Lamentations
Has won that Point, that you keep in store,
Her Letters and Writings, to which you give trust,
Yea, and love and believe her more than me.
You believe her (alas) I perceive it too well,
And call in doubt my firm Constancy
(O mine only Wealth, and mine only Hope)
And I cannot assure you of my truth.
I see that you esteem me light,
And be no way assured of me,
And do suspect (my Heart) without any appearing cause,
Discrediting me wrongfully.
You do not know the Love I bear to you,
You suspect that other Love transporteth me.
You think my Words be but wind:
You paint my very Heart, as it were of wax,
You imagine me a Woman without Judgment.
And all that increases my burning.
My Love increases, and more and more will increase,
So long as I shall live, and I shall hold for a great Felicity
To have only part in that Heart,
To which at length my Love shall appear,
So clearly, that he shall never doubt,
For him I will strive against one World,
For him I will renounce greatness,
And shall do so much that he shall know
That I have no Wealth, Hap, nor Contentation,
But to obey and serve him truly.
For him I attend all good Fortune.
For him I will conserve Health and Life.
For him I desire to ensue Courage,
And he shall ever find me unchangeable.
For him also I powered* out many Tears,
First when he made himself Possessor of this Body,
Of the which then he had not the Heart.
After he did give me one other hard Charge,
When he bled of his Blood great quantity,
Through the great Sorrow of the which came to me that dolor,
That almost carried away my Life, and the Fear
To lose the only Strength that armed me,
For him since I have despised Honor,
The thing only that brings Felicity.
For him I have hazarded Greatness and Conscience.
For him I have forsaken all Kindred and Friends,
And set aside all other Respects,
Shortly, I seek the Alliance of you only.
Of you I say the only upholder of my Life,
I only seek to be assured,
Yea, and dare presume so much of my self,
To win you in syite of all Envy:
For that is the only Desire of your dear love,
To serve and love you truly,
And to esteem all this Hap less than nothing,
And to follow your Will with mine,
You shall know with Obedience,
Not forgetting the Knowledge of my loyal Duty,
The which I shall study to the end that I may ever please you,
Loving nothing but you, in the Subjection
Of whom I will without any fiction,
Live and die, and this I consent.
My Heart, my Blood, my Soul, my Care,
Alas you had promised that I should have that Pleasure,
To devise with you at leisure.
All the Night where I lie and languish here,
My Heart being overset with extreme Fear
Seeing absent the Sum of my desire.
Fear of forgetting sometime takes me,
And other Times I fear that loving Heart,
Be not hardened against me
By some saying of some wicked Reporter.
Other Times I fear some Adventure,
That by the way should turn back my Love
By some troublesome and new Accident.
O God turn back all unhappy Augure.
Not seeing you as you had promised,
I put my Hand to the Paper to write,
Of one difference that I have will it copy.
I cannot tell what shall be your Judgment,
But I know well who can best love,
You can tell who shall win most.
A Letter written by her from Glascoe to Bothwell, proving her Hate to her
Husband, and some suspicions of practicing his Death, which Letter was written
in French, and here ensues, translated word for word.
IL semble qu' avecques vostre absence soit joint l' oubly, veu qu' au partir
vous me promistes de vos novelles. Et toutes foys je n' en puis apprendre, etc.

IT appears, that with your absence there is also joined forgetfulness, seeing
that at your departing you promised to make me Advertisement of your News from
time to time. The waiting upon them yesterday, caused me to be almost in such
Joy as I will be at your returning, which you have delayed longer than your
promise was. As to me, howbeit, I have no further News from you according to my
Commission, I bring the Man with me to Cragmiller upon Monday, where he will be
all Wednesday, and I will go to Edinburgh to draw Blood of me, if, in the mean
time, I get no News to the contrary from you. He is more Gay than ever you saw
him, he puts me in remembrance of all things that may make me believe he loves
me. Perhaps you will say that he makes love to me: Of the which I take so great
pleasure, that I enter never where he is, but incontinent I take the sickness
of my sore Side, I am so troubled with it. If Pareis brings me that which I
send him for, I trust it shall amend me. I pray you advertise me of your News
at length, and what I shall do, in case you be not returned when I am come
there, for in case you work not wisely I see that the whole burden of this will
fall upon my Shoulders. Provide for all things, and Discourse upon it first
with your self. I send this by Betoun, who goes to one day of Law of the Lord
of Belsours. I will say no further, saving I pray you to send me good News of
your Voyage. From Glascoe this Saturday in the Morning.

Another Letter to Bothwell concerning the Hate of her Husband, and Practice of
his Murder.
EStant party du lieu ou j' avois laisse mon coeur il se peult aysemente juger
quelle estoit ma contenance, veu ce qui peult un corpse sans coeur, qui a este
cause que jusques a la disnee je n' ay pas tenu grand propos, aussi person ne
s' est voulu advancer jugeant bien qu' il n' y faisoit bon, etc.

BEing departed from the place where I left my heart, it is easy to be judged
what was my countenance, seeing that I was even as much as one body without a
heart, which was the occasion that while dinner time I held purpose to no body,
nor yet durst any present themselves unto me, judging that it was not good so
to do. Four miles ere I came to the Town, one Gentleman of the Earl of Lenox
came and made his Commendations unto me, and excused him that he came not to
meet me, by reason that he durst not enterprise the same, because of the rude
words that I had spoken to Cunningham, and he desired that he should come to
the Inquisition of the matter that I suspected him of. This last speaking was
of his own head without any Commission. I answered to him that there was no
receipt could serve against fear, and that he would not be afraid in case he
were not culpable; and that I answered but rudely to the doubts that were in
his Letters. So that I made him hold his Tongue. The rest were too long to
write. Sir James Hamilton met me, who showed that the other time, when he heard
of my coming, he departed away, and sent Houston to show him that he would
never have believed that he would have pursued him, nor yet accompanied him
with the Hamiltons. He answered, that he was only come but to see me, and that
he would neither accompany Stewart nor Hamilton, but by my Commandment. He
desired that he would come and speak with him; he refused it. The Lord of Luse,
Hounston and Cauldwellis his Son, with forty Horse or thereabout came and met
me. The Lord of Luse said that he was charged to one day of Law, by the King's
Father, which should be this day, against his own hand writing, which he has.
And yet notwithstanding, knowing of my coming it is delayed, he was inquired to
come to him, which he refused, and swears that he will endure nothing of him.
Never one of that Town came to speak to me, which causes me to think that they
are his, and nevertheless he speaks good, at the least his Son. I see no other
Gentleman but they of my company. The King sent for Ioachim yesternight, and
asked of him, why I lodged not beside him, and that he would rise the sooner if
that were, and wherefore I come, if it was for good Appointment, and if you
were there in particular, and if I had made my Estate, if I had taken Pareis
and Gilbert to write to me, and that I would send This bearer will tell you
somewhat upon this.
Joseph away. I am abashed who has shown him so far, yea, he spoke even of the
Marriage of Bastian. I inquired him of his Letters, whereunto he complained of
the Cruelty of some, answered that he was astonished, and that he was so glad
to see me, that he believed to die for gladness, he found great fault that I
was pensive, I departed to Supper, this Bearer will tell you of my arriving, he
prayed me to return, the which I did; he declared unto me his sickness, and
that he would make no Testament but only leave all things to me, and that I was
the cause of his Malady, because of the regret that he had that I was so
strange unto him. And thus he said, you ask me what I mean by the Cruelty
contained in my Letter, it is of you alone that will not accept of my offers
and repentance. I confess that I have failed, but not into that which I ever
denied, and such like has fallen to sundry of your Subjects which you have
forgiven. I am young. You will say, that you have forgiven me oftentimes, and
yet that I return to my faults. May not any Man of my Age for lack of Counsel
fall twice or thrice, or in lack of his Promise, and at last repent himself,
and be chastised by experience? If I may obtain pardon, I protest I shall never
make fault again. And I crave no other thing, but that we may be at Bed and
Board together as Husband and Wife: and if you will not consent hereunto, I
will never rise out of this bed. I pray you tell me your Resolution. God knows
how I am punished for making my God of you, and for having no other thought but
on you; and if at any time I offend you, you are the cause, because when any
offends me, if for my Refuge I might complain unto you, I would speak it unto
no other body; but when I hear any thing, not being familiar with you,
necessity constrains me to keep it in my Breast; and that causes me to try my
Wit for very anger. I answered straight unto him, But that would be overlong
to write at length. I asked why he would pass away in the English Ship? He
denies it, and swears thereunto; but he grants that he spoke with the Men.
After this, I inquired of the Inquisition of Highgates; he denied the same,
while I showed him the very Words were spoken. At which time he said, that
Minto had advertised him that it was said that some of the Council had brought
one Letter to me to be subscribed to put him in Prison, and to slay him if he
made resistance. And he asked the same of Minto himself, who answered, That he
believed the same to be true. In the Morning I will speak to him upon this
point. As to the rest, William Highgates he confessed it; but it was the
Morning after my coming ere he did it. He would very fain that I should lodge
in his Lodging; I refused it, and said to him, that he behoved to be purged,
and that could not be done here: he said to me, I hear say you have brought one
Letter with you, but I had rather have passed with you. I think he believed
that I would have sent him away Prisoner; I answered, That I would take him
with me to Cragmillar, where the Physician and I might help him, and not be far
from my Son: he answered, that he was ready when I pleased, so I would assure
him of his Request; he desires no body to see him; he is angry when I speak of
Walcar, and says, that he shall pluck the ears from off his Head, and that he
lies; for I inquired him upon that, and that he was angry with some of the
Lords, and would threaten them; he denies that, and says, he loves them all,
and prays me to give trust to nothing against him, as to me he would rather
give his Life ere he did any displeasure to me. And after this he showed me of
so many little flatteries, so coldly, and so wisely, that you will be ashamed
thereat. I had almost forgot that he said he could not doubt of me in this
purpose of Highgates, for he would never believe that I who was his proper
Flesh would do him any evil, as well it was shown that I refused to subscribe
the same: but as to any others that would pursue him, at least he should sell
his Life dear enough; but he suspected no body nor yet would not, but would
love all that I loved; he would not let me depart from him, but desired that I
should wake with him: I make it seem that I believe that all is true, and takes
heed thereto, and excused my self for this night that I could not wake: he says
he sleeps not well; you saw him never better, nor speak more humble; and if I
had not a proof of his heart of Wax, and that mine were not of a Diamond,
whereinto no shot can make breach, but that which comes forth of your hand, I
would have almost had pity of him. But fear not, the place shall hold unto the
death* Remember in recompense thereof, that ye suffer not yours to be won by
that false Race that will travel no less with you for the same. I believe they
have been at School together; he has ever the tear in his Eye; he salutes every
body, yea unto the least, and makes piteous moan unto them to make them have
pity on him. This day his Father bled at the mouth and nose; ghess what Presage
that is: I have not yet seen him, he keeps his Chamber. The King desires that I
should give him Meat with mine own hands: but give no more trust where you are
than I shall do here. This is my first Journey; I shall send the same to
morrow. I write all things; howbeit they be of little weight, to the end that
ye may take the best of all to judge upon. I am in doing of a work here that I
hate greatly. Have you not a desire to laugh to see me lie so well, at the
least to dissemble so well, and to tell him truth betwixt hands. He showed me
almost all that is in the Name of the Bishop and Sunderland, and yet I have
never touched one word of that you showed me, but only by force flattering, and
to pray him to assure himself of me; and by complaining on the Bishop I have
drawn it all out of him: you have heard the rest. We are coupled with two false
Races, the Devil sunder us, and God knit us together for the most faithful
couple that ever he united. This is my Faith, I will die in it. Excuse it* I
write evil, you may ghess the half of it, but I cannot mend it, because I am
not well at ease, and very glad to write unto you when the rest are asleep,
since I cannot sleep as they do, and as I would desire, that is, in your Arms my
dear Love, whom I pray God to preserve from all evil, and send you repose. I am
going to seek mine till the Morning, when I shall end my Bible; but I am vexed
that it stops me to write news of my self unto you, because it is so long.
Advertise me what you have deliberated to do in the matter, you know upon this
point, to the end that we may understand each other well, that nothing thereof
be spilt. I am weary, and going to sleep, and yet I cease not to scribble all
this Paper in so much as remains thereof. Wearied might this pocky man be, that
causes me to have so much pain, for without him I should have a far pleasanter
Subject to discourse upon. He is not overmuch deformed, yet he has received
very much. He has almost slain me with his breath, it is worse than your
Uncles, and yet I came no nearer unto him but in a Chair at the beds feet, and
being at the other end thereof. The message of the Father in the Gate.

The purpose of Sir James Hamilton.

Of that the L. of Lusse showed me of the delay.

Of the demands that he asked of Ioachim.



Of my estate, of my company, of the occasion of my coming, and of Joseph.
Item, the purpose that he and I had together.



Of the desire he has to please me, and of his repentance. Of the
interpretation of his Letter.

Of William Highgates matter of his departing.

Of Monseur de Levingston.



I had almost forgot that Monseur de Levingston said in the Lady Reres ear at
Supper, that he would drink to the folk I wist of, if I would pledge them. And
after Supper he said to me when I was leaning upon him warming me at the fire;
you have fair going to see such folk, yet you cannot be so welcome unto them,
as you left some body this day in sadness, that will never be merry while he
see you again. I asked of him, who that was? with that he thrust my body and
said, that some of his folks had seen you in saschery, you may ghess at the
rest. I wrought this day while it was two hours upon this bracelet, for to put
the key of it within the lock thereof, which is coupled underneath with two
cordwins. I have had so little time that it is evil made; but I shall make one
fairer in the mean time. Take heed that none that is here see it, for all the
world will know it; because for have it was made in their presence. I am now
passing to my intended purpose. You make me dissemble so far that I have
horror thereat; and you cause me to do almost the office of a Traitor:
Remember how if it were not to obey you, I had rather be dead ere I did it; my
heart bleeds at it. So that, he will not come with me except upon condition
that I will promise to him that I shall be at Bed and Board with him as before,
and that I shall leave him not after; and doing this upon my word he will do
all things that I please, and come with me; but he prayed me to remain with him
while another morning. He spoke very bravely at the beginning, as this Bearer
will show you, upon the purpose of the Englishmen, and of his departing; but
in the end he returned again to his humility. He showed amongst other purposes
that he knew well enough, that my Brother had showed me that thing which he had
spoken in Scriveling; of the which he denies the one half, and above all, that
ever he came in his Chamber. For to make him trust me, it behoved me to feign
in some things with him; therefore when he requested me to promise unto him,
that when he was whole we should have both one Bed, I said to him, feigningly
and making me believe his premises, that if he changed not purposes betwixt
this and that time, I would be content therewith; but in the mean time I bad
him take heed that he let no body know thereof; because to speak amongst our
selves the Lords could not be offended, nor will evil therefore. But they would
fear in respect of the boasting he made of them, that if ever we agreed
together* he should make them know the little account they took of him; and
that he counseled me not to purchase some of them by him; they for this cause
would be in jealousy, if attains without their knowledge, I should break the
play set up in the contrary in their presence. He said very joyfully: And think
you they will esteem you the more for that? But I am very glad that you speak
to me of the Lords, for I believe at this time you desire that we should live
together in quietness; for if it were otherways, greater inconvenience might
come to us both than we are aware of; but now I will do whatever you will do,
and will love all that you love, and desire you to make them love in like
manner; for since they seek not my life, I love them all equally. Upon this
point the Bearer will show you many small things. Because I have overmuch to
write, and it is late, I give trust unto him upon your word. So that he will go
upon my word to all places. Alas, I never deceived any body, But I remit me
altogether to your will. Send me Advertisement what I shall do, and whatsoever
thing shall come thereof I shall obey you. Advise too with your self if you can
find any more secret invention by medicine: for he should take medicine and the
bath at Cragmillar. He may not come forth of the house this long time. So that
by all that I can learn, he is in great suspicion; and yet notwithstanding he
gives credit to my word; but yet not so far as that he will show any thing to
me. But nevertheless I shall draw it out of him, if you will that I avow all
unto him. But I will never rejoice to defame any body that trusts in me; yet
notwithstanding you may command me in all things. Have no evil opinion of me
for that cause, by reason you are the occasion of it your self, because for
mine own particular revenge I would not do it to him. He gives me some checks
of that which I feared, yea even in the quick, he says thus far, that his
faults were published, but there is that commits faults that believe they will
never be spoken of, and yet they will speak of great and small. As toward the
Lady Reres he said, I pray God that she may serve you for your Honor. And
said, it is thought, and he believes it to be true, that I have not the Power
of my self over my self, and that because of the refuse I made of his offers.
So that, for certainty he suspects of the thing you know, and of his life. But
as to the last, how soon that I spoke two or three good words unto him, he
rejoices, and is out of doubt. I saw him not this evening to end your bracelet,
to the which I can get no locks, it is ready for them, and yet I fear it will
bring some evil, and may be seen if you chance to be hurt. Advertise me if you
will have it, and if you will have more silver, and when I shall return, and
how far I may speak. He inrages when he hears of Lethington, or of you, or of
my Brother. Of your Brother he speaks nothing, he speaks of the Earl of Argyle.
I am in fear when I hear him speak; for he assures himself that he has not one
evil opinion of him. He speaks nothing of them that is ought neither good or
evil, but flies that point. His Father keeps his Chamber, I have not seen him.
All the Hamiltons are here, that accompanies me very honorably. All the Friends
of the other conveys me when I go to see him. He desires me to come, and see
him rise the Morn betime. For to make short, this Bearer will tell you the
rest. And if I learn any thing here, I will make you a Memorial at Even. He
will tell you the occasion of my remaining. Burn this Letter, for it is over
dangerous, and nothing well said in it; for I am thinking upon nothing but
fraud. If you be in Edinburgh at the receipt of it, send me word soon. Be not
offended, for I give not overgreat credit. Now seeing to obey you, my dear
Love, I spare neither Honor, Conscience, Hazard, nor Greatness whatsoever,
take it I pray you in good part; end not after the Interpretation of your false
good Brother; to whom I pray you give no credit, Huntley.
against the most faithful Lover that ever you had, or ever shall have. See not
her whose faint Tears should not be so much praised nor esteemed, as the true
and faithful Travels, which I sustain for to merit her place. For obtaining of
the which against my Nature, I betray them that Bothwel's own Wife.
may impeach me. God forgive me, and God give you, my only Love, the Hap and
Prosperity, which your humble and faithful Love desires of you, who hopes to be
shortly another thing to you for the reward of my irksom Travels. It is late, I
desire never to cease from writing unto you, yet now after the kissing of your
Hands, I will end my Letter. Excuse my evil Writing, and Read it twice over.
Excuse that thing that is scribled, for I had no Paper yesterday when I writ
that of the Memorial. Remember your Love, and write unto her, and that very
often. Love me as I shall do you. Remember you of the purpose of the Lady Reres,
of the Englishmen, of his Mother, of the Earl of Argile, of the Earl Bothwell,
of the Lodging in Edinburgh.

Another Letter to Bothwell, concerning certain Tokens that she sent him.
Monsieur,
SI l'envy de vostre absence, celuy de vostre oubly, la crainte du danger, tant
prouve d' un chacun a vostre tant amee person, etc.

My Lord,
IF the displeasure of your Absence, of your Forgetfulness, the fear of danger
so promised by every one to your so loved Person, may give me Consolation, I
leave it to you to judge, seeing the mishap that my cruel lot and continual
misadventure, has hitherto promised me following the misfortunes and fears as
well of late as of a long time bypast, the which you do know. But for all that
I will in no wise accuse you, neither of your little remembrance, neither of
your little care, and least of all your Promise broken, or of the coldness of
your Writing, since I am else so far made yours, that that which pleases you is
acceptable to me, and my thoughts are so willingly subdued unto yours, that I
suppose that all that comes of you, proceeds not of any of the Causes
aforesaid, but rather for such as be just and reasonable, and such as I desire
my self. Which is the final Order that you promised to take, for the surety and
honorable Service of the only Supporter of my life: for which alone I will
preserve the same, and without the which I desire not but sudden Death. And to
testify unto you how lowly I submit me under your Commandments, I have sent
you in sign of homage by Pareis, the Ornament of the Head, which is A Head.
the chief guide of the other Members; inferring thereby, that by the seizing
of you in the possession of the spoil of that which is principal, the remnant
cannot be but subject unto you, and with consenting of the heart. In place
whereof, since I have else left it unto you, I send unto you one Sepulture of
hard stone colored with black, sawin with tears and bones. The stone I compare
to my Heart, that as it is carved in one sure Sepulture or harbor of your
Commandments, and above The Queens Heart.
all of your Name and Memory, that are therein enclosed, as is my Heart in this
Ring, never to come forth while Death grant unto you one Trophy of Victory of
my Bones, as the Ring is filled, in sign you have made one full Conquest of me,
of mine Heart, and unto that my Bones are left unto you, in remembrance of your
Victory, and my acceptable love and willingness, for to be better bestowed than
I merit. The ameling that is about is black, which signifies the stedfastness
of her that sends the same. The tears are without number, so are the fears to
displease you; the tears for your Absence, the disdain that I cannot be in
outward effect yours, as I am without faintness of Heart and Spirit, and of
good reason, though my Merits were much greater than that of the most profit
that ever was, and such as I desire to be, and shall take pains in Conditions
to imitate, for to be bestowed worthily under your Regiment* My only Wealth,
receive therefore in as good part the same, as I have received your Marriage
with extreme Joy, that which shall not part forth of my bosom while that
Marriage of our Bodies be made in public, as sign of all that I either hope or
desire of Bliss in this World. Yet, my Heart, fearing to displease you, as much
in the reading hereof, as it delights me in the writing, I will make an end,
after that I have kissed your Hand, with as great affection as I pray God (O
the only supporter of my Life) to give you long and blessed Life, and to me
your good Favor, as the only good that I desire, and to the which I pretend: I
have shown unto this Bearer that which I have learned, to whom I remit me,
knowing the Credit that you give him, as she does, that will be for ever unto
you an humble and obedient lawful Wife, that for ever dedicates unto you her
Heart, her Body, without any Change as unto him that I have made Possessor of
my Heart, of which you may hold you assured, that unto the Death shall no ways
be changed for; evil nor good shall never make me go from it.

Another Letter to Bothwell of her Love to him.
JAy veille plus tard la haut que je n' eusse fait, si ce n'eust este pour
tirer ce que ce porteur vous dira, que je treuve la plus belle commodite pour
excuser vostre affair qui ce pourroit presenter, etc.

I Have waked later their up then I would have done, if it had notbeen to draw
something out of him, which this Bearer will show you, which is the fairest
Commodity, that can be offered to excuse your Affairs. I have promised to bring
him to him in the Morn. Put order to it if you find it good. Now Sir, I have
broken my Promise, because you commanded me neither to write nor send unto you;
yet I have not done this to offend you. And if you knew the fear that I have
presently, you would not have so many contrary suspicions in your thought,
which notwithstanding I treat and cherish as proceeding from the thing in the
World that I most desire and seek fastest to have, which is your good Grace. Of
the which my Behavior shall assure me; as to me I shall never despair of it.
And prays you according to your Promise to discharge your Heart unto me;
otherwise I will think that my evil and the good handling of her that has not
the third part of the Faithful, nor willing Obedience unto you that I bear, has
won against my will that advantage over me, which the second Love of Jason won.
Not that I will compare you to one so unhappy as he was, nor yet my self to one
so unpitiful a Woman as she. Howbeit you cause me to be somewhat like unto her
in any thing that touches you, or that may preserve and keep you unto her, to
whom only you appertain; if it be so that I may appropriate that which is won
through faithful, yea only loving of you, as I do and shall do all the days of
my life, for pain or evil that can come thereof. In recompense of the which,
and of all the evils which you have been cause of to me, remember you upon the
place here beside. I crave with that you keep Promise to me in the Morn, but
that we may meet together, and that you give no faith to suspicions without the
certainty of them. And I crave no other thing of God, but that you may know
that thing that is in my Heart, which is yours, and that he may preserve you
from all evil, at least so long as I have life, which I repute not precious
unto me, except in so far as it and I both are agreeable unto you: I am going
to bed, and will bid you good Night. Advertise me timely in the Morning how you
have fared, for I will be in pain until I get word. Make good watch, if the
Bird get out of the Cage, or without her Mate, as the Turtle, I shall remain
alone to lament your absence how short that soever it be. This Letter will do
with a good Heart that thing, which I cannot do my self, if it be not that I
have fear that you are in sleeping. I durst not write this before Joseph,
Bastian, and Ioachim, that did but depart even when I began to write.

Another Letter to Bothwel concerning the departure of Margaret Carwood, who
was privy and a helper of all their love.
MOn coeur helas! faul li que la folly d' une femme, don't vous cognoissez
assez l' in gratitude verse moy, soit cause de vous donner deplasir, etc.

MY heart, alas, must the folly of a woman whose thankfulness toward me you do
sufficiently know, be occasion of displeasure unto you? considering that I
could not have remedied thereunto without knowing it? And since that I perceive
it, I could not tell it you, for that I knew not how to govern my self therein.
For neither in that, nor in any other thing, will I take upon me to do any
thing without knowledge of your will. Which I beseech you let me understand,
for I will follow it all my life, more willingly than you shall declare it to
me. And if you do not send me word this night what you will that I shall do, I
will rid my self of it, and hazard to cause it to be enterprised and taken in
hand; which might be hurtful unto that whereunto both we do tend. And when she
shall be married, I beseech you give me one, or else I will take such as shall
content you, for their conditions, but as for their tongues or faithfulness
toward you, I will not answer. I beseech you that an opinion of another person
be not hurtful in your mind to my constancy. Mistrust me, but then I will put
you out of doubt and clear my self. Refuse it not, my dear life, and suffer me
to make you some proof by my obedience, my faithfulness, constancy, and
voluntary subjection, which I take for the pleasantest good that I might
receive, if you will accept it, and make no ceremony at it, for you could do me
no greater outrage, nor give more mortal grief.

Another Letter sent from Sterling to Bothwell, concerning the practice for her
Ravishment.
MOnsieur helas pourquoy est vostre fiance mise en pessonne si indigne, pour so
up conner ce qui est entierement vostre. IN enrage, vous m' aviez promise, etc.

ALas, my Lord, why is your trust put in a person so unworthy, to mistrust that
which is wholly yours? I am mad. You had promised me that you would resolve
all, and that you would send me word every day what I should do, you have done
nothing thereof. I advertised you well to take heed of your false Brother in
law; he came to me, and without showing me any thing from you, told me that you
had willed him to write to you that that I should say, and where and when you
should come to me, and that that you should do touching him, and thereupon has
preached unto me that it was a foolish enterprise, and that with mine honor I
could never marry you, seeing that being married you did carry me away, and
that his folks would not suffer it, and that the Lords would unsay themselves,
and would deny that they had said. To be short, he is all contrary. I told him,
that seeing I was come so far, if you not withdraw your self of your self, that
no persuasion nor death it self should make me fail of my promise. As touching
the place, you are too negligent (pardon me) to remit your self thereof unto
me. Choose it your self, and send me word of it. And in the mean time I am sick,
I will differ, as touching the matter it is too late. It was not long of me
that you have not thought thereupon in time. And if you had not more changed
your mind since mine absence than I have, you should not be now to ask such
resolving. Well there wants nothing of my part, and seeing that your
negligence does put us both in the danger of a false Brother, if it succeed not
well, I will never rise again. I send this Bearer unto you, for I dare not
trust your Brother with these Letters nor with the business. He shall tell you
in what state I am, and judge you what amendment these new ceremonies have
brought unot me. I would I were dead, for I see all goes ill. You promised
other manner of matter of your foreseeing, but absence has power over you,
Another wife.
who have two strings to your bow. Dispatch the Answer, that I fail not, and
put no trust in your Brother for his enterprise, for he has told it, and is
also quite against it. God give you good night.

Another Letter to Bothwell for the Practice and Device to excuse the Ravishing.
DU lieu and de l'heure je m' en rap port a vostre friar and a vous, je le
suiuray and ne fauldray en rien de ma part. Il trouve beauc oup de difficultez,
etc.

OF the Place and Time, I remit my self to your Brother and to you. I will
follow him, and will fail in nothing of my part. He finds many Difficulties;
I think he does advertise you thereof: and what he does advertise you for the
handling of himself. As for the handling of my self I heard it once well
devised. Methinks that your Services, and the long A mity, having the good will
of the Lords, do well deserve a Pardon, if above the duty of a Subject you
advance your self, not to constrain me, but to assure your self of such place
nigh unto me, that other Admonitions or foreign Persuasions may not let me
from consenting to that that you hope your Service shall make you one day to
attain; and to be short, to make your self sure of the Lords, and free to
Marry: and that you are constrained for your surety, and to be able to serve me
faithfully, to use an humble Request, joined to an importune Action. And to be
short, excuse your self, and persuade them the most you can, that you are
constrained to make pursuit against your Enemies. You shall say enough, if the
Matter or Ground do like you, and many fair words to Ledinton* If you like not
the Deed send me word, and leave not the blame of all unto me.

Another Letter to Bothwell of the Practice for her Ravishment, and to advise
him to be strange to do it.
MOnsieur depuis ma lettre escrit vostre beau friar qui fust, est venu a moy
fort triste, and m' a demand mon counseil de ce qu' il feroit apres demain,
etc.

MY Lord, since my Letter written, your Brother-in-law that was, came to me
very sad, and both asked me my counsel, what he should do after to morrow,
because there be many Folks here, and among others the Earl of Southerland, who
would rather die, considering the good they have so lately received of me, than
suffer me to be carried away, they conducting me; and that he feared there
should some trouble happen of it: of the other side, that it should be said
that he were unthankful to have betrayed me. I told him that he should have
resolved with you upon all that: and that he should avoid, if he could, those
that were most mistrusted. He has resolved to write thereof to you of my
opinion; for he has abashed me to see him so unresolved at the r^ed. I assure
my self, he will play the part of an honest Man. But I have thought good to
advertise you of the fear he has, that he should be charged and accused of
Treason, to the end, that without mistrusting him, you may be the more
circumspect, and that you may have the more power: For we had yesterday more
than three hundred Horse of Kis, and of Leniston. For the Honor of God be
accompanied rather with more than less; for that is the principal of my Care. I
go to write my dispatch, and pray God to send us an happy interview shortly. I
write in haste, to the end you may be advised in time.



Of the Bills of Proclamation and Combat, set up by Bothwell, and the Answers.
IMmediately after the Death of the King, who was Murdered, and his House
blown up with Gunpowder, the Ninth Day of February in the Night, 1567.
Proclamation was made, That whosoever could bewray the cruel Murderers of the
King should have two thousand Pounds. Unto the which Proclamation, reply was
made, and set up privily upon the Tol-Booth Door of Edinburgh, the Sixteenth of
February in this manner. BEcause Proclamation is made, That whosoever will
reveal the Murderers of the King shall have two thousand Pounds, I who have
made inquisition by them that were the doers thereof, affirm that the
Committers of it were the Earl Bothwell, Master James Balfoure, the Parson of
If this be not true spear at Gilbert Bawfoord.
Flisk, Mr. David Chambers, Black Mr. John Spence, who was principal deviser of
the Murder, and the Queen assenting thereto through the persuasion of the Earl
Bothwell, and the Witchcraft of the Lady Bucklough.



UPon this, new Proclamation was made the same Day, desiring the setter up of
the said Bill to come and avow and subscribe the same, and he should have the
Sum promised in the first Proclamation, and further according to his Ability,
and sight of the Queen, and her Counsel.

The answer thereunto was set up in the place aforesaid, the morrow after,
being the Nineteenth of the same Month. FOrasmuch as Proclamation has been
made since the setting up of my first Letter, desiring me to subscribe, and
avow the same; for answer, I desire the Money to be consigned into an evenly
Man's hand, and I shall appear on Sunday next with some four with me, and
subscribe my first Letter, and abide thereat. And further I desire that Senior
Francis Bastian, and Joseph the Queens Goldsmith be staid, and I shall declare
what every Man did in particular, with their Accomplices.



To which Bill no Answer was made.

THE Thirteenth Day of April the Earl Bothwell coming to the Sessions at
Edinburgh, with an Ensign displaid, and the Streets full of armed Men of his
Faction, was arraigned for Murder of the King, and acquit of the same by a
perjured Jury: whereupon he set up a Challenge to fight hand to hand with any
Man, (being no Person defamed) that would avow the matter.

Hereunto answer was made by another Bill set up in the same place anon after.

That forasmuch as the said Earl Bothwell had set up a Writing, subscribed with
his own hand, whereby he did Challenge any Man (not defamed) that would or
durst say he was guilty of the King's Death, and therewithal did give the Lie
in his Throat to him that would avouch the Quarrel: a Gentleman, and a Man of
good Fame, did by those Presents accept the offer and offers, and would prove
by the Law of Arms, that he was the chief Author of that foul and horrible
Murder, albeit an inquest for fear of Death had slightly quit him. And because
the King of France, and the Queen of England had by their Ambassadors desired
that Trial and Punishment might be had for the same, he most heartily therefore
craved of their Majesty's, that they would desire of the Queen his Sovereign,
that by her Consent they might appoint their day and place within the Dominions
for the trial thereof according to the Law of Arms, in their presences, or in
their Deputies. Which day and place he promised by the faith of a Gentleman to
appear at, and to his devoir, provided always that their Majesty's by open
Proclamation shall give assurance to him and to his company, to pass and repass
through their Countries, without hurt or impediment. What just cause he had to
desire the King of France and the Queen of England to be Judges in the Case, he
remitted to the Judgment of the Readers and the hearers, warning by those
presents the rest of the murderers to prepare themselves, for they should have
the like offer mad eunto them, and their names given in writing, that they
might be known unto all men.

The Confession of John Habroun, young Talla, Dagleish and Pourie, upon whom
was justice executed, the third of January, the year of God 1567.
JOhn Bowton confessed, that nine was at the deed doing, my Lord Bothwell, the
Lord of Ormiston, Hob Ormiston, himself, Talla, Daglish, Vilson, Pourie, and
French Paris, and that he saw no more, nor knew of no other companies.

Item, he knows no other but that that he was blown in the Air, for he was
handled with no men's hands as he saw, and if it was, it was with others, and
not with them.

Item, as touching Sir James Balfour, he saw not his Subscription, but I
warrant you he was the principal Counselor and deviser.

Item, he said, I confess that it is the very providence of God that has
brought me to his Judgment, for I am led to it as an horse to the stall, for I
had ships provided to fly but could not escape.

Item, he said, let no man do evil for counsel of great men, or their Masters,
thinking they shall save them, for surely I thought that night that the deed
was done, that although knowledge should be got, no man durst have said it was
evil done, seeing the hand writ, and acknowledging the Queens mind thereto.

Item, Speaking of the Queen in the Tol-booth, he said, God make all well, but
the longer dirt is hidden it is the stronger. Who Lives, our Deaths will be
thought no news.

Item, In the Conclusion he confessed, he was one of the principal doers of the
Death, and therefore is justly worthy of Death, but he was assured of the Mercy
of God, who called him to repentance.

ITem, Talla confessed ut supra, agreeing in all Points as concerning the
Persons, number, and blowing up into the Air.

Item, He affirmed, that in Seton my Lord Bothwell called on him, and said,
What thought you when you saw him blown in the Air? Who answered, Alas, my
Lord, why speak you that? for when ever I hear such a thing, the words wound me
to death, as they ought to do you.

Item, That same time he saw Sir James Balfour put in his own name and his
Brother's unto my Lord Bothwel's Remission.

Item, He knew of the Deed doing three or four days ere it was done, or
thereabout.

Item, He said, after that I came to the Court, I left the reading of God's
Word, and embraced Vanity, and therefore has God justly brought this on me.

Wherefore let all Men shun evil Company, and to trust not in Men, for ready
are we to embrace evil, as ready as Tinder to receive fire. And further in the
Tol-booth he required John Brand, Minister of the Congregation, to pass to my
Lord Lindsey, and say, My Lord, heartily I forgive your Lordship, and also my
Lord Regent and all others, but specially them that betrayed me to you; for I
know if you could have saved me you would, desiring as ye will answer before
God at the later Day to do your diligence to bring the rest who were the
beginners of this Work to Justice, as ye have done to me; for ye know it was
not begun in my head, but yet he praises God that his Justice has begun at me,
by the which he has called me to repentance.

ITem, Dagleish said, as God shall be my Judge, I knew nothing of the King's
Death before it was done, for my Lord Bothwell going to his Bed, after the
taking off of his Hose, which was stocked with Velvet, French Paris came and
spoke with him, and after that he tarried on me for other Hose^ and Clothes,
and his riding Cloak and Sword, which I gave him, and after that came up to the
Gate to the Lord of Ormiston's Lodging, and tarried for him, and thereafter
that he passed to a Place beside the Black Friars, and came to the slope of the
Dike, where he bid me stand still; and as God shall be my Judge, I knew nothing
while I heard the Blast of Powder; and after this he came home, lay down in his
Bed, while Mr. George Hacket came and knocked at the Door; and if I die for
this, the which God Judge me if I knew more, what shall be done to the
Devisers, Counselors, Subscribers and Fortifiers of it?

FINIS.

