Imprimatur.

Feb. 6. 1690/1. Z Isham, R. P. D. Hen.
Episc. Land. a sacris.
AVTARCHY: OR, THE ART OF Self-Government, IN A MORAL ESSAY.

In Three PARTS.

First Written to a Gentleman in the University, and since fitted for Public
Use.

(...)

Epict. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry,
1691.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN EARL of Bridgwater, Viscount Brackly, and Baron
of Eltesmere, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Bucks, etc.
My Honored Lord,
AFter so many Years Labors in explaining and inculcating the Christian
Religion, I doubt the true Notion of it is still unknown (I am sure the Power
of it is) to the common sort of Christians: Some confine it to this Party, and
others to that; and many place it in a Theory of Doctrines never reduced into
practice, unless it be in starcht Hypocrisy, in affected Tones, extemporary
Effusions, enthusiastic Inspirations, loud Prayers, and long Preachings; and
the running after such Men, and having their Persons in Admiration, is that
which these Men take to be Religion. And most make such a noise about Religion,
which is the Means, that they have no regard to that which is the End. Mean
while there is one thing agreed to by all, of what Sect or Faction soever, as
necessary, though most of all neglected, and that is Morality. And though this
Word is vulgarly taken to signify nothing but a kind of Heathen Honesty; yet I
shall not fear to say, That it is the Essential Part of that which we call
Religion, and the End of all our Writings and Disputes about it. For the
Christian acceptance of the Word Morality is nothing else, but the Conformity
of our Manners to the Rules of Jesus, and living as Christians are taught to do
by the Principles of their Religion. And this respects a Threefold Object, God,
our Neighbor, and our Selves. To God we owe Devotion, and the highest Fear,
Love, etc. To Man an universal Love and Charity: and to our Selves Temperance
and Sobriety. And this was the Sum of Practical Religion in the Old Testament
(as appears by Micah 6. 8.) and in the New, as St. Paul will inform us, Tit. 2.
12. These were the Duties taught by God to the Gentiles under the Law of
Nature, and to the Jews under the Mosaic Dispensation; and afterward refined,
exalted, and spiritualized by our Blessed Lord, and imposed upon his Disciples
in all Ages under the Christian. These are absolutely necessary for every
Christian Man; and whatsoever Allowances will be granted to our Weakness and
Blindness, in the other World (which will be Answerable to God's infinite
Goodness); yet I am sure, there will be none for our impenitent Immoralities.

This may plead my Excuse for making Morality my subject, and then for that
particular part of it which consists in governing a Man's self, I need premise
nothing to what you will find in the following Papers; but that it is the
Instrument of all the rest, without which they cannot be exercised, and which
therefore ought to be first learned. It virtually, at least, contains all, or
most Morality in it; and, if it were well practiced, in all its Parts and
Branches, it would soon abate the Spirit of Pride, Bitterness, and Malice which
rages in the World; and teach Men, Love, Kindness, Sweetness of Conversation,
Meekness, and Humility. It would make Men happy in themselves, and happy in one
another.

Whilst others therefore (My Lord) have been fiercely disputing and wrangling
about the Government of the Nation, the Humble Author hereof, sitting under
Your Shadow in peace, thought it his greater Concern to turn his Thoughts
inward, and study the Government of of himself; whose Meditations, from a very
small beginning, sent to his Friend, have extended themselves to the Dimensions
You here find them in; and, wrapped up in these Papers, are laid at Your
Lordship's Feet, not so much to inform your Understanding, as to beg Your
Protection.

My Lord, the Author is sensible, and the World must confess, That You want
not these Instructions. God has given You and Your virtuous and happy Consort
(the true Partner of Your Joys and Griefs) the victory over Your Passions and
Appetites; and having exercised You Both in an unheard of Affliction, has now
returned in Mercy, and has more than built up Your Breaches. All which has (I
doubt not) taught You to look upward to God in all his Dispensations, to look
inward and govern Your Selves, and to look downward and despise the World,
keeping Your Self unspotted from its Vices.

Though therefore these Papers should be of no use to You, yet if You shall
honor them so far as to place them in Your Library among the Learned, and
shall commend them to the Perusal of my Young Lord, and the rest of Your
Children when they come to Years of discretion, and are fit to entertain such
Thoughts as these, the Author shall have his End in this Dedication.

May Your Lordship's Issue be numerous, and grow up like Olive-Plants round
about Your Table: May They be Good as well as Great, and increase in Virtue and
Piety so fast, that They may anticipate these Counsels, and render all the
following Arguments useless. Which is the daily Prayer of,

My Noble Lord, Edlesb. Jan. 12. 1690/1. Your Lordship's most Humble Servant,
and Chaplain, G. B.

A Praemonition TO THE READERS.
THOUGH the Form of this Essay is Epistolar, and was directed to a Young
Gentleman in the University, as the Title informs you; yet the Author now, by
its Publication, designs it for every Man, and desires each Reader to imagine
himself to be the Dorotheus therein mentioned. And though it concerns young Men
especially (because it ought to be their great Care, who are hereby prepared
against a numerous Army of Fleshly Lusts, ready to assault them; and they of
all Men should lay a good Foundation of Virtue and Piety, and remember their
Creator); yet those that are aged must not think themselves unconcerned, unless
they have finished this great Work, or made some tolerable Progress in it: For
as their Means are greater (having passed by the Importunities of Youthful
Lusts, and seen their Vanity) so their Need is greater; having passed great
part of their Journey, and so are nearer their End, and the Account they must
give to their Creator.

The whole was written originally for the Use of a Scholar, and so may perhaps
smell too much of University Learning; yet it has been much allayed for vulgar
use: and if here and there it does retain any Signatures of its original, yet
most part is plain, and fitted for common Readers.

The general Subject of it is, Morality, or the Practice of Virtue and Piety,
which is the Essence of true Religion. And if there be any Notions in the First
Part out of the common Road, they were thought necessary, in the first draught,
to give a tolerable account of the Reasons of the Conjunction of the Two
Natures in us, and of the Goodness of our Creator, in ordering it to be so: and
they are still retained for the same reason. And the vulgar Reader may (if he
please) pass them over to that which is more useful for him.

The particular Duty explained and pressed, he calls Autarchy or
Self-Government, which is the restraining part of Virtue, or the Power it has
to curb our Appetites and Passions. A Lesson which he commends with so much
Zeal, because no Virtue can be long practiced without it.

The Way that he has taken is instructive in the First Part, and persuasive in
the Two other: for it seems a natural Method, first to explain and then
persuade. And all Three are laid before every Man that will give himself but
leave to consider, Wherefore he is sent into this World? and Whither he must go
when he leaves it? And the Author can only add his Prayers that they may have
their Effect, in discovering the Fallacies of Sensuality, and in turning the
Sinner from the Error of his Way.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART. CONTAINING The Nature of Autarchy (or
Self-Government) and the Rules of its Exercise.
THE miserable Apostasy of Christians in general, from the Practice of their
Holy Religion.. 1, 2. The Reason of this is the Predominancy of our Lusts and
Appetites, and the want of their Regulation.. 3. The Advantages of their
Regulation, and the Possibility of it.. 4, 5. The Design of the Author in order
hereunto.. 6 Of the Two Natures in Man, the Spiritual and the Carnal.. 7. Their
Conjunction, and the Reasons of it.. 8, 9, 10. Why God did not limit our
Appetites to Good only.. 11. Their Contrariety. ibid. The Heathens account of
the Two Nature^.. 12. What the Superior Faculties require of us, and our Duty
thereupon.. 13, 14. What Autarchy is, and wherein it consists.. 15. St. Paul's
account of it.. 16. The Excellency of Autarchy. It is a sure Sign of a Child of
God. The Foundation and Perfection of all true Religion.. 17, 18. Six Rules of
Autarchy, adapted to those that are not yet enslaved to the Tyranny of their
Appetites.. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Some Considerations offered to the
Habituated Sensualists, (who have lived long under the Slavery of their
Appetites) in order to their Freedom.. 25. A short Commendation of Autarchy..
26.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART. CONTAINING A Vindication of the Pleasures of
Autarchy, etc.
THE Preface.. 1. Religion founded upon Spiritual and Inward Advantages, and
the Promises of the Life to come, and is not so concerned in Weakness of the
Arguments for its Outward Pleasures, which yet make it more acceptable.. 2. The
Complaints of the Sensualist against Religious Severities.. 3 An Examination of
the pretended Pleasures of Sensualists.. 4 Of the Expectation of Sensual
Pleasures.. 5. Of their Fruition, and St. John' s Analysis of Sensuality, 1 John 2. 16.. 6. Of the Lusts of the Flesh. Of Gluttony, Drunkenness, and
unlawful Lust. The Vanity of them.. 7, 8. Of Covetousness.. 9. Of Ambition..
10. The Shortness, Uncertainty, and Dissatisfaction of Sensual Fruition.. 11.
The End of Sensual Enjoyments calamitous, etc.. 12, 13. The Pleasures of
Autarchy positively demonstrated.. 14. Its outward Pleasures, and the
Enjoyments of Regulated Sense.. 15. The Objection from Poverty, etc.
considered.. 16. The inward Pleasures of Autarchy, and how it has Influence
upon the Soul.. 17. The inward Peace of the Soul obtained by Autarchy.. 18, 19.
The pretended difficulties of Autarchy considered.. 20, 21. Of the
super-additional Miseries pretended to be laid upon all Pious Men.. 22. to the
End.
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD PART. CONTAINING The Outward Advantages of Autarchy.
THE Preface.. 1. Of the threefold Advantage of Autarchy, viz. A Healthful and
Long Life, Competency of Estate, and Respect and Honor.. 2. Of Health and Long
Life, and the natural Desire we have of it.. 3. That it is the Gift of
Autarchy, and that Sensuality destroys the Body.. 4. The Objection concerning
Mortification, Abnegation of the World, and the early Death of Good men,
answered.. 5. Of the Second outward Advantage of Autarchy, viz. Competency of
Estate, and Sufficiency of Riches. How Autarchy conduces to outward Riches.. 6.
The Objection, concerning the Poverty of some Good men, and the Wealth of the
Wicked, considered.. 7. Two strange Effects of Autarchy, about Wordly Estates,
that abundantly make Compensation. ibid. Of the Third outward Advantage of
Autarchy, viz. A Good Name, Respect, and Honor.. 8. Vice most dishonorable,
proved in several Instances.. 9. Virtue and Wisdom exalts Men.. 10. An
Objection prevented.. 11. Some other Benefits of Autarchy.. 12. A Peroration
and Review of all the Three Parts. Together with the Application to the Reader
in several Particulars.. 13. Autarchy not to be deferred or delayed, upon Five
Considerations.. 14. A Serious Exhortation to Autarchy.. 15, 16.
AVTARCHY: OR, THE ART of Self-Government.
The First PART.
WHEREIN The Nature of Autarchy is Explained, and the Rules of its Exercise
laid down.

. 1. THOUGH the Religion that the Holy Jesus brought down from Heaven seemed
contrived by Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and adapted to render us innocent
here, and happy hereafter; yet if you look into the World (into which you are,
most dear Dorotheus, now ere long to enter, and in which you must live) you
will find that most of those that havereceived, and do still zealously own this
holy Profession, do yet live in the greatest opposition to it. Religion
possesses the Head, and not the Heart, and Men are mightily concerned about
its Doctrines, but not at all about its Duties. Its power over Men, as to the
conformity of their Lives, is much weakened and decayed, and the Spiritual Life
ready to expire. Some Duties, it is true, are observed, out of Design; and its
Outside, for some political Reasons, maintained; but if you draw the Curtain,
and look into the inside of Men's Practice, there is little but what is
counterfeit and Representations, Scenes and Shows. All the Noise that it makes,
is from Men's loud Disputes, and its being bandied backward and forward betwixt
opposite Parties; but for any real Use that there is made of it, there is
little, but that it is made to be a stalking-horse for Ambition; to sanctify a
bad Cause, and a cloak for its Deformity. Its holy Doctrines are silenced and
laid to sleep; only now and then one taken up, and awakened to serve a Party,
and then laid down again, when no longer useful.

Nor is the Law of Christ only (the Perfection of all Laws) but that of Nature
and common Equity also violated amongst us. Property and Selfishness has
engrossed all Hearts, so that whatsoever can be got either by Fraud or
Violence, and possessed without danger of the Law, is counted our own; and what
we account to be out own, we think we may use as we please. Indeed there is a
rude notion of Justice among the Vulgar, but it is only pleaded when they think
they are injured; and exerted when they are like to be Gainers by it: But as
for Truth (a piece of Justice we owe to all Men) there is little or no regard
to it (especially in dealings); but Men swear, lie and dissemble, and will
maintain that there is a necessity so to do. Hence it is, that Oaths (which
were of old Sacred) are now of no Validity; yea, and the common use of Speech,
in bargains, is to no purpose: Lying is become so clamorous, that it has took
away our Senses, and we had as good be deaf and dumb as hear and talk among
Men: And then for Charity (that God-like Virtue) the highest notion of it is
quite lost amongst us, and we never give but when natural compassion wrings it
out of our hands.

Mean while Ambition is restless, and rages so in the World that it overturns
whole Kingdoms, and buries thousands in their Ruins: and Pride (that reigns
among all Sects and in all shapes) will not suffer us to know our selves, or be
quiet with others: And besides these, there is such a deluge of inhumane Vices
(for so I call those that are unworthy of Man, and below the Beast) broken in
upon us from Hell, that no Pen is able to describe, no Virtue oppose: for Man
is become the greatest Enemy to himself, and cruelly wounds his own Being; so
that the Love of our selves can serve no longer as a rule to measure our Love
to others by, and the Apostle's assertion ( No man ever yet hated his own
Flesh) seems not to hold in our times. In a word, we are sunk below Heathenism,
while Turks and Infidels upbraid us. Impiety has overrun the World, and our
blessed Lord's Prophecy is too much verified, Matt. 24. 10, 11, etc. It Is time
then that those days should be shortened, that any Flesh should be saved; and
that he should hasten his coming, for he shall hardly find his Faith upon the
Earth.

. 2. And yet after all, it must be confessed that this general Apostasy of the
greatest part of Mankind cannot be laid to the charge of God, or to any defect
in revealed Religion. He has fenced and cultivated his Vineyard, though it
brings forth* wild Grapes, and has used all means possible to save us but one,
and that is such an irresistible Grace upon all Men, which some have fansied to
be bestowed upon those that are effectually called; such I mean as would carry
us to Heaven by force, and save us whether we will or no. His Precepts are holy
and just, and require of us nothing but what is reasonable to be exacted, and
feasible to be done: besides, his Commands are certainly our Interest as well
as Duty; they are such as would settle Peace and Prosperity amongst Men,
restore the golden Age, and make every Man happy with his Neighbor and happy
in himself; they enjoin nothing but Love, Peace, Meekness, Long-suffering and
Courtesy amongst all men, and would necessarily banish Hatred, Malice, and
revenge, and all the inimical Vices from humane Society: And to render him
happier yet, by Sobriety and Temperance they would settle Health in his Body,
and Peace and Contentment in his Soul. All this the Christian Religion does
upon great and precious Promises, both of this Life and of that which is to
come, and upon Threats proportionable to its Promises; by which Means, and by
the powerful Ministry of those appointed to this Service, God has secured to
himself in all Ages some Witnesses of the inherent Power and Energy of Piety;
which like so many stars, adorn and enlighten our dark Times.

. 3. It may now be justly inquired into, why so amiable and reasonable a
Religion, so profitable to every Man, and suited to his true Interest, should
not have the same Influence upon all, and captivate every understanding? Why
the same cause should not have the same effect, and the same Means prove
successful to every one that uses it? especially seeing there is no fatal
sentence to the contrary, nor do any labor under eternal Fetters, which binds
their Hands from receiving what is offered to them? One would think that the
same advantageous Pardon should be embraced by every rational Creature, and the
same Word prove alike; not the savor of Life to some and of of Death to
others. And certainly the fault must be in our selves only, and in the
indisposition of the Patient, which may produce contrary Effects: For thus, the
same Heat melts down Wax and hardens Clay. Nor is this Indisposition generally
in our Reason and Understanding, but in our Affections. We all know the Will of
God and our own Interests well enough, and accordingly we should resolve upon a
new Life, and perform our Resolutions; but, alas! Man is not usually Master of
himself, and of his own Intentions. The Government that God has settled in us
is sore shattered, if not quite dissolved. His Viceroy (Reason) is under
confinement; and the Senses seduced from their duty; the Appetites (like
dissolute Janisaries in an Interregnum) domineer and carry all before them; and
the Passions, like the Mobb, pretend to settle the State, and make such a
Noise, that the soft Messages of Peace, though from God, cannot be heard: for,
First, Man is usually brought under bondage to the Earthly part, and the higher
Faculties captivated by the lower; he is carnal and sold under Sin, and so
cannot do what he would: The Fall of Adam has weakened his spiritual Powers, and
brought them down, so that they stand upon even ground with the lower
Appetites; and Custom and a slavish yielding up our native Freedom have made us
absolute Slaves to our sensual Part. And hence it is, that though we are
convinced of the Necessity and Benefit of Virtue before, and of Repentance
after we have offended, and promise, and (perhaps sincerely) intend to act
accordingly, yet after all we fail in our Performances, and break our
Resolutions. The next Temptation bears all our Vows and Faith away with it; we
have disabled our selves, and (being under a kind of Confinement) can promise
much, but perform nothing. And then, Secondly, Sensuality being got into the
Throne fortifies it self there, with specious declarations of the lawfulness of
its Title; and possesses the poor deluded with the mighty hopes of its Profits,
Pleasures, and Advantages. It represents the Comforts of Eat, Drink, and be
Merry, to the utmost advantage: It cries up the Felicity of sinful Freedom, and
is always inculcating the Severities and Chains of Virtue. It represents
Religion, sour and austere, and draws her picture, like Magdalene, always
weeping. By these her false Representations, and the Echo's of the Appetite,
poor Reason cannot be heard. Hence it is that we first entertain, and (by
conversation) begin to love, and then dote on, and at last espouse our Vices,
not to be separated as long as the Body and Soul hold together. Thus we are
fallen since we came into this World as well as before, and Adam was not the
only Betrayer of himself and his Posterity.

. 4. In this Condition, 'twould be a great piece of Charity and Justice to
restore the Captive Prince, and break those Fetters wherewith the rational part
is bound up; to restore the Man to that state that God made and intended he
should live in; that the Soul might govern the Body, and the reasonable Will
the Appetite; so that he might live as a rational Creature, and act as one that
is moved upon future Hopes and Fears, and not upon present Enjoyments without
respect to the fatal Consequences thereof: For, if the Man were but brought to
himself, and to the use of his Understanding, Virtue and Piety would find as
ready entertainment as now Vice does. He would then exercise his Reason instead
of Sense, and consider the end of vicious Actions; the present Enjoyment and
future Reward would be brought into the Balance, and Hell and Heaven considered
as well as present Earth. The Inclinations to sin would be less forcible, and
the propensities of Nature which arise out of Appetites would draw but
moderately, and though they had a proper Motion, yet they would submit to the
stronger Power of the first Mover. Righteous Reason would then sit enthroned,
and give sentence according to our true Interest present and to come, and the
Will having once determined, whole Nature would move forcibly toward the
Object; there would be no hanging back toward Sodom, or hankering after the
Fleshpots of Egypt: Men would go on in Piety cheerfully, and run the way of
God's Commandments having their Hearts enlarged. It Is the Empire of the Soul,
and the Power of managing the Body to our spiritual Advantages, with its
attendant Desires (whichin the ensuing papers I would to the utmost of my power
contribute to) that can only restore Piety and Innocence to the World. For
Autarchy is a preparation of the heart for Virtue, and cultivates, tills, and
sweetens this our spiritual Ground toward an Increase of many-fold.

. 5. Nor is this Lesson so hard, much less insuperable, but what is and must be
daily practiced in secular Affairs of this Life, so that we cannot be Men, or
live without it. We cannot enjoy all things, and therefore must deny our selves
many things: and what is done upon worldly considerations, may sure be done
more easily upon those that are spiritual, by how much these are more
considerable than the other, and God is more ready to serve us with his
assisting Grace in this his own Work. Besides, this cannot be difficult to
Youth, who having not contracted any inveterate habits of Sensuality, are more
at liberty: Nor can it be unattainable to Manhood, who, having passed over the
Vanities of Youth, commonly choose what is profitable; much less to Old Age,
who have now no delight in Vanities, nor pleasure in them. Thus every Age has
its advantages as well as disadvantages, that no Man may complain that
Self-Government is absolutely impossible. However let every Man of what Degree
or Age, consider that this Duty is necessary, not only to this Life, but to
that which is to come; and that the Grace of God (that brings Salvation)
teaches us that we should deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World.

. 6. This then (my Dorotheus) being my present work, the end of this triple
Essay, and the mark which each Discourse aims at: I shall,

I. Explain the Nature of this Duty, and lay down the Rules of its Practice.

II. Vindicate it from the Imputations of Austerity, Sowreness, Tyranny, and
other the accusations of Voluptuousness. And if I act not only defensively but
offensively, and make now and then an Incursion into the Territories of
Sensuality, carry away her Pretenses captive, and expose them to Contempt; it
will conduce to the Establishment of Autarchy in every Man's Heart, who shall
be open to receive her.

III. I shall consider the outward Advantages of Autarchy, and settle her right
to all things which are desirable in this World. All which put together will be
a sufficient Explanation and Defense of Autarchy, whose Cause I have
undertaken. And this I shall include in Three Letters, which shall be as Three
several Stages; at the end of each of which the Reader may sit down, rest
himself, and consider what has been taught him.

. 7 I. To begin with the Nature of Autarchy, or Self-Government. That I may lay
a good Foundation and view the Fountain of these sweet and bitter Waters that
flow from the same Composition; you must know, that as every Man is made up of
a double Nature, the Soul and Body; so he may find in himself a twofold
Principle of Apprehension, Understanding and Sense; as also, of Inclination and
Tendency, the Will and the Appetite; the First proceeding from the Spiritual,
the Second from the Carnal part; that truly Angelical, this common with us to
the Beasts below us.

The First, is the Heavenly or Spiritual Part of Man, the chief Faculty of
which is the Understanding, which the Greek Philosophers call (...), the
Imperial or Governing Faculty, because its Office is to guide the blind and
heedless earthly Part, with its Lusts and Appetites, as the Rider does the
Horse with Bit and Bridle, or the Mariner does the Ship with the Helm and
Compass. This is the celestial Part, and directs us to desire nothing but what
is really good for us, both as to the present and future time; I mean, to fear
our Creator, keep his Commandments, live virtuously and soberly here, and,
consequently, happily hereafter; and, for the attainment of future Happiness,
to deny our selves such Pleasures and Enjoyments as would in the end endanger
it. Thus we are taught to abhor Poison, though made up in the most sweet and
delicious Potion: And even the Vulgar (though otherwise sufficiently inclinable
thereunto) shall, upon these grounds, deny themselves Mirth, Leisure, Jollity,
and other Delights of the Body; and, instead of these, apply themselves to
Labor and Hardship, till they have made them habitual; and this, not because
they hate the the first, and love the latter, but because they are sensible
that their Purse or Body will not hold out in their pursuits. And thus also the
Christian (governing himself according to the dictates of the Spiritual Nature,
and acting as a rational Creature, upon Arguments drawn from future Hopes and
Expectations, as well as from present good) abstains from un^ust Gains and
unlawful Pleasures, and bridles his Natural Inclinations to any thing that may
offend his God or his Neighbor. And this he continues to do, till he has at
last broken a Feral Nature to the Bit and Bridle, and made a kind of Habit of
Piety.

The Second is the Sensual Nature arising out of the counter-part of Man, the
Body. This is the Terrestrial Part, and ^ncites us to desire present Pleasure
(or at least that which seems to be so to us) without any consideration of its
Consequents or Effects: For the brutish Part ^n Man is the same with that in
Beasts; incapable of the future Prospect of Good and Evil, and fully satisfied
with what is present. So truly Bestial is this lower part of our Nature, that
it admits not of Hopes or Fears, but tends greedily to present Enjoyment. This
is that Conduit, by which the Devil conveys his Temptations into us, and the
Instrument by which we destroy our selves: Hence it is, that we know no
Moderation in the use of animal Pleasures; but run into that Excess, from
whence proceeds the dreadful Catalogue of Crimes which St. Paul enumerates as
The Fruits of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.

. 8. It may be here questioned, by some, (with more Curiosity, perhaps, than
Profit, were it not that we should be jealous over every thing that might
eclipse the Divine Goodness) Why the ever Gracious and Merciful Deity should
infuse the Pure Spirit, fresh, new-created, and immaculate into the defiled
Vessels of the Body? Why should he join such (...), such disagreeing Natures,
the Heavenly to the Earthly Vehicle, there to lose not only its Glory but
Innocence? For what is this, but Mezentius like, (might Atheism object) to join
the living and dead Bodies together, that the one might die leisurely, but
infallibly, by the Putrefaction of the other? or, to put an undefiled Virgin
(innocent and unknowing of Sin) into the Stews, where she shall meet with
Temptations of all sorts to solicit her Chastity, and from whence, morally,
it is impossible for her to escape unpolluted?

It Is true, the Doctrine of the continual Creation of humane Souls, and their
Infusion into Bodies, is obvious to these and other mighty Prejudices, as that
of their Traduction is to greater; and therefore some thoughtful Men have
revived a long-since-forgotten Hypothesis of the Creation of all humane Souls,
together with the Angels, and other invisible Beings before that of the
visible, of their Lapse from their Primitive Integrity (as likewise did the
Angels, and Mankind after both) and (after a long time of Inactivity) of their
being sent down to Bodies diversely circumstantiated according to their several
demerits, there to grind in their Prison-houses till Time had worn out, and the
Divine Pity forgiven them their Crimes; till Grace and the Exercise of Virtue
had revived the Celestial Fire, and the lost Image of God in them, etc. This
is the Prae-existentian Doctrine, which, (they say) would fitly solve all the
doubts about the Goodness of God in our Origination, and dissolve all that
Darkness that seems to obscure the Face of Providence. I mention not this
Opinion because I would oblige any Man to believe it, but for its Novelty as to
most Men, and for its Ingenuity; nor would I persuade you to it, if you can
clea^ the Divine Goodness or Justice without it: For it is not only the
Privilege of the Schools to dispute, but of every Christian modestly to opine
freely of things undefin'd by God and his Church. B^^ seeing this Hypothesis
receives so little Light from revealed Religion that it i^ generally looked
upon as the Product o^ Fancy, I shall endeavor to untie the Knot in plainer
Terms, and upon more allowed Principles; wherein I must ye^ run back as high as
the Fall of Angels.

. 9. When Heaven, by the Lapse o^ so many of its Inhabitants, first, into a
state of Sin, and then, into that o^ Punishment (bound up in everlasting Chains
against the Judgment of the great Day) became something empty, and the
Celestial Powers were reduced to a lesser Number; it pleased the Creator of
al^ things, in order to the filling up of those Vacancies, to make a Race of
Creatures of a mixed and middle Nature, a little lower than the Angels, and yet
higher than the Beasts that perish: Man I mean, Partaker of both the Heavenly
and Earthly Natures united together; that the Earthly Part might teach him
Humility, to avoid the aspiring thoughts, and so the Fate of the lapsed Angels;
and that the Heavenly Part might exalt his Thoughts, and lift them up to God
his Creator: As his Strength and Endowments were lesser than those of the
Angels, so were his Failures less fatal than theirs: He was placed in a state,
(not of Condemnation, in case of disobedience, as they were; but) of Falls and
Recoveries, of Sin and Repentance: His Station was not so high as theirs, lest,
if he fell, his Fall might prove (like theirs) Final; and yet high enough to
make his Recovery a Work, not a Pastime; and a Work of that Difficulty, to
require the Help of a Divine Savior. Thus his very Composition became his
^dvantage; and his Earthly Part, with its attendant Lusts and Temptations,
became accidentally the Cause of all the Mercies he has received ever since.
To which I may add --

That as he consists of two opposite Principles, so each must have its peculiar
Law or Inclination in opposition one to another. That of the Spirit and that of
the Flesh, each tending, as it were, to its proper Center; the one inviting him
upwards, the other downwards: For each Nature would be incomplete, without its
attendant Inclinations and Fruitions to caress it: The Spiritual would be as
good as dead, without its Intellect and Prospect, and consequently, Desires of
Future Good; and the Earthly part had as good cease to be, as cease to be
sensible of Earthly Pleasures. If we could not experiment the Delights of
Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, etc. how dull and flat would our Lives be? like a
Play without Scenes or Intrigue, without the Passions of Love or Hatred, or any
thing to move the Spectators. It Is then not only out of a Principle of giving
each Nature its Perfections, but also for the Comfort of both, that God has
endued us with Sense and Appetite, as well as Reason: For these take off the
Acerbities of Life, and render it tolerable; they support the Body and Mind
under all the Pressures that God lays upon both under the Sun. Without these
Life would not be worth the Acceptance when proffered, or Preservation when
accepted of.

. 10. And that which perfectly rebates the Objection against the Goodness of
God, is this, That there is no necessity of Sinning intended to be imposed upon
us: for our Appetites and Passions are not sinful in themselves, nor directly
and simply incite us to it; but by accident, when put in a Commotion and Rage,
and when the Reins are loose and broken, like the Horses of the Sun, when a
foolish Phaeton undertakes their Management, which would otherwise bless that
World with Light and Influence, which it now burns up: Or like the Blood in a
ferment, that sometimes destroys that Body it daily nourishes. It Is their
Nature, it is true, to desire to be satisfied, and move strongly toward that
Object they would enjoy, (else we should have no Love or Hatred) but they are
designed for Subjection, and not for Government; to hunt after that Game to
which illuminated Nature directs them and to be called off, or hastened when a
Superior Power shall think fit: For, when under subjection, they may become
subservient even to Religion it self, and, like the Gibeonites, they may be
Hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the House and Altar of God.

This ought to satisfy every modest Enquirer, who, though he cannot comprehend
the exact reasons of his own Origination (alas how should he!) must confess
that he is not only fearfully and wonderfully, but graciously made, and a
Monument of God's Bounty and Mercy. That his Creator is good to him in
particular, as well as to all things in general; and that his tender Mercy is
over all his Works. I have taken the more pains to remove this Stumbling Block
from the Entrance of this Discourse, which yet St. Paul does in fewer words,
with this short unanswerable Question (for the Christian Romans in those times
were not so full of Cavils as we are) Shall the thing formed say unto him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus?

. 11. If it be further questioned, Why God did not limit our Passions and
Appetites when he first bestowed them upon us, so as to make it not possible
for them to hurry us into any Sin or Danger? The Answer will be short and
easy. We are made Men and not Angels, and placed in a mutable condition,
capable of Bliss and Misery; and if God had so bounded our Appetites, that they
were incapable of Excess, we should have been in an Immutable condition, like
those confirmed, blessed Spirits above; a Privilege that they themselves were
not thought worthy of, till they had been tried, and had resisted the
Temptations and Threats of Lucifer and his Apostate Angels. There is no free
Nature but must have a time of probation, before it be rewarded or punished.
Our Life here is like the Children of Israel's; we are led through the
Wilderness of this World, attended by our Folly and our Fears on our left hand
and our right, to prove us, and to know what is in our Heart, whether we will
keep the Commandment or not. And when this time of exercise and probation is
over, we are called off the Stage, and are either freed or condemned. Besides,
were there no possibility of Sin, there could be no Virtue, and so no Reward as
well as Punishment: For if there were no Tempter or Enemy, there could be no
Trial, no Fight, no Victory, and so no Reward; nor could even a St. Paul have
challenged his Crown of Glory, but upon the account of his having fought a good
Fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith. No wonder then that Man should
have Enemies within him as well as without; these serve to awaken his Care,
make him stand upon his Guard, and fight the good fight of Faith. Thus the
Children of Israel had the Canaanites to be their near Neighbors, and the same
Land (like Humane Nature) maintained two contrary Inhabitants.

And as there was no League made to be betwixt these Nations, but a continual
War, so there is between the two Natures in us; the Spirit wars against the
flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, which St. Paul elegantly describes, in
his own Name, under the Person of one unregenerate, and in the state of Nature,
in the seventh Chapter of the Romans. Indeed Advantages may, and must be taken;
the Canaanite must be subdued and brought under Subjection. And though (to
carry the Parallel a little higher) all Commerce with the seven Nations were
forbidden, and a total Abolition of their Name from under Heaven, was enjoined
at the first time; yet when the Israelites had once declined to favor their
Idolatry, the Angel of God brings this sorrowful Message to Bochim, That now
they must not be totally driven out, but remain as Thorns in their sides, and
their Altars as snares unto them; and this to prove them and try their
Integrity: So since the fall of Adam, and the degeneracy of his Posterity, no
lasting and final Victory can be obtained; nor can corrupt Nature be absolutely
rooted out, till Mortality be swallowed up of Life, and Death delivers us from
the body of this Death. The Seeds of Vices must remain even in the Regenerate
and the Fire of Concupiscence, though allayed of its Heat, and covered up in
its Ashes: For all that Piety can do in this life, is to keep it down, and make
it a useful Servant; to regulate it, and render it beneficial to us. And as in
every Kingdom Plots and Cabals will be, and some Dissatisfactions, Commotions,
and Tendencies to Rebellion; so must the Man of God stand upon his Watch, and
be prepared to suppress every Emotion; if he can break the strength of the Foe,
and scatter his troops whenever they make head, it is as much as God (whose
Deputy he is) requires of him; and this during his whole Life, till Death
(calling him off his Watch) relieves him.

. 12. Of this continual War in Man, not only the Philosophers of old, under the
state of Nature have taught much and excellently; but even the Heathen Poets
(the most ingenious, but boldest and worst of Men, that durst represent the
Deity more vicious and brutish, perhaps, than themselves) have taken notice of
it: And therefore, according to their witty way of Allegory, they called the
Higher Faculties Prometheus, and the Lower Epimetheus, and of them they tell us
this pleasant but instructive Fable. Hesiod. op. and dies.
That, (once upon a time) this Prometheus stole Fire from Heaven (viz. Wisdom
and Knowledge) to enliven the Man of Clay that he had made; upon which Jupiter
was very wroth (though I cannot understand why, unless he were envious at Man's
good, a Character good enough for a Poet's Jupiter) and sent Pandora ( viz.
Pleasures) a beautiful but deceitful Female, to Epimetheus, his younger
Brother, with a fine Box or Vessel as a Present; Prometheus foresees the
fraudulent malice of Jupiter, and advises him to send back his Present with the
false Bearer of it, the one being as deceitful as the other; but Epimetheus,
greedy of the Beauty and Jewels both, that he might at once sacrifice both to
his Lust and Avarice, receives the Woman and accepts her Present; which when he
had opened, out flew all the Evils both of Body and Mind, which have ever since
afflicted poor Mankind. I have mentioned this Fable in a Serious Discourse,
because the true History of it seems to be the Fall of our First Parents, and
the Moral of it the State of every sensual, sinful Man; of him, I mean, whose
Epimetheus governs, and contrary to the Monitions of the Superior Faculties,
entertains the Woman, opens her Box, and lets loose those Plagues that must
worry him.

But, without a Fable, (though in one) Ovid brings in his Medaea thus
complaining of the Torture she endured in this Conflict:

-- Trahit invitam nova vis, aliudque cupido, Men's aliud suadet; video melier a
proboque, Deteriora sequor, etc. Met. l. 7. Which is almost in the same Words,
and altogether in the same Sense with that of the holy Apostle. That which I do
I allow not; for what I would do, that do I not; and what I hate, that do I.
Romans 7. 15.

. 13. And now (after a long, but I hope not tedious, Discourse of the
Opposition of the two Natures, that make up our compositum, and the Reasons
thereof) it is but time to draw nearer that I chiefly aim at, and to let you
know what your Superior Faculties (or rather God by them) require of you: and
this is no other but the subjugating of your Passions and Appetites in order to
your threefold Duty, to God, to your Neighbor, and to your Self. Whey prohibit
you (in the First place) all those Pleasures, Diversions, and Alienations of
Mind, which usually obstruct the Love of God, his Fear, and Honor. They forbid
(in the Second place) all immoderate Desires of Gain, which may tempt you to
break the Laws of Justice and Charity, and will teach you to deny your self
those things which stand in opposition to either. But their chiefest concern is
( Thirdly) in the regimen of your self (which is the ground of both the other)
that you observe the great Duty of Moderation and Temperance, be guided by your
Reason, and that you be able to make Resolutions and observe them when they are
made.

For these Ends and Purposes, as a rational Creature and a Christian, you are
to settle in your self this high Court of Judicature, and a constant, firm
Resolution of submitting your self to its Determinations. It Is a great Virtue
to resolve well, but it is a greater to be able inviolably to observe our
Resolutions. It is the greatest part of Wisdom, and requires our utmost force
and strength to stick to a Resolve well taken. This is indeed our common
Failure, and yet he is not a Men that cannot do this: A Man cannot be just to
himself who is unconstant to his own Purposes; the Will originally is the
Follower of the Understanding, and it is as good (nay better) to be without an
Intellect (as the inferior Creatures are) than to ask her Advice and not to
follow it. The only hindrance to this great Duty is the Importunities of Sense,
and the Pleas of Pleasure, Profit, and corporeal Satisfaction. Let these be
kept under and in obedience, and then you will be capable to observe this great
and necessary Rule following. Resolve on nothing but by the Advice of righteous
Reason, and when you have resolved once, let nothing in Nature be able to
divert the execution, but a countermand from the same Authority.

. 14. Whenever therefore you are invited to any Action contrary to the Laws
of God or Man, your great care must be suppress and conquer that Motion; and
that as speedily and zealously as you would Fire in your house, or a Rebellion
breaking out in your Kingdom; as tending immediately to the destruction of the
whole. To this purpose you must stop every wandering or wanton thought, every
inconsiderate word, and every intended Action, (for surely if Words are to be
considered twice, according to the Grecian Orator's Rule, Thoughts deserve one,
and Actions three Examinations) and bring it before the supreme Bar of
Righteous and Impartial Reason. The Rules of Examination are the Laws of God
and Man, which are, in respect of Morality, plain and easy: And here the
Golden Rule (that general Director of all our Actions, among Men especially)
with which our Lord concludes his divine Sermon in the Mount, is of universal
Use, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do you even the same to
them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matt. 7. If your deceitful Heart
disguise the Action, consult a rectified Conscience, and apply this ( Lydius
Lapis) this Touchstone to it, and the counterfeit will soon appear, and you
may make a discovery. If you find it an Amalekite, spare it not for Favor or
Affection; no nor upon the Account of Religion it self, but utterly destroy it.
Without a metaphor, suppress both your Passions and Appetites whenever you
perceive them to interfere with your Duty and lead you into any Sin. This is
that which the Greeks call (...), as if nothing were true Wisdom but this. The
Latins call it Temperantia, Temperance or Government. The first of these (
Wisdom) is usually taken in a larger Signification, and comprehends this and
other Duties: The latter ( Temperance) signifies, in common use, but a part of
this Duty, the moderate use of Meats and Drink, etc. And therefore I have made
bold to introduce two Autarchy, Autocracy.
Words into our Language comprehensive of the Duty I teach you, and which will
include the Regimen of the irascible and concupisciple Passions, I mean
Autarchy and Autocracy, both which signify Self-Government.

. 15. Autarchy then is no other but the exercise of that Power that the Soul
has over the Body, and the higher Faculties over the lower Appetites in order
to the Practice of Virtue and Piety: As it respects our Duty to God it is
subservient to Devotion, and, by its Punishments and holy Revenges upon the
rebellious Appetites, it performs the severest part of the great Duty of
Repentance. As it respects our Duty to our Neighbor, it represses the Emotions
to Covetousness, and teaches us to know what is that which is sufficient for
us: It rebates all Inclinations to Injustice, and obliges us to the Golden
Rule; it abates the Swellings of Self-conceit, and Philauty, and consequently
keeps Peace amongst Men; for Pride and Selfishness are generally the Causes of
all Wars and of Quarrels, Dissentions, yea and of all the Schisms in Religion,
of all the evil Words and invidious Actions with which foolish Mortals torment
themselves and others. And lastly, in respect of our selves, it teaches us to
measure our selves by just Rules and Proportions, and not to think of our
selves more highly than we ought to think, but to think soberly: to judge
meanly of our selves and of our own Endowments and Deserts (for we are, or may
be too well acquainted with our own private Failures and Lapses) and charitably
of other Men, because we know not theirs; and thus it lays the Foundation of
Humility that great Christian as well as moral Virtue. It represses Anger,
prevents Malice, and regulates the irascible Passions; and so is nothing less
than Meekness and Lowliness, the two specific Graces of the Holy Jesus. It
quenches the Heats of Lust, and defends us from those Legions of Tormentors,
that are Consequents of it. It makes us to possess our Vessels, the Body, in
Sanctification, not (...) (as the Original words it) in the Passions of furious
and unbridled Desires. It guards us from Gluttony and Drunkenness, and
(teaching the right use of Meats and Drinks) prescribes the necessary Rules of
Quantity and Quality. Briefly, there is no Virtue or Grace but what it labors
for, and which does not stand in need of its Assistance, and no part of
Religion but what it serves. -- And all this it does by watching over the
Passions, to prevent Tumult, and punish Insurrections; by keeping the rein in
the mouth of the Beast, and the Appetites in due subjection. Thus Autarchy is
Custos Pacis, the Keeper of the public Peace in the little World, the Defender
of Virtue, and a Magistrate bearing the Sword of Punishment (where it governs)
not in vain.

. 16. This is that Christian Duty that St. Paul calls Mortification or killing
of the deeds of the Body, through the help and power of the Spirit, Romans 8. 13.
in order to the Heavenly Life. And these Deeds or Actions of the Body which are
to be mortified, are in another Place called our Members that are upon the
Earth, Coll. 3. 5. because the Earthly part uses them as Members of the Body
of Sin, and operates by them: Of these he reckons there only the concupiscible
Passions, when contaminated and ungoverned, as Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry:
and the Irascible, in the eighth verse following. This is the Crucifixion of
the old man, [call'd so, because we brought it into the World with us, whereas
Regeneration and the Spiritual Life begin in Baptism] and the destruction of
the body of Sin. Romans 6. 6. This is the Crucifixion of the Flesh, or earthly
Part, with its Affections and Lusts, which he mentions to his Galatians, c. 5.
v. 24. By all which words (viz. destroying, mortifying, crucifying, etc.) he
means no other than keeping the Body in subjection, and the exercise of the
Duty of Autarchy. To which purpose he gives you his own Example, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
I keep under my Body, [by Fasting, and other Spiritual Exercises] and bring it
into subjection [to the Soul, the Heavenly Part, whose Office and Charge it is
to govern], lest while I preach to others, I my self should become a Castaway.

And indeed as this our Apostle labored more abundantly than all the other; so
were his Sufferings proportionable, both by land and water, of strangers and of
his own Countrymen; yet his Autarchy or Self-Government was that which made
him endure all, not only with Patience, but with Glory. He used his Body to
suffering, whihc made it become habitual to him; and amongst all those
Pressures that he underwent for Christ, (some of which he himself mentions, 1
Cor. 11.) those he imposed upon himself, (because he imposed them upon himself,
and voluntarily chose them) were so much the more glorious. Thus he was
crucified with Christ, before he was beheaded at Rome; and was made a Partner
in his Sufferings, and conformable to his Death, though never crucified. Thus
he was not only able to do, but to suffer all things, through Christ that
strengthened him; and his Conquest of himself first, made him more than
Conqueror. This was the Original from whence the first Christians took the
Copy of all their Fastings, Discipline, and other voluntary Severities they put
upon themselves: Exercises now quite out-dated, nay ridiculed, and called
superstitious by an impious Pretense to Christian Liberty: Their Austerities
and Fastings, their Penances and holy Revenges, their Retirements and
Self-denials were only to dis-arm the Enemy within, and to render the Fleshly
part unable to hinder their Course of Piety; and that which they all their
lives aimed at, and which we should also (if we would be as happy as they) was
only Autarchy.

. 17. This is not only the great duty and end of all Moral Philosophy, and
Practical Divinity, but a certain Sign of True Piety: Others are sometimes
false, sometimes frivolous; this cannot deceive us. Men miss commonly in the
Notion of Religion, and, leaving the Essence of it, follow its Shadow, and dote
upon its Counterfeit: For if a Man can but express an outward Zeal, though it
be nothing in comparison of the Pharisaic Order of old for the Law of Moses; if
he can but look demurely, and counterfeit a Seriousness; if he can pour out
abundance of bold talk about God (though it be hardly Sense); lament the
Iniquity of the times (that is, slander and backbite his Superiors); and
sanctify all his Raillery with shaking his Head, a Sigh, or a Groan; if a Man
can do this (I say) he must be a Saint, an elect person, holy and beloved, etc.
though, in the mean time, his Heart be as full of Extortion and Excess, as the
Pharisees, those painted Sepulchers, were of old; though he can give his Tongue
liberty to slander, and his Heart to envy; though his Passions be untamed, his
Appetites unrestrained every where but in publicl. The truth is, Autarchy (when
exercised for the sake of Religion) is a certain Sign, and the distinguishing
Property of a Child of God, and all other Signs are delusive: no Man can be
either religious or wise without it. For true Religion begins within, and
subdues the Passions and Affections; is not clamorous, rash, fierce or envious
(as well as) not voluptuous, wanton or unclean; The Wisdom which is from above
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits, and without Partiality or Hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17. He that brings
his Body with its Lusts and Appetites into Subjection to the Spirit, (so that
he allows of nothing either unlawful or inconvenient) he that endeavors above
all to obtain a pure Heart, and a right Spirit, and to this end purifies
himself as God is pure; that visits the Fatherless and the Widows in their
Affliction, and keeps himself unspotted from the World (which is St. James's
Notion of True Religion and Vndefil'd before God); this Man (notwithstanding
some Errors in his Judgment, and Heterodoxes in Opinion) can be no other but a
Son of God, and an Heir of Heaven: for they are Christ's that have crucified
the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts.

. 18. And as Autarchy is a sure sign, so it is the Foundation and Beginning of
all true Religion; whatsoever is not built upon this is founded upon the Sand,
and will fall in time of Temptation: Profession without this is like an
Impostume, it looks red, big, and fiery, and is a mighty Pain to the Professor,
but within it is full of crude Humors and Impurities which will at last break
out into an Ulcer. Nay I will go further, and venture to say, That it is not
only the Bottom, but the Top of all Religion, and its Perfection. Go, sell what
thou have (says our blessed Lord to the Young Man in the Gospel, who bragged
of keeping all the Commandments from his Youth up to that time) and give the
Money to the Poor, if thou would be perfect. Try whether thou can deny thy
self and part with thy beloved Mammon upon the Hopes and Promises of
Possessions that are above? Whether thy Soul or thy Body, thy rational
Faculties, or thy Appetite govern in thee? Whether thou can so far conquer as
to deny thy self this World for the next? For if thou can do but this one
thing, there will be nothing wanting, but thou shall become perfect, and my
Disciple indeed, etc.

And if Autarchy be such as I have represented it, no wonder that it seems
hard: Difficulty puts a price upon Virtue, and even Heaven would not be so,
were it of easy Ascent, and the acquest of every idle Drone. Autarchy is too
great a Duty to be the work of every common Pretender to Christianity; and yet
it is not hard but easy, easy to him that is resolute and faithful to his
best Thoughts, easy to him that is exercised therein; of which more (it may
be) hereafter. In the mean time let this be your Comfort, That it is not so
hard but it is easily practicable, and that it makes all other Duties easy.

And now to apply all this to your self and all others (for whose sakes I have
thus at large traced the Hostilities originally founded in our Nature and our
Duty thereupon.) It Is certainly every Man's Interest as soon as he comes to the
stature of a Man, and to years of Understanding, to consider what he is? and
why sent hither? that so he may lay the Foundation of a wise and honest Life,
and give a good account thereof to his Creator. And that you may do this the
better, I will, in the Close of this Paper, commend unto you and all other
Readers, these Rules and Cautions.

. 19. First, You are therefore, in the first place, to maintain religiously the
Rights of the supreme Judicature, and submit to it: And this by a firm and fixed
resolution worthy of the Courage of a Man, acting according to the Dictates of
his Understanding and not Sense; for such a Man will die, rather than desert
his Reason; but of this before, etc. Consent not therefore to any thing that
your Reason condemns, either as unlawful or inconvenient, though ever so
delightful or advantageous, let the Importunities of Sense be ever so great,
that of Friends ever so earnest, or Example ever so general. Some Men are of a
Nature, stiff, morose, and resolute, not without a seeming Mixture of Pride and
Contempt; these are hardly to be advised or persuaded; and they would in this
respect be happy, if they could always take up the best Resolutions, because
they are best able to keep them: Others are of a soft, easy, and bashful
Nature, apt to be persuaded, and to comply with Customs and Counsels, though to
the prejudice sometimes of their Reason; they are loath to deny and afraid to
disoblige, being too good Natured to strive as well in Virtue as other things:
The first are like hard Wax, not to be dissolved but by Force of fire; the
second, like that which is soft, are apt to be worked into any shape by warmth
and kindness. Though the first be deservedly abhorred as an Enemy to common
Courtesy and humane Nature; yet considering the Policy of the Devil and his
Instruments, it were to be wished that our Nature be not so sweet and pliable
as to ruin us, but had (at sometime especially) something of Sowreness and
Morosity. If therefore you find your self too apt to yield and melt into a
Compliance, you ought to borrow a little Boldness, Self-Opinion, and Contempt
of others, to fortify your self against their Seductions. The Question is only
whether you will be governed by your own Reason, or others Folly, and there is
no question to which of these you ought to adhere: even Shame and Modesty have
their Evils and Extremes, and something of Confidence is requisite to
Constancy; do not therefore disparage your own Prudence so much, as to steer
after every pretended Mariner's direction, but pursue the Methods of your own
Reason; let others do as they please, do you act according to the dictates of
your own Judgment, and take heed of being self-condemned: For if you act
conscientiously, and according to your best Light, without any sinister ends, I
will not say you cannot err, but this I am confident of, That God will not
condemn you if you do, tho it be much. I don't know but I may extend this Rule
to Opinions and Controversies in Religion, but at present I intend it of moral
Actions in Opposition to the Seducements of Sense. It Is hard (you will say) to
take up, and harder to keep a Resolution in opposition to the Solicitations of
Pleasure and Profit, yea and of a Man's Native Inclinations. It Is so, I
confess; and yet sure this would not prove so hard a Work, if you take care in
the second place to

. 20. Secondly, Begin betimes to subdue your Appetites, and use them to the
Yoke, from your Youth; you well remember the Example of bending a twig whilst
it is such, and the Lesson that is inculcated from thence of early Exercise.
The Sensual part when reduced into subjection young, does become tractable and
obedient, and will grow so; whereas, when it has gotten strength it becomes
restiff, and stubborn. You have not wanted either Education or Example; and if
you had, you are young enough to begin this Glorious Work. It is, in my
Judgment, an excellent Method to make now and then an Experiment upon your
self, in things that are lawful: deny your self the Enjoyment of some Pleasures
for a short time, which may be lawfully used at any time, especially then when
you perceive Sense to become most importunate. By this Means you will make a
trial of your Strength; if you are foiled it will be no Sin; if you conquer you
may know your own Strength, and keep that in subjection, which may at last
prove your Enemy. And if there were no other use of the Fasts of the Church, I
suppose this only were sufficient to commend them to practice.

. 21. Thirdly, Endeavor to support your superior Faculties, and assert their
Authority by Arguments drawn from the Nature and End of that Action to which
you are invited; examine whether it be convenient, if not sinful? or whether
some Evil may not be the consequent of it? Some Actions are apparently good, so
that we need not dispute of them; others are evidently evil; but there are
Actions of a third sort, which are indifferent, and though they partake in
their own Natures of neither good nor evil, yet (as they are used) they may
tend to either; these are they that are to be weighed in the Scales, and
Resolutions taken accordingly. Besides, there are some Evils in disguise, and
plead Innocence, and those would be brought under Examination and Discovery.

. 22. Fourthly, Avoid carefully all those things that abate the Strength and
undermine the Government of your superior Faculties. Such as these are,
profane Discourses, evil Examples, debauched Companions, lascivious Songs, and
evil Communications which corrupt good manners: There is surely a kind of
Infection in these, and they are catching especially in some Constitutions;
they infect the Soul through the Ear, pollute the Mind, and propagate Vice like
a spiritual Pestilence; they serve for no other use but to emasculate the
Spiritual part, weaken her Powers, defile her Purity, debauch the Mind, and set
up Sense in the Throne of Reason. But as the greatest evil of all (which for a
while disables the whole Man, the Soul in its Faculties, and the Body with its
Members) avoid Drunkenness. This is a Sin which (when in intense degrees)
brings a kind of Death upon the Body as well as Mind, and so intermits the
Exercise of both Judicatures; but every Tendency to it, more or less,
undermines sober Reason, slackens the Reins of her Government, blinds the
Understanding, and by degrees casts her into a deep sleep; and, thus weakened,
lets loose the Philistines upon her. And though, I confess there be different
degrees of this Sin, and different Constitutions of Men, so that some are made
more wicked by it than others; (and thus some excellent Natures may be free
from its usual Attendants, the greater Crimes I mean, in the use of it;) yet no
Man, I Am sure, can retain his Wisdom and Discretion. You cannot but remember
the old Proverb to this purpose, Inebriari simul and sapere ipsi Jovi non
competit, Drunkenness makes all Men Fools, most Beasts, and some Devils: And
what it naturally tends to, learn from the Mouth of the wise Solomon, who
describes its Effects so sensibly and truly as though he had tried it, and
observed it often. Prove. 23. 29. to the end of that Chapter. Let your Intellect
therefore prescribe the Times, Methods, and Measures of your Feastings, Mirth,
Diversions, and Compotations; consult not Sense about these her near Friends,
to whom she is so much allied, least she deceive and betray you.

. 23. Fifthly. If, by the Importunity of the sensual Part, the Persuasion of
those falsely termed Friends, or the Example of others, you have been seduced to
do any thing unworthy of your self, and thereby have proved Rebel to your
better Part; upon the first return of your Reason, and the recovery of your
Understanding from its Eclipse (for the opacous Body will soon remove, and
righteous R^^son shine out again, and by its Light show you your Sin): I say,
then your great care must be immediately to fall down upon your Knees, and
humbly implore Forgiveness of your Creator, for this Offense committed against
him and his Vicegerent. At which time you are not only to renew your
Resolutions of Amendment, and fortify your self against ensuing Temptations,
but also to inflict some Penance upon your self for your defection. This cannot
but be pleasing to Almighty God, when he observes how you not only pass
sentence, but do execution upon your self, and thereby anticipate his
Judgments: Besides, it will prevail with the Divine Benignity, for a supply of
extraordinary Aids for the future; make you more circumspect over your self
(when you know that you must suffer for it) and satisfy your own Conscience of
the Truth of your Repentance.

. 24. Sixthy, and Lastly, (because in many things we offend all, and so must
and shall do, during this state of Imperfection) above all things beware of the
Habits of Vices, and that you do not give (...) ^ensual Part (at least) the
usual (...). Habits (you know) of all things, especially of Vice, stick hard,
and are not easily removed. Sensuality a little encouraged will grow strong,
insolent, and play the Tyrant, and warmed, with the Snake in the Fable, begins
to hiss, gather Poison, and keep Reason out of doors; the longer we delay to
humble him (which yet must be our Task, at one time or other, unless we resolve
to be miserable for ever) the harder our work will be. And believe me, a Man
besotted to his Vices, or (in the Apostle's Phrase) dead in Trespasses and
Sins, is, next the damned, the most lamentable Spectacle; and the direct way to
this Condition, is to gratify our Appetites so long, till we must deny them
nothing; yea, and at last destroy Appetite it self, by pleasing it: And though
this may seem strange, yet it is the true end of all Debauchery; for Sensuality
does at last devour itself, and the inferior Soul, if let alone (like the Worm
in the Fruit) will become its own Executioner.

. 25. But this case is (God be thanked) not so common: Such a Man must have
lost all Sense of Virtue, be fully reconciled to his Vices, though never so
destructive, and resolved on his own Ruin: He must be deaf to all Counsel,
hardened beyond all Impressions of Reason and Conscience: The Spiritual Life
must be totally swallowed up of the Sensitive; and he must be a hardened,
impenitent, and contented Sinner; content to lose Heaven, and endure Hell. If
he has any apprehensions of his Sin and Danger, he is not irrecoverably lost,
but may admit of Help. To which Purpose, I will, in the Close of this
Discourse, lay down these Rules for his Recovery.

I. Let him be truly convinced of his Condition, his present and future
Miseries, his unworthy, Bestial, and Brutish Life, and the Sorrows to which he
is posting: For if he can be but made sensible of his Condition so as to desire
Help, he is capable of it, and may have it. The Understanding must be cleared,
and the Will rectified, and the Man made thoroughly willing to be cured. Will thou be made whole, says our Lord to the impotent Man, that had lain at the
Pool of Bethesda thirty and eight Years; and having understood his willingness,
he received the powerful Command of, Rise, take up thy Bed, and walk.

II. Let him then leave off all the Incendiaries to Vice, as Wine and
Strong-Drink, and the Converse, Company, and Society of those Betrayers of
Souls, (those Panders for Hell) which have hitherto accompanied him into
Debauchery; and let him frequent the Society of Wise and Virtuous Men, who will
direct and encourage him by their Advice and Example.

III. Let him call upon God, who is always ready with his Grace to assist Pious
Eneavours; who gives liberally, and upbraids no man.

IV. Let him begin with the Outworks of Sensuality, deny himself in smaller
Matters first, and retrench himself by degrees. If he can conquer in a little,
he may be sure to proceed; and the more he prevails, the more he shall be
enabled, till at last he becomes more than Conqueror, and can do all things
through Christ that strengthens him.

V. And for his Encouragement, let it be considered that the old habituated
Sinner's state is not so desperate, but that he also has some advantages of
Piety: his Lusts and Appetites, by continual fruition, are become tired,
nauseate, and, (by the decay) less importunate. His Heats are cooled, his
Rashness moderated, and Righteous Reason is ready to convince him, That all
sinful Enjoyments are but Vanity and Vexation of spirit, That the days are come
in which he can find but little pleasure in them: For a Young man may, in some
measure, be excused, but an Old man cannot; because even Nature joins with
Grace to sound a retreat; his Appetites are ready every foot to leave him, and
he is fain to use Arts to keep them; his Lusts slight him and deceive him, and
he has nothing but a sinful vitiated Will, and a polluted Fancy left, which
yet makes him ridiculous, and exposes him. His Lusts first seduced his Mind,
and now a defiled Mind is forced to caress them; like an out-worn Mistress once
adored, now slighted by her old Servants. It Is but time, certainly then, to
retire, when we can pursue our pleasures no longer: when Providence has taken
away the Temptation, we ought not to make to our selves Images and Shadows of
that which has forsaken us. This is the Order of Nature, and thus Days speak,
(if we would hear) and multitude of Years would teach us Wisdom.

Lastly, Let him endeavor to obtain a true Estimate of the different Pleasures
and Advantages, the Ends and Consequences of Virtue and Vice, and by comparing
them together, become satisfied how much better it is to live the Life of a good
Man, and a Christian here, and to be received into Bliss hereafter; than to be
a Sot, a Slave, a Fool, for a few days, and afterward to be damned.

. 26. This is the great Truth which the two following Essays do endeavor to
illustrate, and which, I hope, your Experience will one day convince you of. In
the mean time, let me only tell you, That the Sensualist, for all his gay
Colors and fine Shows, is but a poor miserable Slave, and enslaved to that
which every good and wise Man keeps in Subjection; I mean his Brutish Part, his
Lusts and Appetites. Whilst the Man that keeps his Liberty, and rules within
himself, that uses Pleasures as a Cordial not continual Nourishment, and takes
only what will agree with his Spiritual Advantages; the Man that can learn and
practice this short Lesson of the excellent Moralist of old, sustine and
abstine, suffer and abstain; suffer with Patience and Resignation what
Providence lays upon thee; and abstain from every thing which may be hurtful
for thy Body or Soul: This mighty Man, I say, this more than Emperor, reigns a
Soveragin in himself; is invulnerable and unconquerable; he falls into no sin,
nor runs into any Danger, but is the Favorite and Care of Heaven here and
hereafter. And thus much of The Nature of Autarchy, and Rules of its Practice,
with which I shall conclude the First Part of this Essay, and am,

Yours, etc.

YTAPA^ OR, THE ART of Self-Government.
The Second PART.
BEING A Vindication of the Pleasures of Autarchy, compared with those of
Sensuality.

. 1. AFTER a curious Search into the Original of Corrupt Nature, the Reasons of
its Conjunction with the purer Spirit, and the Rules to make it serviceable to
Religion, which was the Argument of my former Discourse (my Dear Dorotheus) you
may perhaps think it unnecessary to write a Second time, or add any thing to
that Subject. And truly after I had finished the Former Letter, I became
inclinable to that Opinion my self, till (besides my Promise) I had considered,
that it is easy to give, and hard to take such Counsel, that Autarchy is the
most difficult, and perhaps in some Sense, our only Duty, and that Sense will
become importunate, especially when it has Health and Youth to be its
Advocates. And truly when I find so few Men, even in their best Age, and most
vivid Exercise of their Reason, able to tame the Wild Beast within, I must
confess I cannot rigorously exact it of Youth. My Business therefore shall be
in the following Papers, to work upon your Affections; I mean, to engage my
self in the Cause of the superior Faculties, and endeavor to convince you
that they are not rigorous, nor exercise any Tyranny over us; but that by a
wise and sweet Conduct they would (if permitted) gently and carefully pilot our
crazed Vessel through the turbulent Sea of this World, to the Haven of
Happiness; and this not only when the Rules are drawn by Morality, but by the
strictest Religion. If this can be made out, Self-Government will be your
Choice not your Yoke, and you will find it your great Duty and greater Interest.

. 2. And because there be several sorts of Judgments as well as Constitutions,
so that some will be convinced with that Argument, which others cannot
Apprehend or count ridiculous: Lest from hence, Autarchy and its Virtues should
be disparaged, by a real or seeming poor Apology, I must here premonish you,
that its Exercise does not merely depend upon those outward Encouragements
which follow. Morality is our Duty and our Interest, though never so
ungrateful; and its great Obligations arise from Spiritual Promises and Rewards
in this Life, and the Eternal Joys of the Life to come; and though she were ever
so sorrowful, hirsute, and Squallid; yet those inexpressible Joys she inspires
into the Soul in this Life, and those she reserves for the future state, are
abundantly sufficient to subdue any rational Understanding. Even Afflictions
themselves may be elegible, when, being light and Momentary, they work for us a
far more exceeding weight of Glory. The End makes Sufferings tolerable; and we
see in Temporals, Men are very willing to be sick for future Health, to serve a
severe Apprenticeship for a lasting Freedom, to labor, toil, and sweat for an
approaching Harvest, and to hazard the dangers of the Seas for Merchandice, and
of War for Glory: These are common Practices, founded upon rational
Conjectures. And why should not Religion engage us upon greater and more
certain Motives? The Arguments then that follow are not necessary but ex
abundanti; If they convince, they will sweeten the Methods of Providence,
reconcile the Sons of Sense to Virtue, answer the Objections of the
Sensualists, and remove some Stumbling Blocks that offend the Carnal minded; if
not, know yet that Religion stands upon eternal Foundations, and remains
secure, as having no need of outward Rewards; though it may yet receive some
encouragements and advances in Minds not so defecate and stripped of the World,
as ours must needs be while we live with Flesh and Blood. And indeed the
Prejudices of Sensualists are so many, loud and clamorous, and improved to that
degree, that I thought it worth my time to search into the matter, and consider
whether Piety makes all her Votaries in this Life most miserable: For Men
mostly prefer present to future Comforts, and these short Joys in a Vale of
tears, to those of the Regions of Happiness which are above. If I therefore can
demonstrate, that Religion has its present Comforts, and perhaps greater, and
more substantial than Sensuality can pretend to; all these Prejudices will
vanish, and Men will entertain it for its present as well as future Reward.

. 3. And here I expect to meet with great Disadvantages by reason of those
Prejudices, which seem to be congenite and twisted into humane Nature; for the
Pleasure of Self-denial (which must accompany Autarchy) are looked upon as a
Paradox, and Men bear a kind of antipathy to restraining Virtue; when it puts
the Roins into the Mouth of Appetite, it is thought imperious, and its
Government intolerable. We have a natural Inclination to please our worser
part, which even a mortified St. Paul was forced to complain of; this is the
common Murmurer which looks back toward Egypt; and, like the Spies sent to
search Canaan, brings an evil Report of that good Land; The Land (say they) is
indeed good, but their Cities are walled up to Heaven, and defended by Giants,
the Sons of Anak, to whom we are but as Grasshoppers. See how Fear augments
things, and what Hyperboles Infidelity can fancy to it self, for the Walls
were not so high, nor the Giants so terrible. Thus the Sensualists will
describe the Selfdenying part of Religion; it is confessed (will they say) all
things considered, that it were best if we could govern our selves, and
restrain our Passions, and they are certainly happy that can obtain that Power,
but the number of such have been but small; some select Saints of old, who had,
as it were, put off Humane Nature, and were extraordinarily endued with
Strength from above; but who amongst us, and in these degenerate times of Sin
and Death, can throw down the Strongholds of Sin, and conquer those gigantick
Appetites that defend them? this would be to turn Angels before our time, and
put off that Humanity, that we must at the same time carry about us. Nor is
this Warfare only difficult but painful, nay a kind of Death, to die daily, I
mean to mortify our selves, and kill all those dispositions and tendencies to
Sin implanted in us. It Is certainly a harsh Lesson which our Lord teaches us
though by way of Metaphor; to cut off an offending Hand, and pluck out a wanton
Eye; by which is implied at least (alas that it should be so!) the Difficulty
and yet Duty of Seeing and not Desiring. For why have we Senses given us if we
may not use them? or why have these Senses any Influence upon our Desires, if
they may not be gratified? This is to exact an impracticable Work of us, and
exercise a Tyranny that would justify even a Rebellion: For we can never
become so unkind to our own Inclinations as thus to mortify them, and under
pretense of Religion act a kind of Martyrdom. Alas! the Scripture has
expressed this Work in frightful Terms; and Mortification, Circumcision of the
Heart, and the Death of the Body of Sin, are words that carry Terror in them:
Besides, as though the ordinary Exercise of Religion were not bitter enough,
God has infused more Gall into it by his Dealing toward his Servants, and
Providence seems to exercise them above others with Afflictions. What means
else those Sorrowful Predictions, by which our Blessed Lord forewarns his
Disciples of Persecutions which they should suffer, and which his Apostle, St.
Paul, seems to entail upon Christianity it self, 2 Timothy 3. 12. That all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecutions. I will therefore
(says the Sensualist) lay aside this difficult, this painful Work, and depend
upon Mercy for Heaven; for if God had expected better things from me, he would
have made me better. Heaven is, I confess, worth the pursuit; but it is an
Estate that may be long before it falls, nor know I whether all my Sorrown and
Sufferings in the Pangs of the Newbirth, will at last entitle me to it. -- Or
if this Resolution be too daring, I hope I may yet adjourn this bitter Cup,
this painful Task to Old Age, which is the only time proper for Penance and
Mortification; Pleasures will then be denied me by Nature, and then (and not
till then) I will deny them. Appetite must at last cease, and then I will
resolve no longer to gratify it. It is best parting by mutual Consent, and
when my beloved Vices and I can keep company no longer; then, and not before
then, we must part for ever. --

Thus pleads the Sensualist, and so puts off this necessary, this pleasant work
till Death comes and snacks him off the Stage, and then his Thoughts and
Designs perish. Or if he lives to Old Age, his sinful Habits are become
inveterate and fixed beyond the possibility of a Removal; so that Age finds him
and leaves him, a hardened and contented Sinner. All which (yea, and the
punishments of the other World that follow after) proceed from this (...), this
Fundamental Error, That Autarchy is a harsh, unpleasant work, and her
Government Tyrannical.

. 4. It is now therefore my Task to combat the Sensualist with his own
Weapons, and in his own Way, and to vindicate the Duty that I commend, which is
looked upon as the severest in the Christian Religion, (being no less than
Self-Denial) from the evil Report that Sin and Satan would needs fix upon it.
To do this I consider, That there are but two Qualifications that can commend
any thing to our Observation; viz. Pleasure and Profit: Pleasure is the
peculiar Dalilah of younger, and Profit of older Years. These are the two
boasted Advantages of Sensuality, for which the deluded Wretch pawns both Body
and Soul, and the only Spoils he can aim at. If I can therefore demonstrate,
That there are equal, if not better Pleasures, and as much Profit to be found
under the Government of the Spirit, as there is under that of the Flesh; I have
mine end, nor will the want of these be an Argument against Autarchy. This is
the remaining part of my Task, and the Province that I have undertaken, which
(though it look like a Paradox) I hope to perform with that Evidence, that to
an understanding and considerative Person, it shall reach even to a Conviction.

The only thing I desire of you (my Dorotheus) is to strip your self of all
Prejudices, and lay aside the Love of Carnality; to clear your Mind of all
gross Matter, and to consider Enjoyments abstracted from your natural
Inclinations to them, and as they are in themselves; and thus qualified, I
shall not fear to make you judge in this present Controversy, while I weigh
the present Advantages of Virtue and Vice in the Balance of Reason, and thence
evince that Autarchy is neither so difficult or unprofitable a work as it has
been hitherto represented to you: That the Spiritual part lays no heavy
Burdens upon Men's Shoulders grievous to be born, but that Christ's heaviest
Yoke is yet easy and his Burden light. And this I shall do by examining the
Pleasures of Sensuality in the first place; and, stripping off its Paint and
Garniture, compare them with the more solid and substantial Pleasures of
Virtue. And then, having made some suitable Observations upon the Difficulty
and Misery which are supposed to attend a pious Life, conclude the trouble of
this Letter, and leave the other outward Advantages of Autarchy for the Subject
of the Third Part.

. 5. I am not here obliged to maintain That there are no such things as sinful
Pleasures, no more than with the Stoic deny that there is Evil in Pain and
Torture. I know very well, that whatsoever pleases is a Pleasure, and that
every Man is sensible of so much in sensual Enjoyments; nor am I for the
destroying the Appetites, but for regulating them. This is that which I assert,
and shall endeavor to evince, That the Pleasures of Sensuality are few, poor,
and despicable in comparison of those which are to be enjoyed in the practice
of Virtue, (which is something more than what I promised before) and,
consequently, That it is an absolute cheat put upon us, when these are made an
Argument for Debauchery. This will appear if we take, in the first place, a
general View of the Pleasures of Sensuality, and make as we pass along
particular References.

In every sinful Enjoyment there are Three things to be considered,

1. The Expectation. 2. The Fruition. 3. The End.
Each of which are pretended to have its peculiar Pleasures, and therefore
deserve our particular Examination. I began with the First of these,
Expectation.

And here I need not use many words; for every Man must be sensible to how
great a height the Hopes of vain Man is raised by the Delusion of the Devil and
his own Fancy. The approaching Enjoyment is represented through a magnifying
Glass, and seems great and glorious: The Bubble of Fancy struts and looks big,
and we expect mighty matters. Could I but possess such an Estate, or enjoy so
charming a fair One, etc. Voluptuousness has certainly two Faces, she turns
the Young Face, and smiles upon those that expect her, but looks Old and
Withered upon those that have enjoyed her. Each Circumstance of approaching
Good is thought a Bliss, which yet vanishes in the Embrace; so that if the
Votary to Sin had so much Wit, he would stop at Expectation, and go no further.
He might then indeed continue enamored with the Child of his own Fancy, and
worship the Idol of his own making, without Remorse or Repentance, when it is
too late. But his Unhappiness is, That the same Expectation which deludes him,
urges him on to destroy it self, and so to put an end to his Hopes and Fears
together, by a nearer Advance, which we call Fruition, and comes next to be
considered.

. 6. Secondly. Expectation then being confessed by all to be only an imaginary
Good, swelled out with Hopes and Fears, it is Fruition alone that must crown the
Sensualist, and make him happy. But even Fruition it self is experimentally
proved to be so vain and empty, and next to nothing, to have so little of real
Satisfaction, and so much of Cheat in it, that after a Man sits down and calmly
considers what he has done, it is a great Question whether he will not repent
of his Credulity, rail at the Delusion, and prefer even Expectation it self to
it. For he shall then find that he has embraced a Cloud, and fished all night
for Pleasure, but caught nothing but Shame and Sorrow; that he has been
notoriously cheated; and having sown the Wind, he has reaped the East Wind;
that he has pursued a Phantom, and having hunted after Vanity, has at last
overtook Vexation of Spirit: For, the Pleasures of Sensual Fruition are indeed
but Shadows of those of Virtue, and want their Invigorations and Comforts: They
are as short of these as the Image of the Sun, represented in a Mirror, is of
the Light, Heat, and Influence of that glorious Luminary. That this may
sensibly appear, I will endeavor to wash off the Paint from the Faces of these
Counterfeits, and examine the matter of Fact, and compare the Pleasures of the
Fruition of Vice and Virtue together; Instances will have here their Use, bring
the Matter nearer the Eye and illustrate it. And, to this purpose, I will use
St. John's Analysis of Sensuality, in his tripartite Division, into that (1.)
of the Lust of the Flesh, (2.) that of the Eye, and (3.) that of the Pride of
Life. 1 John 2. 16.

. 7. And in reference to the First of these, Consider seriously with your self,
and then tell me (if you can) wherein consists the true Pleasure of those
Vices, which we call Gluttony and Drunkenness; that Pleasure I mean that is
peculiar to these Excesses besides and above what is found in the limited Use
of Meat and Drink. Is it in the stuffing up of the Body, or the vitiating of
the Palate, in the distempering of the Taste, or the disordering of the
Stomach? Is it found among the Ruins of the Understanding, or the Laxation of
the Members? Surely no Man can take any true Pleasure in playing the Fool or
Madman, or in turning Beast beyond the Example of Nebuchadnezzar. I never yet
knew any Man that delighted in making Experiments upon himself, to procure a
voluntary Epilepsie or Syncope. Men are not usually so fond of the Image of
Death! and yet this, and no other is the Drunkard's Fruition, which is yet so
unaccountable, that the poor deluded seems to be under a kind of Fascination,
to dote on that which must end in Loathing, if not in Sickness and Death. Sure
I am there can be no Fruition in either, but the momentary Touch of the Meats
and Drinks upon the Nerves of the Tongue, and yet even this is not peculiar to
Excess, but is rather an Attendant of Sobriety. The Sober person has generally
the quicker Palate and most Delight, though with a Dinner of Herbs and
Small-beer; and if any Man enjoys himself and his Friend, it is only He.

. 8. And then for unlawful Lusts, (the other Species of Carnality) I may put
the same Question, with as great, and perhaps greater Advantage. Where are the
Pleasures peculiar to the Fruition of unlawful Love? Or, what does the
Adulterer enjoy above, and besides what is to be found in loving and lawful
Marriage? If there be any such Pleasures, sure I am, they must be imaginary and
next to nothing. And that you may make a true Estimate of these and such like
inferior Enjoyments, I must let you know (once for all) that we descend
therein much below our immortal part, and equal our selves to the Beasts that
perish. Nay more, this way the silly Ass may out-rival the Man, and the impure
Goat be more happy than he; that you will find them much below your
Expectation, if not mere Cheats, the Mistress of Debauchees, the Shame of Wise
men, and the Pursuit of Fools; too commonly a Sin, and always a Shame, and the
Sign and Cause of our Mortality. For the Propagation of our Like, both shows us
approaching Death and hastens it, and we diminish our own Lives to give Life to
others. But be it what it will, I have nothing to say against it, in respect of
Morality, when it is regular; I mean, when the Matrimonial Vow has sanctified
it, and the Transmission of our Nature has made it necessary; the strictest
Cato will then allow it, the modest and chaste St. Paul command it, and the
Spiritual part consent to it. This for the lawful Use of it, for which Nature
has provided animal Pleasures proportionate to its ends; but if you can fancy
any other Pleasures peculiar to the sinful use of it (which sure is something
hard to do) turn but your Eyes and Thoughts upon those rotten Carcasses, those
walking Sepulchers, which Lasciviousness has made its Martyrs; see there the
Relicts of its Tyranny, when it has exhausted the Spirits, darkened the
Understanding, weakened the Senses, and putrified the very Soul by the Contagion
of the Body, not to be purified but by the Flames of Hell: And when you have
duly considered this, then let the Adulterer boast of his stolen Pleasures.
These are the chief kinds of the Lust of the Flesh, which is the eldest
Daughter of Sensuality.

. 9. The Lust of the Eye holds the next place, by which I presume St. John
meant Covetousness, whose right to Pleasures comes next to be examined. And if
those I have spoken of, had great Pretenses to great Pleasures, I Am sure, this
has none at all: For, Covetousness is confessed by all to be a wretched
Plague, or rather a Madness; and the Man that is enslaved to it, seems
possessed, and is rightly Termed a Miser. But (because Money answers all
things) if you can imagine that there is any Pleasure in looking upon Bags of
Gold and Silver (that is, White and Yellow Earth) reflect a little upon the
Fate of a Tantalus, and think what it is to have, and yet not enjoy, great
Abundance. If there be any hidden charms in Cares and Fears; in watching
Riches, lest they take wing, and fly away, or (in the best Effect of it) in
being honored and feared; yet I Am sure the Happiness of the liberal Soul which
shall be made fat, and the sweet content of him that is satisfied with Food
convenient, does far surpass them all.

. 10. The Ostentations and vainglorious Boastings proceeding from the Fumes of
Ambition is the Third kind of Sensuality in St. John's Method. And here I
cannot but think that the strutting Gallant must be conscious to himself of his
own Emptiness, and that he should take little Pleasure in cheating others, when
he knows he does but cheat himself. And for the desire of being great I would
fain know where is the Pleasure of forcing a Man's Way through the Briars and
Thorns, the Dark Methods of Secret Plots, and the Labyrinths of Infernal
Combinations? When by many dangerous Steps he is arrived at the unsteady Seat
of Greatness, and has put on the ( Incendialis Toga, the) poisonous Robe of
Jealousies and Fears; When he is hated by some, and feared by others, and made
a common Curse by most, Is this that which you call a state of Happiness? His
Port deprives him of Society, and the distance that he must keep, renders his
Life solitary and uncomfortable; and yet, (which is very remarkable) he is
troubled with Company, and his Attendants will not give him the Liberty of an
Hour's Privacy and Recess. So that indeed a great Favorite, a Statesman, can
neither be familiar or retired, nor can enjoy himself alone or his Friends in
Company, but must be confined to the Bedlam of Buffoons and Parasites. If this
be then such a Pleasant Life, per me licet, let those that will run the danger,
enjoy the Benefit of being great and hated, of breaking the wild Beast to an
easy Pace and Mildness; they had need to have Returns answerable to their
Dangers. And yet after all, I will produce more Safety, Satisfaction and sweet
Content in a mean Estate, and among the Country shades, than in all their Glory.

It Is true, we that move in a lower orb, look up and gaze upon Greatness with
Admiration, and think a Phaeton a happy Man because he sits so high, and
amongst so much Brightness; but alas! we know not what Furies carry him on,
(...) what Dangers attend him. Every Man is uneasy in his own Condition, would
be greater, and has a Tincture of Ambition, and that makes us not know our own
Happiness, even when we are possessed of it. In the mean time, did we seriously
consider the state of Greatness, we should find St. James's description of our
Lives to be adapted to his: A Vapor, that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away: A Cloud, that looks gloriously toward the Sun, and by the
Reflection of his Beams, carried aloft by a superior Influence, for a short
time, and then it dissolves in Tears.

. 11. I have at large examined the Pretenses of those Three sorts of
Sensualities, to that which we call Pleasures, and, setting them in a true
Light, have exposed their Delusions; so that upon the whole matter, we may
justly conclude, That their Pleasures are not so surprising and extraordinary;
nor indeed have they any at all peculiar to themselves, but what is common to
Virtue and Moderation, or rather what proceeds from them: For Virtue dwells in
the Center, and is the Original of all true Pleasure; and Vice in the Extremes,
where she receives and reflects back some of the Emanations which proceed from
the Middle; but has none of her own but what she borrows or counterfeits. Thus
(that I may use an apt Similitude) the Sun, from the Center of the World,
shines by its own Light, whilst the Planets, as so many dark Bodies, are whited
over, and shine by Reflection only.

But because this is not a common Notion, and obvious to every Apprehension, I
will bestow some short Reflections upon the Vanity of Fruition, in respect of
its Shortness, Uncertainty, and Dissatisfaction; Appendages which allay it to
that degree, that it is not worthy of the pursuits of Good and Wise Men.

First. For, First, every Sensual Enjoyment is Momentary and Transient; It
ceafes as soon as perceived; and, like the Lightning, is gone before we are
aware of it. I have here a large Field of Discourse before me, but I need not
stay to confirm what is confessed, and at the same time, lamented by the
greatest Sensualists.

Secondly, It is uncertain; we lose it oftentimes in the Embrace, and it
vanishes in our Arms. The whole Life of Man is but an Aggregate of indivisible
Instants of Time, and every one of these may rob us of it; the Revenge of Saul
was prevented when he had got David even in his Net; and Herod's Divinity
vanished in the midst of his Adorers, when the invisible Hand consigned him to
Worms. Every day gives us Examples of the inconstancy of Worldly Pleasures, and
we are commonly carried up aloft by them, and then let sall, and so broken to
pieces; thus Alexander, in the midst of his Victories, Feasts, and Triumphs,
was called off the Stage; and so was the Rich Man in the Gospel, amongst his
Designs of Ease and Fruition. Nay more than this, a vain and needless Fear
destroys all our Enjoyments, and they are so much the Creatures of Fancy, that
they vanish and disappear, upon the least alteration of it.

Thirdly, It is at best but dissatisfactory; every Sensual Enjoyment is a
cheat, false as Hell, whose Interest it serves; and as Visionary as the nightly
Feasts of Witches: As these imagine that they eat and drink, and yet still find
themselves pursued by the same hunger and Misery; so Voluptuousness leaves us
as empty as before, and raises a greater Thirst than it allays; nay more, it is
lost by Usage, and the poor deluded loathes what he has, admires what he has
not, is always to seek, and is never satisfied; he pursues an Aerie Expectation,
and courts a Mistress, that when once enjoyed inspires him with new Wants, and
puts him upon fresh Quests and Dangers. Thus the Slave to his own Lusts, rowls
the stone of Sisyphus, and carried by the Gyre of his untamed Desires, moves an
unconstant constant Round, till Sickness or Age disables him, and Death arrests
him, and carries him to the Infernal Prisons, where only he becomes Stationary.

And thus I have made some Reflections upon that Men call Fruition, or Sensual
Enjoyment. And I have been the longer, because if there be any Pleasure in
Sensuality, it must be in this: By what has been said, it will appear, That
there is not a greater cheat imposed upon Mortals, or rather that they impose
upon themselves: And I will be bold to conclude, That Sin begins and proceeds
by Delusion, and ends in Misery; That Voluptuousness is a Masque acted by
Furies in disguise, which, toward the end, they throw off, and appear in their
proper Shape. For this is the true End of all Sinful Enjoyments, which I must
next demonstrate.

. 12. There is a way that seems right unto a Man (says the Divine Preacher)
but the End thereof is the ways of Death. Prove. 14. 12. The End of
Voluptuousness is always calamitous, and that commonly in this Life. Sin brings
forth Shame and Sorrow, and forbidden Enjoyments tend to the Destruction of
that Body they are brought to gratify. Thus Intemperance weakens the Appetite,
and consequently the Body: Thus Lust incites Ammon even to incest, and then to
hate even to Death, till Drunkenness and the Sword of Absalom has cut him off,
and so put an end to both Passions. And as Sin, at last, brings a dismal
Catastrophe upon it self; so each Crime has its particular Nemesis even in our
own Conscience. And I dare appeal to Experience, whether (when a Man's Passion
is over, and he is at leisure to consider calmly what he has done) he feels
not Shame invade him, and a natural Horror dart through his Soul? Whether he
does not run, as it were, from the Presence of God (as Adam, his Forefather,
did) as ashamed of his Nakedness, or sow some thin Fig Leaves together, some
poor Excuses to cover it? Thus it is at first, till Conscience is seared or
lulled asleep, and so becomes senseless: Custom will take off the Dread of
Punishment, and because Vengeance seems to slumber, the hardened Sinner removes
it far out of his Sight; and yet for all this commonly Conscience at last
awakes and laying before him the things that he has done, arraigns, and
condemns him: the black Fumes of Atheism, which hitherto have hid his Sin and
Punishment, will at last withdraw; and the Deity, just and terrible, discover
himself to his Soul, and then learn, from his own mouth, the Agony of his
distracted Mind; when he considers that he must leave all his Pleasures,
Friends, and Acquaintance, and be carried alone into the dreadful unknown Abyss
of Eternity! When he begins thus to question with himself, What if now at last
there should be a God, which I have not only provoked, but denied; a Heaven,
which I have slighted; and a Hell, which I have not only chosen, but made it my
Business, and taken pains to procure? What if this God shall meet me in the
other World and convince me of his Being, by his Justice; in what a Condition
shall I be then? Why, no worse than eternally and irrecoverably miserable! And
is it so? I find then I have lived to a fair purpose! I have enjoyed some few
shadows of Pleasures, and suffered many real Griefs! I have been cheated all my
Life time with Hopes, Fears, and Expectations, and found all at last both
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit! And now I can perceive no glimpse of Joy, no
comfort to my Soul; but a Darkness, and Horror, and the Expectation of a
dreadful Sentence when I shall depart hence! But Oh sacred Virtue! and you
hospitable Graces of Integrity, and Innocence! who alone are able to banish
these dreadful Apprehensions, and bring home in Peace, how have I slighted and
despised you! -- This is very probable to be the End of the Voluptuous, because
the nearer he approaches to his Death, the clearer are the discoveries of his
Misery; yet I know very well that some die, as well as live, senseless and
unapprehensive of future Danger; but then their Condition is never the better,
because their Despair as well as Punishment are transferred to the other World.
The Rich man in the Gospel was never the happier in Hell, because he perceived
it not, before he opened his Eyes in its Flames!

. 13. I have led you (my Dorotheus) through the Folly to the Misery of
Sensuality; of living in Rebellion against the higher Powers of the Soul, and
working Wickedness with Greediness. You may easily perceive, upon the whole
Matter, That there is much Sorrow and very little Pleasure in Debauchery, and
that Hell stands at the end of it; That those poor Pleasures that are enjoyed,
are little else but Cheat and Delusion, and at last leave us not only
disappointed but miserable. Happy is the Man that can see through the Disguise,
and apprehend the Deformity and End of Vice. Happy is he, that by an early
Conquest of himself and his Earthly part, makes himself capable of the
Pleasures of Autarchy; of those that are to be found in the Paths of Virtue and
the Regimen of the upper Soul. And these are they which come next to be
considered.

. 14. It was the wise Epictetus that reduced all Morality, and his Readings
thereupon to these two words (mentioned in the end of the former Part) (...),
suffer and abstain. These two infold the whole Duty of Autarchy, and regulate,
at once, our irascible and concupiscible Appetites. The First of these tells us
we must suffer Injuries, Reproaches, and Slanders patiently: The Second enjoins
us Abstinence, from Sin, I mean, and from all Occasions and Appearances of it.
These two were the constant Doctrine of our Lord first, and then of his
Disciples; only he went beyond Epictetus, refined and exalted these Duties, and
made the first especially, (the hardest of the two) one of the Beatitudes,
Matt. 5. Blessed are ye when men shall revile and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my Names sake. Rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets,
that were before you. The Conquest of our selves, the Exercise of Self-denial,
and the patient bearing of Injuries, is a present Blessedness as well as a
future: This cannot be discerned, I must confess, by the most part of Mankind
in a degenerate Age, which will admit of no Happiness which is not carnal. We
put Sensuality in the Chair, and make her. Judge of the Pleasures of Autarchy;
and she will not fail (without all question) to give sentence on her own side,
in her on Case; viz. That Self-Government is a painful, and a miserable sort of
Life. Whereas, let enlightened Reason be placed on the Tribunal, and you shall
hear (that which Solomon long-since noted, even to a Proverb) That her Ways are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.

I have already, I hope, sufficiently proved, That there is no considerable
Pleasure appropriate to Sensuality, but what she borrows of Temperance and
Moderation, and then dishonestly claims to be her own; and, That her End is
Sorrow and Shame. This were enough to obtain my Point, and make Autarchy (the
severest of all Virtues) much more eligible; but I shall proceed to confirm the
same thing more directly and positively, and that whether we consider those
Pleasures that are outward or inward, those that concern the Body or the Soul.
For though I have appealed from the Sentence of Sensuality, in this Case; yet I
will admit of the Evidence of the Senses, when not either disordered or bribed
into a false Information.

. 15. And here I dare challenge all the Sensualists in the World to show, in
all their boasted Enjoyments, any thing equal to the Delights of Moderation; or
any Delight that does not take its Original from thence: For Animal Pleasures
arise first out of the Temperate use of Nature, and when they are used beyond
this, they become weak, decay, and die. Sure I am, that the Pleasure of Tasting
(and so of all the other Senses) is more vivid, quick, and lasting, and
consequently greater, in the Temperate Person, than in the Glutton: Debauchery
feeds upon, and devours it self by being gratified; The full Soul loathes the
Honeycomb, but to the hungry even bitter things are sweet: The frequent Use of
any thing takes away its Pleasure, and it dwindles to nothing. Expectation,
Art, and Fancy may support it for a while, but at last it dies, and is utterly
lost by Enjoyment; whereas, he that governs himself by Rules and Measures,
reaps all the Delight that Nature has provided for him: For, whilst Riot makes
Men dull, stupid, and insensible; Moderation keeps up, and maintains the Vigor
of the Senses, and consequently their Pleasure. Thus Virtue takes the best
Course to propagate Youth, and continue it; her Servant is not usually dim, nor
is his natural Force (by Disorder, etc.) abated; such is he, or such would he
be, if Autarchy might have its Effect.

. 16. Nor can Poverty ( Infoelix Paupertas, as the Poet calls it, the Unhappy
Poverty) or Meanness of Birth or Fortune diminish these; I mean, the outward
Pleasures of the Autarchist; his Dinner of Herbs tastes as well as a fatted Ox
upon the Rich Man's Table: He needs no Sauces to commend his Meat to his
Palate, or Varieties to delight him; Hunger and a good Stomach makes his Food
(be it ever so mean) pleasant, and Nature supplies him with the same, or at
least as delightful, Rarities, as Art does other Men. And here give me leave, a
little to vary from my Argument, and make a short digression in favor of that
we call Poverty: For if we search into things themselves, and lay aside the
accustomary abuse of Words and Titles, we shall find that Heaven's Bounty is
not so unequal, nor that there is so much Difference betwixt Men, in respect of
outward Blessings, as the World judges. For, First, we are all equally Rich in
the common Blessings of Nature, and the Heavens and Earth, with all the good
things of each, are bestowed upon every Man: The Sun, Moon, and Stars, and
their Light, Heat, and Influence is every Man's Propriety; and the Hills,
Rivers, Woods, and Plains, with all the other Varieties of Nature (Objects more
August than Art can frame) are all exposed to his View, to delight and serve
him. Secondly, The Great Man has no more from all his Superfluities than the
Poor Man from his Necessaries: All the Revenues in the World, will but allow
the Owner Food and Raiment (his Family and Servants devour the rest); and all
his stately Buildings will but give him shelter from the Extremities of Heat
and Cold; and the Poor Man has that which affords him both these, and commonly
with more Peace and Safety. Thirdly, The Greatest Person cannot appropriate his
Riches to himself; but other Men, (even the meanest) shall (in spite of
Covetousness) share with him: He may indeed look upon his Palaces, Buildings,
Aquaeducts, etc. with Delight and Admiration (and so may the meanest of his
Servants; and Strangers with greater Admiration than either): He may call them
his own, and pride himself in his Magnificence; but I do not see, but (to most
Intents and Purposes) they are as much his Servants as his. Indeed there is
this difference betwixt the legal Owner and others; he may pass over his Right
to others, and leave them his Heirs, (to he knows not whom) which another
cannot. He has the Care and Trouble of them, which a Stranger has not; but as
to the Profits and Fruits of his Possessions, though he has the First Choice,
yet his Inferiors must share with him, and enjoy it to as good Effects as he.

This that I have said, is not to detract from Worth and Nobility, but to
comfort those that are esteemed the Drudges and Slaves of this World. We have
all enough, if we could comprehend God's Bounty and be contented. If we could
but govern our selves, and regulate our Desires, we might be Rich enough: For
then we should prize the Music of the Birds, and value the Odours of the
Flowers, above artificial Perfumes; we should think our selves loaded with the
Blessing of Nature, were we apprehensive of them, and could we view them with
an intellectual Eye; we should then find the Blessings appropriate to a middle
Estate, as well as those of a greater, and though our Commons be not great nor
costly, we should find Satiety. This is not altogether alienate from the
Subject in hand; for it shows the outward Pleasures of Self-Government, even in
low Circumstances, and that whilst the Voluptuous studies to gratify his
decayed and out-worn Senses, the Autarchist enjoys the Caresses of Nature, and
there can be no innocent Epicure in the World but only he.

. 17. Nor is the Influence of Autarchy confined only to the outward Senses, but
it reaches the inward; yea, and the Operations of the Soul also: For though the
Soul be a Substance distinct, yet she is much influenced by the just and due
Temperament of the Body, and has no Converse with things without but by the
Mediation of the Senses. And though, according to the Notion of the Platonists,
she be imprisoned in these walls of Flesh, and has no Liberty to walk abroad,
only she may look out of the Windows of her Gaol, till Death comes and unlocks
the Doors, unlooses those Bonds that fasten her to the Body, and sets her at
Liberty; yet, during this Life, she contracts a kind of acquaintance with her
Prisonhouse, and a Love to her Fetters: She is courted, and sometimes seduced
by external Objects, she pertakes of Angers, Fury, and loves Fondness; and
forgetting her native Country, and her Heavenly Nature; doats oftentimes upon
low and base Objects in this strange Land. In this present Condition Temperance
opens and clears the outward Windows, and Knowledge regulates her Perceptive
Faculties, and both these strengthen and preserve the superior Faculties;
which shows her her Error, and helps her to avoid it. Hence the Charms of
Voluptuousness are dissolved, her Enchantments ended, and the Soul recovers her
primitive Light and Purity. Thus the Understanding becomes enlightened, and the
Candle of the Lord burns without the Interposition of the Clouds of Ignorance.
Thus the Memory is purged of polluted Images, and made a Treasury of such
useful Idea's as Nature first designed it. And thus the Will becomes regular;
the Desires limited to that which is good; the Heart pure; and the Spirit
rectified, from whence proceeds Innocence and Peace, which is the special Gift
of Autocracy, and deserves our further Consideration.

. 18. What the Ancient Pythagoras said of Piety in general, may be affirmed of
Autarchy in particular, when he says it is, (...), A Peace in the whole Soul,
with Cheerfulness. For Sensuality fills us full of Fears and Jealousies,
Expectations and Disappointments; and is like the Lower World, the Seat of
Storms and Tempests; whilst Piety would render our Minds as the pure Ethereal
Regions, above all Winds, Meteors, and Alterations, quiet and at rest. The Mind
of a pious Man is a Heaven upon Earth, and presages to what place he must
ascend: His meek and innocent Conversation produces outward Peace amongst all
(for who would disturb him that wrongs no Man, nor gives any Offense by word or
deed?) And as he is guilty of no Crime, so he fears no Danger, but is at peace
with himself: No Heavy and Dismal Clouds of Despair obscure the Serenity of his
Soul. His Mind is always temperate, free from torrid Desires, and frozen
Despondings: He knows not the Terrors of a guilty Mind, and is ignorant of
Fears, because he is ignorant of Sin: His Conscience is void of offense toward
God and Man, and therefore under no dread from either: He is contented with his
present Condition, and therefore feels not Fear's Ague nor Envy's Consumption:
Briefly, he is in a continual Calm (though in a stormy World) and whilst others
fret themselves under their Load, and struggle in their own Toils, he is
contented with his Lot, and at rest.

. 19. Thus for the Concupiscible; and then for the Angry Passions, he governs
them also. Hence it is that Abuses and Railery move him not, and he
distinguishes betwixt the effects of Madness (for such he takes Rage to be) and
the friendly Rebukes of a Wise Man: He hears the Taunts of the Scornful
unconcerned as he does the Barking of a Dog, and only takes care that he be not
bitten. He looks upon a dissolute Tongue with pity, and is more troubled at the
Commendations of some Men, than at their Abuses.

And certainly there is nothing so undecent and ill becoming (as well as
troublesome); nothing that makes us more ridiculous, or that gives an Enemy
greater advantage, than unbridled Fury; nor can any Plague torment the Soul and
Body, and prey upon both, more than secret Malice: Whereas it is a God-like
thing to forgive; It elevates us above humane Nature, may I not say above the
Angelical? Besides it is the truest pleasure to be able to pardon. To deserve
well, and yet suffer patiently without Reward, is a part of Greatness unknown
to any but the Autarchist. To suffer wrong silently, and being injured to seek
a Reconciliation. It Is more generous, sure, not to seek Reward, but to receive
it, and save our selves the trouble of pursuing that which will be forced upon
us; for rewarded here or hereafter we must and shall be, as long as our Lord's
Promise stands good, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in
Heaven. And as there is a future, so there must be a present Reward, which is
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. An internal Comfort, an ineffable Pleasure
which arises out of a clear Conscience, which is a continual Feast: This is a
Treasure far surpassing all the Riches of Nature and the Pleasures of Sin,
though dressed up to the utmost advantage; for they are but for a Season, but
this shall not be taken away from us. Joh. 16. 22. Deny me (O Lord) Riches,
Health, Prosperity, Liberty, or whatsoever else is most dear to the Animal
Life, only deny me not this. Exercise me in what Trials, and with what
Afflictions thou please, only allow me this Cordial, and I shall be
sufficiently happy! This will be a sufficient Compensation for all Sufferings,
and Support in them all: It will be a Light to guide us in this dark Sphere,
and a Defense against all Dangers: It is an internal Armor which will render
us unconquerable, till we have past all the Perils of this World; and are
arrived at Heaven, where confirmed and never-ending Joys attend us. -- For the
proof of all which, I appeal to the Experience of every Man that has been
acquainted with Virtue and Piety, and observed their Effects: I appeal to the
Noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, who suffered in their Quarrel, and became
by this more than Conquerours. See then the different ends of Vice and Virtue!
The First presents you with some Shadows of Pleasures which prove both Vanity
and Vexation. This Second bestows upon you True Pleasures, both outward and
inward, solid and durable; which neither Pain nor Sickness nor Death it self,
armed with all its Terrors, can deprive you of; and which will never forsake
you, till they have brought you to that place where there is fullness of Joy and
Pleasures for evermore.

. 20. I have at large discoursed of the true Nature of the Pleasures of
Sensuality, that cheat so many into their Ruin; and, after an impartial
Discovery of their Inside, I hope I have sufficiently exposed their Falsehood,
Vanity, and Insufficiency. I have added to this an imperfect Account of the
Pleasures of a well-governed and virtuous Life. Imperfect I say, for they are
to be felt, not expressed. I have nothing to add to this Letter, but some few
Reflections upon these Two Heads. I. The Difficulties; and, II. The Miseries,
that (in the beginning of this Discourse) were objected to attend this Duty:
And then conclude the trouble of this Letter, etc.

. 21. As to the pretended Difficulties of Autarchy, I have this Answer.

1. That Autarchy in it self is neither hard nor ungrateful, but easy and
natural. Its Regimen was settled by our Creator in the beginning and first
origination of Mankind; and therefore not difficult to him who institutes his
Life according to the Order of Nature: For indeed all manner of Intemperance is
a violence and rape upon our Nature, and we find that (till she is conquered by
long and customary Force) she both abhors and resists it. Thus, for instance,
Gluttony presses her down, and Drunkenness strives to stifle and drown her,
whilst she (poor Wretch!) struggles with all her force, throws up the
unconcocted load, the same way it was imposed upon her, and in resentment of
this Violence pines her self sometimes several Days afterward. This, I say, is
the true state of virgin, and undebauch'd Nature. And therefore Self-Government
is her Guardian; nor can it be difficult originally, but natural, and
consequently easy. But then --

2. As it cannot be denied, but that this among many other things is now grown
difficult to us, so it must be confessed, That this Difficulty is the Effect of
long and customary Habits of Licentiousness; nor can it be wondered, that a Man
habituated to a sinful Course of Life, and used to be carried about by his
unruly Passions, should find some uneasiness in the first entrance of a regular
and staid Conversation; no more than that an untamed Horse should at first time
regret the Bridle; or the young Bullock the Yoke that is laid upon his
unaccustomed Neck. All Changes, from one extreme to another, prove troublesome,
and in every Alteration of Life we may observe the like. The beginnings of
things must be difficult, especially to a prejudiced Nature; and he that is
accustomed to Extravagance must resent a Restraint. The Neophite cannot but
expect some trouble in the Government of his Passions and perverse Nature; and
the young Practitioner will be weary of his New Work; but he that has used
himself to it, finds the Sweet of it; and he that is exercised therein shall
find its Delights.

3. And then, for those affrightful Names of Mortification, etc. they were at
first given with respect to the Removal of inveterate Habits, and the trouble
it puts an old Sinner to. As for the things themselves, they are not simply
necessary to the Duties I commend, nor indeed to Christian Religion, no more
than Physic is to our Mortal Bodies. Not simply necessary, but only by way of
Consequence, and by reason of those Diseases of the Mind which we have
contracted. When Piety begins to decay through the Weakness of the Powers of
the Soul, and the Prevalency of the Appetite; then the Spiritual Pill becomes
necessary; and if it be unpleasant to the Taste, or makes us sick in its
Operation, we may thank our Diseased Minds for it. Corrupt humors cannot be
evacuated without Pain, nor can the dumb and deaf Spirit (much less that which
is raging mad) be cast out without sore Convulsions of Mind, and a renting of
the Heart, even to a seeming Death. But all this is but accidental to Religion,
which in it self is an easy Yoke, and a light Burden; a sweet and delightsome
Employ, and requires none of these Severities: For to a Man that has been
trained up in Subjection to the Heavenly part, and has lived so till he has
become capable of sensing the Pleasures of the Divine Life, there is no need of
Mortifying of Lusts and Appetites; these have been regulated long ago, ab
initio, bred up in Obedience, and taught Submission from his Birth.

I shall only add two things more upon this Head, and could wish that they
might be as seriously considered as they must be confessed. The First is, That
the strictest Precepts of Christianity, such as Self-denial, and taking up the
Cross (the severest Doctrine of the severest Religion) has its peculiar
Pleasures and comforts, and that in proportion to its Hardships. Secondly, That
Vice is the greatest Slavery, and brings greater Mortifications and Hardships
upon the Body (yea, and upon the Appetites themselves) than the most
restraining Virtue, and consequently that Men usually take more pains, and
suffer more to go to Hell, than is required in order to Heaven and a Blessed
Eternity.

. 22. As for the Miseries that the Beginning of this Discourse seems to entail
upon Piety, whether they are ab extra or ab intra, I answer briefly,

1. That God is not severe or cruel to any Man, much less to his Servants. He
is good unto every Man, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works: He is
slow to Anger, of great kindess, and repents him of the evil.

2. That he punishes them, or suffers them to be afflicted, arises out of other
Causes; as, First, To prevent Sin and the Doting upon this World, by letting
them see their own Frailty, and the World's Deceitfulness: To take down
Temptations, and abate the Lusts of the Flesh, etc. Secondly, To punish Sin in
this World, that their Souls may be saved in the World to come. Thirdly, To
bring them to Repentance, and recover their Spiritual Health. As a careful
Physician, a severe Schoolmaster, and a loving Father who chasteneth every Son
whom he loves, and scourges every Son whom he receives. And thus Afflictions
are real Blessings, and the End changes the Means into tokens of Love and
Mercy. Fourthly, To make them Instances of the Divine Goodness. Thus Job stands
a Monument, not so much of Humane Integrity, as of God's Justice and Mercy; his
Justice in punishing his Creature, which, for all his Integrity, had some time
or other deserved as much as this; (and God may justly withdraw the Blessings
of Health and Riches from Job which he had given him) and his Mercy in
returning them double to him. Besides, he is an ancient Example of the Power of
Divine Grace, as also of Humane Imbecility. And the same or the like Account
may be given of the Apostles and the First Christians, who remain Evidences of
the great Love of God to Mankind, who spared neither his Son to procure us a
better Covenant, or his Servants Blood to seal to the Truth of it. And
therefore --

3. As to those Vid. Matt. 10. 17. and 24. 9. Luke 21. 12. Joh. 15. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 1. 8. and 3. 12.
Texts where our Lord warned his Disciples of Sufferings; or those of his
Disciples to the Primitive Christians, of the Afflictions and Persecutions
which they must expect: They are not universarily applicatory; for their Case
was extraordinary, and they were fitted with Divine Gifts accordingly. And
those Texts do more particularly point out those calamitous Times, and cannot
be applied to those times in which the Church had peace and rest from her
Labors. Their work was in the heat of the Day, and God that called them to
such a mighty Work, first enabled them, and then crowned them for it; but as
for us, we labor in the cool, nor can we expect any Opposition but that of our
carnal Lusts and Appetites. Piety is commanded, and Virtue is encouraged and
rewarded, and Religion is not now to be espoused in Chains but upon the Throne.
So that notwithstanding the extraordinary examples of some of God's dear
Servants in the Old Testament, and of many more in the New, I am bold to
conclude, That Autarchy tends naturally and of it self, to present as well as
to future Pleasures, whether it be of the Mind or a Regulated Body, and to make
us happy here and hereafter.

And thus, having made what Observations and Reflections I thought suitable
upon the Vanity of the pretended Pleasures of Sensuality; having pleaded the
Cause of Self-Government, and vindicated it from the Acccusations of Tyranny or
Cruelty over the Body or her attendant Passions, I will reserve her Outward
Advantages to be the Subject of the Third Letter.

YTAPA^ OR, THE DUTY of Self-Government.
The Third PART.
Of the Outward Advantages of Autarchy; and an Exhortation thereunto.

. 1. I had not long finished the Second Part of this Moral Essay (in which, I
hope, I have somewhat contributed to the allaying the Heats of your Sensual
Desires, and rebated your Prejudices to the Economy of Self-Government) but I
be thought my self of my Promise made in the Conclusion of it, to treat of the
Outward Advantages of Autarchy. It Is true (my Dorotheus) the inward Pleasures
mentioned in my last, of Joy, Peace, and the Testimony of a good Conscience are
the greatest Blessings we are capable of on this side Heaven; but then the
other outward Blessings are not to be despised. As long as we are here we all
naturally desire those Delights that caress Humane Nature; and he must be more
than an ordinary Philosopher that can overlook all corporeal Pleasures. He is
happy that can gratify his Soul, but yet he is thought more happy that can
gratify his Soul and Body both, and yet preserve his Innocence. If then
Autarchy be a Friend to both these, its Government sure cannot be refused. What
it is in respect of Pleasures, has been the Subject of the former Paper, and
what it is in respect of all Outward Advantages, shall be the Subject of this.
After which I shall draw up all the Premises into one conclusion; and, tying a
Knot upon it, leave it with you to the judgment of after Experience.

. 2. The Outward Advantages of Autarchy, which I have not discoursed of in my
former, may be reduced to these Three Heads:

1. A Healthful and Long Life. 2. A Competent Estate, or Sufficiency. 3. Honor
and Respect from all Men.
These are the Three Principal Favorites of the Body, and are courted as our
greatest Happiness, while we are here. A sickly long Life is therefore thought
so much the more miserable, because it is long, and a Healthful Short Life
miserable by reason of its Shortness. And both Health and Length of Life cannot
make us happy, according to the vulgar Opinion; if we are condemned to Poverty,
and to eat the Bread of Carefulness. And there be many that will not be
satisfied without a third accessional, I mean Honor and Respect. And there is
no Man, but the highest Christian, that can wholly lay them all aside, and say,
with St. Paul, That he counts all things but dung and loss, so that he may win
Christ. I cannot expect you should arrive at this Spiritual Life, this
Perfection of Wisdom these many years. It will be sufficient if you attain it
at last with all the Aids of Morality, and Religion. In the mean time it will
be sufficient to alliciate a young and unexperienced Nature by that which seems
most inviting in this World, (though it be but as Children with Toys, and such
are most of us in a spiritual Sense) I mean with Earthly Blessings such as
Life, Estate, and Honor. My Business therefore shall be to demonstrate to you
(not that Autarchy will infallibly make you live long Healthful, Rich, and
Honorable, or instate you presently in the Possession of these Three
Blessings; for there may be many Circumstances which may hinder the Effect, and
God may not prosper the Means for the Ends designed: nor do I intend to affirm
that this Duty will enfeoff you with the intense degrees of each, i. e. that it
will make you live to threescore years and ten or fourscore, and all that while
in abundance of outward Prosperity, Riches, and Grandeur; for this is not
entailed upon any Duty, but) That it is the readiest Way, and the most probable
Means to obtain a convenient portion of each, and enough to ascertain an
outward Happiness: That it naturally tends to long Life, and Health,
Sufficiency of Estate and Respect; and, where it is not hindered of its effect,
will ensure them. Thus, as the Reasons of the former Paper will make you a
Votary to the Spiritual Government as a Christian and a Philosopher, so those
of this may work upon you as a Man. I begin with the first of its Temporal
Advantages, A Healthful and Long Life.

. 3. Of all the outward Blessings that God usually crowns Man with in this
World, Health and Long Life ought to be first named, because most desired. The
First begets the Second, and they mutually caress each other, and would do so
eternally. When things are as they should be, Nature abhorrs an Alteration for
fear of a Dissolution. The sullen Rocks cling together and oppose Separation;
and the soft Waters which are dashed into a thousand pieces against them,
reunite their Parts, which will not separate till Gravity and the indispensible
Laws of the Universe compel them. The Vegetables, though they die at Winter, do
yet retain the Seeds of Life against their Resurrection in the Spring, and
accordingly appear again in their various Figures and Colors: The Birds and
Beasts labor night and day, to preserve a beloved though (to themselves) an
unprofitable Life, and when they can no longer escape the Snares of the cunning
Fowler or cruel Hunter, they mournfully utter out their resentments of Man's
Tyranny in their inarticulate Rhetoric. Man, the Lord of the visible Creation,
preserves his own Life by destroying others, and pays Nature in himself what he
has robbed her of in other Creatures. We are apt to admire the Happiness of
Methusalah, and (if we thought it to any purpose) would desire to live as long
as he. We complain of Nature's unequal bounty to the Antediluvian World, whilst
she confines us to Threescore or Fourscore Years. To live long, and see many
happy, or (rather than die) unhappy days; to live, though old, lame, decrepit,
and despised (much more when young, healthful and strong) is the universal
desire of deluded Mortals, enamored of their Sorrows and besotted of their
Chains: Nor can Reason, Counsel, or Experience (without a Diviner Ray darted
from Heaven into their Souls) undeceive them. And after all, it is something
unaccountable to find that, though most Men make Long Life the chiefest
Petition in all their Addresses to Heaven, yet there are few that will confess
they have received it, though they have passed their great Climax. So great is
our aversion to Death, our greatest Friend that would put an End to our
Troubles, and lay us up in Peace. Young men put it far from them; and Old men
do not care to hear of it, though descending down toward their Grave. And I
have experienced in my self, now entering into my Declination, a kind of
Reluctance to be told I was so far on my Journey: I conclude therefore that
there is something in Nature (some Relict of the Old man) that is afraid of
Death, though she carries it within her; and thus perhaps it will be with you,
and therefore to please the lower Soul, and reconcile it to the Government of
the upper, I shall endeavor to show that it is the usual Gift and natural
Consequent of Autocracy.

. 4. To this Purpose it will suffice to propose this one Consideration. viz.
That, --

There is nothing that can conduce more directly to the Health of the Body (and
consequently to its Preservation to Old Age) than the regular Use of Meat,
Drink, and animal Pleasures, which Self-Government enjoins. This alone is able
to preserve Health, and to recover it when lost, and (if some Original
Distemper or fatal Providence interpose not) to convey it down to Old Age; to
procure the Vigor of Youth in Age, and a healthful and strong Constitution,
and consequently a Long Life, etc.

This Truth is self-apparent, and shines by its own Light; for most Diseases
are confessed to be the Effects of Intemperance. Vice tends to our Ruin from
its first Entertainment; and the Body of Sin naturally leads us to the Body of
Death. Excesses bring Sickness, and Surfeiting will turn to Choler. By
surfeiting many have perished, but he that takes heed prolongeth his Life:
says the wise Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 37. 30.

Instances will best illustrate this Truth for their Conviction.

For thus the Glutton lives to eat, not eats to live but to die; when by
contrarieties of Meats and Drinks he has vitiated his Appetite, and collected
a Mass of Crudities in his Stomach, the morbifick Matter which at last sends
him out of the World. Thus the Drunkard drowns himself in a Dropsy, or by a
Collection of Adventitious Heats inflames his Blood into a Fever; when he shall
call for Drink without Satisfaction, and use it without Offense. And I wish it
were seriously considered how peculiar an Enemy this Sin is to our Lives, and
of how many sad Accidents it is the cause, some times fatal to Body and Soul;
of which we have too many Examples: So false is that flattering Proverb, A
Drunkard never takes hurt. And indeed Drunkenness is a kind of Daemoniacism,
and taking away the use of the Members of the Body, and Operations of the Soul;
the evil Spirit casts him sometimes into the Fire, and sometimes into the
Water. Nor is it a wonder that when the internal Principle of Direction, the
Understanding, is destroyed, the Guardian Angel driven away, and kept at a
distance, the Devil should take the advantage to do a Man a Mischief. In a
word, Intemperance is such an universal Purveyor for the Grave, that it is
become long since a Proverb, Plures gula quam gladio, etc. The Throat is the
greatest Enemy as well as Preserver to it self, and destroys more than the
Sword.

Thus the impure Slave that with an Adulterous Eye pursues every Woman (besides
his Fears and Dangers) wears out his Body, and twists up his own Scourge. A
Disease, I mean, that destroys his Form and Beauty, torments him with Pains
when he should take his rest; makes him water his Couch with his Tears, and his
Bed to be the Place of his Punishment, because it was the Place of his Folly;
and at last consigns him over to Rottenness, and to become his own Sepulcher.
And if Whoredoms and Adulteries do not always produce such Tragedies, it is
because they are, in some Measure, restrained, and so it is the Effect of
Autarchy.

Nay those immaterial Diseases, those of the Mind I mean, that are not so
conversant with gross Matter, even these become prejudicial, if not fatal, to
our Lives and Health. Covetousness pines and withers the Body; Envy dries it
up, and makes it pale; and Pride begets Quarrels, Contentions, and Wars, that
send thousands to the Grave together. I need not instance in more, for it is the
Confession and Complaint of emasculated Debauchees, that their Vices have been
their Enemies, and contributed to their Destruction. So that there is a natural
Reason as well as Providence in the Sentence of the wise Solomon, Evil shall
pursue the Sinner, and he shall not prolong his days. Prove. 10. 27. and 13. 21.
Eccles. 8. 13. It Is Autarchy alone that prescribes Moderation; that
distinguishes betwixt the Abuse and Use, betwixt the Poison and Nutriment of
Meat and Drink; that maintains a due Temperament, and satisfies that Nature
that she preserves.

. 5. And here I cannot conceive what Sensuality has to say for it self, and in
its own defense; unless it is by way of Recrimination: Unless she leads you to
the Cells of Asceticks, and the Oratories of Recluses, and shows you the pale
and lean Effects of Fasting and Mortification; the Skeletons of some few
Saints, who chose to anticipate Death and die whilst they lived. See there
(will she say) the Effects of Bigottism and Religious Frenzy, what she would
reduce the World to if she could procure once a perfect Empire there! And what
can Luxury it self do more? Besides thou may observe that Wise men die as
soon and as well as Fools, and the Righteous fall promiscuously with the
Wicked. Alas! Death makes no difference; nor can Integrity, Wisdom, Valor, or
Parts oppose him. The End of Man is determined, and then why should the Means
be blamed; he was to die at that time, and therefore why should his Vices be
accused for bringing him thither? Thus Sin is ready to excuse it self, though
she lays the Fault at God's door, and on his everlasting Decrees.

To all which I answer briefly.

First. Waving the Question about the determination of our Lives (of which I
shall find occasion to give you mine opinion toward the end of this Discourse)
I say, as to the Hardships, Fastings and Mortifications of restraining Virtue,
I cannot find (as I noted before) that Autarchy absolutely and universally
prescribes them, but only where our particular necessities require them. God
has given his Creatures richly (though moderately) to be enjoyed, and having
given us his Son, with him has given us all things. But when the Beast within
(the Sensual part) begins to wax fat, and kicks against its Master and Maker
both; there is then but too apparent Symptoms of a Spiritual (...), an evil
Habit of Mind; and then Fasting and other Ghostly Exercises become our Duty:
For it is Physic to the Body as well as Soul, and serves mutually their
Necessities. Besides, I do not find any Command, even in that Case, to make our
selves sick, or to impair our Healths, for the sake of Religion.

Secondly. As for the Oratories of Recluses, and the Cells of Anchorites, I
know not where we shall find them in Europe, unless we travel to Mount Athos in
Greece in quest of them. And as for those Multitudes in the Roman Church, that
pretend to leave the World, and undertake the Vow of Coelebacy and Poverty,
most of them (I will not say all, for some Orders perhaps still retain their
original Strictness and Abnegation of the World: most of them I say) have
miserably degenerated from the pretended Sanctity of their Founders. It Is true,
there was such a sort of People of yore, and all Christians were in ancient
times extremely careful to keep themselves unspotted from the World, and some
perhaps even to a kind of Superstition. But this was then, when Religion
possessed the Hearts as well as the Heads of its Professors; and when the
Breath of the Holy Jesus was yet warm upon the Heads of his Disciples and the
Primitive Christians. But, in these wretched times of Sin and Death, it is more
than we can do to persuade Men to a Recession from the World, in prohibited
degrees and a sinful Converse: and therefore this Instance is (especially with
us) utterly impertinent.

Thirdly. As for those good Men that die Young: It proceeds not from any defect
in Autarchy, but from other causes. Perhaps from some Native Distemper, which
they receive by Traduction, twisted up in their very Essence: From the original
Weakness of the Contexture of their Bodies, made at first, and intended by
Nature for a Tent, not a continual Habitation for the Soul: Or, if the Pillars
of the Body were ever so strongly built up, yet some accidental Emergency, some
hidden Train may suddenly blow up the Fort; and God, by his providential order
of Second Causes, may concur to its dissolution: Perhaps out of Judgment, as in
the Instance of the disobedient Prophet, that was sent to declare against the
Altar at Bethel, and in his return was delivered up to the Lion that slew him,
1 King. 13. Perhaps out of Mercy, when living well and longer are inconsistent,
and when the righteous are taken away from the Evil to come. These and such
like may be the Causes of the early Deaths of some sober and regular Sons of
Virtue, which yet their Temperate Life naturally tended to prevent. So that,
notwithstanding some particular Instances, we may safely conclude, That
Sensuality is destructive to Humane Nature; which Autarchy, by its Rules and
Directions, would long preserve; or in the Words of the divine Preacher, My
Son, forget not my Law, but let thine Heart keep my Commandments. For Length of
Days, and Long Life, and Peace shall they add to thee. Prove. 3. 1, 2.

. 6. The Second outward Advantage of Autocracy is, A competency of Estate or
Sufficiency of the bona Fortunae, as we commonly call Riches. And when I have
said this, I mean not that it will infallibly and suddenly instate you with
Abundance, or that there is no other way to become Rich; but that it is the
only lawful way to a worldly Estate, and a probable way as well as lawful. It
will defend you from Poverty, and feed you with Food convenient, if not with
Superfluities: It is the proper and natural Means to obtain and increase an
outward Fortune, and where Providence interposes not, it will attain that end.
This must be confessed by him that considers that it enjoins, 1. Parsimony and
Temperance, whereby we become the best Husbands of what we have, and avoid all
needless Expenses, the Effects of Pride and Prodigality, and the Consumers of
mighty Estates. 2. Justice and upright Dealing, which will procure us credit
with all Men, and preserve what we have gotten: For let Men take what Measures
they please; yet they will not deny, but that Honesty is the best Policy: For
Justice does attract the Love and Favor even of the Unjust; and upright
Dealing will find a present as well as future Reward. With the same Measure you
mete withal it shall be measured to you again. 3. Care and Industry, which
engage us by all lawful Ways, Means, and Measures both to get an Estate and
increase it. For if we search into the Causes of Want and Poverty, we shall
commonly find Idleness or Debauchery at the Bottom of it; and most Men must
accuse their own want of Providence, not the Providence of God, for their Wants
and Indigency. 4. Liberality, Charity, and Mercy, which are so far from being
Enemies to Estates, that they augment them; for the liberal Soul shall be made
fat, and he that waters shall be watered. Prove. 11. 25. Besides they call
down the divine Benediction upon our selves and our Endeavors. To him that
seeks the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, all things shall be added.
Matt. 6. And he that castes his Bread upon the waters shall find it again with
increase: We may reasonably expect to reap what we sow, and receive by the same
Measure that we mete to others. Luc. 6. 38. It Is our Lord's rule that cannot,
will not fail, us if we do not prevaricate with our selves. Give, and it shall
be given unto you, good measure pressed dowm, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your Bosoms. Nor can this Promise become ineffectual,
but by our own Fault, our Covetousness, Hypocrisy and Infidelity.

And now I dare appeal to the Judgment of any Man, whether there can be a more
probable way to an Earthly Estate, than to be industrious in our selves, to
have credit with others, and the Blessing of God to crown our Endeavors? And
whether it be not as evident on the other side, that Sensuality makes Men
Prodigal, Debauched, Spend-thrifts, Unjust, Fraudulent, Creditless, Unmerciful
and Cruel, and so to inherit nothing but the Curses of Men, and the Vengeance
of God?

. 7. But here I must walk cautiously, lest the Sensualist take the Advantage,
and prevent the usual Objections which he will make to what has been said upon
this Head. It is confessed therefore, that sometimes all these means fail: That
Virtuous Men continue poor, whilst Violence, Oppression, and Cheatery thrive
and grow rich: For God has his secret Ends and Purposes, and may make what
Exceptions he pleases from this general Rule, viz. The hand of the Diligent
makes rich. Prove. 10. 4. There is a secret Providence that orders every Man
his quota: And thence is that which Solomon observed long ago, There is (says
he) that scatters and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth more than
is meet, but it tends to poverty. Prove. 11. 24. And yet this is no
impeachment of the general Rule, viz. That Autarchy naturally tends to Riches,
or at least to Sufficiency. But if this be further pressed (though I know no
reason for it) I must not omit two mighty and almost miraculous Effects of
Autarchy, which will sufficiently supply that Defect and make a Compensation.

1. The First is that of making the Poor Man rich, above what Care, Labor, or
the Philosopher's Stone can do. For when God, for Reasons best known to
himself, denies him Abundance, Autarchy teaches him to supply that defect, by a
willing Submission to Providence, and a full Contentment with his small
Portion, as that which God sees to be best for him: For he only knows what
Measures are fit for us, and where to place the Two, as well as the Five and
Ten Talents. Some Vessels are not fit to be filled with strong Liquors lest
they burst, and every Man cannot bear the Temptation of Riches. God designs the
Salvation of all Men in the first place, and to that great end proportions the
Means thereunto. These, and such like Considerations make him sit down fully
satisfied with his share, and thus at least he is Rich, and having nothing does
yet possess all things.

And here I must tell you (my Dorotheus) that it is not a great Estate that
always makes a Man Rich; for there may be great Poverty amidst great Abundance.
It was a sore Evil which Solomon saw and lamented long ago, A man to whom God
has given Riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants nothing for his Soul
of all that he desires; and yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a
stranger eats it. Eccles. 6. 2. And what is he better for that which he has,
or rather seems to have, who either not uses it, or abuses it? Or wherein
consists the Happiness of that Man whose Riches are given him out of Judgment,
not Love; and to be snares of the Devil, not helps to Charity? An Estate may be
acquired, I'tis true, by Fraud or Violence; but then it proves a continual Worm
to the Conscience, a Plague to the Mind, and a Consumption to the Body. When a
Father must run the danger of Damnation to convey an Estate, with a Curse, down
to his Son, and capacitate him to run the same Hazard; will you call such a Man
Rich and Happy? No, certainly, he is Poor, Miserable, and a Wretch! whose
mistaken Love to his Son, has induced him to sell his own Soul to buy him an
Estate, and made himself miserable in the other World, to procure his Child a
Shadom of Happiness in this. Whereas he that can conquor his Desires, and
subdue his Passions; that is contented with his honest Lot, is rich toward
God, and communicative toward his Fellow Creatures; That Man, I say, is richer
than Croesus the Lydian King, or Crassus the wealthy Roman Subject.

2. The Second is that of sanctifying our Riches, and making it serviceable to
our Eternal Concerns. A strange Property sure to convert Poison into Food; to
heal the unwholesome Waters, and of the Snares of the Devil, to make a Jacob's
Ladder! And yet this is true: For our Lord tells us, that this Mammon of
unrighteousness may be so rectified and distributed, that it may and will
procure us Everlasting Habitations. And Autarchy alone (which forbids us to
imprison it in our Chests, or consume it on our Lusts; but use it for our
honest Necessities) does teach us this mighty Work. Thus (...), the Cable-rope
is untwisted to that fineness that it will perforate the Eye of a Needle,
according to Theophylact's Sense of the Word; or else the Eye of the Needle is
so expanded, and enlarged to that dimension, that (...) a Camel may easily pass
through it. Vid. Annot. in Matt. 19. 24.

. 8. The Third outward Advantage and Gift of Autarchy, is, A Good Name,
Reverence and Esteem with Men. And this is evident by the Respect and
Veneration which is given by the worst as well as by the best of Mankind to
Virtue wheresoever it is found. Thus a sober Person shall be revered by the
most profligate, and the temperate admired (though envied) by the most
debauched. The chaste Virgins, who keep their Innocence against many
Temptations, shall at last be honored as the Vestals were of old; their very
Company shall chill and quench the fiery Emotions of Voluptuousness: for Virtue
bears a Majestic Grace with it, whilst Vice sneaks into dark Corners: it
carries a secret Awe with it, and checks the Attempts of Sensuality.

It Is true, there want not some, that from the Seat of the Scornful can scoff
at Virtue, and ridicule Piety (the peculiar Talent and Character of the last
and worst of Times) but then, take notice, it is not when in its own Shape, but
when misrepresented. They give it disgraceful Names, and dress it up in a
monstrous Shape, and then rally upon it. Thus Temperance is traduced under the
notion of Covetousness, and Piety is first termed Hypocrisy and then exposed
as such. The patient Man is said to be a Coward; and the provident a poor
narrow-soul'd Fellow: The chaste is called coy and Proud; and the pious and
devout is termed superstitious and popishly affected. Thus Vice claps a
Sambineto upon Virtue before she is to be executed; and, like her Primitive
Votaries, she must be deformed in the Skins of wild Beasts, before even the
Dogs will fasten upon her. But otherwise it stands a universal Rule, that
Goodness commands the Respects of all, and her God-like Majesty shines even to
the dazzling of her Enemies: for so did her great Master's Divinity overthrow
those that came to seize him, and the invisible Rays of his Godhead dart them
down backwards that came to bind him: Every one applauds Virtue, though few
follow her: And all men call her Blessed, though she has few that will imitate
her. The greatest Debauchee will commend her to be Guardianess of his Children
after his Decease, and while he lives condemn that in them which he practices
in himself. This he does while he lives, and when he dies, his Relations (if of
Ability) build him a Monument and a Pillar, and record upon it all the good
Works that he did, but none of his Vices. Hence are those lying Epitaphs, and
pompous Commemorations with which the Tombs of some are adorned, whose Names
yet stink worse than their Carcasses; and the Canonization of some Saints to
Heaven, whose Souls are (I fear) long since consigned to Hell. This is
Demonstration sufficient to convince us, that nothing can consecrate our Ashes,
and give us a kind of Immortality here, but Virtue.

. 9. On the other side, there is nothing more dishonorable than Impiety, or
unman-like than Sin. For instance: How shameful a thing is it to see a
Creature, dedicated to the Service of God, study nothing but the Satisfaction
of his Belly? For a Man made for noble Thoughts and Contemplations, to sink
below the Beasts, and become a driveling Sot, and covetous of that which his
Nature cannot bear! To see the glorious Image of God and Man both defaced, his
Beauty clean gone as well as his Reason, and himself a Companion to the Dog in
his vomit, and to the Sow in her wallowing in the mire! To see a rational Being
without Sense, and a Man without Understanding, even beyond the Example of
Nebuchadnezzar.

How much below common Truth does he descend that can swear to that, which his
own Conscience (at that very instant) tells him is damnably false; or that can
fawn upon him that he hates to death? That can dress up an Ape with gaudy
Titles; and cringe, and bow to him, whom yet he will aside call a golden Ass?
How cowardly a thing is it to be forced to dissemble hidden Treachery; to
flatter an Enemy, and so take advantage of his Security, that he may mischief
him in secret, whom he dares not meet publicly? How unworthy a thing is an
insidious Parasite?

What can be more sordid, than for a Man of Reason, and a Professor of the
Christian Religion, (a Religion that exalts Reason, and directs us to the
Angelick Life) to dote upon Gold or Silver, that is, white and yellow Earth;
and to prefer a piece of Money to a Heavenly Virtue? What can be more foolish
than to sell a Man's Soul, (that is, himself) for a Bubble; or be condemned to
the Galley all his life, that he may be said to die rich? To be always fearing
Want, in the midst of Plenty; and to hanker after more, when he has already
more than enough? What more deplorable than to choose a Fever, that he may have
the pleasure of drinking and dying; to slave himself for fear of Want, and die
for fear of Death?

What pity is it to see a Gentleman, otherwise completely endowed with the
Gifts of Nature, to turn Slave to his Lusts, and Fop to the Humors of a Proud
Woman? To see the Imperial Darius fawn upon Apame his imperious Concubine, and
him that governed so many Gallant Men, governed himself by an inferior Harlot?
To see a Man forsake his loving Yoke Fellow (that bears up one end of all his
Cares and Fears,) and all the Pledges of their mutual Loves, for the Embraces
of a Strumpet, who loves him not but for his Money; who will first consume his
Estate and then his Body, and at last leave him to run the risque of his broken
Fortunes, not to be repaired without fresh Sins and Dangers!

And, that I may say all in a word, to see a Christian, made at first but a
little lower than the Angels, and instructed in those Mysteries which were hid
from them; to see such an one (I say) degenerate below the Beasts, and seek his
chiefest Happiness with the worst of them! Thus every Sin draws after it the
tail of a Serpent, Disgrace and Shame; and no sooner did it enter into the
World, but it made the guilty Adam hide himself from the presence of the God of
Purity. Nor has it got any great repute (though many Followers) ever since. It
is naturally ashamed of it self, blushes at its own Deformity, and usually
walks abroad in disguise, under borrowed shapes, and better names to conceal
it. Thus the Prodigal must be called generous, the Covetous provident, the
Lascivious complaisant, and the Debauched a Good Companion. Thus Singularity
and Faction were termed Zeal; Disobedience tenderness of Conscience; and
Murder, Rapine, and Ambition blended together, were called the Cause of God,
and Reformation. -- It Is a hardened Sinner indeed that will not blush to hear in
public what he does in private, and a patient one that will not highly resent
it: For tell but a common Harlot what she is, and you move a nest of Wasps; and
the Adulteress will take the advantage of the Law against you. Shortly, Every
Sin is a reproach to Humane Nature, a disgrace to Reason, and an indignity to
the Order of the Creation. Sin and Shame are inseparable.

. 10. On the other part, (that I may look into the other Scale) Wisdom exalts
them that are of low Estate, promotes them, and brings them to Honor. It lifts
up the poor out of the dust, and the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set
him with Princes, even with the Princes of his People. It is a portion more
precious than Gold; than the Onyx, Sapphires, and Rubies: It is the Original of
all true Nobility, and supports their Titles and Dignities, which Debauchery
would destroy, and so pulls 'em down into the order of the Vulgar. For Virtue
is the true Nobility, the Palladium, or (that I may use a Christian term) the
Guardian Angel of Greatness: She enobles her Servant, and, not only himself,
but his Posterity; without this, Grandeur is but a swelling Bubble, a Cloud
without Rain; or, rather, a blazing Comet that shines with borrowed Rays, and
attracts the wonder of the Vulgar, and yet is in it self an unlucky Omen to the
World; and though its dismal Effects may continue long, yet it soon vanishes.
Wisdom first founded the World, and has preserved it ever since, and as for
the several Governments of it, they have been all continued by Autarchy: For
Self-Government is the Foundation of all others, and he that will rule others
must first learn to rule himself; his own Passions and Affections require his
first care, and after that then those of other Men. If a man cannot rule his
own house, how should he take care of the Church of God, says the Apostle? And
I add, If he cannot govern himself, he can govern neither: For it is the surest
way to begin at the bottom, to lay a good Foundation, and so build gradually.
The best ordered Governments choose their Generals out of those that have gone
through all the Degrees of Discipline in the School of War.

. 11. And yet, after all, it must be confessed (and I note it here to prevent
an Objection) That Desert is not always rewarded, nor Merit crowned, in this
World. Some precious stones must lie buried in the Earth. It Is not fit Nature
should be quite rifled of all her Treasure at once, and have all her Rarities
shown together: For if she had no reserve, she might be bankrupt, and her
Treasures would be soon exhausted. There is not Reward enough perhaps in the
World to satisfy all Rivals; and the Fountains of Honor are not infinite, but
have their Bounds: besides it is but reasonable that some things should be
reserved for the Rewards as well as Punishments of the other World, and we may
well imagine this to be the design of Providence when it seems not to regard
Virtue or Vice in this. All that I have hitherto pleaded for, is, That Virtue
is usually rewarded in this Life, and that with Honors; or, at least,
Reverence as part of its Portion. That the Autarchist, (the good Man that can
govern himself) is usually thought the fittest to govern others; and that such
a Man shall be esteemed and revered, even by the most disorderly. But if at any
time it falls out otherwise, if Providence (for reasons best known to it self,
perhaps for our own Good) shall so far alter the course of Nature and
dispositions of Mankind, as to suffer Desert not to meet with due Respect; be
not you ( Dorotheus) yet discouraged in your Race of Virtue, for the more is
reserved for you when you arrive at the End. Be content therefore to be a
Jewel, though sometimes you lie neglected in the Dust; and to shine, though
none takes notice of you. It Is a greater thing to deserve to be a Prince, than
to be one actually; and he is indeed a King that reigns over himself and his
own Appetites, though he has none other Subjects. Remember that Virtue is its
own Reward here, though it had neither Riches nor Honors attending; besides it
must be rewarded hereafter. Those internal Blessings of Peace and Joy are its
own, and, when it has no other Reward in this World, (which is very seldom)
God takes notice of it, and his Reward is with him, and the greater because
deferred. And therefore upon the whole matter, I must conclude, That Autarchy
is the only way to true Glory here, and Immortality hereafter.

. 12. By this time you must confess that Godliness (and Autarchy is nothing
else, but the Power it exerts over the furious and raging Passions) has
usually the promise of this Life, as well as that which is to come. That her
outward Advantages are great as well as her inward. Her ways are ways of
Pleasantness, and all her paths are Peace. Length of days are in her Right
hand, and in her Left Riches and Honors. These are the Privileges that Solomon
annexes to a Heavenly Wisdom, of which Self-Government is the greatest and
hardest part. I might here further add to its Advantages that of outward Peace
with Men, (for Peace of Mind was proved to be her gift in the last Discourse)
the quiet I mean, Good Will and Neighborhood, she would settle in the World;
and the Dissentions she would banish out of it: It would restore the
terrestrial Paradise again, together with its pristine Innocence, and make that
a Tempel of God, which is now become a den of Thieves: It would cast out the
Devil of Hatred and Malice, of Self-Love and Covetousness, of Pride and Revenge
(those Fiends that will not suffer us to live in Peace) and restore Love,
Meekness, and Humility to bring the Frame of Nature in order again. Thus it
would make us all happy if we would accept of Happiness; and we should, while
we live here, have some Fore-tastes of the Felicity we are to receive
hereafter. These are some of the Advantages of Autarchy: I might add many
other, and make many ingenious and surprising Observations thereupon. But it is
time to retire, and try to practice mine own advices: Besides, I have in some
measure discharged the Promise made in the First of these Essays, and therefore
after a brief review of the whole, I will descend to the Conclusion.

. 13. You have heard therefore (my studious Dorotheus) in the First Paper the
Doctrine of Autarchy explained, together with the several Rules of Practice. In
the Second I have, I hope, satisfied, you that its Pleasures are true,
substantial, and durable; whilst those of Sensuality are delusive, uncertain,
and unsatisfactory: That its regimen is not so grievous or difficult as the
World would persuade you; but that it is attended with the best inward and
outward Pleasures. In this Last I have endeavored to show its outward
Advantages, as Health, Long Life, Riches and Honors in this World, as well as
Eternal Life in the World to come; if it fails in any outward Blessing, it is
but in order to a greater; it naturally leads to 'em, and if it sometimes miss
let not that be your discouragement: Food may, by accident* cause Diseases, and
that which is the means of Life, cause Death. However, it cannot fail of Life
with the Ancient of days, and the Riches and Honors of a Heavenly Kingdom.
This is the Argument of what I have writ upon this Subject; and my Design and
great End in all this, is to excite you to the Practice of those Virtues
included under the Notion of Autarchy; and such are Patience, Meekness,
Humility, Temperance, Continency, Charity and such like. And to this End, I
will commend to you these Considerations.

I. It is a Duty not only according to original and incorrupt Nature (in which
the lower part is designed to obey the upper, and joined to it for its service)
but also worthy of it. It is the peculiar Character of a good and wise man, of
him that lives the Life of Angels here, and is designed to live with them
hereafter: It is the only way to restore the defaced Image of God, recover our
lost Integrity, and the Ethereal Seats from whence we are fallen, which is our
business in this World; for we are sent hither to be exercised in Virtue, that
we may be fitted for Light and Glory: And he that does not answer this end of
his Creation in this Life, shall sink down in the next; he shall have cause to
lament that he had any Being here, and shall be so much the more miserable, by
how much he might have been happy.

II. It is an Exercise that has the reality of all the true Pleasures that God
usually bestows upon the Sons of Men, in this Vale of Tears; whilst the
Pleasures of Sin are false, counterfeit, and momentary: Besides, it is a
Preparative for future and greater Joys, when God shall lift up our poor
dejected Souls out of their terrestrial Prisons, to the Ethereal Seats and
Offices nearer to himself. To which add, That it has (as you have heard
proved) all the outward Advantages we can expect in this state of Darkness and
Death. For it has been evidenced, That nothing can tend more to Health and
Long Life, Riches, Credit, Respect; yea, an immortal Name (if any such thing
can be obtained here, or is worth the pursuit,) than this Great Duty. Thus it is
an Aggregate of all the poor present Joys of these lower Regions; and an
earnest of those of a higher; and if any thing can make us happy here, it is
only this.

III. It is an Exercise that the World, as well as Religion, will in some sense
exact of us: For though Christianity requires stricter Rules of Discipline for
the Body, by how much its Principles are higher, nobler, and more removed from
Corporeity; yet Autarchy is daily (and in some respects must be) used in every
condition of Life. Every prudent Man must use it, and so has done from the
beginning; and that Man does not live who denies himself nothing. If mortal
Desires were all to be satisfied, they would be soon too clamorous to be
endured, and would, in a short time, destroy themselves as well as us. We daily
deny our selves some thing, and look upon it to be no burden, but are content
so to do. Subjects deny themselves the Pleasures of Regality, and Princes
willingly relinquish the Liberty and Recesses of Subjects. The poor are
contented ^o fare hard, and be without the Varieties of the Rich Man's Table,
and the Rich Man is forced to want the Appetite and Freedom of the Poor. We
look upon it to be our Fate to be without many things, upon prudential and
secular Accounts. The World will enjoin Self-Government, without the censure of
Tyranny, and why may not Religion? Be but then as wife for your Soul as you are
for your Body or Estate, and you need no more. The other World may sure engage
you as far as this.

IV. And Lastly (that I may come nearer your self, and your present
Circumstances), It is an Exercise that can only suit with your Education under
the best Discipline and the most learned place under Heaven* It is the true End
of all your Studies at School and in the University. It is the Aim of those
excellent Men that have the educating of Youth, the cultivating of Natures, and
the dressing of Souls in every Seminary of Learning. It is the End of your
Friends Cares and Fears for you; of the Sciences that you have studied, and the
Degrees you have taken: and particularly of the highest and most useful
Science, called Moral Philosophy. As to Physics, there be many things in
Nature inexplicable, and so are like to remain till this Dream of Life is over:
And other things are explicated several ways, by several Men, endlesly
confuting each other (so that some have concluded to sit down with a Resolution
to profess to know nothing;) but Morality, or the Doctrine of conforming our
Manners to the Rules of Virtue, is plain, easy, and certain. And while other
Sciences may be perverted to vain and sinful Ends and Purposes, the Morality of
the Schools is the Handmaid to that of Divinity, and leads to that we learn of
Christ. It has an inherent holiness in it, and is not subject to Perversions;
and the Moralist shall he still accounted (as he was once by the Oracle) the
wisest and the best Man: For this Learning (especially that part that teaches
you to govern your self) e coelo descendit, descended from above, and directs
us thither.

. 14. Nor are you to deferr the Duty of Autarchy, or the governing your self
till Old Age or a fiter Season in your Judgment, but set your self to the
present Practice of it. And against the delaying of this or any other Duty, I
must lay before you these Five Considerations.

1. Our Life is uncertain, neither have we here a continuing City, but must, we
know not how soon, be turned out into the vast Abyss of Eternity to seek one.
In all the Periods of our Time, Death attends us as well as in Old Age, and our
last Day is both certain and uncertain to us: For God, when he sent us hither,
allotted us our times, long or short, according to his Will and our
Necessities, and in proportion to our Wants and his Goodness. And he has
wisely hid the Bounds and Limits of these our times in Darkness and unknown
Futurity; so that we cannot find them out till we have passed them: And this
the rather, that no Man might presume upon his remaining Sand, deferr
Repentance, or depend upon any but God for Life. That we might always expect,
what (for ought we know) may befall us at any time, and make every Day our last,
because it may prove so.

2. Though we cannot find out the Dimensions of our Lives, which are hid with
God, and beyond which we cannot pass, as Job tells us, Job 14. 5. Yet, I
suppose, it lies in our own power to shorten them, and so curtail that Blessing
that Heaven designed for us: For I conceive, that those Terms and Limits are
assigned Conditionally, and upon supposition of our using the best Means and
right Management of our selves. And, consequently, in these licentious Times,
few Men reach those Bounds set by God and Nature: And though, it may be, we
cannot enlarge those Terms set for us (which I am apt to believe, in compliance
with Job's Words aforementioned;) yet it does not follow but we may shorten
them. Thus Excesses carry us off betimes; and Debauchery dispatches us in a few
Years: the Sword has slain its thousands; but Sensuality its ten thousands. It
is beyond the power of Physic to restore what we consume and destroy; and we
are most of us at all times, and all of us at some time or other (God forgive
us) a kind of felo de se's, or Self-Murtherers. Autarchy must therefore be
begun betimes, because it can then only bring us to our Journey's end, and save
us from the imputation of contributing to our own Death.

3. It Is a foolish and dangerous thing to put off that which we must, not only
begin, but perfectly exercise at one time or other, or else be miserable. It is
contrary to all the Methods of Wisdom and Prudence in the world, to deferr a
thing of that infinite concern to us, as Salvation, or the Means requisite
thereunto. Procrastination may possibly make us miserable in a moment, but it
can never do us the least good.

4. God, with whom are the Measures of Life, and the fatal Bounds which we may
not pass, may justly resent our delay, and offer us his Grace no more. He that
slights his great Concerns in this World, when he has Opportunity, may justly
have that Opportuity taken away from him; and who knows but God may enlarge or
abbreviate our Lives, according as we use or abuse his Tenders of Grace.
However, the Door may be shut, and the day of Salvation may end before that of
Nature. The Scripture tells us, To him that has shall be given, and he shall
have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away that which he
seems to have.

5. And Lastly, Procrastinators seldom begin, much less finish any Religious
Work. And there is this reason to be given for it, The same Cause which makes
you deferr a thing to day, will to morrow, and so forward. And if Difficulty,
Idleness, or Want of Inclination be that cause to day, it will be more to
morrow, and so forward. The longer the work of Self-Conquest is deferred, the
harder it will grow, till it becomes insuperable, and the more will be your
Aversion to it. The Flesh, which at first is tractable and tender, will (if
left to its own Management) become stubborn and hard to be bowed. And therefore
it has been observed, That Procrastination is not only a Sign but a Cause of
final Impenitency. Remember, therefore, the Sentence with which a late pious
Author concludes his Book, out of the Mouth of the wise Siracides. Make no
tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put it not off from day to day. Ecclus. 5. 7.

. 15. The Conclusion of all shall be hortative, and (that it may have the more
Effect) in the words of the divine Psalmist quoted and approved of by St.
Peter; and so declaring the Sense of the Old and New Law about the Duty of
Autarchy, and its present Reward. Psalm. 34. 12, etc. and 1 Pet. 3. 10, etc.
What Man is he that desires Life, and loves many days, that he may see good?
Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy Lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil
and do good, seek peace and ensue it. For the Eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his Ears are open to their prayers; but the face of the Lord is
against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
In which words the great Duty is Autarchy, which consists (1.) in the
Government of the Tongue, from Raillery and Falsehood; (2.) of the Actions, in
declining every evil Act, and doing that which is good; (3.) of the Mind, that
it be free from the unruly Passions, peaceable in it self, and peaceable with
all men. Thus for the Duty; then for the Reward, It incloses the Duty on all
sides, that one may not be seen without the other. It promises (1.) Temporal
Blessings, as most agreeable and taking with flesh and blood, viz. Long Life,
Many Days, and Enjoyment of Good in them: And then adds. (2.) Spiritual
Blessings, and these follow the Duty; God's Eyes, i. e. his gracious Aspect or
Providence, watches over the righteous, and his Ears are open to their Prayers;
whereas, on the other side, he sets himself in opposition to them that do evil,
his Face or Countenance is against the Sensualist, not only to cut him off from
the earth; but the very Memory of him, his place and name, so that they shall
no where be found.

You see then ( Dorotheus) both your Duty and Reward. And what now can be
expected from you, upon the whole matter, but that you should act like your
self, as a Man of Reason and Understanding; and, having the Candle of the Lord
for your Guide, that you follow its Light in all things. Do nothing therefore,
unworthy of your Knowledge and Learning; and entertain no Thought that may be a
shame to either. Bring every intended Action to the Test, and examine it before
the upper Court of Judicature. Avoid Self-condemnation as the greatest evil;
and scorn to do that in private, which you dare not own in public. Eschew not
only every sinful, but every unworthy Action; and abstain not only from Evil,
but from the very appearance of it. Desire nothing but what is necessary and
proper for you; and suspect every Licentious Act, though there appears no
present Sin in it. Use your Body to some Discipline, and accustom it to
Disappointments now and then, that it may the easier bear the non-enjoyment of
things prohibited. Keep it and its Appetites at a distance and under the rod;
and if it rebels, exercise it with Fasting and Abstinence. In a word, Be
absolute in your self, and tolerate no Resistance there.

. 16. Thus taught Socrates that living Image of Wisdom, and Plato the God-like,
and the rest of the wise and obedient Sons of Nature, enlightened only by the
glimmering Candlelight of its Laws. Nay, thus taught and lived the Holy Jesus,
and spent his time here in Fasting, Prayer, and other spiritual Exercises, not
out of any necessity in respect of himself, but that he might give us an
Example: He willingly chose Sufferings and Poverty rather than Empire, and
preferred Sorrow to Mirth, as more proper for a Vale of Tears. Thus lived and
taught his holy Apostles and first Followers, denying themselves, chastising
their Bodies, and keeping them under, and that not only for Cure, but for
Prevention. And thus lived and taught the Primitive Saints for some hundreds of
Years; till Iniquity began to abound and the divine Love to wax cold: Many of
whom (that they might be more than Conquerours, show the Power they had over
themselves, and avoid Temptations) chose to prevent Death, and die whilst they
lived; leave the World, I mean, and all its Vanities and Follies, abandon
Delights, renounce all humane Conversation, deny themselves even innocent
Entertainments, and shut themselves up from the power of Vainglory and all
Society. And this was the Original of a Monastic Life.

I know very well that there is no Necessity of going thus far, and that even
this sort of Desertion of the World has degenerated into Hypocrisy. That the
blackest Crimes have been acted in the dark, and the greatest Licentiousness
under the Monk's Cowl and Hood. I know likewise that no Man is necessitated to
take upon him the Vow of Coelibacy, or to forsake the World in that Sense. Our
Lot is easier than theirs, who were forced to fly to the Mountains, and spend
their times in Solitudes. Religion is (God be thanked) both commanded and
rewarded; and Autarchy admired by all, though used by few. But this is that I
have and must maintain, That we must keep our selves unspotted from the World,
and the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. And, in order thereunto, That we must learn
the Art of Self-Conquest, by the most convenient and suitable Methods; and that
we ought to be prepared to suffer, though we have no present Enemy or outward
War. That Christianity is a spiritual Warfare; and that we have the Devil, and
our own Lusts to combat and conquer. And, finally, That those good and wise
Men, which like so many Stars illuminate these dark Regions of Sin and
Ignorance, ought to be Autarchists.

Shine then (my Dorotheus) amongst these few: for thus only shall you ensure
inward Quiet and Peace amongst the Uncertainties of an unconstant World; you
will experiment true external Pleasures, besides the Comforts of a pure
Conscience, which nothing can take from you; you will find inward Pleasure and
Peace, if not that which outward, and probably Long Life, Health, Credit,
Respect, and many good days. The strait Gate will grow wider, and the narrow
Path broader, and Autarchy will at last prove your Reward as well as Duty: You
will begin here to live the Spiritual Life, the Life of Angels and beatified
Souls; which, as you grow older, will become more and more delightful; till at
last you meet Death disarmed of all its Terrors, lovely and charming, because
it will conduct your willing Soul to the Regions of Bliss, and to the Company
of Angels. Which is the daily Prayer of your Friend, and the Design of these
Papers.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printted for Dorman Newman.
THE Way to Health, Long-Life and Happiness: or, A Discourse of Temperance, and
the particular nature of all things requisite for the Life of Man: as all sorts
of Meats, Drinks, Age, Exercise, etc. with special Directions how to use each
of them to the best advantage of the Body and Mind. Showing, from the true
ground of Nature, whence most Diseases proceed, and how to prevent them. To
which is added a Treatise of the most sort of English Herbs, with several other
remarkable and most useful Observations, Very necessary for all Families. The
whole Treatise displaying the most hidden Secrets of Philosophy, and made easy
and familiar to the meanest Capacities, by various Examples and Demonstrations.
By T. Tryon. The Second Edition, with Amendments. Also the other Works of the
Author.

A Brief Exposition of the Church-Catechism, with Proofs from Scripture. By Dr.
Williams. The Third Edition.

The Penitent Lady: or, Reflections on the Mercy of God. Written by the Famed
Madam La Valliere, since her retirement from the French Court to a Nunnery.
Translated from the French, by L. A. M. A. The Second Edition.

Contemplations on the state of Man in this Life, and in that which is to come.
By Bp. Tailor.

A Golden Chain, to link the Penitent Sinner unto God. Whereunto is added a
Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.

A Moral Discourse of the Power of Interest. By David Abercromby, M. D. and
Fellow of the College of Physicians at Amsterdam. The Second Edition.

Letters of advice from two Reverend Divines, to a young Gentleman, about A
weighty Case of Conscience. And by him recommended to the serious Perusal of
all those that may fall into the same Condition. Fly youthful Lusts. 2 Timothy 2.
22.

Dr. Willet's Synopsis Papismi: or, a general View of Popery. Wherein the whole
Mystery of Iniquity, maintained by the Church of Rome, is Confuted by
Scripture, Fathers, Councils, Imperial Constitutions, Pontifical Decrees, Their
own Writers, Our Martyrs, and The Consent of all Christian Churches in the
World. Divided into Five Books or Centuries, containing so many Hundreds of
Popish Heresies and Errors. Together with the Life and Death of the Learned
Author. This Book has been Five times Printed, and contains near 400 sheets
in large Folio; there being a small number left, they are proposed to be sold
at 7s. 6d. in Sheets, or 10s. bound.

Shelton's Art of Short-Writing, both sorts, Tachygraphia and Zeiglographia.


