THE JESUIT Countermind. OR, An Account of a NEW PLOT Carrying on by the
JESUITS: Manifested by their present Endeavors (under all SHAPES) to raise
COMMOTIONS in the LAND, by Aspersing His SACRED MAJESTY'S COUNSELS and ACTIONS.
ALSO The Reasonableness of Modesty in SUBJECTS in Judging the Concerns of their
PRINCE.

(...). PLATO. Odi profanum vulgus and arceo. HORAT. LONDON, Printed in the
Year 1679.

TO THE READER.
THe Jesuits by their undiscerned Insinuations have Bewitched the People into
such a suspicious, turbulent, and disloyal vein, that the Scenes of their
Laboring Minds are nothing but the supposed Tyrannous Intrigues of His
Majesty, etc. their Resolutions edged for a Reformation, and all their
Discourse represents to the life their Inward Thoughts, for they will not speak
a good word of His Majesty, but talk altogether of his oblique and ugly
Proceedings (as they term his Royal Prosecution of the Public Good)
condemning him in every thing that he does, if the Action be not Commensurate
to that narrow Scheme of Justice and Policy which they embrace, as if forsooth
the Vast Affairs of State must needs be couched in the Module of every
Mechanic.

A Reflection on the unreasonableness of this Immodesty and Censoriousness in
the Vulgar, prompted me to write down in vacant Hours my Thoughts of it for my
own private satisfaction: So that that must excuse me for Publishing it in such
a disorderly Method and Style, the confusedness of the former and the tenuity
of the latter resulting from my being Immerse in prosecution of my Arguments,
so that I could not take so much care of the Rules of Speech to please others,
but let it go at random in those words that seemed to be most expressive of my
Thoughts, whether within the Rules of Modern English or no, 'twas all one to
me: For my end in Publishing it, was to excite Modesty in Subjects, so that if
any by perusing it shall learn to practice this Virtue, I have my desire:

So farewell, J. Br.

THE JESUIT COVNTERMIND: OR, An Account of a New PLOT.
THe Romish Politicians, in all the Efforts of that Zeal they discover in their
Endeavors to Introduce the Catholic Religion into Protestant Nations, never
so wholly lean on any particular means they use, as thereby to be either
disabled, or discouraged from betaking themselves [upon a Defeat of the first
Stratagem] to another that promises equal likelihood of Success, but are ever
active in secret Ambuscade, absconding themselves in the Dark Vmbrages of Cruel
Subtilty: And though their Conspiracies may seem to the Eyes of some, to be
Extinct, or at least Dormient, through a Languid Faintness, and Supine
Lassitude resulting from the Frustration of their Industrious Vigilance; Yet
those that have made a more narrow Inspection into their Deportment and
Designs, do Inform us, that no sooner is even one of their Capital and prime
Plots unravelled to the bottom, and divested of its Closure with the event, but
(Hydra like) up springs another in the room: A pretty Infant Contrivance, which
if carefully Fomented by the tender Fathers, the good honest Jesuits, is like
to prove a hopeful and useful Instrument in time to promote the Interest of the
Mother of Witchcrafts. Nor is that Objection of any Validity which may be taken
from the Disparity between the Circumstances of ours and other Nations Laws.
For, say they, Indeed they may never be weary of carrying on Designs in other
Nations, where there is no such care taken to root out the whole Race of
Ignatius 's Followers, though they find some of them tardy. But in ours, say
they, It is impossible for them to succeed any more, since His Majesty has so
prosecuted the Business home, that no Papist can live in London, unless he take
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: And all those that dwell in the Country
are confined to an impossibility of meeting in Consultation about any such
thing: Whereas the late Plot was pursued with all Industry, Policy, and Secrecy
by Potent Confederates, for London abounded with Papists Incorporating almost
whole Streets into Romish Societies: And not only that City, but all England
swarmed with Jesuits and other Ecclesiastical and Secular Orders. So that
indeed they might have some probabilities of accomplishing their Aims; But now,
the forementioned Alterations of these things, deprives them of any Means of
bringing in their Religion here again. This may seem at first sight to have
some show of Truth, But if searched into, is but a mere plausible Flourish: For
their Sanctuaries at Doway and S. Omers, supersede all the Crosses and
Obstructions they have met with hitherto; especially if we consider what vast
Contributions have been made both by Foreigners and Natives toward the carrying
on the Plot: and they have had no Occasion as yet, we may presume, to expend so
great a Sum of Money; and whether they be not yet aided in the same manner,
and their Treasury increased, we have no assurance. This then, according to the
account given by Doctor Oats, in several Passages of his Narrative, and the
Appendix thereto; and as the Event in some measure evinces, seems to be their
Second Plot, to raise Commotions and Rebellions in the Kingdom: By traducing
His Sacred Majesty's Counsels and Actions, casting Aspersions and Calumnies on
whatsoever he does or intends; and so by Consequence they would disaffect the
Kings Subjects against his Government, suggesting to them, that he is
Tyrannically disposed, purposing a Monopoly of Arbitrary Rule: Notwithstanding
His Majesty has in all His Speeches, Public Deportments and Transactions,
discovered Intentions Diametrically opposite to such Treacherous and
Uncharitable Surmises. But here lies the Ground of the Jesuits Hopes.

They observe, that as in all Alterations of State, in Wars, Sieges,
Rebellions, or any other Signal Popular Calamities, the Vulgar People are
Impregnate with a strange Turbulency and heat in their Spirits, which is apt to
exert its self in Various Pranks, and sometimes in Enormous prevarications. So
it is now in this Land: For being as it were nettled with the late Horrid
Attempts of the Papists, they cannot be quiet, but are harassed in their
Spirits by an unusual Fervor, and this differs proportionately to their
various Tempers, Educations, Converse and Interests: Some swelled by
Hypocondriack Flatulencies, presume to foretell that these Convulsions in our
Land are certain Prodromes of the last period and dismal Catastrophe of this
Lower World; others provoked by peccant choler, and habitual Self-conceit, are
angry with every thing almost that occurs, if it have any Reference to the
Public: Others act and speak after another manner, all as their Fancy guides
them: that Faculty (however Tinctured with peculiar Idea's, accommodate to the
Genius of each Individual) being generally Regnant among the inferior Orders
and Ranks of Men.

But that which is of greatest Subserviency to the Jesuits ends, amongst the
several Humors of Plebeians, is the common propension of their overheated
Heads to be tampering too busily with the Abstruse Mysteries of Religion, and
the Great Affairs of State.

But I had almost forgot that against this may the former Objection be urged,
and that the Jesuits can make no use of these Extravagancies in the English
People, since, as has been said, without taking the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, none can stay in London of their Profession, nor can with any great
probability be capacitated to make any Disturbance in the Country. I answer,
That if some Officers in Ireland were dispensed with for taking those Oaths,
upon promise of delivering up their trusts upon demand from their Contractors
or their Substitutes: It is as rational to conceive, that the Jesuits may
dispense with themselves, or their Missioners now upon a parallel account, this
being as well as that, subordinate to the Grand Design of Introducing the
Romish Religion.

Let it be granted then, that if they please they can allow (according to their
Infallible way of reconciling Contradictions) Perjury in this case to be no
Perjury, but Sacramental Perfidiousness to be Holy Faithfulness. And can we
suppose they will be backward in sending their Missioners, or coming
themselves, and (under a new disguise of Sanctity and Loyal Obedience) dwelling
and passing for well-meaning persons in the Nation. Now this being granted,
what hinders but that they make use of the two forementioned Propensions in
the Vulgar to Religious and Political Enthusiasm, make use of them, I say, in
order to the accomplishing their Designs. For as to the first, the Irregularity
and Fanatic Fervor in matters of Religion, it is sufficiently Notorious, how
easily the Vulgar are elated into Admiration of those of their Sect and
Faction, who seem Zealous in some trivial Matters, as it were excited by a
Supernatural Impulse, perhaps only the Effervescency of predominant Choler: I
say, how natural it is for the lighter sort of the People, those (...), to be
moved into a Venerable Esteem of these Blazing, and (as likely) S. Judes
wandering Stars, so that whatsoever they dictate to them is embraced as an
Oracle, and being naturally desirous of, and propense to the Advancement of
that which they esteem Religion, they may with great facility be wrought into a
detestation of whatsoever may be presumed to be an Obstacle in the way of its
promotion. Therefore here wants only a sly Jesuit to step in, and putting on
the Vizard of Holiness and Zeal for the Christian Cause, to preach to them such
Doctrines as may tend to the removing all Blocks and Impediments, telling them,
that it is lawful to kill Kings that deprive them of their Liberty of
Conscience: However if they proceed not to so high a pitch of Audacious
Villainy, yet to be sure these professed Regicides will not stick to wound his
Reputation, insinuating strange Jealousies into the Minds of the People: And,
that this has been the practice of the Jesuits in Scotland, and elsewhere; I
think there wants but opportunity of reading the Narrative of the late Plot
Published by Doctor Oats, to prove it. And why may we not suppose the same
Instruments to be stirring now, since we find such correspondency in the Event;
every pedling Mechanic, or ill-bred Rustic presuming to descant on the
Actions and Counsels of their Prince,: censuring every thing either as ill
intended, or weakly prosecuted, Thus by an unavoidable Dilemma reducing
whatever he says or does, under the Classis of Tyranny or Folly. This is the
first sort of Men whom the Jesuits seduce: There are another kind of State
Fanatics also whom they Inveagle, and by puffing them up into Self-conceit,
cause them to speak great swelling Words of Vanity, doting on their own
Imposturous Suggestions as the Original Patterns of Policy; whereas in truth
they are but the delirious Hallucinations of their own corrupted Fancies.

And here though I have seemed to be general in my Accusation* I would not be
understood without due Restrickions, neither do I think this malignant
censoriousness is altogether so predominant at present as it has been of late;
mistake not my design which is not to build a Rant against Men out of a moer
angry, quarrelsome humor, but rather to prevent the danger which may be feared
to result from the Continuance of so horrible a Vice as this Civil Blasphemy
is, in the eyes of all Sober men. So that I desire pardon if I have already, or
may hereafter in the following Pages of this Treatise, let fall any Passage
tinctured with too much Disdain and Indignation: for I assure you, such
Reproachful Terms proceed from my being so Immerse in a Vivid Resentment of the
odiousness of this Crime, which also is exploded in the Sacred Lines with
Expressions of great Detestation.

To Resume therefore the Line of my Discourse, it being Conceded that it is no
Groundless Panick fear, that the Jesuits are the Cherishers of these Censures
and Calumnies which have been, and no doubt still are Vomited forth, by the
rash and heedless Vulgar. The next thing I have to do is to show the
unreasonableness of this Immodesty in Subjects: And after that the danger of it
to themselves and the whole Nation, if not speedily amended.

First therefore, as to the unreasonableness of Immodest Hastiness, and
peremptory Dogmatizing concerning Princes Actions: It may well be presumed,
That the Mysteries of Government are far above the Capacities of Plebeians, who
confining their Disguisitions to the more sensible Phoenomena in the State,
their Conceptions of the subtle Cabbala's thereof, are like the Rustic
Apprehensions of Astronomy, rude and incongruous. Indeed the Necessities and
Contingencies appendant to their several respective Callings and Conditions in
the World by Ingulphing all their Thoughts and Projects reject them into a
fatal Inability to take notice of the Collateral and private Figurations, which
Providence in her constant Inrotation makes on the Stream of Political Affairs.
It Is true, there are some ordinary and vulgar Marks, by which mean
Understandings (though they be already as it were absorpt by the inferior
Objects of Sense and Domestic Contrivance) may yet trace the Motions of that
great Master-wheel, that Matchless Engine of Divine Wisdom, so as not only to
be able to govern their own Affairs with Discretion, but also to make some
suitable Conjectures of the Public Interest: but when they once go beyond
these, they have ventured out of their Sphere, and are most commonly
bewildered, and like Children apt to be frighted with their own Shadows, those
dark stalking Images in the Fantasy; for being not used to see the various
Springs which set a going the Admirable Harmony in Humane Affairs, they take
every thing for a Bugbear that makes a great Noise in the World, and either
Heaven or Hell they think must have an immediate hand in such Exotic
Digressions; whereas these Discords do more enhance the Melody to a Judicious
and Contemplative Mind, who knows that the greatest and loudest Exorbitancies
in State Affairs are only the Periodical Invariations of that Nemesis that is
by God interwoven in the very Texture of the Universe. Such an One trusting
only to the Calmness and Serenity of Reason, not to the garish Impostures of
Fancy; is (as a consequence of exquisite and curious Observation) very
diffident in these Matters, and indeed in most things else that are Invested
with such mutable Circumstances and Accidents: So that he does not so often
expose himself to such gross mistakes as naturally result from the hasty and
perfunctory glances of the vulgar shallow Rhodomonts, but with wary yet as
zealous Industry, as those that keep a greater clatter, he traces the various
Minute Rivulets that silently insinuate into the grand Current of Affairs: he
traces them I say, as near as he can to their Spring-heads, and then returning
again, narrowly observes their several Intercourses, Conjunctions, and
progressive Advancements; and this nice Scrutiny causes humility and meekness
of Conversation, so that he does not pass rash and immature Censures on any
thing, but mildly and rationally concludes that it is prudence to suspend his
Judgment, in Cases not thoroughly condescending to his Understanding, and such
certainly are the abstruse Mysteries of State, as his Experience can witness:
And not only his, but others also who have been better Capacitated, as one
would think, to know the Mysteries at Court: and yet even these had not
interest enough to discern the true Secret of Counsels, as appears from the
frequent disparity and not unusual contrariety that is discovered in several
Narratives of the same State Transaction made by Persons highly, yet not
equally, qualified for a Commodious Information in those Matters: nay sometimes
so well qualified, as even to have a Concern in the Business they profess to
give an account of, and yet it seems one of them must be mistaken. And can we
think that if the Jesuits were glad to allow Fifty pounds a year to a subtle
Critic, that so by his watchfulness and inquisitive Diligence, they might have
a true account but of some of the Kings Words and outward Behavior: Can we
think, I say, that the inferior sort of the People can attain to any probable
certainty of having a true account of such of His Majesty's Concerns as neither
are Committed to the Press, nor delivered in any Authentic Manuscript? And if
they can have a true Account of them, yet how can they judge of them, since
they so far transcend their Capacities, by reason of the vast distance (in
Situation and Magnitude) of their several respective Spheres; so Great, that if
they were supposed to be searched into with the greatest Advantage the
Plebeians are capable of; such as are Acuteness of Parts, the perusal of
Histories, good Intelligence, and the like: I say, suppose the Vulgar to be
Privileged with all these Helps, yet some have concluded they will be able to
discover no more of the true Bias, and secret Tendency of these Profound and
Recondite Counsels, than a skilful Astronomer assisted by all the Writings of
Men Famous in that Science, by his own dexterous Sagacity, and the most
exquisite Optics, can discover the dark Intrigues in the Moon: though by the
forementioned helps he can sufficiently inform himself of the Habitableness of
that Adjacent Planet, and can discern the difference of Land and Water, nay and
will perhaps venture at the proportion of her Hills by their Shadows: Yet, I
say, for all this he is not able to give any Rational Account of what is done
by the Inhabitants there; but must needs by pretending to such Knowledge, incur
the just Imputation of Indiscreet Folly, and come off as ridiculously as the
Virtuoso, that would delight himself with fine long Harangues concerning the
Interest and Actions of a certain Monarch there, who by him was affirmed to be
Marching at the Head of a Great Army. Thus deluding himself with Fantastic
and imaginary Scenes of War, portrayed ('it is like) on his flexile Mind by a
Pencil dipped in the Moist and Lunatic Illapses from that adjacent Planet. And
this is the case of the unstable and empty Vulgar, who gaping after News, do
commonly Imbibe the Droppings of the Court, though very much sophisticated and
embittered with the Choleric Exsudations of intermediate persons. Thus puffing
up his frantic Mind with strange uneasy Forms, cheating himfelf with a
Belief, that his Anxious Soul with Laboring Steps has gone through all the
Labyrinth of the State-Councels, unravelled the whole System of true Policy;
whereas, poor man! he has only been dragged through the Phantasms of his heated
Brain. In a word, it was a waking Dream which presented to his busy Thoughts,
the KING and COUNCIL Acting thus and thus, Involved in Dark and Tyrannous
Intrigues: When, alas! were the man well awaked into a due pitch of Sobriety,
he would easily discern that his Vast Distance from the ROYAL SPHERE, must
needs engage him in as Idiotick Conceits of what is done there, as the Vulgar
have of the Moon, which they are apt to fancy to be a fine Bright Frame with
the Picture of a Man in it, having a Bundle of Sticks on his Shoulders. I say,
as gross would be the Fancy of Plebeians, of what is Transacted at the
Council-Boord, were they not privileged with some broken Adulterate Narratives
of those things; which yet may in a Parallel Degree delude them, to what the
above-named Virtuoso's Optics do him in gazing on the Moon, insinuating false
Hypotheses into his Frothy Credulous Soul.

I would not by this seem to put a Curb on Men's Understandings, and lead them
by the Nose into a Supine Acknowledgment, That whatever Kings do is Infallibly
Just and Prudent; this were to make Civil Popes of them: And yet here I must
needs confess, that I think as their being Men has subjected them to those
Frailties of Lapsed Humane Nature, which by a Divine Nemesis are in different
Measures and Degrees the Lot of all Men, according to the Various Obliquity of
their Fall: So also that High Place they possess amongst Men, and their great
subserviency to the mysterious Designs of Providence, Entitles them to more
frequent and plentiful Assistance from Heaven: And the Superior Orders in the
Universe, if not a special Energy from the Deity, makes good their claim by
Ennobling them with Vast and Comprehensive Intellects, suitable to their Noble
Emploiment, and the otherwise inextricable Difficulties which attend on it, and
these sublime Acquisitions, may be discovered by a cautious Observer in the
greatest part of Princes and other high Ministers of State, if there be not
some Impediment in Nature, or gross flaw in their practice, which last made the
Royal Psalmist, after the Retirement of the Divine Influence upon the
Commission of Murder, implore the Restoration of that Celestial Favor, that
so his enervated understanding might recover strength, and (to express it in
the common translation of his own words) That he might be established with a
free and (as One adds) a Princely Spirit, a Mind Impregnate with Illapses of
Eternal Wisdom, and so capacitated to produce deep Counsels and Heroic Actions
befitting his Royal Dignity, and suitable to the vast and otherwise
unalleviated pressures of the State. So that this great and pious King prayed
but for what he had deprived himself of, his former illuminations from Heaven.
And truly it seems very Congruous, that the Mysterious Whispers of the
Invisible World, are in a more intimate manner communicated to Pious Princes,
whose Immense Minds cannot but by their ever active and strong Vibrations (like
Unisons in Music) snatch into Sympathy some Courteous Angel, who (Deo favente)
holding back the Veil, must needs degurgitate upon them full and penetrant
Coruscations from the Abyss of that otherwise Inaccessible Light: Thus
tincturing their Counsels and Actions with that Wisdom that may render them
weighty and unsophisticate. But lest I should incur the Imputation of
Rosicrucian vanity, in thus pompously ascribing Divine Illumination to the
Ministry of Angels; I will crave leave to digress a word or two to prove my
Assertion: It will be easily granted I hope, that if many of the Prophets were
Illuminated in this manner in the Old Testament, God has not Innovated the
Circumstances of this Favor in the New: But that in many cases, I do not say
in all, Divine Light may be communicated to men by the hands of Angels. That it
was thus under the Law, many of the Hebrew Masters do attest, Maimonides is
full to this purpose, both in his De Fundamentis Legis, and More Nevochim: I
will instance one place for all. But Maimon. More Nev. Part. 2. cap. 41. Sci^o
quod omnium eorum Prophetar. qui Pro* betiam sibi factam esse dicunt, quidam
eam Angelo alicui, quidam vero Deo Opt. Max. ascribant and attribuant licet per
Angeli ministerium quoque ipsis ob^igerit. etc. Vide Smiths Select Discourses.
this is a Digression, yet such an one as may well enough square with my intent
in the foregoing Considerations; for in thus proving in what an Illustrious
manner the Prophets were of old Inspired, I do more then tacitly subindicate
the Excellent Prerogative of Princes also, the latter being called (...), as
well as the former, and that Title only belonged to those Favorites of
Heaven, whose Souls (if not obnubilated with Vice) were permitted to bask under
the more Glorious Irradiations of Divine Light: And this, I say, was, and upon
the same terms is still, the Privilege of Kings as well as of Priests and
Prophets. And consequently it is very Irrational for ordinary ignorant
Plebeians, whose Domestic mean Employments could never permit them to
cultivate their Understandings with any other knowledge, save what they have
gained by Experience, in their trivial Converse with men of the same Rank with
themselves, and some few Superficial Observations concerning the Public: It is
irrational, I say, and argues much self-conceit in them, when they take upon
them so boldly and rashly to censure and condemn the Actions of their Prince,
as it is too common for them to do, when to better weighed men those very
Actions carried the appearance of sound Policy and sedulous care for the
Public: and if they did not seem so pleasing to them in that particular
posture they behold them in, yet even an Implicit Recumbency in such cases
were very commendable in the Vulgar; who, were it not for some few innate Ideas
and common Notions floating up and down in their Minds, surviving the shipwreck
that was made of the rest of those precious Jewels in their Apostasy and fall,
I say, were it not for a few Sparks of Reason left, they seem to verge
exceeding near to the Brutes in their Sentiments of things, and therefore
certainly it is very decorous, that in Political Matters whose Scheme is very
abstruse and curious, they should rely on the judgment of their Supreme
Governors, whom for the most part, Heaven, Nature, Education, and Experience
have blessed with comprehensive, quick, and profound Understandings. We may
also take notice, that they are frequently endued with many other Gifts and
Accomplishments, such as that which Illustrates the Majesty of our Gracious
Sovereign; viz. His power of Curing by a Touch that malignant and inveterate
Disease called The Kings Evil. All that I would intimate by what is said, is
this, That by the Laws and Polity of the Superior Invisible Orders, or by what
other indispensible Conditions of the Creation, we know not: there is a
peculiar Mark set on Princes, they are Signalized with Extraordinary Advantages
of Mind, and by a more Conspicuous Residence of Divinity in them, their persons
are made Sacred; so that by arrogant or irreverent detractions to depretiate
Royalty, is but a lesser kind of Profaneness, and a very suspicious Prodrome of
flat Blasphemy and Atheism.

But I will not anticipate what is hereafter to be spoken concerning the
Religious Obligation that lies on all Subjects to be modest in this case; to
proceed therefore in the discovering the Ineptitude of Censoriousness.

Many and various Topics I might make use of, to Illustrate and Fortify my
Assertions, and to prove that want of Resigned Understandings in the inferior
Plebeians, when the Object is any ways appertaining to Policy; as a Princes
management of Affairs, is the most absurd, incongruous thing in the World: the
ultimate Vote in such matters, being not only by right the peculiar Prerogative
of the Supreme Powers, but also must at last of necessity be cast upon them,
else the Order of Nature must needs be inverted, the Economy, happiness and
safety of the Civil World distorted and dwindled into Confusion,
irreconcilable Enmity and endless Contention: As to the Confusion that will
result from this Epidemical Censoriousness.

It must be considered, that unless the King make himself a very Proteus in his
Counsels, moulding them into as many Shapes as there be several Opinionists in
his Realms: he had as good do nothing, for every one will still be so conceited
of those Models of Policy, that float up and down in his shallow Brains, that
he will very hardly be brought to yield an Inch to any that shall contradict
him: and it is a thousand to one if there be a thousand in the whole Kingdom,
that agree in the same Opinion exactly; where then shall the business be
decided? I mean, who shall determine what form of Policy is best, this man's, or
that man's? Or whether the Kings is not to be preferred before them all? Here is
no Tribunal, or Infallible Chair to resort to for Satisfaction, for each person
is so Incrustate in his own Conceit, that you had as good endeavor to break
the Adamant, as to expect any impartial condescension from his hardened Soul:
No! he scorns to be guilty of such base Incurvation of his erect and sublime
Intellect, so as to cringe to another obtruded Notions: The King himself shall
not curb his freeborn Mind. This or something Analogous to it would be the
humor of all those, who are thus settled upon the Lees and gross dregs of
turbulent Pride and darkness, whenever they are a little stirred and
troubled; nothing can be drawn from them, but muddy, partial, and tenacious
Obstinacy, and contradictory Inconsistences. What is to be done in this unhappy
Juncture? Where is the (...) of true Policy to be found? Why in this
Aenigmatical Repository; every where, and yet no where: Every man would be
Judge, but no man's Sentence shall be Authentic with other men: Here is a
verbal Anarchy, and ten to one but the next Morning brings forth a real one.

The most natural Method therefore of reducing things to their proper Order
again in such cases, is to place the King in the Seat of Judgment, resolving
all to stand to his Verdict in Political Matters; and though he should seem to
them to deviate from Wisdom and Fidelity, yet modesty should take away their
prosumption of the former, and Charity should null their suspicion of the
latter.

And now I am fallen upon the mention of Charity, methinks it is very
congruous, that that Sweet Ingenuity, that Benign Candor in Christians, which
should put a Check on their overhasty judging their Brother, should much more
exert it self in this case; where besides the Obligation of Natural Affinity
between all men, there is a supervening and more intimate tie of Gratitude from
Subjects to their Prince, to whose Vigilance they owe the Security of their
Quiet and Ease: and upon that account, should be very tender of His Honor, by
never daring to broach or countenance in others any Aspersions, or contemptuous
harsh Reflections which may seem to touch his Sacred Person, and his Management
of Affairs. And it is as much the Duty of Subjects, as it is an Argument of
Generosity, thus to deport themselves in reference to their Sovereign, for the
Supreme Monarch of the World has joined in one Command, the due payment of his
own and Caesar's Tribute; but certainly his own would not in his esteem be
discharged, especially that part of it which consists in a reverent Behavior
and Usage of all things belonging to him, should men be continually grumbling
and quarrelling at the Inscrutable Methods of his Providence in Governing the
World; and because they could not comprehend thoroughly its profound Intrigues:
therefore they should upon some seeming Exotic Digressions and uncouth
Meanders of Divine Wisdom, presently suspect and presumptuously divulge their
Jealousy that God was carrying on a Design to gull all Mankind into horrible
Servitude and Misery: Whereas these mistaken Symptoms of such a Plot, were only
the reserved Traces of the Great Council of Heaven, in order to the Good of the
World; only not condescending to the narrow researches of Humane
Understandings: and sure it is but a lesser degree of that cloudy malicious
Surmise, when Subjects so impudently presume to Snort at the Actions of their
King, especially in a time of peril to the Church and State, if he do not keep
on the broad Highway, as these silly conceited Plebeians are prone to esteem
those Models of Policy they have familiariz'd: I say, if a Prince does not
obviate the imminent danger just in the same manner as those Mighty Politicians
would have him, is it not notorious Insolence in them to defame him, and so
contemptuously to traverse his Deep Counsels? though the supposed
Irregularities and extravagant deflections from the vulgar beaten-path, proceed
but from a certain knowledge and foresight, that in such cases the Proverb is
true, which informs us, That sometimes the longest way about is the nighest way
home: For in thus seeming to abandon, or negligently to manage the Public
Welfare, he indeed more closely, but more warily withal, prosecutes it: perhaps
he may fetch a larger compass then these slow-pated Gentlemen can tell how to
trace him in; But it is only to remove some foreseen Obstacles, or anticipate a
fly Machination, perhaps he may a while stand still, when a more steady and
full prospect of his Business may expedite the Accomplishment of his
well-intended Aims: And yet these seeming Statick and retrograde Postures of
Princes may sometimes arise from a mistake somewhat Analogous to theirs, who
think the Planets really go back and stand still, when that delusive
Phenomenon arises only from the several Stations of the Earth See the Notes on
Dr. More's Poems.
in its Annual motion. He that understands Copernicus his Scheme of the World,
will best relish the Comparison: For so these Plebeians moving in a narrower
Sphere, cannot keep pace with the vast Orb of Politicians, and yet measuring
their Stately Motions by the Superficial Ideas in their delirious Fancies, will
be apt to think the others stand still and go back, when the fault lies only in
their Inconstant Skulls, and overhasty propension to censoriousness. But
however suppose these disparate Motions of Princes to be real, yet it is
Idiotick to murmr all this while, as if the Matter was in the Suds, as they
say: for these Oblique Transcursions and Statick postures, do but help to
resume his way more prosperously, now encouraged by the defeat of the prevised
Obstructions: In this not much unlike that Glorious Monarch of the Day, the
Sun, who for all that Heavenly Labyrinth and Learned Perplexity he seems to be
entangled in, when beheld in an Astronomical Scheme, yet nevertheless rejoices
as a Giant to run his course, breaking through all those seeming Difficulties,
which are only the Product of busy Minds. Such is the Zodiac of Policy
wherein Princes move, and their Postures and Motions, seem they never so
oblique or obscure; nay though they should (like that Great Light) seem to the
Vulgar to stand still, yet their Course is steady and regular, ever tending
toward the accomplishment of their Scope, and he that should deny this, because
by reason of several interposing hindrances, he could not precisely trace their
Footsteps, deserves to be counted as much a Fool or Madman, as he that should
think the Sun went not forward, because he could not at that time discern his
progress when some Clouds intercepted his sight, or suppose the Air serene and
clear, yet the vast distance of the Solar Sphere rejected all Terrestrial
Gazers into an unavoidable inability to descry his seeming minute, though
really prodigious, steps in the Ecliptic, according to the Ptolomaick
Hypothesis, which I may make use of here for the Comparisons sake, though I
discard that almost obsolete Opinion, when I hearken to the Dictates of severer
Reason.

I would not by these more Lax Considerations of the vast distance between a
Prince and his Subjects, seem to set up, as I said, a kind of State-Pope, whose
Actions must not be questioned or scanned as being Infallibly Excellent and
without Fault. All that I mean is this,

1. That all Political Transactions are in their own nature Intricate, as it
were Essentially involving Labyrinths and Meanders in their very Constitution,
but acquire a greater inextricableness, by the numerous and assiduate
Contingencies that emerge from the various events of Peace and War, etc.

2. That upon the account of these inseparable Difficulties that attend the
Management of State Affairs, none can be presumed fitter to conquer them, and
dispatch the Concernsof a Nation with Safety, Honor, and Immunity from
subsequent Disasters that may result from perfunctory Attempts to cure present
Diseases: I say none can be supposed to be in a better capacity to do this,
than he whose very Birth entitled him to the Privilege of being initiated
(when adult) into the Rudiments of true Policy, whose Education made good his
Native-claim, and both were seconded with adventitious Light and Conduct from
the Celestial Ministers of State; And such an one is every pious Prince.

3. That therefore the Prince with his Council ought to be esteemed the ORACLE
of the STATE; and he who over boldly pries into their Consultations, or rashly
censures their Actions, forseits his Modesty, Gratitude, Duty and Reason, and
discovers a Mind intoxicated with self conceit, hardened with base
Unthankfulness, and sunk into gross Folly, and Irreligion: So that I might very
well pass on to another part of this Discourse, were I not invited to pursue my
present Theme more closely, and to reduce Matters to particulars, for fear of
the spreading contagiousness and regency of this Disease. Not to mention how
cunningly the poison is imbibed when taken by men who in plain words own the
Pre-eminence of Royalty, yet by their Jesuitically Oblique Reflections on its
Proceedings, are taught to embrace and easily learn to give to others injurious
and irreverent thoughts of it, and deprive it of the most suitable means to
justify it self, and disabuse them; which means consists in its being handled
with that due modesty and ingenuous Reservedness, that its fore*named app ndant
Circumstances require: And not only those, but others also, which I will
enumerate immethodically, as they occur.

It may be considered therefore, that one vast disadvantage accrues to the
Vulgar in judging of State. Affairs from their unacquaintedness in a multitude
of particulars relating to the Alliances, Leagues, Correspondencies, and
several other Transactions between a King and the Princes of Foreign Nations:
not to mention his private Concerns at home, whether at the Court, or any other
parts of his Realms, between him and his Nobles: All which perhaps may be
extraneous to the main engrossing present Affair of the Public, and yet he
must be allowed to prosecute them with as much perhaps more vigor and
alacrity, then at that time is requisite to the management of that other great
Affair: Whence it will fall out, that now and then they will force him to make
an Eruption into some Public Actions, whose coherence with, and dependence on
those forementioned private Concerns not being understood, or so much as
dreamed of among the Vulgar; it must needs follow, that if they take upon them
to judge of those Actions, they will still imagine they bear a respect to that
part of the Public Affairs which fall under their Cognizance, and so will make
a false Construction of the Scope and Tendency of such Actions, which probably
may not have any Affinity with the Public Affair, but only are performed in
order to the accomplishment of his own private. But here when I make a
difference between a Prince's public Actions and his private; I mean only
this, that the management of some of their Concerns does not imply so immediate
and direct a relation to the present great engrossing Affair of the Public,
though they may have a real Aspect on it, as to their Remote tendency, by an
exquisite Cadency of Events falling in with the Stream. Sometimes also they act
with a direct Aspect on the Public, but yet their Design is hid from the
Vulgar. As sometimes a Prince may be Negotiating with an Ambassador concerning
the present Great Matter in Public Quest, and yet his Subjects may not dream
of any such thing* this private Negotiation may cause the Prince to run out
into extraordinary Actions, and such as to the Vulgar who were ignorant of what
passed between him and the Ambassador, may seem exotic, if not worse: so
easy is it for the Vulgar to commit gross Errors, if they presume to descant
on every unusual Phenomenon in the management of State Affairs, when
oftentimes they are raised from Causes so remote from the knowledge of the
Vulgar, that unless we suppose them not only to be well skilled in the
Histories of Neighbor Nations, and of their Court Proceedings, and in the
Histories of our own Land; but also versed in many unpublished Narratives, or
at least all those Passages in them which relate the several Alliances,
Leagues, Titles, and other Circumstances wherein our Sovereign either upon his
own or his Ancestors account may be engaged: To some of which these unusual
Public Carriages of a Prince may have reference; I say, unless we will suppose
the Vulgar to know all this, which is all one as to suppose them of the Kings
Cabinet-Council; it must needs follow, that they will be guilty of gross
Hallucinations, when ever they take upon them to censure such Actions and
Public Deportments of a Prince: their narrow thoughts not being able without
those forementioned helps, perhaps scarce with them, to pursue the vast and
intricate Designs of Princes through all the Elaborate Tracts of Policy.

And this Consideration will I presume carry greater force with it, if it be
but considered how many of the Ordinary Passages and Transactions between
Neighbors in the same Town are not fully understood by others in the same
Corporation (and perhaps men of competent judgment in such Affairs) only by
reason of their not being acquainted with the grounds of such Transactions
which cannot be known without a satisfactory Information in several particular
Circumstances relating to the Condition of the persons concerned and their
Kindred; Many of which Circumstances, or all of them may be pointed at in such
Transactions: and if such Dilucidations be necessary to make Neighbors
understand one another business, though its utmost Aspect may perhaps be
confined to persons dwelling in the same Town, we must needs think that the
greatest part of a Princes Affairs as to their scope and tendency, is lost to
the Vulgar, since they have oftentimes an intimate connection with things done
in very remote Regions, some hundreds of years ago, amidst Circumstances to
many of which we are wholly strangers. It Is no wonder therefore that many
Actions of Princes seem uncouth to the Vulgar, and their abrupt Transitions
from the ordinary course of common Policy, make the silly people start, their
crazy understandings not being able to bear the sudden motion. Indeed to make a
man a competent Judge in those Phanomena, it were requisite that he be well
versed in the whole System of the Political Affairs of such a Realm, and that
he be able with one compendious glance, to look on these extraordinary Actions
of Princes, and the whole body of Political Concerns together, for they will
never appear to their true advantage, but when they are looked on in their
proportional conduciveness to advance the due Symmetry of the whole; and this
cannot be done but by a full display of them altogether. He that shall then
attentively survey the Great Current of State Affairs, and the apt Insinuations
of these Novel Rivulets, and though they seem to proceed from By-corners, yet
how naturally they glide along with the Stream* He that shall observe how the
knowledge of somewhat done a hundred years ago, and a thousand miles off, does
yet illustrate a present Eruption of a Prince into some seeming Exotic
Discoveries of Concernment and care; such an one will discern the Folly of
being over hasty in censuring Occurrencies so disadvantageously looked on, when
irrelatively and severed from the Coincidence they had with Matters to them
utterly unknown; or with the whole stream of State Affairs.

Hitherto the Tenor of my Arguments against Censoriousness in Subjects, and
their immodest Determinations concerning those Methods of Policy that are used
by their Prince, has not altogether excluded them from a possibility of having
true Narratives of their Proceedings, but only upon a tacit Concession of that
Privilege to some of them does yet deny them any Capacity of making a suitable
Conjecture concerning the re-cluse tendency of all their known Transactions, or
of defining whether such a supposed Tendency of them be Commensurate to the
Rules of true Policy. But there are not wanting Arguments to prove that it is
very improbable at least, if not impossible for the Vulgar to have so much as a
true genuine account of their ordinary Deportment and Counsels in reference to
the Public: And then these Critics will be inexcusable in their peremptory
descants on Transactions, which perhaps owe their Birth to Vulgar Report:
however they can have no ordinary assurance to the contrary, and therefore
cannot escape S. Judes Censures, who calls those Gnostics in his time, Filthy
Dreamers, and gives this Character of them, That they despise Government, speak
evil of Dignities, and of things they know not. And just so do our
State-Criticks, speak evil of things they know not, which I will endeavor to
prove.

It may be considered therefore, That a great Disadvantage accrues to these
men's knowledge of the profound Mysteries of State, by reason of the many hands
through which all Narratives of Princes Councels and Actions must necessarily
pass (supposing they be true at first) before they can come under their
Cognizance; and certainly they must lose much of those Appendages which are
requisite to dilucidate an entire true Account, by being obnoxious to the
Additions, Substractions, Tinctures, Glosses, and Manglings of all those
Intermediate persons, whose various and severally peculiar Interests,
Dispositions, Affections, Humors, and Mistakes may conduce to the depriving a
Narrative of its Native Symmetry, Extent, Luster and Scope, and this
disadvantage is augmented according to the various descents of Inferiority in
the persons thus censuring, every lower step from the Prince, exposing them to
more egregious probability of being misinformed by reason their Converse, and
so the means of Information in these Matters, is confined to men of the same or
a very little higher rank then themselves. Now that a Narration passing through
so many hands must needs be maimed, and in many things come far short of the
entire perfect Original, scarce any indeed will imagine but he whose Fortune in
the World, and privileges of Nature, Education, and Converse, furnish him with
the means of receiving such a Story in its several gradual representations from
Noblemen and the common people, or any such like disparate ranks of men, so
diversely qualified for a Commodious Information in these State Mysteries.

More particularly it may be considered, how great a prejudice devolves on the
Vulgar, from the Satirical Glosses and biting Reflections which by maliciously
witty men may, and commonly are interwoven slily in written or traditional
Narratives of Princes Transactions: By these Arts an ingenious person indeed
may represent a Transaction how he pleases, even so as shall make a deep
Impression on the prejudicate and unwary mind, though far enough from the
truth. Thus a very good cause may be being disfigured according to their
petulant malice appear odious to the Vulgar, who have not the brains to
distinguish betwixt the true Story and these subtle deductions, of pre-byass'd
men, but swallow all down whole without mincing or chewing, and it goes down
the easier in that oftentimes these by-blows are struck with a jerk; I mean
that common mode of Satyr which the Vulgar are daily used to, a blunt clownish
kind of Wit, which their ordinary Repartees make them very pregnant in, and so
the sooner taken with it in any discourse of others, whence it glides with the
Contents of the Story into the very inmost recess of their pliable Spirits,
rooting its self there as deeply as the true Narration, and by a close mixture
of their Idea's they become one: and the man is as firmly persuaded of the
truth of the collateral gloss, as of the direct tenor of the Story. One may
easily guess what it is I aim at by this last consideration; it is only to
intimate, that it is not so often the real obliquity of Princes Actions, but a
cunningly suborned representation of such obliquity that has such influence on
the Vulgar weak mind, as to make it sapinely reel into base censoriousness. I
have spoken all this while of these Narratives of Princes Transactions which
have no certain* way of being conveyed to the Public notice; but being only
traditional, or at best but privately transcribed, are obnoxious to various
Sophistications, so as it is probable very few, if any of them are represented
truly to the vulgar Enquirer. But here I am sensible I have exposed my self to
a shrewd Objection, for I have seemed to make an Instrument with two handles,
that being taken hold of by one, may serve to defend the Prince, but if by the
other, may as desperately wound him: For say they, there being such lubricous
uncertainty in all Narratives of Princes Actions, many of their ill practices
will escape the knowledge of the Subjects, being painted over by Interessed
persons, in a fine plausible Dress: to which, and to prevent another suspicion
in the Reader, I answer, That I aim not to prove that all the Consultations and
Actions of Princes are impeccable, and need no correction or amendment; this
were to deny them to be men, and to absolve them from subjection to the common
frailties and impersections of our Nature: and besides it would be a task so
disproportionate to my power, considering at what a vast distance I behold
their Actions that I could not possibly in undertaking it, evade the just
censure of the Reader; That I have unawares fallen into that self conceitedness
and immodesty which I blame in others, in thinking my self capable of having a
true account of what Princes do, when the truth of it is, I am so far from
thinking so, that I must confess the contrary thought in its full latitude, was
the chiefest Motive that induced me to venture on this Essay. So that I do not
pretend in the least that I have a particular knowledge of the Congruity of
Princes Actions, beyond what other men of the same rank with my self may have:
For I must confess that many things I observe in their management of State
Affairs, do distress my reason to find a satisfactory account of, but when I
consider how many of their Actions, while Ignorance and Prejudice darkened my
understanding, appeared unpleasing, in which yet I now think I discern a
manifest discovery of Care for the Public, at least of lawful and very
allowable circumspection in reference to their personal concern, and those of
the Crown, which also are prosecuted in order to the Public Welfare, when I
reflect on my Sovereign as a Christian, and as Signalized with excellent
Endowments, and peculiar Accomplishments; when I view the vast height and
distance of his Sphere: In short, when I remember all the foregoing
Considerations which set forth the great difficulty of making a true Judgment
of their Deportment. I cannot but conclude, that common Ingenuity, Modesty, and
Discretion, besides the obligations of Reverence, Gratitude, and Loyal
Obedience, make it highly rational for me to check my forward thoughts that
would over-hastily venture out of their Sphere, and peremptorily judge of the
recluse Affairs of Kings, especially our own most Gracious Sovereign, who has
given the most Satisfactory Evidence to the World the Rational part thereof
could think fit to require; that he is most zealously devoted to the Public
Welfare both of Church and State.

To the Objection therefore I answer more particularly, That it is possible some
faulty Actions and Counsels of Princes, may by the plausible Rhetorications and
smooth Glosses of their Followers be represented to the Vulgar as without
Crime: but then again, it should be considered, that unless it be apparent that
all their actions are but painted over, whilst in the mean time they are really
criminal, no man can escape the imputation of gross Censoriousness that will be
swayed by every slight Insinuation either of his own suspicious humor, or of
other men's malice, to infringe the Sacred Bond of Charity which is in these
cases required between Christians, and should here be elevated into an
extraordinary benignity and generosity of Spirit, but would degenerate into
Diabolical baseness, should he without apparent and undeniable Evidence of
their truth, give credit to every Report that is raised concerning the ill
designs and practices of his Sovereign, especially in this dangerous Crisis of
Affairs, when it is so well known to all, and publicly declared by the
Discoverer of the Plot, That the Jesuits are the Fathers and Fomenters of
these Stories, hoping thereby to deprave the affections and minds of the
People, and to Conjure up the old Spirit of Rebellion, which is commonly
ushered in by an universal humor of muttering against the Government, as it
was in the late Civil Wars, for just before their breaking out, the Jesuits
had carried on as desperate a Plot, and broughe it to almost as good maturity
as they had done this last, 1678. Only in the very nick of time it was
discovered to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, who immediately
communicated the Business to the King, and both of them with admirable Industry
and Secrecy (as the case required) set themselves to Counter-plot that Infernal
Society. Now the Jesuits finding themselves defeated in that horrid
Enterprise, would not lay down the Cudgels so, but by a strange Retort of
Machinations, they gained ground again, and defended themselves best with that
which one would think should have destroyed them, that is their Adversaries
Weapon; for observing that the common people had got a trick of murmuring and
barking at every little flirt of the Robe and Gown, though but the natural
result of the graceful mien and deportment of their Wearers. I say observing
this, they made use of it to accomplish their Designs, Insiunating every where
in all Companies and upon all Occasions, that the King was a Tyrant, and that
both he and the Archbishop were little better then Papists; and that they
connived at Popery; the One by not using his Authority for its extirpation; the
Other by sheltering himself under Royal Protection, and bringing in all manner
of Innovations into the Church.

Thus did the Jesuits delude the silly people, filling their Mouths with
Complaints against the King, because he did not go their clownish way to work,
and knock all Papists on the Head, and because squandered away so much Money to
keep up the Splendor and Grandeur of the Court, (that is as much as to say,
because he did not Cashier Sixteen of the Blood Royal, and their necessary
Retinue at the Court) which is the very Glory of a Kingdom, and the old
established Law of the Land: Many other Complaints there were up and down the
City and Country among the common people (the Jesuits having envenomed their
Tongues) so that unless the King and the Archbishop had pinched up the Affairs
of Church and State to such an intolerable streightness, that nothing of Civil
Splendour and Hospitality might be discerned in One, or Sacred Majesty and
Venerable Order in the Other. Nay, unless the two forementioned Illustrious
and Renowned Persons in going about to stop some small pretended Leaks in the
great Body of Ecclesiastical and Secular Polity, had used the Rustic and
unartificial hammering of these gross Mechanic Sages, and so endangered an
incurable Rupture by Strokes so disproportionate to the exquisite Touch of the
Civil Law, and the more inviolable Obligations of Christian Charity, they were
still murmured at by the quarrelsom Vulgar: For thus it was, that that
Malignant Spirit in them had as it were dreined from all parts of the Kingdom
those peccant Humors, which though but thinly dispersed, and easily purged out
by the Natural Course of the Law, yet by being united in a disadvantageous
juncture of Circumstances, seemed to the unskilful and rash Plebeians to carry
the Symptoms of a Mortal Disease. Thus flinging Dirt on the Face of Affairs,
and then persuading themselves it was its true Complexion: A very clownish
Sophism, and which brought its Reward along with it; for the purblind Fools
that had taken such pains to bedaub the Commonwealth, not long after fell over
head and ears into the Mire themselves.

For this Insolent Humor was so cherished by the Libels, flying Reports, and
daily Insinuations of subtle Jesuits, who every where had their Instruments at
work to raise a Civil War, that at last it grew Rampant, Mariners and such
kind of rude Fellows, the very Dregs of the Nation, would strout up and down
the City in Tumults, exclaiming against the Kings Actions, representing him as
a Tyrant, and I know not what, till at length they fell to Threats, and so by
degrees involved this Kingdom in a most cruentous Civil War; and he that shall
peruse the Records of other Nations, will find that these Mutterings and Verbal
Attempts against the Government, were a certain step to the overthrow of the
people addicted to them.

And it is as like to be so now as ever, if this Epidemical Vice be not
amended, God always punishing Rebellions with Signal Tokens of his Displeasure,
making the very Basis and chief Prop of their treacherous Obstinacy (like the
Ground whereon stood Corah, Dathan, and Abiram) the very entrance to their
destruction. This I mention, that whom the Vitiosity and Turpitude of these
Proceedings will not dissuade from persisting in them, their usual dangerous
Consequence may deter.

And truly if men would but have the patience to search to the bottom of that
common Aphorism [That the depraved practices of a People precede their own
destruction.] They would find it eminently true in that Crime which is the
Subject of this Treatise, and others of that nature* Not that they need
presently be put to it so as upon every occasion of such Sins in a Nation, to
invade the Sabbatism of the Deity, and conclude the necessity and actual
certainty of his Eruption into immediate personal execution of Justice on the
offending people, though sometime the outward Letter of the Scripture, to
comply with the Exigencies of lapsed humane Understandings, seem to countenance
such a Supposition; but they might discern all these things carried on in a
silent natural Concatenation of Causes and Events; men (by these as well as all
other vicious courses) not being more the meritorious then really and
physically the instrumental Causes of their own Miseries in this Life; they by
their Follies laying such a Train, as (let but the natural course of the World
alone) will not fail in time (often speedily) to entangle them in inevitable
punishment, thus becoming by a hidden Fate their own Executioners. So that
though these kind of Vices seem to their blind Actors to have no Influence
either on their own private Miseries, or on the Calamities of the Public, yet
the unprejudicate will soon grant that the contrary is true, and that such
Prevarications by a Divine Nemesis engage secret invisible Strings in Nature to
draw those that are guilty of them, into an undiscerned Labyrinth of
Difficulties and Torments; proportionately to the several degrees of their
accumulated and repeated Immoralities: and that this is not only certain in
men's private troubles, but also in the Calamities that befall the Public,
there being as it were a Dormient Combination in Mankind, or at least a latent
Conspiracy in Nature, that by an eminently reciprocal Cadency of Events, each
particular Vice of every individual person, in inflicting punishment on
himself, should also conduce to the sufferings of others, and in conducing to
other men's Calamities should again retort a share on himself: Every Member of a
Body Politic containing some Arcana and secret Preparatives which once touched
are presently spirited with a natural instinct of Affecting the whole. So that
none of these Vices though never so minute can be committed, which will not in
a proportionable measure, by an exquisite Mechanism of Providence, successively
awaken certain occult aptitudes in humane Converse, and through them impart its
malign Influence to the Public: Though it must be confessed that some Crimes
(whose perpetration necessarily engages a more prompt assistance of those
hidden Channels*) do more vigorously, suddenly, and with more apparent success
of their dispersive noxiousness, infest the Community. Such are those
Prevarications which are the various abuses and violations of that Contract,
which by the Law of Nature and the positive Obligations of Christianity is
made, and supposed to be actually in force for the common happiness of Mankind;
and which is particularized into diverse explicitly limited and peculiarly
circumstantiated Leagues of this and that Society of Men between themselves,
according to the several distinct Exigencies of Nations and Commonwealths. I
say, Crimes that receive their Specification from the Infringement of this
Fundamental Law and Bond of Justice, according to the proportion of the rupture
do more manifestly damage the Public, then those which are of a more personal
consideration, that is such whose direct Aspect and essential Termination seems
to be Confined to the persons that are guilty of them, as Intemperance in its
several Latitudes, or the like; though indeed most of them, if not all, do in
some measure damage others, but not with so* apparent conduciveness to the
public wrong, as those Actions which necessarily include a more plain and
apert relation to another, such are all those which have for their Object the
Body, Goods, or good Name of another person.

For in such Transactions, he that prevaricates does immediately and directly
injure some body else, and by a vibration of the stroke wherewith he hurt the
other, he vuln^rat^s himself also, thus in thinking to jerk his Neighbor, he
has made a Rod for his own back too, which the forementioned Nemesis which is
interwoven in the very Texture of the Universe, will be sure to lay on in due
season, whose subtle Contrivance and unavoidable Lassies in these Instances may
be somewhat faintly adumbrated in the usual pastime of School*boys that they
call Hitting their next Neighbor; for one of them by smiting him that sits
next, snatches him into consent to the Play, and the stroke is carried on to
the next, and so round, till the whole School be engaged in a posture of
Offense and sportive injuriousness, and the first Striker receives his Blow
again, with the advantage that may perhaps arise from the attentive eagerness
of his now alarmed lascivient Companion, besides the Overplus of Penance from
his Master, for being the Ringleader in that ominous vanity. I need not stand
to apply this Childish Comparison, the matter being plain enough, that
transitive Vices, acts of injustice among men, do not only wound some one
Member of a community, but by reason of Emissions and Circulations of a peccent
humor resulting from neglect to cure the first incision, do most commonly
corrupt and infect the whole Body, and consequently the Perpetrators themselves
are involved in the general Calamity, especially those acts of Injustice which
have Kings for their Object, carry in their Aspect more eminent Menaces of
ruin to the people guilty of them; and such an one is the Crime I explode in
this Discourse, An imrenching on the Sacred Prerogative of Prindes, robbing
them of their Honor, a kind of Civil Sacrilege. There are a multitude of
Aggravations might be reckoned up to display this Vice in its proper colors,
but I shall rather at present discover the danger of it: And if we look back
into the Records of former Ages, we may easily be satisfied, that murmuring
against Governors, censuring their proceedings, speaking great swelling words
of vanity, was always punished with Signal Tokens of Heavens Displeasure.
Without question it was with no languid sentiments of their own wisdom and
skill in Political Affairs, that Corab and his Company ventured to check the
supposed Efforts of Tyranny in Moses their Prince, Ye take too much upon you,
said they, seeing all the Congregation is holy: Behold here the Insolence of
these Rebels, who would have Introduced a kind of Anarchy, a thing odious to
God and Man, every man should have been allowed as great a share of that
Sanctity which was requisite to a Princes being invested with the Supreme
Authority, as Moses himself the Elect of God, culled out and Consecrated from
his Infancy, (by preludious Intimations from Heaven) to Rule over that People:
I say, these Arrogant Statists thought every man in as fit a condition to
manage the Public Affairs as Moses himself; and no doubt but that Corah's
Followers would give themselves the liberty to descant upon this action of
Moses and that Counsel, encouraging one another in their Treasonable Thoughts,
till at length the Earth opened her Mouth and overwhelmed all the Conspirators,
that they might be an Example to all Generations, and an Instance of Gods
severe displeasure against disloyal and mutinous Pride. Profane Histories also
give us an account of the dismal Consequences of this Vice, Rome especially in
its rise, growth, and several changeable postures, might furnish us with
pregnant Examples to this purpose, but this were to Transcribe a great part of
their Writings, who have undertaken to deliver down to Posterity true
Narratives of the Affairs of that once flourishing Commonwealth: I might
moreover appeal to Modern Histories of our Neighbor Nations concerning this
matter, but I think none can parallel our late Civil Wars for the horrible
Consequences that attended on it, and yet all this had its first Original (as I
have above hinted)* from the saucy Complaints of a Peace-pamper'd people who
took their swinge in muttering at the late King of Blessed Memory, because of
some Peccadillo's in Government, that are in one kind or other to be found in
any Commonwealth in the World, and are not always to be attributed to any
voluntary car^lesness, or Tyrannous Propensions in the Supreme Power, but to
the Insuperable Necessities of State. Much less would any ingenuous people have
suspected any such Vices in a Prince, who by most unparalled Concessions of
Princely grace, gave all the Evidence of a faithful and peremptory adhaesion to
the good of his Subjects, that he could with honor in his Circumstances
discover, or any Inhabitants of this Land expect, witness his Noble
Condescentions to his Parliament in surrendering the Tower, Militia, and Royal
Navy, and Complying with them in every thing, to the Sacrificing all those
Privileges which are the chief Props of the Royal Prerogative and highest
Advantages of the Crown. And yet all these Royal Discoveries of an hearty
desire to take away groundless Jealousies and Surmizes from his Subjects, could
not quell that virulent and implacable Spirit which reigned among the Vulgar,
who would not be satisfied with these Concessions to the Demands of the
Parliament, unless his Majesty would also have fulfilled all the brutish
Requests of the Rabble, who in that dangerous juncture of time were very
pregnant with ill shaped Petitions to the Houses, a kind of modest commands,
hoping by these repeated Insolences to fright the King into a Compliance with
their sordid Proposals: But alas! they were exceedingly mistaken, for the King
indeed had yielded in an honorable way to many and most of the Requests put up
by his Parliament, yet he would not so far degrade Himself as to let this
arrogant carriage in the Vulgar, extort from him any Actions that were
repugnant to that regular duct of Reason and Conscience, which he had always
followed, and which used to facilitate his passage through the strangest
threatening Emergencies in his way: so that though the Common people would make
nothing to disgorge their foul choleric Sentiments in the very Streets, and
every public opportunity, yet this could no ways tempt the Generous and
Impassible Mind of His Majesty, to a deviation from his customary path, but
trampling on these Rudenesses with a Noble Scorn, He still went forward in the
prosecutions of his Councels for the good of the Nation.

And truly in my Opinion, the Vulgar had better use Modesty and Silence, making
good Constructions of whatever in the Kings management of Affairs seems
doubtful, then by venturing to censure such Arcana, incur the present
probability of being in a gross uncharitable Error, besides the ineptitude of
such presumptuous Calumnies; for in thus bespattering Princes, they act as
vainly and brutishly as Dogs, that (for I know not what currish humor in them)
bark at the Moon, who nevertheless keeps on her progress and governs the Night
according to the established Laws of the Universe, not impeded or retarded in
her course, by the quarrelsom exclamations of these petulant Animals: Even so,
Princes in their Methods of Policy, are as little concerned at the scurrilous,
peevish, and unoccasioned Descants and Aspersions of their Nettled Subjects,
but resolutely steer on as the Compass guides them: Therefore if these
Despisers of Government would but listen to the Dictates of common Prudence,
they would surely be reduced to greater Sobriety; for in thus Railing at the
Supreme Power, they either propose to themselves some end as perhaps the
reducing the Supreme Power to condescend to their Humors, which (as I have
just now proved) is a very absurd and ridiculous Hope, or else they act without
any Design at all, but only in obsequiousness to the Edicts of a Choleric
Nature, and so they discover into what a vicinity of temper they are fallen
with the Beasts those (...), which act without reason, proposing to themselves
nothing, but impetuously are hurried into a continual subjection to their
Passion, and the predominant heaving of the Plastic Power: So these Railers
seem to be driven on by a Fortuitous Impulse, never consulting with the sober
Dictates of Reason.

People have now got a habit of talking and prating about State Affairs, and
yet they can give no rational account why they do so, but only to gratify
their Pride and other darling Passions, whilst in the mean time the Devil, and
his Ministers the Jesuits, with no small Complacency behold the success of
their Designs, laughing to see how easily receptive the People are of all
Reports, though never so groundless and ridiculous, so they any ways reflect
upon the Fidelity and Care of the King, not considering how withal they imbibe
the noxious extract and Spirit of Envy, Malice, Treason, and other Diabolical
Vices that always in these cases envenoms the popular breath: I say, the people
do not consider this, but still (as if the old Athenian humor were revived)
are inquisitive after News, though all the Aerie Volumes of Fame are stuffed
with nothing but Lies concerning His Sacred Majesty, and the slanderous style
declares the Author to be a Jesuit.

Certainly they who had the Impudence enough to call His late Majesty of
Blessed Memory, a Bastard, and to deny our Royal Sovereign to be his Son: Thus
disanuulling his Title to the Crown, will not stick to make His Subjects
believe he is a Tyrant, and to represent him in any other shape that may
alienate their Affections: they who had their Missioners in Holland to
disaffect that People against the Prince of Orange, by raising Stories
concerning his Tyrannous and unjust Designs, are not destitute of as active
Agents in this Kingdom to accomplish the same Design; for 'twill be good
fishing in troubled waters, since they can do no good in the clear, it will be
easy for them to prepare their Gins and tend their Machinations undiscerned,
when they have raised a dust to disturb the sight of the Inhabitants, and when
we are striving in an unnatural War to undermine, trappan, and destroy each
other, Protestant engaged against Protestant, Brother against Brother, Father
against Son; their business will be to draw the Net suddenly over us, and by
the help of a Foreign Invasion and potent Conspiracy at home to Involve at all
in one Comprehensive Ruin. Have they not endeavored already to exasperate the
German Emperor against His Majesty? By accusing His Majesty of underhand
promoting the Rebellion in Hungary? Have they not gone about to Incense the
Spaniard also? As for the French King, they have him Cock-sure already, and if
they fail of the others, we are no ways beholding to them, for they have done
what they could do. I insist the more on these things to Confirm my Rational
Hypothesis, if I may so term that which is almost proved to be Matter of Fact,
I mean, That whatever Slanders, occult Aspersions and Calumnies are cast on His
Majesty, in flying Reports, and misrepresentations of his Proceedings, are
raised and increased by the Jesuits and their Agents, who lurk up and down in
the City, as is apparent, by the frequent Attempts that have been made to fire
the same; as also by His Majesty's Second Proclamation, For the Departure of
all Papists: Wherein mention is made that the occasion of its being put forth,
was, the Contempt the Papists showed of the former, by still continuing in
London, contrary to the Tenor of that Proclamation. And we need not question
but that they made use of their time in sowing the seed of Sedition and
Disloyalty in the hearts of the credulous Citizens. What shall I say more to
persuade my Countrymen that they are under an Infatuation whilst they thus
suffer themselves to be gulled into their own Destruction, under a pretense of
Redress? I mean, whilst they so readily entertain Jealousies, and vent their
Suspicions concerning the Proceedings of His Majesty, styling him a bad
Commonwealths-man that will not discover as great a credulity as they. One
thing more I will offer to be considered before I conclude.

It may be observed, that this discontented, insolent Humor has Infected the
whole World in one measure or other, scarce a Nation to be found wherein some
do not find fault with the Political Method of their Governors, and
accordingly Reports are scattered up and down ['tis like by some cunning
Faction] concerning his Weakness in this Counsel, his Tyranny or perfidiousness
in that; so that let his Consultations and Actions be never so wise, and
conducive to the Public Good, yet his Subjects shall have contrary Thoughts of
him, being seduced and deluded by these false Rumors, the Offspring of some
Traiterous Cabal, such as the Jesuits may be among us: Nay we might produce
Instances in our own Nation, and that lately, of this truth: That the Supreme
Power has been under an Universal Odium among the Vulgar, when afterward it is
known that He managed Things well all that while; So that it is not always a
real Fault in the Prince that is the cause of such Censures, but merely the
distempered Minds of the Vulgar.

And this I presume will appear more probable, if it be considered that most
generally it is only the baser and most ignorant sort of the people are guilty
of this Censeriousness, who have no Gust of that Sublimity that embellishes the
Actions and Counsels of Princes, but from their Infancy Imbibe fordid Nations,
if not a perfect hatred of what is tinctured with Grandeur, or any ways favors
of Royal Magnificence, imagining all things should be done in that mean simple
way that they are used to in their Domestic Affairs, their Phantasms of
Political Exigencies are vitiated with the Idea's of those Trivial Concerns
that engross their Care and Inspection; As if the Intrigues of State must run
parallel with those of a private House or Corporation in all their Appendages.
This Primitive, and as it were innate disrelish of the Circumstances with which
the Crown and Scepter are Invested, is the Basis of all those Grudges,
Murmurings, and Jealousies that arise among the Vulgar; for when any thing is
suggested that reflects upon the Supreme Power, presently meeting with such a
natural antipathy in men, it awakens and excites it into coactivity, which
commonly produces a strong bias in the Vulgar to jelousie, so that ever after,
they are apt to be born down into a Credulity of any thing that represents the
Supreme Power in a posture of Tyranny, and by the weight of their own abject
Minds are soon sunk into Censoriousness and the depth of verbal disloyalty.

But methinks this vile depression and submersion of the Vulgar should (like
the Alternate subsiding Balance) help to buoy up the generous mind: For if only
the Vulgar be the men that most generally censure and condemn the Actions of
their Prince, a wise man will impute it to their Clownish Ignorance and
Morosity, and will follow the Examples of the more Acute and Benign
Intelligences, who will not prostitute the Mysteries of State to their own
erroneous Judgments, but deny themselves a liberty so constantly resulting from
a Servitude to the worst of Passions, and so frequently introducing a Slavery
to the basest of Rebels. It Is true, it may fall out sometimes, that persons of
good quality and accomplishments may yet have very ill thoughts of a Prince,
who no ways deserves it, but this is but seldom, and then for the most part
it is their fortune and quality in the World has made them been thought fit
Judges of such Matters rather than any real qualification of the Mind; for it
has been experienced in other Lands, that men who (whilst they have lived
privately and unconcerned) have had no great Vogue among those that knew them
for any shrewdness of Judgment, have yet acquired that Commendation, by being
publicly rebellious, their being really and notoriously depraved, rendering
their wisdom conspicuous, but it was but only to them that had but a small
share of it, or common honesty themselves; for to knowing persons they appeared
only as Usurpers of the Title [Wise] possessing it by no natural propriety,
which is evidenced in that their Judgments in all those matters which are
requisite preparations to a capacity of being a Critic in State Affairs, have
been found very deficient: There is required indeed a naturally active Spirit,
before a man, even to the shallow Vulgar, can pretend with any color of reason
to judge of those high matters; now this activity of Spirit however otherwise
uncultivated, yet if it can but discover its self in a sagacious management of
Domestic businesses, or the ordinary Affairs between man and man; it is
sufficient in the eye of the Vulgar, who measure all Accomplishments by their
own, and think him a very valuable man who exceeds them in such ordinary
trivial matters, though they slight and contemn Persons of higher Endowments,
because they are above their narrow Apprehensions; but the other they will
esteem fit for any thing, even to manage Kingdoms if need be, and their
estimation will be increased if to their natural sagacity in some things there
be added a Confident Deportment in reference to higher Concerns: Thus Cobblers
by being sharp, active Fellows, and by a little Converse with History, have
gained sometimes on the Vulgar so as to be raised by such disorderly Rabbles to
high preferment, only on the account of their loud rattling out of hard Names of
places, and great men in foreign Countries: such Pedantick Tricks have
recommended many to the unskilful, as very able men, well versed in Political
Affairs, and he could not be thought less than a Statesman who would embellish
his Discourse with those lofty Strains, wherein either some of the Polish
Iskis, Eskis, Oskis or Vskis made up each Period. Such sublime pedantry as this
is often adopted by the amazed Vulgar for sublime wisdom; whereas in the truth
it is but the garish display of a volatile Fancy: and because that effeminate
faculty is for the most part predominant among the lower orders of Mankind,
they are snatched into a consent and sympathetical adherence to any thing that
is tinctured with it.

Thus the slight and unsolid Rhetorications of an ordinary confident Critic,
dragg the supine Vulgar into the filth of Censoriousness and civil blasphemy of
things they know not, making them to set their Mouths against the Heavens, and
with a Train of their impudent Lies, like Lucifer the Father of Lies, to
dethrone the Stars if it were possible. And these are somewhat a kin to those
whom in the Fifth Page of this Treatise I call by the Name of State-Fanaticks,
a whimsical race of people that the Jesuits seduce, by infusing into them an
enchanting Ferment, a Hotch-potch of State-Heresies drawn from Casuists,
Civilians, and corrupted Divines: Not that I think every one that talks about
these things to be versed in the whole System of such Jesuitical Doctrines, for
as I have above said, many illiterate persons may gain the Credit of being
Statesmen among the Vulgar by some Pedantick Tricks, as voluble discourse,
confident deportment, and the like, who yet may be altogether devoid of any
smattering in that other Learning; but yet there are too too many whose Fancies
being parturient, verify that in the Civil Law which my Lord Verulam observed
of Philosophy, a little of which will make a man an Atheist: for these
Semi-Civilians, like those Philosophasters, sit down contented with that small
discovery the first Stage gives them in the Law of Nature and Nations, and so
make false conclusions, couching the most copious Hypotheses and Questions
within the narrow limits of their Inchoate knowledge, especially being blinded
by their seducing Guides, the Jesuits, and falsely persuaded that all Secular
Science was contained in that Fragment they were acquainted with, (like the
Rusticks who think the utmost limits of the World extend no farther then the
Margin of the visible Horizon) whereas if they had the patience to go on, and
their Understandings were not darkened, they would find that each step enlarged
their prospect, till they had gone over the whole Sphere of Political Wisdom,
returning to the Point whence they set forth, where they might recollect with
themselves, that as in all Orbs, so in this Circle of Humane Learning, there
was a vicissitude of Superiority; that is, they who have completed their
Knowledge and finished their Disquisitions in the truth, may yet remember how
variously they have altered their opinions of things, according to the strength
or weakness of Arguments occurring in their way, and therefore ought not to be
dazzled into a hasty implicit Assent to any thing by its vigor and flashy
light, without examining or making a Scrutiny, whence the Ray proceeded,
whether from Heaven or Hell, (for that has its counterfeit Beams also.)

To make my meaning more plain, It is well known that many Mechanic persons of
otherwise jejune Intellects, will yet pretend to a smack in that spurious
mixture of Democratical Policy that is picked out of some Heathen Writers, some
Papists, and not a few Protestants, and all Incorporated into one Mass, and
Informed by that Soul of Atheism and Heresy, Mr. Hobbs: These Mechanics I
say, will insist on the Notions of Natural Liberty and Supremacy in the people,
and such like stuff, having Imbibed these Principles either immediately from
Books, or from their Converse with men who have read those Books, which though
they have gone Incognito for good Orthodox Protestant Writings, yet are
oftentimes discovered, or at least may very reasonably be suspected to bethe
Product of a Jesuits Brain. However, it is certain such Books are written and
entertained by many seeming intelligent persons, and no question but the
Jesuits have seconded them with their personal Insinuations among the Gentry;
so that these Heresies are grown almost Epidemical, and therefore by
consequence the whole Land must needs incur the Pestil ential Infection: hence
proceed all those heart-burnings, and their evil effects, such as bitter and
unfavoury Expressions, belched out against His Majesty, and his Proceedings,
enough to make any other Prince Nauseate the unmannerly and ungrateful Vulgar;
but our Gracious Sovereign has from his first Inauguration to the Throne,
habituated himself to Clemency, and unparalled benign Candor to his
Subjects, never revenging himself for all the barbarous cruelty his Father or
Himself have undergon.

But I forget that it is an Essay I am writing, and yet I have no reason to do
so, the very Immethodical Style might put me in mind of that: And indeed were I
not conscious of its being Commensurate to an Essay, I would beg the Readers
excuse for Publishing so confused a Collection of Thoughts. However this I may
say, That though it be void of Symmetry, yet that deficiency is made up in the
multitude and validity of its Arguments, which though scattered without Order
in the Discourse, may yet be reduced to it by the active and sagacious mind,
the disjoynted parcels being by that penetrating virtue settled, and by
Intellectual Ligaments united in their proper respects and uses to the design
of the whole SCHEME.

POSTSCRIPT.
THat the seeming Extravagancies in the Style of this Essay, may be the more
readily excused by the Intelligent: The Author thought himself concerned to add
a word or two to what he had said in the Preface to the Reader, for he is bold
to profess his Hopes, that this Short Discourse though in never so odd and
exotic a Dress, may find Acceptance with some, as others concerning the same
Subject, only digested into a different form, are entertained by their proper
Genius* for there are certain Occult Attractives in all Treatises which will
captivate the Minds of those men who are prepared with a Correspondent Gust;
and all this results from the various Idiopathies in lapsed Mankind, which are
apt to Incurvate the Choice of Right Reason* and to transport them in their
Choice, by Impulses from peculiar Springs in the inferlour partial Faculties of
the Soul, whether there fixed by Nature, Education, Providence, or Chance: And
since this is so, why should I be loath to venture this Piece abroad, upon a
misprision of it s being Impolite or whimsical, and so unpalatable to the Nice
Genius of this Age, that loves to luxuriate in those delicious Graces of
Speech, which the French call La cadence des periodes; I say, why should the
unsuitableness of my style by being reflected on hinder me from publishing this
Essay, since it is commonly experienced that the most ornate Treatises and
those of the sweetest relish to some, are found by Experience to be Nauseated
by others. And what matter is it for the Style, provided there be truth at the
bottom.

FINIS.

