COLONEL HUSON'S (Or the COBLER'S) CONFESSION, In a Fit of DESPAIR.

Taken in Shorthand by the Pen of a Ready-Writer.

Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam. The Devil would be Gods Ape.

Printed according to Order.

Huson's Confession.
Enter Huson in a melancholy posture with an Halter about his neck. Huson. DId
the wheel of Fortune ever move so swiftly as now? Was I not but the other day
above the Parliament, the Laws, the City, and the Good old Cause? Nay, did I
not lay aside all other Considerations to imagine to my self greater ascents to
dominion, since Fortune denied me nothing I could propose to my self? Have all
my Familiars forsaken me, Ties the rope.
who was so lately their dearest Favorite? Is there no way left to evade
disgrace and ruin, but to precipitate all my Honors from this beam, Points to
the beam.
and terminate my vast attempts in the narrow compass of a noose? Had not I
better have sticht my ambition to my in-sole and tackt them close to the Last,
than thus at length to become my own hangman, when the world is not so
courteous as to afford me any other (since none so vile) Executioner? Since the
case is no otherwise, nor will be mended without my end, I will make use of
such a one, as (if exercised sooner) might have prevented much mischief this
Kingdom has received by my bloody ambition, and have made the World rather
pity than (as now it will) deride my misery.


Enter Pluto in grave Attire. Pluto. Is not this the voice of my most devoted
Servant?


Huson. Your dejected, deserted, despairing Castaway.


Pluto. How! Castaway? is my service grown so contemptible, as to bring my
most intimate Favorites into this condition?


Huson. I ascribe not my misery to any other cause than my own folly and
miscarriage, whereby I have so disappointed the designs of my good Lord, that I
am not worthy to be named in your presence.


Pluto. Away, away with this whining humor of melancholy, do think to do me
service and tby self honor by this puling kind of despair, upon every
discouragement; I am very sensible of thy miscarriages not without the highest
aggravations, I have all along been no less than a father unto thee, have
fitted thee for my service, preserved thee from the infection of learning, wit,
civility, or any real sense of religion or ingenuity; furnished thee with
cruelty enough, dissimulation in the most perfect form of plain simple honesty,
continually inspired thee not only with counsel but courage, for many high
attempts, so that there is nothing left in thee at last but what is merely
connatural to my self and of my free gift. And yet that after all this, you
should desert my wonted providence, and rely more upon your own judgment than
my dictates was a provocation not expressible but by my eternal fury. I must
tell thee, had Noll or Bradshaw ever so much forgotten themselves, or me their
great Lord, I should not have been wrought to such lenity by any persuasions:
but since thy penitence has wrought so high upon thy spirit, I will reveal a
secret of most high consolation to thy self. I have long since determined, upon
thy faithful service to me in this world, not only to advance thy honors and
fortunes here to the highest degree, but in my infernal Kingdom to prefer
thee to the chief general-ship of my dreadful Legions: and from this my grace
and favor to thee no ordinary provocation shall divert me, therefore draw near
and make an humble and penitent confession before me, in order to thy
readmission into my favor.


Huson. I most humbly confess, Kneels before him.
to thy infernal Majesty, thy blessed Jezabel; thy Saints Cain, Herod, and
Judas, Cora, Dathan and Abiram, Nero, Julian, Machiavil, and Ravilliack, John
of Leyden, Knipper Doling, Melchier, Hofman, and Muncer, Jack Sraw, Jack Cade
and Wat Tyler, thy devout Servants, Enoch ap Evan, Pym, and Hacket. Thy Great
Officers of State and zealous assertors of thy Good old Cause (now with thee)
Cromwell, Prideaux, Williams and Bradshaw, with thy innumerable Army of Tyburn
and Smithfield Martyrs, and to all thy company of black Angels and infernal
Spirits, etc. That I have offended against thee my Ghostly Father, in word,
thought and deed, by my faults, my faults, my great faults. First, that when it
was in my Power and thy Commands, I neglected utterly to destroy the Rump of
the Long Parliament, taking them for thy servants as well as my self, and
therefore not so strictly harkening to, and obeying thy commands as I ought in
duty to have done.


Pluto. I deny not but they were my Servants, did my works, and still do, but
this is no excuse for your neglecting my positive commands, since my secret
designs are not fully known, nor can be to my best servants on earth; but go
on.


Huson. Secondly, that when thou had put it into my heart, (upon the
Apprentises football play) on Monday the 5. of December. to take the opportunity
to destroy men, women, and children, in the City of London, and make prize of
their estates thereby to engage the Army to go on in thy service under my
command, I did not prosecute the design further than the death of a few
innocent persons, to the greater prejudice than promotion of thy service.


Pluto. These are humbling faults with a witness, and should teach the
avoiding of the like for future.


Huson. That when there appeared no other means for the upholding the interest
of thy servants, but only the firing of the City of London with Grenades, and
so distressing thine and our enemies; through diffidence and want of courage I
waved that thy great design. The consideration of which my most grievous
offense, so increases my confusion and sorrow for this and other the like
enormities, that expressions fail me, and I can go no further at this time, but
humbly desire pardon from you my Ghostly Father and great Protector and all
your infernal and forementioned Saints and Servants, for these and all other
the like my transgressions, with a hearty promise of double diligence in thy
works of darkness for time to come.


Pluto. I am satisfied in thy confession and upon thy hearty repentance for
these thy faults, and the renewing of thy obedience for the future, do absolve
thee by my own terrible name, and that black infernal lake in my Kingdom;
therefore arise, and for thy penance let this thy confession be forthwith
published to all my servants in the world, lest they by the like incogitancy
renew thy miscarriages; but let my lenity in this small penance obliege you to
an increase of your diligence in my service for time to come: and for a further
testimony of my paternall affection, in especial to you upon the renewing of
your obedience thus to me take some of my advice in general, and for particular
occasions I and my spiritual servants will never fail in our assistance.

I. Be sure never to attempt any great thing without the specious pretense of
Religion, and the Good old Cause.

II. Never condescend to any thing in favor of the family of the Stuarts, but
remain their inveterate enemy.

III. To your utmost, obstruct the settlement of any Government whatsoever in
the Church.

IV. In all places show your self a most zealous assertor of liberty of
conscience.

V. Incline to all factions whatsoever, but be sure never cleave to any
particular.

If thou shall be constant and faithful in observing these my general rules,
and all my particular dictates, thou shall find by an uncontrol'd prosperity,
that thou art not the least in my favor, and at last a far greater preferment
in my fiery region, then this world affords.


Hus. If ever I fail in performing (to my utmost) your commands, account me as
I am unworthy the honor of your favorite.


Pluto. The greatest happiness I give my best Servants, shall attend thy most
prosperous attempts, dear son,


Vale.
FINIS.

