Edinb. 18. January, 1649.
THE RETURN OF THE ESTATES of PARLIAMENT UPON THE TESTIMONY, Communicated unto
them by the Commissioners of the General Assembly, and their concurrence with
the same.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened. Taking to their most serious
consideration the seasonable Testimony against Toleration, and the present
proceeding of Sectaries and their Abettors in England, in reference to Religion
and Government, With an Admonition and Exhortation to their Brethren there from
the Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland
communicated unto them by you; And pondering the present sad and strange
condition of affairs in their neigh^bour Kingdom of England represented
therein, and in several other Papers come to their knowledge; They do return
unto you their hearty thanks both for your good correspondence (which the
Parliament will with all cheerfulness entertain) and for your great car^ and
faithfulness in giving such necessary and seasonably Warning and Testimonies
against the dangers of the times on all hands at al^ occasions, And do heartily
Concur in the grounds thereof against Toleration and the present proceedings of
Sectaries in England in reference to Religion and Government, and in the
Admonitions and Encouragements so fully expressed in the said Paper: And do mos^
willingly add this our Testimony thereunto; That our Brethren o^ England may
be the more moved by the mouth of two Witnesses and especially such as together
with them stand and fall, and are covenanted with them for mutual good, to lay
those things to heart, and to abstain from all such sinful and dangerous
courses, And the faithful not to faint under these afflictions, or to omit any
necessary Testimonies or Duty against the corruption of the time; And because
there have been several aspersions published in Printed Pamphlets, for the
strengthening of the hands of those who go on in these sinful ways, and for
discouraging the hearts of these who are suffering under them; Therefore the
Estates of Parliament after diligent enquiry at all the Members of this Court
upon their public and solemn Oath, both concerning themselves and others: Do
Declare, and can assure their Brethren of England, that they cannot find that
either this Kingdom or any person thereof, had any knowledge of, or accession
unto the late proceedings of the English Army in relation to the Kings Person,
or the Houses and restrained Members thereof, But are very confident there is
no ground for such aspersions. On the other hand so soon as this Parliament was
conveened and constituted, and heard of the present posture of affairs, They
being no ways satisfied with their proceedings, and the reasons thereof,
published to the world, And being convinced of the dangerous consequences
thereof, and calamities likely to follow thereupon They did give present
instructions to their Commissioners upon many reasons founded on the
Obligations and Declarations made between, and by both Kingdoms (of which the
matter of Fact is fully expressed by the Paper given in by our Commissioners on
the 5. of January instant, to the Speaker of the House of Commons in our name,
and according to our mind, herewith communicated to you) to press a delay of
all procedours against the Kings Person, the Prince his right of succession, or
the fundamental Government of the Kingdom, until this Kingdom were heard to
represent their interest and desires; And in case of their refusal that they
should enter in the name of this Kingdom their dissent, and Protest, That as
this Nation is free from all knowledge of, and accession to these designs and
practices, So they may be free of all the Calamities, Miseries and Confusions
which may follow thereupon to these distracted Kingdoms. And as our constant
resolution and earnest desire to preserve inviolably the Peace and Union
between the Kingdoms, will evidently appear to any who will read (beside all
our former Actions and sufferings for it) our Act of Indiction of this present
Parliament, and our Act repealing all past in the last Parliament or Committee
of Estates for the late unlawful Engagement against England. And as ye are
witnesses of our keeping a Solemn day of Humiliation, not only for our own sins
and miseries, but also for the sins and distresses lying on our dear Brethren,
and for seeking the Lords Direction to us, that we may know and perform all the
duties which the LORD requires of us at such a time, after such Judgments and
Deliverances on his part, such an Acknowledgement and renewed Covenant on our
part, not only in relation to our own affairs at home, but also to what may
concern Religion, King and Kingdoms, according to the solemn League and
Covenant in these united Nations; So We Declare that it is our constant
resolutions, with Gods assistance to give all seasonable Testimonies, and do
all necessary duties within our power and calling, for the preservation of the
begun Reformation against Toleration of all Religion, and of the fundamental
Government against Anarchy and confusion. And for continuing and preserving the
Peace and Union between these Kingdoms, and all the Bands thereof, so often
acknowledged and expressed in their Treaties, especially one King, one
Covenant, one Religion, And for the observance of the manifold Declarations
emitted between and by both Kingdoms to the World, in the positive and
necessary duties for pursuance of all the Ends of the solemn League and
Covenant. And to this effect we are and shall be most ready to deal and
interpose in all earnestness and sincerity of heart, and by all lawful and
necessary means with all whom it may concern, for settling Peace and Truth in
these Kingdoms, upon the grounds and Propositions so often agreed unto, and so
long insisted upon by these two Nations, and upon what further shall be found
safe and necessary for the removing of these distempers, and preventing new
issues of blood, Calamities and Confusions in these Kingdoms, which the
Searcher of hearts knows to be the earnest defire, and firm resolution of
this Court and Kingdom.

Lowdoun Cancel. I.P.D.P.

FINIS.

