AN HISTORICAL RELATION Of the Late General Assembly, Held at EDINBURGH, From
October. 16. to Nov. 13. In the Year 1690. IN A LETTER From a PERSON in
EDINBURGH, To his Friend in LONDON.

LICENSED

April the 20th. 1691.


LONDON, Printed for J. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. MDCXCI.

A LETTER FROM EDINBVRGH. TO ONE in LONDON, etc.
SIR,
I Received yours, and do not think it strange, that those of England are so
desirous to know the Acts and Proceedings of our General Assembly in Scotland;
for not only Curiosity but Interest may prompt them thereto: I will readily
serve you in this Matter, and intended, though you had not required it, to have
given you an Account of it, that you might have Occasion of gratifying your
worthy Friends and Acquaintance. It Is true, I was not Eyewitness of what past;
for you know my Circumstances would not allow that; and the Brethren (as they
call themselves) endeavored to keep out all that were not of their own party,
or who might tell Tales; forbidding the Keepers of the door to admit any
without a leaden Ticket in the shape of a Heart, which was the Pass given them,
which was not so easily obtained, except for their particular Friends; and if
any of the Episcopal Party were discovered, there was a Cry presently,
Conformists are here; and the Officers were sent to thrust them out. However
notwithstanding of this strictness, there were always two or three discreet and
intelligent Persons of my Acquaintance present at every Session, from whom I
have what I write to you. And I assure you that you may trust the Ingenuity and
Faithfulness of the Relation. But before I come to the Assembly it self, there
be some things previous to it which you ought to be informed of* A General
Assembly in Scotland (you know) is much of the same Nature with the Convocation
in England, or a National Council; and of no less Authority here: Nay, our
Presbyterians exalt the Authority of their Assemblies above that of King or
Parliament; and there be some standing Acts of their Assemblies against Acts of
Parliament, and which discharge Obedience to them: Whereupon our Presbyterians
being not content with what the Parliament had done for them, nor thinking
their Authority sufficient for setting up their Government; they required a
General Assembly, by whose Authority (which with them is supreme, and next to
that of Jesus Christ) their Government might be firmly established, and all
their Actings and Proceedings ratified and approved by it. Yet they knew that a
free Assembly of the Clergy and Laity throughout the Kingdom would rather
defeat than advance their Designs; therefore they considered how they might
prevent that by some Method, which would exclude all who were not well affected
to their Interest, or zealous for the Good Old Cause.

In order hereunto they prevailed with the Parliament, to lodge the whole
Government and Management of Church Affairs in the hands of those few Old
Preachers who went off when Episcopacy was reestablished An. 1661. and such as
should be admitted and approved by them. When these Ministers off the Episcopal
Persuasion who had complied with the present Civil Government heard this, they
thought themselves injured, and therefore addressed to the Parliament to be
admitted to a share of the Government, or at least not to be absolutely
subjected to them, who were their stated and professed Enemies. This they
claimed as due to them, not only upon the account of their being Lawful
Ministers of the Gospel, but also upon the account of the public Faith, which
promised them Protection upon their compliance with the Civil Government:
Notwithstanding which, their Petition was disdainfully rejected, and the Act
continued as before, in favor only of the abovementioned Presbyterian
Preachers. By which means all the present Episcopal Clergy and such of the
Laity as favored their Interest, and had complied with them, were rendered
incapable of bearing any Office in the Kirk, and of Sitting and Voting in their
Meetings. This the Episcopal Party justly complained of, and said; That though
Episcopacy was abolished merely upon an unjust and false Pretense, that that
Government exercised Tyranny over the Church, yet now a real Presbyterian
Tyranny was established, that instead of Fourteen Bishops Sixty were set up,
who would Lord it over their Brethren more imperiously than they either did or
pretended to do; and that Presbyters were subjected to them who owned
themselves to be no more than Presbyters, which had no Precedent in the
Catholic Church, but also they who could not be denied to be Lawful Ministers
were excluded from any share of the Discipline and Government of the Church;
which was contrary to the very Principles and Tenets of the Presbyterians
themselves; who make every private Minister to be invested with the Authority
of ruling as well as of teaching; and who affirm it unlawful for any Minister
to part with that Right; and who therefore were wont to exclaim against
Bishops, because they seemed to usurp it wholly to themselves. All the Excuse
made for this was, That they could no otherwise make their Government sure, and
that the Episcopal Party deserved to be thus treated for their Apostasy, in
betraying and renouncing the true Rights and Interests of the Church by
complying with Episcopacy. Hence it was inferred that Presbyterians do juggle
both with God and Man: For whereas they would have the World believe, that
their Model of Government and Forms of Discipline are so much of Divine Right
that they can submit to no Terms of Composition with Men about them; so when it
makes for their Interest, they can without any scruple introduce essential
Alterations thereof: For Parity (which they make the Institution of Christ) was
now taken away, and out of the pretended exigence of the Church nine hundred
Ministers were suspended from one half of that Power given them by Christ,
which at other times is said to be so essential to them that they cannot be
Ministers of the Gospel without it.

Shortly after the passing that Act of Parliament, for setting up the
Presbyterian Government, and committing the Care and Management thereof to
these few surviving Presbyterian Ministers, who had not complied with
Episcopacy; there was a Meeting at Edinburgh of Presbyterian Ministers and
Lay Elders to advise about the Affairs of the Kirk, and to lay down Methods how
a General Assembly should be called and constituted; because (as I have
observed) one could not be had according to their minds, after the old manner
and standing Rules of General Assemblies. By Virtue of the Act of Parliament,
none had the Right to meddle with the Government and Affairs of the Church but
such Ministers as had been removed by the restoration of Episcopacy; and
certainly these men were greatly overseen when they parted with that Privilege,
and admitted others to share with them before they had settled the Church
according to their minds: For by these means they were overpowered and
outvoted, and forced to yield to other things than what they first intended;
but they were not sensible of this their Error till it was past remedy. First,
the remnant of the Remonstrator Party, who had been actually deposed in the
time of Presbytery, and some of them for scandalous and gross Crimes, came to
sit in this Meeting; they were very active and useful, and therefore it was
thought fit to receive them; but some being sensible of the Irregularity of
admitting Persons lying under the sentence of Deposition by their own Kirk, it
was therefore moved that the Sentence of Deposition might be first taken off:
But the Debate was laid aside and suppressed, because these men urged and pressed
that their Sentence of Deposition might be declared void and null, being done
Clave errante, by a Factious party; wherewith some of the old Public
Resolutioners were pricked, and therefore proceeded to defend themselves, and
particularly one Mr. Alexander Pitcarne protested against their Proceedings,
and threatened to print his Protestation, and to declare their Meeting unlawful,
while such incapacitated Members were allowed to sit in it: But such early
Heats being unseasonable and prejudicial, they prevailed with him to take up
his Protestation and to forbear the Publishing it. Into this Assembly also were
received all these younger Brethren, who had been admitted to the Ministry
clandestinely in the time of the last Reign, or avowedly and openly since the
receiving their Indulgence from King James. These were hurried on with more
Fierceness and Zeal than the former, who indeed wanted not sincerity and
concernment enough for the Cause.

-- Gelidus tardante Senecta
Sanguis hebet, frigentque effoetae in corpore Vires.
The Old Men thought that they ought to rule, and bear the greatest Sway
because of their Age and Experience, and that the Act of Parliament was
especially in their favors; but the younger Brethren would not be imposed
upon, seeing Parity was the Constitution of their Government. And it was said
that one Mr. Webster told Mr. Gilbert Rule very bluntly, that tho he was a
younger Man he merited more than he, having taken the Ministry upon him in the
time of Persecution, when no temporal Except the Contributions of the Sisters,
which were something to one who knew no other ways how to live.
Interest did encourage him to it; whereas the other entered into it in the time
of Peace, and deserted it in time of Trouble.

Mr. Gabriel Cunningham was chosen Moderator of this Meeting, which was
extraordinary as to its Nature, neither was there a proper Name for it; For it
was neither Session, Presbytery, Provincial, nor Diocesan Synod, nor General
Assembly, nor Commission of the Kirk, which are all the Church Judicatures ever
have been since the Reformation; but ever since it bears the Name of the
General Meeting. Here they appointed Ministers for the several Corners of the
Country, divided them into Presbyteries, prescribed the Rules of trying
Episcopal Ministers, and ordained that where the Presbytery consisted but of
four or fewer, the next Presbytery should be joined to it, which yet in many
places made not a competent number for so weighty a business, as the examining
and censuring Ministers for their Doctrine and Manner: For the two Presbyteries
of Hidingtoun and Dumbar, where (you know) there be near thirty Parishes,
consisted but of five Presbyterian Ministers. There was the like number in the
Presbyteries of Dunse and Churnside, where there were about as many Parishes.
In the Presbytery of Aughterarder there was but one Presbiterian Minister, and
when the next was joined to it, they made but three; so that when it was
debated in the Assembly, whether one of them, to wit Mr. William Spence (of
whom you will hear more afterward) should go for Angus; they pleaded against
his going, because that without him they could not have a Quorum in the Country
where he then lived; and at the same time Sir Colin Campbell and Ardbruchill
stood up and said, in the face of the Assembly, that for twenty Miles Westward
of Perth, there were but two or three Ministers, meaning these of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, which shows how little agreeable either their Persons
or Government are to the People.

Here also they laid down the Method and Manner of constit uting the next
Assembly, which was to sit in October, viz. That where a Presbytery consisted
of eight Ministers, they should send four Ministers and three ruling Elders to
the Assembly; where they were under eight and above four, three Ministers and
two ruling Elders; four should send two Ministers and one ruling Elder; and
where there was but one, that one and a ruling Elder should come: By which you
see that the old Method of constituting General Assemblies was quite altered,
and that as many Parts of the Kingdom were not allowed Representatives in that
Assembly, so others were not represented equally, nor could they bear a suitable
Proportion therein; but the smalness of their number was admitted as a defense
for this Irregularity. At this Meeting they appointed a General Fast before the
sitting down of the Assembly, to be kept on Sunday the 5th. of October, which
was the third Fast had been observed on Sundays within the space of a Year,
which is neither agreeable to the Nature of the day, nor the Practice of the
Primitive Times; but our Presbyterians are above these things; they have more
regard to the Practice of their own Predecessors, than either to Reason or
Antiquity; and you know it was the Custom of the old Presbyterians to keep all
their Fasts on the Lords day: At this time also we had another instance,
whereby they showed themselves the true Sons of their Fathers, who did not
confine themselves to Matters purely Ecclesiastical, but who also were always
catching* at the Power of the Magistrate; whose Privilege it is in this Kingdom
to license Books, and in their Licenses to grant the Monopoly of them: This
Privilege was assumed by the General Meeting; For they ordered an old Treatise
of ruling Elders to be reprinted by the Heirs of Andrew* Anderson, and
discharged any other to meddle therewith; This is the Form of their License
word for word.

The General Meeting of Ministers and Elders of this Church have appointed this
Treatise of Ruling Elders and Deacons to be Printed by the Heirs of Andrew
Anderson and none other. Extracted by

JOHN SPALDING, Clerk.

This was a small Beginning, however the Privy Council thought fit to take
notice thereof, and to give a check to these Encroachments on the Civil Power,
and therefore ordered the Copies to be called in, and the License to be torn
away; so that after the first day all the Copies were sold without the
Imprimatur; and two Friends of mine (who otherwise cared not for the Book) were
forced to pay a triple rate for one with the forementioned License, which was a
new Proof of the Presbyterian Usurpation.

After the Meeting the Brethren went home, and fell to their work with all
their might, according to the Instructions given them in their General Meeting.
It was expected that they would first have planted the Churches made vacant by
the Council and the Rabble, which were more than could be supplied by all the
Ministers of that Persuasion: But they were not so zealous to plant, as to
pluck up what was already planted; they would not begin to build, until what
was already built was overthrown to the Ground. More than a third part of the
Churches in the Kingdom wanted Ministers, and the most of them for more than a
Year. But as if that was only a small matter, it was overlooked; and all Pains
and Care laid out in emptying these Churches where the Episcopal Ministers
continued to preach. Their beloved West was destitute of Ministers, the
Churches there and in Galloway were almost all shut up. So that when the
Assembly met, two Ministers declared before them, that where they lived there
was not so much as the face of a Church, there being no Ministers but
themselves and one other: Yet none were sent thither, but they showed greater
Inclination to seat themselves in the Lothians and South, which is indeed a
better Country, but where there was less room for them, and where they were not
so acceptable to the People. Many were indeed astonished at this, nor could
they either justify it, or well understand the Politic thereof. Strange! there
were already more Churches vacant, than there were Presbyterian Ministers to
put in them, and yet so many more were aimed at, and coveted. It was sad and
lamentable to see so many desolate Congregations in all parts of the Land, such
Multitudes of People without the Gospel, and without the direction of Pastors,
and yet they would endeavor to deprive them of this Blessing, who by the good
Providence of God had it still continued with them. However they did this
either to force the People to join with them when none other could be had, or
being conscious of their own Ignorance and Inability, they thought it neither
fit, nor their Interest to tolerate them who were more judicious, and who would
accustom the People to Sense and solid Discourses, which held forth the true
Nature and Design of the Gospel, and which armed People against sanatical
Delusions.

When some were asked why they studied to cast out all the Episcopal Clergy,
seeing they could not yet supply their Churches, and why they would preach in a
Meeting House, where there was an Episcopal Minister unblameable in his Life
and Doctrine, and draw the people from him, rather than go to another Parish
which wanted a Pastor altogether. It was answered, That there was less
prejudice both to Church and People by the want of Preaching, than by the
Preaching of Men of Episcopal Principles and Persuasions: And Mr. Frazer of
Bray said in a Sermon before the Parliament, That it was better that the Temple
of the Lord, did lie sometime unbuilt and unrepair'd, than be reared up by
Gibeonites and Samaritans. But to return, Nothing came before the Presbyteries,
except Citations and Libels against Episcopal Ministers, and to make the
greater dispatch, they sat every Week. The Presbyteries were a perfect
Inquisition, who sent out Spies to inform them not only of the public Sermons
and open Practices of the Episcopal Clergy, but also what they spoke and did in
private; Neither did they search only into their present behavior, but also
they made enquiry into the former Actions of their Lives, and if they upon
diligent search made any discovery of any little Blemish or Failure, though
before forgotten, it was made a part of their Indictment. Mr. C. an old Man of
eighty years at Lady-Kirk, was libelled among other things for Drunkenness,
alleging an instance fifteen or sixteen Years ago, who as he proved the
alleged Instance to be false, so he said very well, that seeing a latter
Instance could not be produced, it did appear, that he was neither scandalously
Drunken, nor guilty of the Habit thereof. There was a formed Design of
disgracing the Episcopal Clergy, and of rendering them infamous for Immorality;
but it will be much for their advantage, that after earnest desires and
endeavors to blacken them, there was little or nothing made out against them;
When any real Scandals were found, they were loudly talked of, and publicly
proclaimed, and laid to the charge of the whole Party, as if it were a matter
extraordinary to find some unworthy persons among nine hundred or a thousand:
The least defects of Behavior were heightened and aggravated as if they had
been gross Crimes, and what was no fault was made one by a perverse and
sinister Interpretation and uncharitable Construction. When more heinous Crimes
were wanting, the Libels were stuffed and swelled with Articles, which of
themselves amounted to nothing; but accumulated together, were by them looked
upon and sustained as amounting to a great guilt. And when nothing could be
devised against the Minister himself, he was accused for his Elders and
Parishioners, if they could be taxed for any real or apparent Crimes; For then
it was said, that he profaned the Holy Ordinance of the Lords Supper, because
he was assisted by such Elders, in the Administration of it; and that he
admitted such persons, whereas yet neihter the one nor the other were under
Church Censure or legal Conviction. The Libels were generally so frivolous and
impertinent that they ought to have been rejected with Scorn; but whatever was
offered by the Bygots was admitted, and all care and caution used not to
discourage them. The great Scandals of Mr. Couper and Mr. Graham Ministers at
Dumfermline were the admitting Persons promiscuously to the Sacrament; the
profaning the Lords Day in suffering people to bring in Kail, and fan Barley for
the Pot that day; and by allowing their Children to play with others, though
they were very much under that age, which even in the opinion of Jewish Doctors
was obliged to the strict observation of the Sabbath. Another Minister was
designed to be libelled for plucking a few Pease on Sunday; but that being so
parallel to the case of the Disciples, which our Savior defended, it was not
permitted to be made use of. One was accused because he sometimes Whistled; And
another because one time playing at Bowls, he broke an innocent Jest, which
none could have construed Profane, but they who were impure.

If any had at any time publicly or privately expressed any Zeal for
Episcopacy, or reflected on the Covenant, and the Principles and Practices of
the Presbyterians, who now always assume the names of the Godly, and the
peculiar people of God, or if it could have been alleged, that they had any
ways, tho never so indirectly, or even in obedience to the Magistrate, been the
occasion of any trouble or uneasiness to them, this was never omitted; but was
sure to be made a main Article of their Libel. Thus Mr. Crawford (the old
Gentleman mentioned before) was accused for calling the Covenant a Band of
Rebellion. Mr. Heriot, Minister at Dalkeith was libelled, as calling Monmouth
and Argyle Rebels and Traitors, because he read the Proclamation set forth
against them, and which was appointed to be read in Churches At the end of this
Le^ter, vid^ Inform^tion giv^ in by M^ Heriot ^^ the Priv^ Council.
by the King and Council. And a certain Great Man was so picqu'd at him upon
this account, that he would neither hear his Defenses against the other
Articles of the Libel, nor yet interpose his Authority (which was then the
highest in the State) for keeping him in the Exercise of his Ministry, though
it was desired by the Generality, and the best of his Parish. Mr. Wood of
Dumbar was charged in his Libel with Cruelty, and a persecuting Spirit, because
he persuaded a Friend of his to put away a Servant who would not keep the
Church, and thereby made both her self and her Mistress liable to the Law: He
was also accused for saying to one who expressed his fears, as if the Liturgy of
the Church of England would be introduced among them, God send us no worse; and
that he had never expressed his thankfulness to God, for the deliverance of the
Land from Popery and Prelacy. To the first he replied, That he was indeed sorry
if any such Expression had dropped from him, because he was sensible it was too
mean for so great and so glorious a Church as that of England: To the other he
said, That he thanked God heartily for any deliverance that the Land had from
Popery, but he could not do so for the overthrow of Prelacy, unless he either
acted the Hypocrite, or was convinced that Presbytery was the greater Blessing,
and the more Ancient and Apostolical Government; which he never yet saw made
out. Mr. Graham (whom I mentioned before) had in his Libel imputed to him, the
taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Canonical Obedience, which, they said,
showed him incorrigibly Episcopal. Mr. Couper had added to his Libel his taking
the Oath of the Test. Mr. Johnstone of Salin was accused for being too much
affected to the Episcopal Government, and for recommending superstitious and
erroneous Books to the people, as they were pleased to call the Whole Duty Man,
which was expressly mentioned. Another Mr. Johnstone Minister of Burnt Island
was libelled, for conversing with some persons whom they alleged to be no
Friends to the Government either of Church, or State; and for using the
Doxology, etc. which, etc. could only refer to the Creed and Lords Prayer. The
Minister of Abbots-Hall was accused for neglecting the Catechism of the
Westminster Divines, and using that which was first set forth by the Synod of
Edinburgh, and afterward enlarged by the Reverend and pious Bishop Scowgal:
The Catechism (I must tell you) is as well as the Whole Duty of Man much spoken
against, and severely condemned as erroneous; but what are the particular
Errors of it which make it so dangerous, I could never learn, nor do I believe
you could guess them, except they were told you.

By these Instances you may understand the Nature of our Presbyterian Libels; I
forbear to give you more, because I suppose there will be a Collection of them
published: But you must know that they would never give any of the Episcopal
Clergy the title of Minister, but only that of Incumbent. Mr. Graham complained
of this, and demanded a Reason, who was told by way of Answer by one that
preached at Innerkeithing that there were no true Ministers but Presbyterian
Ministers; And as they denied them the Title of Ministers; so to take away
their right to their respective Parishes, one Article of their Libel was, Their
entering by Presentation from a Patron, and by Ordination, Collation, and
Institution of the Bishop, contrary to the Word of God; The Constitution of
this Church, Acts of Assemblies, and the Lands solemn Engagements. When the
leading Men of that Party were upbraided for making Episcopal Ordination a
ground of a Libel; They excused themselves and laid the blame of it upon the
people; but in this they showed their Hypocrisy and deceitful Dealing. For it
was well known that the Presbyterian Ministers were always consulted in the
forming of the Libels, and many of them were drawn up by themselves, and that
all them were every where of the same strain, which makes it evident that it
was a concerted business among them, to beget in the peoples minds an aversion
to Episcopal Ministers, as not true Ministers, nor entering in at the right
door; though they were also careful to foist in some other thing to excuse
their Censures with the more judicious, who could not be so easily deluded and
imposed upon.

As the Articles of the Libels were for the most part frivolous and
impertinent, so the manner of their process was neither legal nor reasonable;
for seldom did they let the Minister accused know his Accuser, and so he might
have been made a Witness against him, which is contrary to the Laws of all
Nations: Beside, they always received the Libel, and sustained the validity of
it, before he was heard, and not regarding what Defenses might be opponed,
caused him to be cited to hear and see himself deposed: Nor was he suffered to
be present at the examination of the Witnesses; but in many places, if not
everywhere, the Witnesses were allowed to be present all together, when they
gave in their Evidence: By the Civil and Canon Law, and the reasonable practice
of all Nations, they who bear Hatred, Malice, or have discovered any Prejudice
against the accused, cannot witness in Judgment against him; but this was
wholly neglected and past by, and the most avowed, professed, and open Enemies
received as Witnesses, and such also allowed to sit as Judges. Thus Mr.
Calderwood a professed, and bitter Enemy of Mr. Heriot Minister of Dalkeith, who
was the chief if not the only Informer against him, sat and judged him in the
Presbytery in the quality of a Ruling Elder; And when the said Mr. Heriot
desired that he might be removed, it was utterly refused him. So when Mr.
George Purves Minister at Glencorse appeared before the same Presbytery at
Dalkeith, he objected against some of the Witnesses as carrying Heart-Malice
and ill Will toward him; they having sometime before assaulted him in the
Pulpit with Swords and Staves, and taking him by the Throat, had gone near to
have strangled him, if he had not got present Relief; therefore (said he) they
ought not to be allowed as Witnesses against me, for they that did so, what
will they not do to procure my ruin? Upon which the very Reverend and Worthy
Matthew Selkirk, who is now settled Minister at Crighton, rose up and spoke to
the Moderator; That if these Men had done so out of Malice and personal
Prejudice, they ought not to be received as Witnesses; but if they had done it
for the Glory of God, he saw no reason why they might not be admitted. If one
part of the Deposition seemed to prove the Libel, or any Article of it, though
the other did exculpate the Minister or extenuate his fault, the first was
marked, and the other left out; So I was told of one who is since dead, who was
accused for saying* that Women wanted Souls; The Witness declared he had heard
him say so, but that he only delivered as the Opinion of another, and yet upon
this the Article was looked upon as proved: When the Witnesses cleared the
Minister or asserted his Innocence, they were dismissed as knowing nothing of
the Matter; but such were greatly encouraged and cherished as showed themselves
earnest and forward to divest him of the Character of a faithful, pious and
upright Pastor: And when they passed the Sentence of Suspension or Deposition
against any, at the intimation of it, from the Pulpit in his own Church, the
whole Libel was read, though several of the Articles were so frivolous and
trivial as not censurable by Law, and others of them that contained Matter of
Scandal were no way proved.

As for the Episcopal Clergy, some of them disowned their Authority, and would
not appear; Others appeared, and gave in their Defenses; and some perceiving
the Partiality of the particular Presbyteries appealed to the next General
Assembly, hoping to meet with greater Moderation there, or at least that before
that time the Civil Government would put a stop to these rigid and unreasonable
proceedings. Thus matters went till the sitting of the Assembly, and by these
proceedings the Presbyterians not only increased the prejudices of those who
differed from them, but they also disgusted many of their Friends. The
Presbyterians you know were much inferior to the Episcopal Party in number,
quality, learning or good Sense; and I assure you, that now they have lost much
even of that Interest which they had in this Nation, many who thought well of
them while they were kept under, are now ashamed of them, and have deserted
them: I am told that many (even in the West) abominate them: It is most certain
that in other places of the Kingdom, they are feared and dreaded as a Plague to
Mankind, just as the Jesuits are.

When the time of the Assembly drew near, the several Presbyteries set about
the choosing Commissioners for it, and things were so laid, that the most
bigoted and hotheaded were generally chosen, and those of a more moderate
Temper put by. If there had been any respect to the qualifications of Men, none
in that part of the Country he lived in would have been preferred to Honest Dr.
Hardy; but because heretofore he had kept correspondence with the Episcopal
Party, and still pressed Moderation toward them, he was excluded. In like manner
Mr. Alexander Pitcairn of Dron was put by, because of his carriage at the last
General Meeting, though he is said to have more Learning than the most of them;
and there were but three others in the Presbytery with him, and none of them,
of these old men to whom the Government of the Church was entrusted by the late
Act of Parliament: He indeed came to the Assembly, sat in it, and interposed
his Judgment, but was no Member of it, and so consequently had no Vote. When
these Measures were perceived, it was concluded, That Mr. George Campbel should
be also shuffled out of the Assembly; but that would have made their designs
too apparent, there being none of his Presbytery whom they could bring in
Competition with him, as also they had not much reason to fear any Opposition
from him because of his modesty and quietness, which makes him averse to
Contests and Jangling. He has indeed the Character of a learned, good, and
discreet Man; and by his Moderation at first he did very much displease his
Brethren, which (as I am informed, but am loath to believe) has obliged him for
removing their Jealousies to express himself of late more severly against the
Episcopal Party than he used to do formerly. As for Lay-Commissioners, such
were picked out as either were most bygottedly affected to their Interests, or
whom they desired and designed to make fast Friends to their Party. In the
Presbytery of Churnside the Lord of -- was chosen, and in Dunse the
Competition lay betwixt the Lord of Lanton and M. the last was like to have
carried it, but some one suggested to the Moderator, that it would very much
reflect upon them to have both the Commissioners for the Merse stained with the
Scandal of Adultery; upon which the Commission was given to Lanton, and the
other was put by, whom yet they would fain have obliged, he being one who has
at present a considerable place in the Kingdom.

The King you know ought to have a Commissioner at every Assembly, to see that
Affairs of State be not meddled with by the Brethren, who indeed still retain
the strong Inclinations, which they as well as the Church of Rome have always
showed to meddle with them, pretending they only do this in ordine ad
spiritualia. Every one looked that the Earl of Crawford should have been the
person, whom the King should have honored with that Employment, and his
Lordship himself rejoiced in expectation of it: But (to the surprizal of all)
some few days before the Assembly sat, a Commission came down for My Lord
Carmichael, which made the zealous Brethren hang down their Ears: And My Lord
Crawford gave an Indication of his secret Grudg at the disappointment, by his
entertaining every body who came to see him with Protestations, that he did not
desire it, and with Reasons and Excuses why he would not have accepted of it,
if it had been offered to him: But we may justly suspect that his Lordship
would not have refused it, seeing he frequented the Assembly, and officiously
meddled in all the Concerns of it, even before he was made a Member; and upon
Carmichael's advancement, there were Letters immediately dispatched to procure
a Commission for his Lordship from some Burgh or other, because a Commission
from a Presbytery had been neglected, upon an expectation that his Lordship
should have represented the King himself in the Assembly: His Lordship was so
humble, that having missed of the highest Station, he would rather serve in the
meanest, than not have an hand in advancing the good Cause; or be deprived of
the occasion of perfecting what he had so zealously begun: He had indeed
merited the highest Honor in the Kirk, but all except the very Bygots of that
side approved the King's Choice as best and wisest for himself, and the
Interest of the State. For My Lord Carmichael was looked upon as a Man of good
Sense, and he had lately given proofs of his Discretion and moderate Temper, at
the Visitation of the College of Glasgow; whereas My Lord Crawford kept within
no bounds of Moderation at the Visitation of the University of S. Andrews, and
was much taken notice of for his rough Usage of the Masters, particularly the
Reverend old Dr. Weemse Dean of S. Andrews, and Principle of S. Leonard's
College, who had been a Master in the said University for the space of 45
years, under whom My Lord Crawford studied Philosophy, and to whom he was then
particularly obliged; the Dr. had also been a zealous Assertor of the
Protestant Religion, and designed to have made the University his Heir;
notwithstanding all which, My Lord would not suffer him to have favor of a
Seat, when he attended that Visitation, and when the honest Gentleman's Age and
Infirmity obliged him to rest himself on the step of a Stair in the room,
because other Convenience was denied him; his Lordship sent an Officer and
raised him; such Roughness and Incivility you may think incredible, but I had
it from the old Gentleman himself; of the which, with all other Particulars of
that Visitation, as also of the Visitation of the other Colleges, I am told
that the World may expect a full Account. But to return from whence my respect
to my Lord Crawford carried me.

All the Members of the Assembly being duly couven'd on the appointed day, viz.
the 16th. of October, they went to the High Church where Mr. Gabriel
Cunninghame Moderator of the last General Meeting did preach on S. John 2. 17.
And his Disciples remembered that it was written, the Zeal of thine House has
eaten me up. In which the old man gave a greater Proof of his Memory than his
Judgment, for the same Sermon had been preached on the same Text by Mr. Oliver
Bowlis, an. 1643. before the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament at Land.
I have seen the printed Sermon compared with the Notes of what was preached,
and I assure you Mr. Gabriel made an exact Repetition, and followed his Author
verbatim so far as was fit for his purpose, only he left out some things in the
Close of Mr. Bowlis's Sermon, and added some bitter Reflections on the
Episcopal Party.

There was a Parallel carried on betwixt Presbytery and that Miracle of our
Savior in whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; the setting up
Presbytery at this time was compared to the Work of the Reformation, and was
made a more wonderful and signal Act of Providence. The Episcopal Party were
called formal and nominal Protestants, who professing to retain the
Fundamentals, did pervert and corrupt the very Doctrine and all the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ. The Presbyterians you know can never have their fill of
Preaching, and therefore a single Sermon was not thought sufficient to open
their Assembly, but they returned in the Afternoon, where Mr. Patrick Simson
preached, on 3. Zach. 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, if thou will walk in my
Ways, and if thou will keep my Charge, then thou shall also judge my House, and
shall also keep my Courts, and I will give the Places to walk among these that
stand by. When his Matter and Expression were considered, no body thought his
Sermon was borrowed as that in the forenoon had been, for it was Presbyterian
Stuff course enough. He ascribed to their Meeting a Supremacy absolute and
immediate next under Christ.

After both Sermons they went to the Place appointed for the Assembly; Mr.
Gabriel Cunninghame opened the Meeting with a Prayer, after which he made a
Complement to the King's Commissioner, and desired that his Commission might be
seen and read. The Commissioner having produced his Commission, he desired that
every one might also show theirs; which occasioned a confused Jangling for some
time. The next thing they fell upon was the choosing of the Moderator, for Mr.
Gabriel could no longer preside, it being against their Principles to allow a
constant Moderator. For Persons were in Nomination, the first was Mr. George
Campbel Minister at Drumfries, whose Character I have given you before; the
next was Mr. Gilbert Rule, who formerly passed under the name of Dr. Rule
because of his practicing Medicine; he sat in the Asembly as Commissioner from
the College at Edinburgh; where he was lately installed Principal, in the room
of the reverend and learned Dr. Monro. In the last times of Presbytery he was
an Independent, but now he seems to own no such thing, but presses the
Presbyterian Government as of Divine Institution: He is of great Authority
among his Party, and is reckoned by them a learned and judicious man; but first
he seems not to have the Latin Tongue, for he often wounds Priscian, and has
so little Command of that Language, that he dare not extend his Prayers before
the Students above two or three Sentences, which when observed made one wish
that all the Presbyterians were obliged to pray in Latin, and then they would
not be so tedious, nor vent so much Nonsense in their Prayers, as most of them
now use to do: Again, the things he has published discover no small Ignorance;
witness, his silly Gloss on that Expression of S. Jerome; Quid facit Episcopus,
excepta Ordinatione, quod Presbyter non faciat: Where he makes Ordinatio to be
the ordering of the Meetings of the Clergy. This Exposition of the Fathers
Words you may find in the 169 p. of his pretended Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation.
He also published a Pamphlet, wherein he represented the Principles and
Practices of Presbyterians; which is a very weak and empty Paper full of
Contradictions, wherein the Scripture is grossly wrested, and wherein several
things are obtruded as certain and of great Importance, which have no
Foundation either in Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity. As by this it appears
that his Learning is not great, though he has had the Boldness to enter the
lists with Dr. Stillingfleet, so he has often in his Sermons vented himself
bitterly against the Episcopal Party.

A third Person was Mr. Meldrum once Minister at Aberdeen, but who has
preached at a Meeting House in the West ever since the Indulgence granted by
King James. He indeed entered the Ministry in times of Presbytery, but he also
complied with Episcopacy when it was restored. He at first together with Mr.
John Menzies Professor of Divinity at Aberdeen, did hesitate upon the Oath of
Canonical Obedience; which Bishop Mitchel of Aberdeen would by no means allow;
so that they both ran a risque of being deprived. But afterward upon a
Conference at S. Andrews with the Archbishop of that See, who it seems dealt
somewhat smoothly with them, they both subscribed the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, and were sent back to the Bishop of Aberdeen with recommendatory
Letters from the Primate; upon which they were admitted to their Places, which
the one kept till his Death, and the other till the Oath of the Test. I am told
that Mr. Meldrum denies the matter of Fact, and will not acknowledge that ever
he took the Oath of Canonical Obedience, but the thing is too notorious to be
denied; for as the Primate of S. Andrews assured the Bishop of Aberdeen of it
by a Letter under his hand, of which Mr. Meldrum himself was the Bearer; so the
Bishop of Aberdeen to make their Compliance as public and exemplary as he
thought their demurring and refusal had been scandalous, before he remitted
them to the Exercise of their Ministry, caused a public Intimation of their
Subscription to be made in the old Church of new Aberdeen, which Intimation was
made by Dr. Keith afterward Professor of Divinity at Edinburgh, which
certainly would not have been done, if the matter of Fact had not been certain:
Especially if it be considered that they themselves, tho present, did not offer
to contradict it. When this rigorous Proceeding of the Bishops against them was
in ordinary Discourse complained of, he defended himself by an old Scotch
Proverb, which is, That a fidging Mare should be well girded: And it has been
told me the Subscriptions both of Mr. Menzies and Mr. Meldrum are still extant.
However Mr. Meldrum paid true Canonical Obedience, as much as any other
Minister, to the Bishop of Aberdeen, and lived in particular Friendship with
Bishop Scowgal, who succeeded in that See: he frequented the Presbyteries and
Synods, submitted to their Acts, and assisted several times when the Bishop
ordained, and so far deserted the Principles of the Covenant and our Scottish
Presbiteryans, that he swore and subscribed the Declaration, when he was
admitted Rector of the Marishal College of Aberdeen. It cannot be denied but
that he carried himself well, and gained the good Opinion of all, while he kept
his Place, and even after he had left it for not taking the Test, he did not
desert the Church, nor renounce Communion with the Episcopal Party, until the
time that King James discharged the taking of Oaths, and suspended the Laws
which enacted them, and then because he was not permitted to return to the
Exercise of his Ministry at Aberdeen, tho he was allowed to go any where else,
he became so picqu'd and offended at the Bishops, whom he apprehended were the
Cause thereof, that he presently struck in with the Presbyterians, and either
to make his Change appear the more sincere, or because he had really altered
his Judgment and the Principles he formerly professed, he has broke of all
correspondence with the Episcopal Party, though some of them were his most
intimate Acquaintance, and as Occasion offered vented himself as bitterly and
severely against them, as any Presbyterian whatsoever. And when he was last at
Aberdeen, tho he was kindly and civilly invited by his old Colleagues to take
their Pulpit, yet he would never preach for them, nor so much as hear them; but
chose rather to go preach in the Meeting House, where he exhorted the People to
Thankfulness for the deliverance of the Land from Prelacy, and to be earnest in
their Prayers that it might never return again. In him we have an apparent
Instance, how great a Temptation even to a judicious Man Picque and Interest
and Popularity do oftentimes prove. At first he pretended that he would only
attempt to reclaim the deluded People of the West from their Errors and
Extravagancies, who (he said) had been lost for want of good and knowing
Ministers amongst them; but it was plainly foretold by a Person of Quality and
great Worth, that it would appear he could not work upon them, but that they
would ensnare him, and bring him over to all their Fooleries.

The fourth and last Person was one Mr. Hugh Kennedy, who is usually called
Father Kennedy by the Phanaticks here, and by others Bitter Beard: he is of a
little Stature, but such a one as has made a great Bustle in his time; he was a
Ringleader of the Remonstrator-Party, and with the Scottish Army at Newcastle,
when they delivered up King Charles I. and received a part of the Price of his
Blood, as is commonly reported six thousand Marks. In the Year 1660 he was
deposed by a Synod of Presbyterians for several Crimes; especially for being a
Firebrand among his Brethren, and for a Book entitled The Causes of Gods Wrath
upon Scotland, which Sentence of Deposition was never taken off, till the last
day but one of this Assembly, as you shall hear afterward.

These were the four Persons nominated to preside in the Assembly; when it came
to the Vote, Mr. Gilbert Rule had four or five; Mr. Geo. Meldrum one; Mr.
George Campbel forty eight; but the most were in favor of Mr. Hugh Kennedy,
and so the Chair was assigned to him, who came short of the rest in Learning,
yet surpassed them in Subtilty and Malice. Having chosen a Moderator, the next
thing requisite was a Clerk, they appointed Mr. John Spalding, who had been
Clerk to the General Meeting, to officiate in the interim till they should
choose one, but he continued all the time of the Assembly, for there were so
many Competitors for the Clerkship, and each of them had such Interest by their
Friends in the Assembly, that they durst never put it to the hazard of a Vote,
for fear of dividing the Assembly; the Competitors were as we heard,
Mersington, Corsrigge, two Lords of the Session; Park Hay, the famous James
Stewart, and one Kerr.

In this Assembly there was an hundred and eighty Persons, Clergy and Laity.
There were no Commissioners from the Shires of Angus, Merns, Aberdeen, or any
of the more Northern Parts of the Kingdom; and even several Places on the North
side of Tay had none; only here and there in a Corner, where the Presbyterians
had seated themselves, and assumed the name of a Presbytery, there were one or
two chosen and Commissionated to represent them in the Assembly. None of the
Universities or Colleges had any Representatives there, save that of Edinburgh,
whom Mr. Gilbert Rule represented; so that this was no more a General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, than that of Trent can be called a General Council
of the Catholic Church; nor did any other Spirit rule in the one than what
prevailed in the other, I mean a Spirit of Faction, Interest and Prejudice, as
will appear by the Consideration of their Proceedings, though there were
Prayers enough put up for another Spirit, if they had been disposed for it.

The Presbyterians of Scotland have always contested with Kings about the Power
of calling, adjourning and dissolving Assemblies. They pretend to an intrinsic
Power in themselves in this matter, to which (as Mr. Rule says in his
Representation, etc.) that of the Magistrate is cumulative, and not privative.
The adjusting of this Matter therefore was the first Difficulty brought before
the Moderator, and no small Trial of his Skill; for as in the one hand they had
all the Reasons in the World to complement and gratify the King; so on the
other it is well known the Presbyterians are very tenacious of their pretended
Rights, and very jealous of Encroachments upon them, which makes them cautious
of giving Precedents. Now this Difficulty he resolved thus, he suffered the
Commissioner to appoint the time of their Meeting, and without taking notice of
what the Commissioner had done, he himself adjourned them to the same time;
sometimes also to complement the Commissioner be would so cunningly smooth the
business, as when he had resolved upon the time of their Meeting, he would
first ask the Commissioner if his Grace could attend them at such a time, and
then adjourn to the said time; so they always agreed about the time of their
Meetings, and by this means the Debate betwixt them and the King was waved, and
never decided. There happened a pleasant Passage to this Purpose, which I must
not omit; Mr. Gabr. Cunninghame presiding one day in the absence of the
ordinary Moderator, he asked the Commissioner what should be the next time of
their Meeting; but whether it was out of Forgetfulness that he did so or not,
he corrected himself in his Prayer. For he began with an acknowledgment of
Christ Jesus being supreme Head and Governor of the Church, and then said
these Words, Thou know, O Lord, that when we own any other, it is only for
Decency sake.

The next day they met, and only heard the King's Letter read, and appointed
some Persons to draw up an Answer. We expected to have seen both in Print, as
is usual, but neither of them has been as yet published, because, as is
supposed, there was something in the King's Letter a little checking, which
they would not have every one to know, viz. That he favored their Government,
because he was made to understand it was most agreeable to the Inclinations of
the People; that he would have them very moderate in their Proceedings, and do
nothing which might displease their neighbor Church: This last did not go down
well with them, for it troubled them to be made in any ways accountable to a
Church, which in all their Discourses they exclaimed against as superstitious
and idolatrous, and into which they are designing to introduce their glorious
Reformation. Neither was the first very acceptable, for if the Inclinations of
the People were the Motive of setting up Presbyterian Government, when it
should (as it very easily might) be represented, that the Inclinations of the
People were against Presbytery, and the Spirit and ractice P of the present
Presbyterians, his Majesty might be moved to remove this, and set up another
Government. Therefore in their Answer they asserted that their Government was
not only suitable to the Inclinations of the People, but also most agreeable to
the Word of God, and that this might not be looked upon merely as the Flourish
of an Epistle, they designed to back it with the Authority of an Act; which
should declare their Government both of Divine Right, and also the true Legal
Government of this Church, which they pretended had never suffered any
Alteration, except in time of Usurpation, Tyranny and great Oppression. But the
Commissioner apprehending the Consequences of such an Act, thought it not fit
to let the same pass, without Advice from Court; and therefore desired a Copy
of it to send to the King his Master, who it seems did not approve of it: For
it never more appeared here, at which the Brethren have not a little murmured.
And if it had passed, as it would not have contributed much to the
Establishment of their Government, it being the Act of so inconsiderable an
Assembly; so it would only have discovered their Ignorance, Falsehood and
Impudence: For it is clear from our Histories (as was declared in a late
Discourse) that Presbytery heretofore was never settled but in times of
Rebellion; and what Enemies our Scottish Presbyterians have been always to
Kings, and how much they were wont to encourage Rebellion King James VI. has
from his Experience fully and plainly declared, in his Basilicon Doron, where
he cautions his Son against them as the most barbarous, treacherous and
perfidious sort of People, who are less to be trusted than the thieving
Borderers, or the wildest uncivilized Highlanders. The Argument also, which Sir
James Montgomery of Skelmorly used for Presbytery in the Parliament, shows how
much it favors Monarchy and Kingly Power, which was this, That it was the
Peoples only Security against the Encroachment of Kings, and a proper Curb to
restrain their Insolence and Extravagancy; And indeed when they are encouraged,
they so restrain them as to make them signify nothing, as appears by their
Behavior to King James VI. before he went to England, and what they did to
King Charles I. whom they persecuted and pursued to Death. As to the Moderation
which his Majesty required of them, they promised with a solemn Attestation,
that they would show all the Moderation that his Majesty could expect; which
when considered was not a very great Obligation on them; for if the King
understand them aright, his Expectation will be very small, Moderation being
very rarely to be found among Presbyterians.

It being an old Custom of general Assemblies to ease the Ministers of the
Place where they meet from preaching, they ordered this day who should preach
the following Sunday, and when they were appointing Preachers for the rest of
the Churches and Meeting Houses in Edinburgh, one Coliness.
stood up, and said; It was fit to send Ministers to the Conformists Kirks too:
But the Moderator perceiving the Commissioner displeased at the Proposal,
replied; That they sought none of their Help, and they should get as little.
The first that preached in the High Church before the Commissioner, was Mr.
Geo. Meldrum, whose Text was Philip. 4. Ver. 5. The Sermon was framed to please
the various Humors of Men, and to recommend himself to Persons of different
Tempers, for the general Drift of it seemed to be for Moderation, which both
the Court and all good discreet People called for; yet he cautioned it with
such Restrictions and Exceptions as that he might justify himself with the
more rigid, and prevent their jealousies and suspicions of him: He who preached
the Sunday following (if my Memory fail not) was one Hamilton, who was somewhat
singular in his reckoning the Years during which we of this Nation have been
deprived of the Gospel; for whereas the rest of the Presbyterians reckon but
28. viz. from the Restoration of the Royal Family and Episcopacy, he ran ten
Years farther backward, and made it 38. leaving People to guess his reason, and
when the Matter was enquired into, it was found that he dated the want of the
Gospel from the Year 1652. because since that time they never had a General
Assembly, and then too they were not suffered to sit, for the English Governor
here raised them, because they had no Warrant from Cromwell, and carried them
out surrounded with Guards to Bruntsfield-Links, where he dismissed them with a
severe threatening, if any three of them should be found together. It would be
tedious to give you a particular account of all the Sermons which were preached
here in the time of the Assembly, but in general I assure you they were very
nauseating to all rational Persons, for except one or two preached by Mr.
Carstairs and Mr. Robert Wyllie, they were either miserably flat and dull, or
else full of bitter Zeal against the Episcopal Party; Instead of the Doctrins
and Duties of Christianity, the excellency and divine Institution of their
Government was the subject of their Discourses, and when they happened on any
necessary or weighty Point of Religion, they treated them in such a manner, as
if they had designed to burlesque Religion, and render it ridiculous, which
gave a great advantage to atheistical and profane Men: So it is observed that
Religion does suffer more now by the setting up of the Presbyterians, than it
did or was like to have suffered in this Nation by the attempts of the Jesuits
and other Papists a little while ago; for then it fell out that People searched
and considered the Points of their Religion, and they that were ignorant of the
Truth or dis-believed it, came to understand it, and to be convinced of it, and
were resolved to be steadfast in the defense of it, whereas now the Contest
being about Forms of Government, and Discipline, which generally People look
upon as matters of lesser moment, all enquiry into the important Points is laid
aside, and seeing there is such Hypocrisy and Ignorance among these very Men
who set up themselves for the peculiar People of God, and that they who would
be thought as it were inspired, or at least of all others most acted by the
Spirit of God, are guilty of base and unworthy Actions; this tempts People to
think all Religion a sham and cheat.

On Monday the twenty fifth they met at eight a Clock of the Morning for Prayer
only. Some say eight, others ten, and some that eleven prayed successively: One
told me he stayed till five of them prayed, however they continued to pray from
eight to twelve. The Moderator began, and when he ended he named the person who
should pray next, and every one did the like till Dinner time. Among others who
were desired to pray there was an old Man who at first declined it, pretending
a bodily indisposition, but when it was voted he should pray, he fell to it,
and prayed longer a great deal than any of the rest. This Exercise of long and
continued Prayer was so unusual, that it became presently the talk of the Town,
and people had different Sentiments about it, and put various Constructions
upon it: Some said they were practicing what our Lord condemned, S. Matthew. 6.
considering that their Prayers generally are but Babbling and vain Repetitions.
Others that they were imitating the Ten or Twelve of which are said in a
Morning one after another.
Popish Masses. Some dreaded the effects of these Prayers when they called to
mind the custom of their Predecessors, who used to usher in some Villainy by
Fasting and such solemn Prayers, as Tacitus reports of Nero, that when he
solemnly consulted the Gods, it was a certain sign that he intended some cruel
and bloody Enterprise: But the more probable seemed to be that this was to pray
themselves, if possible, into a moderate Temper, as the King's Letter required,
or to vindicate their want of it, as being more agreeable to the mind of God,
seeing it was denied them after so many Prayers. To this purpose one of them
had a very remarkable Expression in his Prayer; for, having in compliance with
the rest put up some petitions for Moderation, at last he concludes with these
words, But, O Lord! to be free, it would be better to make a clean That is to
turn all the Episcopal Clergy out of the Church.
house. This Week they appointed Committees for the several Affairs that were
before them, which sat at their own convenience, and now and then they met in
full Assembly, but they passed away the time without doing any thing
considerable, so that some began to apply to them, Parturiunt Montes, etc. The
Moderator laid the blame of it on the ill attendance of the Members of the
Assembly, and the slow Proceedings of the Committee; but the true reason was,
That they were restrained by the Instructions sent from Court, and the fears of
increasing the clamours and prejudices of the Country, as also they were
somewhat retarded by the unskilfulness of their Brethren in managing Affairs of
this Nature. The Old Men having for a long time been disused, and the Younger
Sort wanting experence; there were besides some little differences among the
Brethren, tho the Moderator did all he could to smother them; for when there
was any appearance of the least Jar, he referred the matter which was like to
occasion it, back to the Committee to be further considered, and then as on all
other occasions in his Prayer he thanked God for the Oneness that was among
them. For they endeavored to make the World believe that there was great
Harmony in their Assembly which they talked of with a great deal of Fondness
and Vanity, especially when the Cameronian Party joined themselves to them, tho
it may be justly said that matters were rather hudled up betwixt them, than any
true Union effected, and if the cunning of the Moderator had not prevented it,
the Breach was like to have been wider; For the two Persons that appeared for
the Cameronians, viz. Mr. Shiels, and Mr. Linen gave in two Papers, one of
Overtures, and another defending their Practices as being most agreeable to the
Practices of the true Presbyterians, and upbraiding the rest as deserting and
apostatizing from them, which reflected on all that sat there, and yet they
offered in the face of the Assembly to make good and justify the same. At
first the Moderator checked and rebuked them, but perceiving they would not
submit themselves, they were first sent out, and then after some time called in
again, and taken by the hand and desired to sit down with the rest, without
entering upon any debate. He told them upon their second appearance, that he
knew they meaned well, and had done them service, and that they did expect good
from them, tho at first he said they were rash young Men, who had done much
hurt to the Church. The Sunday following both the Cameronians at Restalridge,
and the other Brethren in the Pulpits of the Town, preached upon this Agreement
and Union of the Parties. The latter gave God thanks for it, and the former
justified themselves, and declared that thereby they had neither condemned
their own former Practices, nor yet approved of the Corruptions that were among
their Brethren. The Cameronians in the Country having got information of this
Union, sent some of their number to the Assembly with some Papers, who were not
allowed to come in before the Assembly, but some of the Brethren were sent out
to confer with them, who received their Papers, and giving them fair Words,
dismissed them. The Papers having never been publicly produced, the Contents
of them were not known.

As to the Affair which came before the Assembly, the first thing remarkable
was the Business of Mr. Gabriel Simple which took up some days; He had received
a Call (as the Word is) both from the People of Jedburgh, and also from those
of Killpatrick, and each of them petitioned the Assembly for him, because of
Spiritual Sibness and Pastoral Relation which they had to him; At the same time
there was an Address read from no less than twelve Parishes in Northumberland,
as was pretended, desiring that the said Mr. Gabriel might not be taken from
them, he having taken compassion on them when they lay weltering in their
Blood, and no Eye to pity them, and showing that England was over-gone with
Briars and Thorns which would overrun Scotland too if Mr. Gabriel did not weed
them out, that by Mr. Gabriel's care twelve Parishes were well provided, which
could not be so well done by any ordinary Man; That he had been twenty four
Years among them which was sufficient to found a Pastoral Relation. Mr. Gilbert
Rule seconded this Address, and pleaded for those of Northumberland, that they
might have the benefit of Mr. Gabriel; alleging, that it was Charity to plant
the Gospel in England, and he declared thaet he knew not only twelve Parishes,
but that for fifty Miles they wanted the Word of God; For ( said he) betwixt
Berwick and New Castle there was less practice of Piety, than amongst Papists,
or Heathens, and therefore it was fit to send Ministers among them, he
concluded his Discourse thus, That as we ought to plant the Gospel wherever
we can, so the Presbyterians of England having now a Liberty granted them by
King and Parliament they might very well call back such as had been driven in
amongst them in time of Persecution. To this last the Moderator replied, Mr.
Gilbert, What if they should call you? And when he answered, that perhaps he
would then go, he said to him, Mr. Gilbert, I do not think you so great a Fool.
But as to Mr. Gabriel the Moderator and the generality of the Assembly were for
calling him back to Scotland, alleging that Charity began at home, when they
had reasoned a long while upon the Matter too and again, Mr. Kirkton stood up
and said, What needs this ado? For he had heard that Mr. Gabriel durst not
return to Northumberland, there being an Order from several Justices of Peace
to apprehend him, which Mr. Gabriel confessed to be true. This decided the
matter as to Northumberland, and showed that Mr. Gabriel would have had his
forced return colored with a Solemn invitation; and when it came to be
considered, whither Jedburgh or Killpatrick should have him; he discovered his
own Inclinations before it came to a Vote, telling that Kirkpatrick had no
Manse for him, neither could he maintain a Horse at it, when the Votes were a
stating Mr. Gabriel Cunningham desired the Moderator to pray for drowning the
noise of the Assembly. But Mr. Kirktoun answered, What needs all this fool
Praying, it was not the Custom to pray at every thing, so they past immediately
to voting, and the Votes carried it for Jebburgh, which no doubt was according
to Mr. Gabriel 's own desire.

The next great Affair was the removing Mr. George Campbel from being Minister
at Drumfries to be Professor of Divinity at Edinburgh, which was made vacant by
the Visitation of the College, for that Dr. Strachan could not comply with the
Terms required in the Act of Parliament. The Magistrates of Edinburgh being
Patrons of the place gave a Call to Mr. Campbel, which was backed by the
earnest invitation of some others about the Town. He indeed deserves the place
better than any of that Party having qualifications of Learning and Modesty
beyond what is usual to be found amongst them. But as the People of Drumfries
were not willing to part with him, so neither was he willing of himself to
settle at Edinburgh in his old decaying Years, especially when he perceived
such strong prejudices against the Presbyterian Party to increase. The matter
was referred to the Assembly where it was long and hotly debated. The necessity
and importance of training up Youth was alleged for his coming to Edinburgh,
but he on the other hand said, he was more capable of doing good at Drumfries,
and had stronger ties and obligations to that place, and at last added that he
not only had not the inward call to accept of the Profession of Divinity, but
did find in himself an inward aversion and backwardness thereto, which he
thought should not be slighted; for there was in it not only (...) but (...),
which occasioned the matter of the inward call to be considered and debated.
Mr. Rule said, That it consisted in the internal Qualifications for the place,
and the outward harmonious Call of the Church, and that as they were Judges of
the first, so the last would be known by putting it to a Vote: adding, That the
Spirit of God was a harmonious Spirit, and that the Spirit of the Prophets was
subject to the Prophets. Mr. Campbel replied, That he put a wrong Gloss on the
Place, but however he would not debate it now. It was referred back to the
Committee and considered again in a full Assembly, and at last the matter was
put to a Vote, having before they collected the Votes prayed for direction
therein. By the Votes it was carried that he should come to Edinburgh; tho it
was observed that the more judicious part were against his coming, being
prevailed upon by the weight of his own Arguments. However after they had
resolved upon his coming, they allowed him till Lammas following to remove
himself and his Family (as some say) as others would have, that he might in
this time bring his mind to close with the Call of the Assembly, because he had
said, he would leave the Kingdom rather than obey.

A day or two after the Decision of this business concerning Mr. Campbel, there
came a Commission from the Town of S. Andrews to My Lord Crawford to represent
them in the Assembly: The Moderator ushered it in with a great Commendation of
his Lordship, and the manifold Obligations which they had to him, and regreted
he had not been a Member of their Assembly sooner, and that he had not his
Commission from a Presbytery; for which, he said, the Presbytery of Couper
particularly should be rebuked, in that they had neglected him. But the reason
was, (as I told you before) that it was expected he should have been
Commissioner for the King. When this Commission was read, My Lord Crawford,
(whose Joy for which was to be seen in his Countenance) stood up, and made a
Discourse about the Weight and Importance of that Trust, and of his
Unworthiness to be a Member of that Venerable Assembly, and desired that they
might allow him the favor which they had granted to Mr. George Campbel, which
was to have till Lammas next to advise on it: His Lordship not knowing well
what to say, but thinking he was obliged to say something, fell on this
Impertinence; which moved the Spleen of the Assembly, and made them spoil the
gravity of their Meeting: And indeed who could forbear laughing, to hear one
make a scruple of acting by Commission, when he had made none to act without
one; officiously attending the several Sessions of the Assembly, and particular
Committees, and giving his Opinion in all the Matters that came before them.
And what a ridiculous thing was it, to ask Nine Months time to advise whether
he should be a Member of a Meeting which was to be entirely dissolved within a
fortnight.

After they had sat ten or twelve days, they received a Petition from two
Persons, the one was called Smith, the other Grieve, in name of the Town of
Dundee. In the Petition, which was drawn up according to their usual Canting
Style, they complained of their want of the Ministry there, and desired that
some might be sent to them to preach the Gospel; upon this the Commissioner
asked if the Episcopal Ministers of that place were legally turned out; and it
being replied that they were deprived by the Privy Council a year ago; the
Moderator was suffered to proceed in the business, who pressed it with great
Earnestness, telling the Assembly, that he knew that not only in Dundee, but
that in all Angus the Gospel was not preached, and that there was no true
Minister there, tho he and all the World besides knew, that except one or two
Churches all the rest of that Shire have Ministers settled in them, who daily
exercise their Functions, but indeed they are Episcopal Ministers; whom neither
he, nor others of that party make any account of, for on all Occasions they so
express themselves, as if the Gospel and Ministry were confined to the
Presbyterian Kirk. But to return to the business of Dundee and Angus, Mr.
Andrew Bowie, and one Mr. Reiel declared to the Assembly, That they had been in
that Country already by an Order from the General Meeting, but that they had no
encouragement from that People, on the contrary they had met with great
Discouragements, and perceived that they were so averse and indisposed for
receiving the Gospel, that it was needless to send any to them; for they would
not get an Auditory except in a Kirk, and the People would not give them the
Keys of the Kirk doors, nor admit of them except they were compelled by
Authority. To which the Moderator replied, Brethren, as you have made an Offer
of the Gospel to them in the name of the General Meeting, so you must now go
and offer it in the name of the General Assembly; and added, That they would
recommend the Affair to the Privy Council, who would certainly see to their
encouragement, and to have the Keys of some Kirk or other given them. As for
Dundee, which was said to be generally refractory, the Moderator said, They
could and would plant Ministers and Elders therein, whether the Town Council
would or not. Which if it be not an Intrusion, let the World judge: When it was
desired that some others might be added to these two Brethren, Mr. William
Spence sometime Minister of Glendoven was named by several, which was opposed
by others, because the removing of him would leave the Presbytery of
Aughterarder without a Quorum, as I mentioned before; however after some
Debate, it was carried he should go: And other three also were appointed to be
in readiness upon advertisement of the success and encouragement of these
Brethren. As for this Mr. William Spence, one of the Apostles for Angus he
served some years under Episcopacy, but having desired an Augmentation of his
Stipend, and it being refused; he conceived a Picque at the Bishops, because
they gave him not (as he judged) due Assistance before the Commission of the
Kirk, which he first vented by passing severe Reflections upon them, and
afterward he grew to that height, that he dispersed Papers bespattering both
them and the Government, and addressed to the Presbytery for a Reformation: His
Fellow Presbyters endeavored to reclaim him, and to suppress his Libels, but
their Attempts being in vain, the Matter was carried before the Bishop and
Synod of Dumblane, who finding him obstinate deposed him, and afterward upon
his further Contumacy and Disobedience excommunicated him, which Censure was
never yet taken off, because he never showed any Repentance, neither made any
Application about it.

Shortly after the receiving of this Petition from Dundee, there came a Letter
to the Assembly from Aberdeen subscribed by some Phanaticks there; who, I
assure you, in that Place are neither considerable for Number, nor Quality. The
Letter was to the same purpose, desiring the Assembly to send them Ministers,
and complaining that they had wanted the Gospel for Thirty Years. Mr. George
Meldrum was present when this Letter was read, and neither contradicted the
Assertion nor qualified it; but suffered it to pass without any Reflection or
Censure. Which silence of his was admired by those that knew him, neither could
they excuse it, considering that he both knew the place particularly, and could
not but be convinced that the Gospel had been preached there, in as great
Purity as in any place in the Kingdom: For not to speak of the present
Ministers of that City, who have the Approbation of all wise and judicious
Persons, both for preaching and other Qualifications. Mr. David Lyall, now at
Montross, was a long time Minister there, and is esteemed to have a good Talent
of popular preaching. Mr. John Menzies Professor of Divinity, who was ever
esteemed an eloquent Preacher, as well as a learned Man, continued in the
exercise of his Ministry there, till the year 1684, and Mr. Meldrum himself was
Twenty of these years Minister there also; and Dr. Garden who succeeded him
must be acknowledged to be both a knowing man and an able Preacher; one who
teaches the truth in sincerity, without respect of Persons. So that Mr.
Meldrum's new Interest must have strongly perverted his Judgment, or he may be
justly charged with Hypocrisy and Cowardice; seeing, for fear of displeasing a
Party, he would not own the truth on so fair an Occasion. The Presbyterians
speak much against a sinful silence, and certainly such was his at this time.
Some alleged, that the sending of this Letter was a Device of his own, to get
himself sent back to Aberdeen; for one would have thought that the Assembly
would rather have sent him than another, because he might be supposed to know
both the place and the People best where he had been so long Minister; but the
Assembly took no notice of him, and appointed two to go thither to preach the
Gospel, of which one was Mr. Shiel a Cameronian. So that as Mr. Meldrum fell
off from the Episcopal Party because he was not permitted to return to his
Place at Aberdeen, for the same Reason he should now desert the Presbyterians,
seeing they would not restore him unto it.

Upon some other occasion it was proposed by the Moderator to send some other
Persons to make an offer of the Gospel to the rest of the Northern-Shires;
accordingly an Act past, appointing several (I know not the exact number) who
were commended to the Council for their Viaticum, as the Moderator worded it,
which Mr. Fraser of Brae found fault with as sordid, and then he wished them to
call it Maintenance or Provision, or what they pleased, for they knew his
meaning well enough.

But that which is most remarkable, is, that in this as well as the two former
instances, Persons were commissionated to preach and make an offer of the
Gospel; for in these very Terms it was proposed, stated, voted and determined,
as if they were going to convert Pagans and Infidels; this shows their
Ignorance and Uncharitableness, and is to some a just ground (tho there were no
other reason) for separating from them, and refusing Communion with them,
because they divide from the Catholic Church in all Ages, they pervert and
alter the nature of the Gospel, and teach another Gospel than what is to be
found in Scripture. Indeed they cannot justify their present Proceedings, and
all this noise they make in setting up themselves, unless their way (as they
use to speak) be of equal importance with the Gospel it self; but if the Gospel
be in the Scripture, the Episcopal Party have preached it more plainly and
purely than they. And if they teach another Gospel than what has been taught by
the former, they must leave the Scriptures, and with the Papists have recourse
to vain and uncertain Traditions, or to the more vain Imaginations of
Enthusiasts.

Before I relate to you any more of their Acts, I Will divert you with an account
how the Assembly dealt with such Ministers as had appealed to them upon the
hope of milder Treatment and greater Justice than what had been found in the
particular Presbyteries. If you had seen the last Letter they sent to the King,
as it was first presented to the Assembly to be approved and subscribed, you
would have concluded that all Grievances had been redressed, and that the
Episcopal Clergy had received a reparation of all the Wrongs which they had
complained of, for the Letter expressly contained so much, but the Libel was so
gross that it could not pass tho the Moderator urged it, wherefore the
amendment of it being referred to Mr. Gilbert Rule and Mr. Robert Wyllie, they
made it run thus; That the same was recommended to the Commissioners of the
Assembly, and several Synods to be redressed. How true even this is, I cannot
tell, time will show, but sure I am 'twas not done by the Assembly, for they
shifted off the examination of these Appeals, saying it was injurious to the
Presbyteries to question the justice and legality of their Proceedings, and
pressed that the Complainants might be referred back to the particular
Presbyteries and Synods from which they had appealed, which was done, and that
was equivalent to the approving all that was done, because none would condemn
their own Proceedings. The Affair of Peebles is an evident proof that the
Assembly was not willing to canvass the Actings of any Presbytery, far less to
renverse their Orders and Sentences. The Duke of Queensberry being not only
Patron, but also a very considerable Heritor of the Parish, was as well as
others both in point of Honor and Interest concerned to have the matter
discussed; and Mr. Knox who was called to be Minister there righted. Wherefore
the Duke recommended the Business with great earnestness to the Commissioner,
that it might be brought before the Assembly, being confident that the Assembly
would not take upon them to approve the Proceedings of the Presbytery, who had
governed themselves neither by Reason, Justice, nor Equity in the Matter; as
was made appear in a printed Information which I have herewith sent you; Vide
the first Paper.
whereupon the Commissioner interposed so far as to get it one day proposed in
a full Assembly; but when the Clark took up the Process to read it, there was
such murmuring among the Brethren, that what he read could neither be heard nor
understood, and some two or three whispered the Moderator in the Ear; so that
before the Clark had read six lines, he stood up, and addressing to the
Commissioner told his Grace, that it was fit to wave this Affair for the
present, that the Brethren were displeased that it was brought in so abruptly
before the Assembly, when it had not been considered in the Committee, that
they were not ripe enough as yet to take cognizance of it, and that there were
several particulars in that Affair which were not fit to be spoken of in
public; to which the Commissioner yielded either out of too much good Nature,
or out of fear that the stubborn and forward Men would have baffled his
Authority if he had offered to oblige them to do any thing against their will.
To save his Credit in yielding to the Assembly, he required them peremptorily
to fall upon it at the next meeting; the Moderator promised it, but there was
never a Syllable more of it, nor it seems did the Commissioner think sit to
start it again. Before I leave this Matter, I must tell you a remarkable
passage in Mr. Veatch his Answer which he published to that printed Information
which I spoke of before: That whereas it was objected that he had not a popular
Call to the Parish of Peebles. This, says he, ought not to militate against
me; for if by such a Call be meant an unanimous Call of all, or the greatest
part of the Parish; it can be expected but in very few places of the Country*
to a Presbyterian Minister, and never at all, says he, to be hoped for in the
Parish of Peebles. This indeed is a certain Truth, but it was thought strange
to see a Presbyterian so plainly confess it, seeing hitherto they would have
the King, and all the World believe, that both their Persons and Government
were most agreeable to the Inclinations of the People* Mr. Veatch had not his
Wits about him when he let fall this Declaration, and it seems was more intent
upon his own particular, than the general Interest of the Party he belongs to;
for hereby he gives a Lie unto the Parliament, lover turns the Ground whereon
the Government was built, and plainly intimates that he and his Brethren are,
and must be Intruders, seeing they cannot have the call and consent of the
People. The want whereof was charged heavily on the Episcopal Clergy in the
West by Mr. George Meldrum in a Sermon before the Parliament, who thought it so
heinous a Crime, that he said, before he obtruded himself upon a People against
their own will, he would choose rather to beg his Fraught and go to America: It
were to be wished that all his Brethren were of that mind, for then the Nation
would be soon rid of them; and I assure you they might have their Fraught
without begging it; for both Gentry and Commons would pay that more cheerfully
than their Stipends. Now if it was a Crime in the Episcopal Clergy to take the
Cure of a Parish without the express formal consent of the People, what may it
be thought in a Presbyterian to come in upon a People when they expressly
declared and protest against him. I know no other way of justifying this, but
by asserting the Doctrine which one of their Laics raised from ver. 6. Psalm.
119. while he was lecturing to the Neighborhood, viz. The People of God may
sin, but the Wicked must not sin, and there is a heavy Vengeance waiting them
if they do; but we will leave this, and return to the Point we were upon.

The Assembly was just so puzzled with the Appeals of the Episcopal Clergy, as
their Ancestors the Pharisees were with the question about John's Baptism; for
on the one side they feared the Court who desired and required them to be
moderate, and indeed they perceived that it was their Interest at this time to
make some show of Moderation. But on the other hand it was against their
Interest to condemn the Proceedings of the Presbyteries, nor could they do it
because they were agreeable to the Rules concerted and prescribed by the
general Meeting; so following the policy of the Pharisees they waved the
difficulty by remitting all to the Commission and particular Synods. By this
means they secured what was already done from being renverst, and also freed
the Assembly from the blame of any Injury or Injustice done, or to be done; for
then these things might be charged on particular Persons, and not on the whole
Party. However they ventured upon three or four Processes, and by them you may
guess what they would have done with the rest. The first was, That of Mr. Lesk
Minister of Turreff within the Diocese of Aberdeen, whose Church was claimed by
one Mr. Arthur Mitchell by virtue of that Act of Parliament, which restored the
old Presbyterians to their Churches whether they were vacant or possessed by
others. Mr. Lesk first made Application to the Council, and thought to have
suspended Mr. Mitchell, as not being comprehended within the Act of Parliament,
which only was designed in favor of these, who had left their Ministry for not
complying with Episcopacy; whereas Mr. Mitchell was deposed, and deprived long
before that time: But that not taking effect, the Matter was brought before the
Assembly, where Mr. Lesk instructed, that Mr. Arthur Mitchell was never legally
settled Minister of Turreff; that about the Year 1655. he was actually deposed,
and that tho he continued to preach there by means of a prevailing Faction of
Remonstrators under the Usurper, he was never looked upon as Minister of the
place: and that in the Year 60. the Synod of Aberdeen being freed of the force
and restraint that was formerly upon them, did ratify the former Sentence of
Deposition. And as for himself he pleaded that he had been legally settled
Minister according to the Laws of the Land, that he had submitted to the
present Civil Government, which had promised protection to them who did so; and
that the Heritors, and People of his Parish were for his continuance among
them, and altogether averse to Mr. Arthur Mitchell. To prove this last, he
produced a Declaration and Petition subscribed by the Gentlemen and others of
the Parish. Mr. Mitchell alleged that one or two of the Subscriptions were not
genuine, and therefore that the whole ought to be neglected as a Forgery. Mr.
Lesk replied, That he laid not the stress of this Cause on that Paper, that he
only produced it as an Adminicle, that he had not gone about seeking
Subscriptions, for he looked upon that as below the Character of a Minister;
but that it was given him by honest Men, and therefore he had reason to believe
the Subscriptions genuine. And if they laid any stress on the Inclinations of
the People, if a competent time were allowed him, he would easily prove that
they were for him; but at present it was to be considered whether he was legal
and rightful Minister of that place. After two days debate it came to a Vote;
and the Vote was not whether Mr. Lesk or Mr. Mitchell should be continued
Minister at Turreff; but whether Mr. Mitchell was not rightful Minister Anno
1661. and only turned out by the unjust courses of the Times, and whether he
was not now to be looked upon as rightful Minister there; which Vote was
carried in the affirmative, and Mr. Lesk being called in, was told that the
Assembly had deprived him, and ordained Mr. Arthur Mitchell to be Minister at
Turreff. He asked the reasons of their Sentence, which were refused; but what
ever might have been pretended, the true reason was, That they were glad of any
pretense for casting out Episcopal Ministers, who were always in their Sermons
and Discourses called the Priests of Baal. By virtue of that Act of Parliament
I just now mentioned, all the Churches were taken from the Episcopal Ministers,
to which any Presbyterian had the least pretense, tho the former had complied
with the Civil Government, and the other were settled in other places which they
were not resolved to leave. So for instance, Mr. James Kirkton who has a
Meeting House in Edinburgh, and is called to be one of the Ministers of that
City went out to the Parish of Martine, where he had been formerly Minister,
and forced away Mr. Andrew Meldrum present Minister without allowing him time
to dispose of his Goods; and after he had performed this noble and heroic
Exploit, and preached a Sunday or two to get a right to the Stipend, he
returned to his Charge at Edinburgh, and turned his back upon that in the
Country, as if there had been no more to be feared, seeing the Curate was
driven away.

The next Appeal which I suppose was considered, was that of Mr. Sleery from
the Presbytery of Linlithgow, he was a Minister of the West, who had been
rabbled out of his own Church, and thereafter was desired by the Minister of
Falkirk to serve his Cure during his Sickness, which he did; and when that
Minister died, the Heritors and People of the Parish upon the experience they
had of him, desired that he might continue to preach to them, promising that
when the Government was settled, they would take care to get him a legal Title
to the Parish: but it being firmly resolved on by all possible means to put out
and disable all Episcopal Ministers; the Presbytery of Linlithgow caused the
said Mr. Sleery to be cited before them, who compeiring, was interrogated by
what Authority he preached at Falkirk, and how he came to use the Doxology. The
last, he said, was the custom of the place, and that he did the first at the
desire of the People. The Presbytery not being satisfied with his Answers to
these, and some other Questions, discharged him from preaching there any
longer, and declared the Church vacant, to which Sentence he refused to submit,
and appealed; therefore it was necessary to interpose the Authority of the
Assembly, for dispossessing him of that Church which was the reason why he was
called upon. When he compeired, the Moderator asked him if he acknowledged the
Civil Government, and if he would submit to that of the Church, to both which
he answered affirmatively; but when it was asked him if he repented of his
compliance with Episcopacy, he said, If it was a Sin he would repent of it. His
Answer did neither please nor satisfy them; for the Moderator told him it
seemed he yet doubted whether it was a Sin or not. So finding by this and some
other things, that he was not yet a through Convert, they deprived him of his
Church, and discharged him the Exercise of his Ministry.

A third Person brought before the Assembly was one Mr. Forseith Minister at
St. Ninians, he was accused for marrying a Man to his first Wives Neice, which
he confessed before the Assembly; and also that he had been informed of the
Relation, and diswaded from doing it by the Episcopal Clergy, amongst whom he
lived. All his excuse was, that he was not much himself when he did it, being
in great confusion and consternation because of the Rabble that was then up,
and who continually threatened him as they had fallen upon his Neighbor
Ministers. And he further alleged, that it was the only miscarriage he could
be charged with in thirty five Years Exercise of the Ministry, and therefore he
desired the Assembly to pardon him, and to restore him. This they refused, and
confirmed the Sentence of his Deposition, which was very just, and the only
justifiable Act of the Assembly from its sitting down to its rising.

A fourth Affair which the Assembly had before them, was that of Mr. John
Mekenzie at Kirkliston. I suppose you have seen an account of his Process
before the Presbytery of Linlithgow, for he carried it up with him to London to
show it to his Friends there. But in case you have not met with him, nor
received an account of the whole Matter, take it in short thus. When rabbling
was practiced and in fashion here, he amongst many others of his Brethren had
the Church Doors shut against him, and by this means was hindered from the
Exercise of his Ministry in that Parish; but having complied with the Civil
Government, he made an interest by his Friends to maintain his legal Right and
Title to the said Church, which vexed and galled the Presbyterians, who by this
means were kept from settling a Minister of their own Persuasion there. All
endeavors were used to remove him: First, They set him upon him to dimit
voluntarily, which he refusing, they next threatened to force him to it upon
Articles of Scandal. But his Innocence, and unblameable Conversation being
sufficient proof against that; they at last pursued him before the Presbytery
of Linlithgow, upon the pretense of deserting his People. He appeared before
them, and defended himself, declaring he was always ready and willing to
exercise his Ministry if the Rabble would have suffered him, and allowed him
access to his Church, and therefore the fault did not lie at his door. Upon
this he was blamed for speaking contemptibly of the Rabble who were said to be
the necessary Preliminaries to the Government both of Church and State, and
from that they would have been infering his secret disaffection to both. The
Presbytery were forced to vindicate him from all imputation of Scandal, and for
a mark of their singular and extraordinary favor, they said they would give
him recommendatory Letters to put him in capacity of being elected Minister of
another Parish; but still they urged his quitting of that of Kirkliston: and
when he perceived that they had firmly resolved to declare his Church vacant to
gratify the Rabble, and some few other unreasonable Persons who were
dissatisfied with him, he appealled from them to the King, and the next
lawfully called general Assembly. This being the Tenor of his Appeal, many of
the Assembly spoke against the receiving or sustaining it, alleging that it
was not to them he appealed, for his expression did imply that this Assembly
was not lawfully called, seeing it was called before he appealed, and yet he
made no particular reference to it. Besides, said they, it is clear he means an
Episcopal Assembly by his appealing to the King jointly with the Assembly; for
these Episcopalians do make the King the Head of the Church, whereas we cannot
own any such thing. My Lord Arbruchel desired the Assembly to be favorable to
him, for he knew him to be well affected to the Government, and that he had
served the King abroad for the space of seven Years. To which one replied, That
he was as well paid for it: he served him for Wages, and so would he have done
the Turk too. They were much irritated by his going to London to represent
their Proceedings, and to clamor against them; Every Man took occasion to vent
his passion and pique at him; some said he was Scandalous, and called him a
Drunkard and Swearer; some called him one thing, and some another, and one said
he should be deposed because he was a proud, stubborn and insolent Fellow. The
Commissioner apprehending there would be little Justice where there was so much
pique and prejudice, desired the Moderator to delay the Affair, and to allow
the young Man time to appear and answer for himself: but the Moderator replied,
That it was best to proceed now, and more for the young Man's Reputation, for
if he were present they would be obliged to take notice of some Crimes, and
Scandals which now they would pass over without inquiring into them, forgetting
that the Presbytery had acquitted him of all such Guilt, and that he himself
had given him a good* Testimony when the Affair was first brought before the
Assembly. The Commissioner still urging that they would deal tenderly and
gently with him; Indeed (replied the Moderator) Your Grace shall find that we
will use great tenderness toward the Young Man, and we shall be very discreet,
for we shall only take his Kirk from him, which they did immediately. So that
you have a Sample of the Presbyterian Tenderness, which I think is very near a
Kin to the tender Mercies of the Wicked, which Solomon declares to be cruel;
for when they deprive one of his Livelihood and Good-name, they call it
Tenderness; and if it be so, I pray God save us from their Cruelty.

Except these four, I heard of no other Processes wherein the Episcopal Clergy
were concerned, that were revised and discussed before the Assembly, there were
indeed one or two more mentioned, by the Interest made by the Persons
concerned: Vid. second Paper.
As the Business of Mr. Heriot in Dalkeith, and Mr. Wood in Dumbar, but they
with the rest were referred back to particular Synods and Presbyteries.

All this while the Presbyterians had been intent upon the emptying of
Churches, now at last they began to consider how Churches should be filled, and
Vacancies supplied. They wanted Laborers for their Harvest, and therefore they
first passed an Act, For calling home such of their Party as were serving in
other places abroad; and appointed the drawing up, and directing of Letters for
acquainting those in Holland particularly with the Mind of the Assembly and the
Necessity of the Church: It happened that of these who were spoken of, one was
dead, and another detained Prisoner in Dunkirk. Wherefore one said at the
reading of the Letter, That the Assembly needed the Power of Miracles, for
bringing back the one, and that they ought to address to the French King to
obtain the other. In the next place for the increasing the number of the
Brethren, they appointed some to search out, and to give in Lists of such as
were thought fit to be called to the Ministry. And indeed they may come to have
enough of them, by the Measures and Methods which they lay down and follow; but
they are not like to have many learned and knowing men; for they set light of
Learning and Knowledge, and do often run it down: Zeal for the Good Cause is the
chief Qualification, and serves instead of Learning and other Accomplishments.
The Episcopal Candidates are thought as dangerous as those who are actually in
Office: Therefore instead of these who have been several years fitting
themselves for the holy Ministry by proper and useful Studies, they are putting
others upon the Design who never studied at all, neither have any competent
measure of Learning for it. Brewers and illiterate Tradesmen are setting up to
be Ministers. Not to trouble you with other Instances; one Russel a Coalgrieve
in Fife is made Minister at Kennaway: What Talent of Learning he has you may
easily guess, when you may understand that he is altogether ignorant of the
Latin: When he was passing his Trials before the Presbytery, they according to
their Custom prescribed him a Latin Exercise in some Head of Divinity, which
he earnestly declined; and when they would needs keep up the Formality, he
complained for obliging him to pray and preach in an unknown Tongue: Having
miserably bungled through the Discourse, when it came to the Disputes, Mr.
Mitchel at Leslie proposed an Argument by way of Enthymema, and he denied the
Major, having been at pains to conn the Terms Major and Minor before he came
there, and his Instructor having forgot to tell him the different ways of
Argumentation: Then Mr. Mitchel putting his Terms in the ordinary form of an
Hypothetick Syllogism, fancying he might understand that: When the Syllogism
was repeated he said to the Proponent explica terminos Minoris, which was Sed
verum prius. Having gotten this Specimen of his Learning, the Presbytery
acknowledged that he indeed wanted Gifts, but he had Grace, and that was
sufficient; and therefore they approved of him and received him into the
Ministry. Mr. Russel hearing that he was so much upbraided with Ignorance, to
wipe off that Stain, he offered to make some Ostentation of Learning in a
Sermon, by the Repetition of a Latin Verse. The Verse he chose was this common
one; Regis ad Exemplum, etc. But alas, the Way he took to save his Reputation
ruined it for ever, for he blundered it thus, Regos ad Exemplas totis
componitur orbos.


And as their Clergy are at present without Learning, so it cannot be expected
that their Successors (if they shall have any) will be any whit better,; for
they have laid, our Colleges wast, driven away our learned men, and have not
qualified Persons of their own party to put in their places. The University of
S. Andrew is altogether laid wast, there is neither Principal nor Regent there,
and those who have succeeded to the Vacancies in the Colleges of Glascow and
Edinburgh are known to be Persons neither skilled in Books, nor any part of
good and useful Learning: So that they are not capable of directing the Studies
of the Youth which resort thither; nor is it to be supposed the Youth will much
regard their Advices, when it is evident that the chief of them have need to be
put back to learn their Grammar. The Narrowness of the Presbyterian Spirit is
an Enemy to Knowledge, and will obstruct all Learning; for they not only count
it Impiety to call their commonly received Principles into Question, but also
they reckon a free and rational Inquiry into the Grounds and Reasons of them to
be very dangerous: They are no less friends to implicit Faith, than the Church
of Rome, and do not regard the Advice of S. Peter, which is, That we should be
ready always to give an Answer to every man that asks a Reason of the Hope
that is in us. You may easily guess how squeamish they are about Points of
Divinity, when they make the Cartesian, and other Systems of new Philosophy to
be gross and damnable Heresies. So that if Presbyterianism prevail, all freedom
of Spirit, all improvements of reason and knowledge will be banished, and the
world must be condemned again to hear both in Schools and Pulpits impertinent
chat, a Clutter Clutter of words and canting phrases which cannot be
understood. They are great enemies to Mr. Gregory the Learned Professor of
Mathematics in this place, they seek by all means to turn him out, and say
that these Sciences are not only useless but dangerous: and indeed they have
reason, for they are no friends to ignorance and nonsense their peculiar
properties. But the want of kindness to Mr Gregory, and the Mathematics is
somewhat more excusable in them; but that they should slight the knowledge of
the Hebrew, and other oriental tongues is a little strange, and cannot be
justified seeing the right understanding of the Scripture does so much depend
thereupon. They have thrust out Mr. Alexander Douglass the professor of these
languages here, who as he was a person of a most peaceable disposition, so he
was an ornament to the Society he lived in by his skill and knowledge in these
matters: he cannot have a true Successor here, for he has scarce his equal in
this Kingdom, nor Perhaps are there many in other places who do exceed him in
the thing he professes. But perhaps the Jewish Synagogue would have been found
so favorable for Episcopacie, and therefore it is fit and wisely done to keep
both Clergy and Laity in ignorance of it. Their kindness for the dead is as
small as for the living, and they encourage learned books as little as learned
men. The trade of books is fallen so low since the Presbyterian reign was set
up, that our Stationers are thinking either to quit their employments, or to go
and live elsewhere, for they have not made the rent of their shops these two
years. The Episcopal are not in circumstances for buying and the other crave
no other books then Durham on the Canticles and Revelation, Dickson and
Hutcheson, Dyar and Gray, These are their Classical Authors and the standard
of their learning: and it is from those that they take the heads of their
Sermons, and the instructions which they tender the people. But though learning
be not the talent of a Presbyterian, yet they have arrogated to themselves the
gift of preaching; they have the name of Powerful Soul-searching-Preachers:
whereas the Episcopal Ministers are only named dry moral Lecturers, and under
this name slouted and abused both in Sermons and pray^rs.

So vain were they of this gift of preaching that for some time we had a new
Sermon published by them every week; they thinking thereby to gain and
proselite the whole nation, But the Stratageme failed them, nay it proved to
their prejudice; for thereby peoples curiosity was diverted from hearing them
in the Churches, where they could not expect other than noise and nonsense,
seeing there was so much babble and in their printed, and consequently more
deliberate discourses. An acquaintance of yours has made a rare Collection of
notes of their Sermons both printed and unprinted. To which I refer you for
instances to prove the truth of what I have been saying: The last Sermon that
was published came forth the first week of the Ass. The Author is one Mr. James
Clark who preached in the meeting house at Dumbar. It was a Sermon ad Clerum;
preached, as was said, at the deposing of the Parson of Old-Hamstocks, which
being an extraordinary occasion, something better then ordinary, was expected:
but there never appeared a more silly and empty discourse, nor is it possible
that you can conceive so meanly of it, as it deserves. It was even far below
Mr. Andrew Gray's Sermons. The very Presbyterians whose gust craves no fine
things, were ashamed of it. My Lord Czawford to excuse it laid the blame on the
Printer and complained of him at the Council Table, for offering to publish it
without a License, alleging also that it was without the Authors consent, and
that the Copy was an imperfect uncorrect one, which some ignorant or malicious
person had taken from the Authors Mouth: But when the Printer was examined, he
produced an Authentic copy from the Author himself, and declared that he
revised the sheets as they came from the Press, so the Printer was free of the
faults that were in it* and they could be only charged on Mr. Clark, who it is
believed showed all the learning and eloquence he was Master of.

But it is fit now we return to the Ass. and give you an account of what acts
they passed for regulating the discipline of the Church for the future. The
first of this kind and the first also of any other that passed in the Ass. was
an Act against marriages without public proclamations; as also against the
private administration of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Mr. Gilbert Rule pressed that the Sacrament of Baptism might not at all be
administered but in public and after Sermon, and called the private
administration not only Superstitious but also Sorcerie and Charming, and said
further that the same was contrary to Scripture and Antiquity. Mr Kirkton took
him up briskly and said that was disputable, that he could buckle him, or any
man upon that point, but would not debate it now. He added that by their
rigorous imposition of indifferent things he had lost five men of considerable
note the last week, And concluded tho* there were a thousand acts against it,
he would rather Baptize in private then suffer the Children to go to the
Curates. Some Highland Ministers crayed that they might not be liable to that
act because it was impossible to bring all the Children of their parishes to
the Kirks by reason of the vast distance some of their people lived at from
them; but whether they intend to give a dispensation was not expressed. The
Moderator to excuse their own practices heretofore said, there was a
distinction both of times and places, for, said he, in times of Persecution I
think an honest Minister riding on the way, may go into a man's house, Baptize a
Bairn and come out and take his horse again. Though while they were under
restraint, they made no Scruple of baptizing privately the children of those of
their own persuasion, yet now they refuse to baptize any except in public; nor
will they do it but when there is a Sermon: and they are so strict upon the
point that they suffer the children to dye rather then slacken their rigor. In
the Country the benefit of Baptism can be only had on Sundays because then
only there is preaching; and if Children cannot live so long they must take
their hazard of departing without that sign and Seal of their Salvation. I know
a Parish where two or three persons importuned the Minister to baptize their
Children publicly or privately as he pleased: but he peremptorily refused to
do it on a weekday, though they who intended to have been present at the
baptism would have made a competent number for an ordinary Country Sermon, and
before Sunday two of the Children dyed: we had lately in this City a more
notable instance of the stiffness of their humor in this particular. A Certain
Citizen designed to have his child baptized on a week day at the ordinary time
of Sermon: he with the Gossips came in time enough to the Church, but because
the child was brought in about the close of the Sermon, neither Mr. Kennedy who
preached, nor Mr. Erskine the Minister of the parish could be prevailed with to
administer the Sacrament to the Infant, but they caused it to be carried home
again without baptism. The people generally take this very ill, and are very
much displeased with the Presbyterian Ministers on this account. Wherefore to
Justify themselves, they frequently preach against the necessity of Baptism,
and to talk of it as if it were an ordinance neither necessary nor much to be
regarded, and do account the esteem and value which is ordinarily put upon it,
and earnest desires the people have after it, to be the dregs and relics of
Popery among us. When a child was brought to Mr. Kirkton he took occasion to
show the Superstition of that Ceremony, and said to the People, you think it
necessary to have your Children Baptized, but I tell you (said he) I know a
good Godly Minister who lived till he was fourscore that was never Baptized all
his life time.

In the next place, they renewed an Act of a General Assembly appointing
Pedagogues, Chaplains, Preachers, and Students to take and subscribe the
Confession of faith; and further they Commissionated some to draw up a list of
all these acts of Assemblies which were fit to to be observed and put in use,
wherein they acted very cunningly, for though it be well known that they receive
all the acts of Assemblies as if they were Scripture, and pay no less regard to
them* yet because some of these incroach upon the power of the Civil
Magistrate, Therefore to prevent the Jealousies of the King they would not make
a general Act ratifying and approving them in Cumulo, nor yet would they
condemn or censure any of them. But they enforced such as were proper and
suitable to the present state of affairs, and waved the declaration of their
sentiments concerning the rest.

Fourthly, because the Ass* could not sit so long as was necessary to determine
all particulars and to give rules and measures for the settling of the Church in
this juncture, nor was it sit it should do it; Therefore they resolved to choose
a Committee who might sit after the dissolution of the Ass. who should have
full and Supreme Power to Act in all things that related to the Church. It Is
said, that this overture was first made by the Moderate men, who thought by
this means to reduce affairs to a better temper then the Ass. was like to do,
by reason of the many rigid and indiscreet men who were in it. Therefore six
were proposed to be a part of this Committee, and to name the other Persons of
whom the Committee should consist. Four of these six went under the Character
of Moderate men, the other two were of another temper, and were joined to them
on purpose to prevent suspicion: But the High flown Brethren soon smelled out
the design, and therefore they first Voted two more of their own side, and
because that only put them in aequilibrio, they again got four more to be
added, so that they were double the number of the other, and by this means the
Committee consisted most part of the strictest and most rigid Presbyterians,
Their Names are as follow,

For the South. Ministers.
John Veith Gab. Simple Gilbert Rule M. James Kirkton John Spalding Michael
Bruce Gab. Cuninghame William Erskine William Weir Alex. Pitcairn M. Richard
Howison James Veitch Patrick Simpson Matthew Crawford George Campbell James
Laurce Archibald Hamilton M. Patrick Peacock Rob. Duncauson John Balandine
William Ker Patrick Venier M. John Hutchison William Eccles Neil Gitless M.
Andrew Morton Thomas Forrester William Violin M. David Blair Samuel Nairn
Elders.
Earl of Crawford Earl Sutherland Visc. of Arburthnet La. Halleraig Lord of
Ormestone Sir John Hall Sir James Riddel Balife Muir Lairds Balife Macklurg
George Stirling Coltness Glanderston Lammington [Air John Muir provost of
Hamilton of Grange
For the North. Ministers.
John Law Hugh Kennedy M. Will. Crighton John Anderson Alex. Forbes William
Legget Robert Rule M. James Frazer Go. Meldrum Edward Jenuson James Rymer
Thomas Ramsay M. Robert Young William Mack Andrew Buey
Elders.
Ia. Ardbruchill Green know Naughton Meggins Lewchatt
Afterward it being represented that the Visitors for the North were too few,
there were added these following Ministers.
James Stewart James Vrquhart M. Alex. Dumbar Alex. Frazer Thomas Hog Hugh
Anderson William Machay M. Walter Denune Geo. Meldrum at Glass Arthur Mitchel
William Ramsay M. Francis Melvil John Maccullork


Elders.
Brodie Grant Grange Dumber Eight Colloden Dalfolly Parkhay Sir John Monro Sir
George Monro Embo Sir David Frazer M. John Campbell of Moye
This Committee was appointed to keep quarterly Sessions viz. on the third
Wednesday of January, and the third Wednesday of April, and to appoint
afterward their meetings as often as they shall think fit. That a Quorum
should be ten Ministers and five ruling-Elders, and they were allowed to choose
their own Moderator, and Clerk. The Instructions prepared for them by the
Committee for overtures, were first read and debated on Thursday before the
Ass. rose, but they were not agreed to till the Tuesday thereafter. On Monday
they were read with some alterations: but Mr. Kirkton and a great many more
adhered to the exceptions which they made at the first Reading, and said, that
the Alterations were not considerable. He alleged also, that what was then
read was not a true Copy of that which the Committee had agreed to, and offered
to the Moderator a true double of it, but the Moderator refused it, saying, he
knew nothing of the matter: and because the Ass. was not like to come to an
agreement at that time, therefore the matter was referred back again to the
Committee, and all who had any thing to say about it were appointed to attend
them. The next day it was brought back again to the Ass. and concluded; Mr.
Kirkton and some others who pressed alterations being absent. To satisfy your,
and my own curiosity I used means to procure a Copy of the instructions, and
got them with some difficulty which I here set down.

Instructions for the Committee or Commission of the Kirk.
First, they are to take into their Cognizance all references and appeals not
discussed in the Assembly and such matters as have been stated before the Ass.
and referred to them, and to discuss and determine the famine.

Secondly, they are to give their advice to all Synods and Presbyteries when
required, and though not required, yet upon information of any irregularity or
precipitancy of proceedings in Presbyteries they are to interpose their advice
for sisting processes till the next Synod or Ass.

When this 2d. Article was read, some asked if the Commission had power to call
before themselves any business, and to take the same out of the hands of
Presbyteries. To which the Moderator answered, no* but they are only to give
their advice, and said he, I think no Presbytery will refuse it, which if they
do, it must be Cum periculo, and the Church of Scotland will be free from any
imputation of their actings.

Thirdly, they are to have power to visit all Ministers in Presbyteries as well
Presbyterian as others.

Fourthly, they are to purge out of the Church all who upon due trial shall be
found insufficient, Scandalous, Erroneous or supinely negligent.

It was moved that the words supinely negligent might be left out, but the same
was refused.

Fifthly, they are to be careful that none be admitted by them to Ministerial
Communion, or to a share in the Government, but such as upon due trial (for
which the visitors shall take a competent time) shall be found to be Orthodox
in their doctrine, of competent abilities, having a pious, Godly and peaceable
Conversation as becomes a Minister of the Gospel, of an edifying gift, and
whom the Commission shall have ground to believe will be faithful to God and
the Government, and diligent in the discharge of their Ministerial duty, and
that all who shall be admitted to the Ministry or shall be received into a
share of the ^overnment shall be obliged to own and subscribe the Confession of
Faith, and to profess their submission and willingness to join and concur with
the Presbyterian Church Government.

At first it was Presbyterian communion, and only faithful to the Government.
Mr. Kirkton said that this Article was a matter of very great consequence, and
desired it might be well considered, for in hoc vertitur fortuna Scotia, and
complained that there was not one word of the Scandal of conforming, which he
said was the greatest of all Scandals. Mr. Frazer of Brae proposed that the
clause of repentance might be inserted; The Moderator answered, that in effect
it was there already, if they looked upon the Commissioners as discreet and
Judicious men; for so (said he) they will admit none without repentance, for
without that they cannot have ground to believe that ever they will be
faithful to the Government. Mr. Kirkton replied, that they could never be sure
of Episcopal Ministers, for many of them (says he) has changed three or four
times already, and they will do it at every turn: Mr. William Weir moved that
they might be obliged to declare that they should neither by advice nor any
other way endeavor the alteration of the Presbyterian Government.

Sixthly, that they be very Cautious in receiving in Informations, and forming
Libels against the late Conformists, and present Incumbents, and that they
proceed in the matter of censure very deliberately, so as that none may have
just cause to complain of their rigidity, yet so as to omit no means of
information, and that they shall not proceed to censure but* upon relevant
Libels and sufficient probations.

Seventhly, that this Commission do not meddle in public affairs or in any
thing not expressed in their Commission, which is hereby declared to be given
them in hunc finem only and pro presenti Ecclesiae statum.

Eighthly, they shall be answerable, and censurable by the next General
Assembly, and shall continue till the first of Nov. next, if there be no
General Ass. before that time.

By these Instructions it appears that the Committee was mainly designed
against the Episcopal Clergy, who as yet kept their places because of their
compliance with the Civil Government* Presbyterians can never be brought to
have true kindness for Episcopal Ministers had they never so many
recommendations for their parts, piety, or their Interest in the favor of
great men. But on all occasions they do draw back from them, and do refuse to
concur with them in advancing even the Common ends of Religion and truth. And
at this time they not only had an aversion to them on the account of their
different principles, but also they were afraid to receive them into their
communion, and especially into a share of the Government, because the Episcopal
Clergy was double their number, and therefore it was dangerous to admit them,
lest by the plurality of their number on some fit occasion they should forge a
change of the Government. They considered that the Compliance and submission to
Presbyterian Government, which such would give at this time, would not be free
and willing, but only out of a necessity to serve the present Turn till they
should be better stated: Wherefore either to revenge themselves upon the
Enemies of their Government, or the better to secure it, it was from the very
first resolved upon to lay aside all Episcopal Ministers, unless they evidently
testified a change of mind as well as of outward behavior. But how to compass
this was the difficulty, for a direct Act for this would make their design
plain and show their malice bare faced, it would increase the Clamours and
Prejudices of the people, nor could the state in Equity suffer it to pass. The
only expedient then was, to do it by some indirect by-blow, by putting
something to them which they could not do; and by this means render them liable
to their censures, or which, if they did, would prostitute their reputation
with the people, and turn them odious as men of no Principles, Honesty, or
Stedfastness. And as they envyed them their reputation and favor, so they
thought if they could bring them to forfeit that, there would be little
difficulty in turning them out, neither needed they fear the doing of it as
occasion offered. It was observed that the Fasts formerly appointed went ill
away with the Episcopal Clergy; some Ministers would not observe them at all,
others would not read the Proclamation appointing them, because of some
insinuations which reflected on Episcopacy, and those who complied with it, and
generally the people censured those who read and observed the same.

Another Fast therefore more plain and particular then the former was thought
the fittest Stratagem for procuring the ruin of the Episcopal Clergy. The
motion was no sooner proposed then entertained, and a Committee appointed for
the drawing up the reasons of it, which were publicly read in the Assembly
November. 11th. When the Clerk had done, the Moderator said, Brethren, this is a
Savoury Paper, Indeed it is a most Savoury Paper, and worthy to be heard over
again. After a second reading, Mr. Frazer of Brae asked who was to observe the
same, whether Presbyterian Ministers or Curates also Brother, said the
Moderator, that is not timely stated, for we must first consider the thing, and
conclude that, and then we shall consider the persons who shall observe it.
Others said, that what Mr. Frazer had proposed ought first to be considered.
When they had for some time exercised their wit about the reasons of the Fast,
and the way of wording it, the Moderator asked the Commissioner if his Grace
had any thing to say about it, who answered, yes, and therefore desired it
might be delayed till the next day, which was accordingly done: the next day
being the 12th. of Nov. the business of the Fast was again brought before the
Ass. and the paper containing the reasons of it read with this alteration, that
The Declaration, Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and Test, and some such
particulars were left out: It would seem that the Commissioners refused to
suffer it to pass if these had been expressly mentioned: wherefore to get the
Commissioner to condescend to the thing, they dashed out the names: But he is an
ignorant reader, and has little skill in spelling who does not perceive that
they are all couched and implied. So this day the reasons were approved, and an
act passed, requiring all persons throughout the Kingdom whether in Kirks or
Meeting houses punctually to observe the same. I should detain you too long, if
I should give you an account of the reasons here, and pass observations
thereon. I choose rather to send you the paper it self that you may see it and
consider it with your own eyes, and at the first view of it you may be
convinced how choking it will be to the Episcopal Clergy, who can neither in
credit or conscience observe it; nor can any who are less interessed in the
Episcopal Government go along with it, unless they could be persuaded that
Episcopacy, is not only unlawful but the cause and occasion of much wickedness
and impiety, and the setting it up is to apostatize from God, and to make
Defection from the truth. None can observe this fast for the reasons enjoined,
but at the same time they must condemn the Church of England and other
Protestant Churches, nay the Catholic Church of Christ from the Apostles days
down to Calvin. The Ass. understood well enough how contrary the design and
reasons of this fast were to the sentiments of those who were commanded to
observe it, and that they could not keep it without being guilty of the
greatest Hypocrisy and mocking of God: and therefore for them, for their own
particular ends to require men thus to mock God and play the Hypocrite, was a
horrid and most unjustifiable voice of villainy, this shows that they fast for
strife and envy, and not to please God, but to ensnare men not to avert the
Divine Judgments but that they may have occasion of executing their wrath and
malice under the Color and shadow of zeal against Sin. With the Act of the
Ass. for the fa^^ I have sent you also the act of Council annexing the Civil
Sanction to it procured by my Lord Crawford's means: Vide the last Paper.
and I desire you to take Notice of the Close of it, where the Observation of
the Fast is Urged out of fear of Gods wrath, and after that is subjoyned the
highest perils from them, which some said was like the Proclamations of one
Borthwi^k sometimes a Bailiff in this City, which were wont to be under the
pain of death, and forty Pound besides. The mentioning of these printed Acts
brings to my Memory a passage of the Printer; Some in hopes of getting gain
thereby Petitioned the Ass. for the gift of publishing their Acts. Mrs.
Anderson claimed the privilege by virtue of a gift from the King to print all
public Acts and Proclamations; and withal she might have deserved such a
savor from them having ever heretofore Favored their Party, and allowed them
the use of her Press for publishing their Pamphlets, and even such as durst not
be well avowed. But either because they would have a Printer of their own
distinct from the Kings, or that they would not show kindness to her, who had
accession to the guilt of the late Reigns, by printing their sinful Acts and
Proclamations: for one or both these Reasons they denied her the Favor, and
bestowed it on George Mosman who represented in his Petition, that he was not
only always a true friend to their Interest, but also a sufferer for the Cause.
And it is true he was ever Whig enough, but what his Sufferings were it is not
well known, seeing he ever lived peaceably at Edinburgh, and had the freedom
of a good trade, whereby he is become Fat every way. Other men lose by their
Sufferings, but they gain by theirs even in this life. So Mr. Johnston died two
Thousand pound Sterling rich who was not worth forty or fifty pound when he
left his charge. Though Mrs. Anderson was repulsed by the Ass. yet she would not
give over, but next tried her Interest with the Council, that at least she
might have the printing of those Acts which had the Civil Sanction added to
them, they being comprehended within her gift. Crawford who thinks all the Acts
of the Presbyterians should be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians stood up
for Mosman, others pleaded Mrs. Andersons right, it not being in the power of
the Council, far less of the Ass. to take away their right and property or any
part of it. But one said smartly, that the Case should be stated not betwixt
Mrs. Anderson and Mosman, but betwixt the King and the Ass. whether the King
should yield to the Ass. or the Ass. to the King My Lord Crawford thought the
first no absurdity, and offered to produce instances of it in former times. But
the rest of the Counselors thought they were obliged in Civility to prefer the
King, and so Mrs Anderson carried it.

I believe I may have wearied you with the length of my Letter, I crave pardon
only to add two or three particulars more, and I shall close. The first was,
their appointing an answer to be made to the printed accounts of the
persecution of the Episcopal Clergy in this Kingdom. At the general meeting it
was laid on Mr. Meldrum who declined it. Then it was recommended to Mr.
Alexander Pitcairine who did nothing in it. He excused himself before the Ass.
in that he knew not the matters of fact and the true Information was not sent
him. The Ass. ordered him again to go on in it, and appointed Mr Gilbert Rule,
and some others to assist him in the work, and required all the members to
furnish them with Instructions proper for it. Mr. Meldrum in a Sermon before
the Ass. offered to Justify the barbarities of the Rabble, and the ill usage
which the Episcopal Clergy met with, alleging that their errors, vices and
scandals deserve no better at the peoples hands: But what Justification and
defense will be made by those who are appointed to do it, in name of the Ass: I
do not know, but this I am confident, that they will never prove any material
circumstance in matter of fact to be false.

A Second particular I am to make you acquainted with, is an Act for taking off
the sentence of deposition which was pronounced against some Ministers,
especially those of the Remonstrators party anno 1660 I told you before that it
had been proposed at the General meeting, but was then laid aside by reason of
the mistakes that were like to arise among the Brethren about it Now the
Moderator who was mainly concerned in the business finding himself a little
better stated made an overture of it to the Ass* the day it was dissolved: and
to obtain it the more easily, he brought it in by way of a surprise: Brethren,
said he, you may remember there were once some unhappy differences among us,
which some carried so high as to proceed to inflict the sentence of deposition
upon some on that account; now I think it sit before we part, that this
sentence be revoked; that as we are all one man's bairns so we may be all alike
stated. Mr. Gilbert Rule replied, that he judged it better to bury these
matters in oblivion, that they could not pass a general Act for reponing these
men without re-examining their processes, which was no ways fit; and perhaps
they would not be found all alike, for some might be deposed for Scandal and
other Crimes, and not only for these unhappy heats and differences. The
Moderator answered him, Brother there is no need of condescending or
particulars, and I believe they will be found all alike, and that they are all
very honest men that are concerned: So he named Mr. Wier and some others, and
among the rest himself in the third person, saying, There is one Mr. Hugh
Kennedy, whom I warrant you ken all well enough. To conclude, the Act passed,
the sentence of deposition lying upon these persons was made void, and they
declared to be true and lawful Ministers. And herein truly the Moderators wit
failed him, for instead of righting himself which he designed, he raised
objections against himself which otherwise would have been forgotten; and by
this Act brought an indelible tash both upon his own public Ministry these two
three years, and also upon the present Ass. in that the Moderator and many of
its members were both legally and Canonically incapable. Now that they hear
this, they pretend that the sentence was taken off formerly, and that the Ass.
only ratifyed and confirmed what was formerly done in these men's favor, and
that it was usual to ratify in the first General Ass. the Acts of inferior
Judicatories. But as they cannot instance the time nor the meeting in which
these persons were reponed, so they never had any proper or avowed meeting for
such a business till the Indulgence granted by King James; and we never heard
it so much as proposed before in any of their avowed meetings till the last
general one as was already declared; and either the sentence lying upon these
persons was valid or not: If it was not, then what needed such a Solemn
annulling of it by an Act of the General Ass. But if it was valid, then the
Ass, approved of men who were contumatious to the discipline and government of
their own Church; for they received such to be members of the Ass. and also
choosed one of that Gang to pr^side in it, whatever may be said as to the
deposition of these men, if it was found expedient that the Ass. should pass a
verdict on it, it had been prudent and proper to have done it before their
admission as members; and if the Credit of the Ass. had been regarded, they
would not have chosen a Moderator against whom there was such a considerable
exception? certainly a less reason may invalidate the Authority of the Ass.
render it unlawful and unworthy to be owned and submitted to.

The last particular I shall trouble you with is about the choosing
Commissioners to go from the Ass. to the King to make a true representation of
their proceedings, to entreat the continuance of his favor, and to vindicate
themselves from the aspersions of their enemies. It Is said that Mr. Carstairs
whom the king had sent down with letters of instruction to the Ass. expected
that they would have honored him with that trust, but whether it was out of
any Jealousy of his conduct or faithfullness or if it was to gratify others who
might have had particular designs of their own they passed by Mr. ^arstairs,
and gave the Employment to Mr. Gilbert Ride and Mr. David Blair. The first I
have often had occasion to mention, the other preached in a meeting house here;
he is said to be not so course but something better Polished than other common
Presbyterians: He is Son to Mr. Robert Blair Minister at St. Andrews, who was
famous for many things but especially his Civility to King Charles the 2d. when
he made him a visit at his own house. Mr. Blair when the King came in was
sitting in a Chair, and it seems at the time under a bodily infirmity which
both kept him from rising and excused it, when Mrs. Blair ran to to fetch a
Chair to the King, he said, My heart do not trouble your self, he is a young
man he may draw in one to himself.

At last I come to the dissolution of the Assembly, which was talked of
several days before, and actually concluded and resolved upon Nov. 13. Their
last Sederunt was in the afternoon, and continued till it was night. There they
debated the calling of another Ass. and the time of its sitting; some were for
one month, some were for another, and there were few months of the year but was
favored by one or other as sit for an Ass. In the midest of these debates
among themselves, the Commissioner (whose advise they never sought in the
affair) stood up and dissolved them in the Kings name, and by the same
Authority called and appointed another to meet on the first of Nove. next to
come, 1691. The Assembly was Surprised with this, but it would seem they
thought not fit to call it in question, therefore they submitted: and all was
concluded with a prayer and Psalm: The Psalm they Sung was the 133.

Thus ended our famous Assembly: an account whereof I have given you as fully
and exactly as I could: I was not overhasty to believe any information till I
found it confirmed by two or three others: If I be mistaken in some small
circumstances, which the best Historians may err in; I am sure no material
falsehood can be charged upon me, Let it be no prejudice against the truth of my
relation, that I sometimes appear no friend to the Party; but though I be not, I
will not willingly and wittingly lie upon them. I need not assure you of my
ingenuity who knows that I hate to utter a lie, either for advancing the best
cause or destroying the worst. But I confess I can hardly bridle my passion
when I consider the error and injustice, the unreasonableness and Hypocrisy
which these people are guilty of, who if you will take their word for it are
the only true Godly, and who only have a sense of Religion and the practice of
it: but I am confident neither Church nor Religion will prosper till that
Spirit be cast out which possesses them. I pray God convert them, and let out
much of his Spirit upon them, and all others, that our Land may have peace, and
that the divisions of our Church may be healed; that our Confusions may be
wholly removed, and order and good Government restored, and that the worship of
God may be duly and decently performed as may best tend to the advancement of
his Glory, and the good and Edification of the Souls of his people, with this
prayer for the Church, and my hearty wishes for your self, I take my leave at
this time.

December 1690.
FINIS.
INFORMATION FOR THE Heritors, Elders. etc. OF THE PARISH of PEEBLES; Against
MR. WILLIAM VEATCH.
THE late Mr. John Hay Minister of the Gospel at Peebles, being by Bodily Pain
and Sickness utterly disabled for the public Exercise of his Ministry, and
apprehending the time of his Departure to be approaching; Out of a deep concern
for his Flock, after the Example of good and faithful Pastors in all Ages,
resolved to look out for a Successor; And for that effect, wrote to the Duke of
Queensbery, (then undoubted Patron of the Parish of Peebles) to nominate some
Able and Godly Minister, who might assist him as a Helper during his Life, and
to whom he might recommend and leave his Charge at his Death. His Grace being
well satisfied with so Pious a desire, remits the choice to himself, whereupon
he calls and invites Mr. Robert Knocks, one of the Ministers of the City of
Glasgow, who having accepted the Call, and to the great Comfort of the Pastor
and People, served the Cure for sometime: The sick Man had his peaceable Exit
in the Lord, solacing himself in this; That he had not left his Flock as Sheep
without a Shepherd; Immediately after whose Decease, the Heritors, Elders, and
Parochioners, did apply themselves to the Duke's Factor, to Petition the Duke
then at London, and to acquaint him, that they Unanimously desired Mr. Robert
Knocks to be their Minister, in place of the deceast Mr. John Hay, which
accordingly the Duke agreed to, and ordered Mr. Knox to continue in the
Exercise of his Ministry there. And thereafter upon the 17th of November 1689,
being the Lord's Day after Sermons, the Session being sitting, and the Duke's
Letter read unto them, the whole Heritors, Elders, and Parochioners then
present, did Unanimously and Cheerfully receive the said Letter and Nomination,
and promised to Mr. Knox all the Encouragement that could be expected from a
Dutiful People; And the Session did order the Lairds of Haystoun, and Halkshaw,
William Plenderleith, John Hope, and John Gevan, late Provosts of Peebles, to
wait upon the Duke at his Return, and give him Thanks in all their Names for
his care of them. After which time Mr. Knox having all the right to be Minister
at Peebles, which the state of the Church could then admit of, viz. Designation
and Appointment of the Patron, with the Consent and Concurrence of the
Heritors, Elders, and by far the greatest and most substantial part of the
People, and wanting only the formality of an Induction or Institution, in
regard there was no Legal Ecclesiastical Judicatory then in being to confer it
on him, continued in the free and peaceable Exercise of his Ministry, until the
sixteenth of February 1690, when some violent Interruption being offered unto
him by a Company of Unruly People, as he was coming to the Church on the Lord's
Day in the Morning; the Heritors, Elders and People as aforesaid, were so much
concerned, that by an express Obligation subscribed under their Hands, they
declare their Resolution to adhere to the said Mr. Knoks as their Minister; And
Commissioned some of their Number to pursue that high Riot, before the Most
Honorable Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council; Upon whose Complaint and
Application, the Lords of Council finding Mr. Knox to have good Right to serve
the Cure at the Church of Peebles, did justly punish the Author of the Tumult,
and oblige the Magistrates of Peebles, to take such care of the Peace, that
there might be no Interruption offered to him for the Future, and thereafter he
enjoyed his Ministry comfortably and peaceably, until the Presbytery having as
would seem by all their posterior Acts, resolved to Thrust him out, and obtrude
another on the Parish, did by their Act of the 24th of July last at Kirkurd,
without ever examining his Right and Title, or giving him any Citation,
Proceeding upon a false Supposition, as if he had possessed himself wrongously of
the Church, required him to forbear Preaching, till he should be allowed by
them. The Extract of which Act, being delivered to him by the present Provost
of Peebles most unseasonably upon the Lord's Day thereafter, just as he was
going to the Pulpit; he taking it as the Act plainly bears, to be only a
Temporary restraint, till such time as he should apply himself to the
Presbytery for their Allowance, did patiently and pleasantly obey it, taking
his seat among the Auditors, while the Provost fetched a Minister from the
Meeting House to Preach in the Church, who after Sermons by an Order (as he
said) from the Presbytery, surprised the Parish, by declaring the Church to be
vacant, for the supply of which pretended Vacancy, the said Presbytery sent Mr.
Robert Eliot one of their own Number, upon the 24th of August being the Lord's
Day, to Preach and hold a Meeting for the calling of one Mr. William Veatch;
Which Meeting being called after Sermons, the Heritors, either by themselves,
or their Proxies, together with all the ordinary Elders of the Parish, and the
generality of the whole People, Compeered and Protested against the calling of
Mr. Veatch, appealing from the Presbytery to the next Provincial, or General
Assembly that should happen to be, promising to give in the double of their
Protestation and Appeal, with the Reasons thereof to the Presbytery the first
Day of their Meeting; whereupon they took Instruments. The said Mr. Robert
Elliot in a strange and unbecoming Heat and Transport, insolently presuming to
take Instruments against them in the Name of Jesus Christ, and without any
regard to their Protestation, he with his Associates proceeded to Nominate so
many pretended Commissioners, to go the next day with Mr. William Russel who
was sent by the Presbytery, and in the Name of the Parish of Peebles, to offer
a pretended Call to the said Mr. Veatch, among which Commissioners the
notorious Villain Beatty, who occasioned the former Tumult, was one, who for
his horrid Profanation of the Lord's Day, and villainous Attempt thereupon
against Mr. Knox, had been lately and deservedly punished by the Privy Council,
to which Call, albeit only signed by Cardronno, who has but small Interest in
the Parish, and two or three mean Heritors who have but two Aikers of Ground a
piece almost, Mr. Veatch cordially embracing, came and presented it to the
Presbytery of Peebles, at and within the Chapel thereof upon the (...) day of
September following; The which day and place, the Heritors etc. by themselves
and their Proxies, compeared and gave in their Protestation and Appeal in
Writing, with the most grave and weighty reasons thereof, viz. That the Church
could not be reputed vacant, Mr. Knox who had beside Possession, a good Right
and Title thereto, and to whom they were firmly resolved to adhere, not being
either Deposed, or Deprived, but only Inhibited for a time, by the Act of the
Presbytery, and his Right not examined, and discussed either by the Presbytery,
or any other competent Judicatory; And suppose the Church had been vacant, as
it was not; Yet the said pretended Call of Mr. Veatches was ipso facto void and
null, in regard of several essential Defects and Informalities of it, such as
the Call had not been made in a Regular way by a public meeting of Heritors,
Elders, and Town Council, but by private subscriptions, which the Magistrates
of Peebles by menaces and promises had secretly collected from a multitude of
Persons legally incapable of any vote in the Election; Some of them having no
interest at all in the Parish. That there were none of the Elders consenting
thereunto, and of a multitude of considerable Heritors in the Parish, only two
or three petty and obscure ones consented. All which reasons are more fully
expressed in the Appeal, whereupon they took Instruments, but the whole
Presbytery (except an Old Grave Man who dissented all along) taking no notice
thereof, nor to vouchsafe in the least any Answer thereto, accepted of and
sustained the aforesaid pretended Call, exhibited unto them in favors of Mr.
Veatch, Ordering an Edict to be served for him the next Lord's Day; which Edict
being returned to the Presbytery, upon the 17th of September, and called at the
Chapel door, compeared again the Heritors, Elders, etc. and Declared their
Adherence to their former Protestation and Appeal, with the whole Reasons
thereof, and subjoyning some more pregnant Reasons thereto; viz. That the said
Mr. Veatch was a person utterly unknown to them; and that they ought not to be
constrained with an implicit Faith, to entrust the care of their Souls to a
Man of whom they had no competent knowledge; Yea, that he was a Stranger to the
Presbytery it self, and that they had never been at the pains to hear him
Preach; that they might judge of his Qualifications for so eminent a place;
that the little Trial the Parish had of him in two or three Sermons, they were
in their private Judgment of Discretion not well pleased with his way of
Preaching, for several Grave and Weighty Exceptions which they had ready to
produce. That for the prospect of a more lucrative place, he had by indirect
methods got himself loosed from other Calls, that he might force himself in
upon the Parish of Peebles. And finally, that the Presbytery had in many
instances behaved themselves very partially in this whole Affair, for all which
Reasons more amply enlarged by them at that time, and contained in their
Instruments; They did de novo Protest and Appeal against any further Procedure
of the Presbytery upon the said Edict, giving in a Copy of this their new
Appeal, with the Reasons of it, and taking Instruments thereupon, in contempt
of which repeated Appeals, with the most irrefragable Reasons thereof; the
Presbytery having determined before hand to institute Mr. Veatch; and for that
effect engaged Mr. Robert Elliot to Preach at his Institution, proceeded the
very next day, being the 18th of September, actually to Institute him, in most
Illegal and Disorderly way, contrary to an express Act of the General Assembly,
holden at Glasgow, December 17. 1638. Whereby it is expressly provided, That no
person be obtruded into any Office in the Kirk, contrary to the will of the
Congregation. At which pretended Institution, there were none of the Heritors
of any worth, or esteem, nor of the standing Eldership of the Parish, (and
excepting the present Magistrates,) none of the substantial Parishioners; Yea,
in proportion of the Body of the Parish, few at all to Accept of or Embrace
him; in so much that it is informed, Mr. Elliot publicly expressed his grief,
That there were so few honest Men in the Parish to receive their Pastor.

In Respect of all which, and that the Heritors consenting to Mr. Veatch his
Call, are but very few, and against severals of whom there are Competent and
Relevant Exceptions; viz. That some of them are not Heritors, and others by
promise of case of their Stipends, and some by Threatenings if they did not
consent; And that the Heritors who have protested against the said Call, are
not only the most considerable Heritors, and have the most considerable
Interest in the Parish, but are double the number of the other, beside the
whole Eldership. It is therefore hoped, That his Grace, His Majesty's High
Commissioner to the Assembly, the Right Reverend Moderator, and the Reverend
Brethren of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland now sitting, May
Examine, and take into their Grave and Godly Consideration, the whole Progress
of this Affair, together with the Parishes Protestations and Appeals, which
they Humbly Crave may be publicly Read, hoping by their Pious Wisdom, to have
their Lawful Pastor restored unto them; And in Order thereunto, to be relieved
of such an Illegal Intruder, who upon many Accounts has rendered himself unfit
to be continued in such a Charge, particularly, because being conscious to
himself of the weakness and Insufficiency of his Call, partly by his own
Solicitations, partly by other undirect Motions, he did influence some few
Heritors of Note, to sign it after an Edict had been served thereupon; Again to
shake himself Loose from the Calls, which were Referred to the Synod of Kelso,
he had prevailed with some of his Friends, to Represent his Call to Peebles, as
the effect of an immediate and Extraordinary Providence, which they did so
flourish out in the several Circumstances, that it might appear equivalent to a
voic^ from Heaven, which he ought not to disobey. Whereas it can be evinced, by
clear Evidences, That it was a Draught and Design of Men, carried on underhand
for a considerable time. And it is left to the Assembly to judge what a gross
Hypocrisy and Abuse of the Sacred Name of Providence, it is to pretend an
immediate hand of God, to the Cobweb-Plots and Contrivances of sinful Men;
Sure, for as well as this Providence was painted forth to gain this point
before the Synod, there were some of that Meeting, who could see through the
vanity of that Pretense; And in special, one Grave and Wise Member, could not
let it pass without a tart Reflection on it; Siklike, upon the day of his
Admission, he was not afraid publicly to take God to witness, that no prospect
of a great Benefice had induced him to come to Peebles, whereas it transcends
the comprehensions of the most vast and extensive Charity, to fancy what other
motive could prevail with him, to reject Calls of People that were Zealous and
Unanimous for him; and thrust himself in upon a Parish who desired him not, and
can expect no Spiritual Comfort from his Ministry. And finally, He has since
that time imposed conditions of admitting Children to Baptism in that Parish,
which neither the Law of the Land, nor the late General Meeting of this Church
has warranted him to do; whereupon several Persons were necessitate to take
their Children to be Baptized by others, and some have taken Instruments
against him. And not a few Infants have been in apparent Danger of Dying
without Baptism, to the great grief of their Parents; Among whom were weak
Twins belonging to one of the late Magistrates. All which can clearly be proved
against him, together with several other Articles which they have to produce,
and can prove, competent time being allowed unto them for the Citation of
Witnesses, but which they have hitherto forborne to make use of, out of
tenderness to his Character, and will always forbear till they be constrained
to take this last Remedy.

This is the exact Copy of the Information and Petition given in by Mr. Heriot,
Minister of Dalkeith, in Print, to the Privy Council at Edinburgh.
INFORMATION FOR Mr. ALEXANDER HERIOT, Minister at DALKEITH.
In Relation to the Label against him, before the Presbytery at Dalkeith, and
the Sentences thereon. And Petitions to the Lords of Their MAJESTY'S Privy
Council.
The Appeal given in by the said Mr. Alexander Heriot to the Synod of
Midlothian, containing a short Information of the Progress of that Process, to
that time, is as follows.
MOderator, Being conscious of my Innocence, and finding my self Wronged, and
Injured, I here appeal from this Synod, to the first General Assembly, when it
shall meet; and in the mean time to their Majesty's Protection, for Justice and
Relief; And since the Law allows the Liedges a competent time to give in the
Reasons of their appeals, I here Protest within Twenty four hours, to give in
the Reasons of this my appeal to your Clerk; And withal, I protest that this
be Recorded by him. And upon all I take Instruments.

The Reasons of Appeal of Mr. Alexander Heriot Minister at Dalkeith, from the
Synod of Midlothian, to the next Lawful General Assembly, And to their
MAJESTY'S Protection for Justice, and Relief in the mean time.
THERE being an Indictment given in to the Presbytery of Dalkeith against the
said Mr. Alexander Heriot, and the Libel bearing it to be given in in the Name
of the Parochiners, the said Mr. Alexander Heriot and Parochiners compeered,
and craved that his accusets might be named to him, and that they might
subscribe their Charge against him; And that in regard that the said Heritors
and Parochiners did not only Viva Voce, but by a Writ under their Hands
Disclaim and Disown it, except Alexander Calderwood, and a few others, ex faece
populi. And albeit no Libel ought to be admitted without a Pursuer; Yet the
Presbytery refused to condescend upon the Ingivers of the Libel, or to ordain
them to own and subscribe it. Like as, none had the Confidence to own it,
except the said Alexander Calderwood, who sat among them as one of the Ruling
Elders, and who is notourly known to be the said Mr. Alexander Heriot's
declared Enemy (although without cause) and who invented and reported most
false Calumnies against him, of which when he was challenged, his answer was,
That whether they were true or false, he had thereupon taken two hundred of the
Parochiners from his Communion; Mr. Heriot declined him as Judge in this
matter, wherein he both informed and accused; which not only consisted in the
knowledge of the Presbytery (who had no other Information but his) but which
was likewise offered to be proved by his Oath; yet notwithstanding thereof,
against all Law, Reason, and good Order, the Presbytery would not remove him,
but allowed him to fit as one of Mr. Heriot's Judges, and appointed him one of
the Examinators of the Witnesses: and he forgetting that station, informed and
tampered with some of them, and threatened others, as to what they should
depone; and the Witnesses being overawed and interrupted in their Examinations,
and not allowed to declare the whole Truth in complext matters of Fact, whereby
the Depositions may be lame and weak, and carry a quite contrary meaning of the
Truth, of what the Witnesses offered to depone; And some of the Witnesses
having desired that they might see and read their own Depositions before they
subscribed them, the same was absolutely refused, with this Expostulation;
What? do you distrust us? and do you question our Clerk's honesty? And thus
they caused these Witnesses subscribe what was written, so that there may be
left out the material parts of their Depositions, which cleared their
Ministers. And not only are there several Articles of the Libel, which are not
upon these Heads, to which the Trial of the Regualr Clergy is restricted by Act
of Parliament, and which are in themselves alterius sori, but likewise there
was an additional Libel raised against the said Mr. Alexander, and without any
Citation given to him thereupon, or Copy, Sight or Notice given to him thereof;
Witnesses are examined, than all which there can be nothing in judicial
Procedures more Partial, Pernicious, and Unjust. And Mr. Alexander Heriot
having appealed from the Presbytery to the General Assembly, the Presbytery
notwithstanding thereof proceeded, and found the Libel Valid, and Proved; and
therefore, and in regard of Mr. Heriot's Contumacy (as they termed his Appeal
to the General Assembly, which sat in October last) they suspended him from the
Ministry, and referred him for further Censure to the General Assembly. But the
General Assembly having found no Contumacy in the Appeal, they referred him
back again to the Synod. And now the said Mr. Alexander does again Appeal from
the Synod, and from any Sentence they shall give in this Matter, to the next
lawful General Assembly, and in the mean time, to Their Majesty's Protection
for Justice and Relief. For their Grounds and Reasons.

First, There being a Petition given in by the Heritors and Parochiners of
Dalkeith to the Synod, attesting, the said Mr. Alexander his Faithfulness in
the Ministry, and his Innocence as to the things Libelled against him; and
craving, that according to the Act of Parliament, the Depositions of the
Witnesses might be made parent, that they might be the better Redargued; yet
the Synod suffered not the said Petition to be read.

Secondly, The said Mr. Alexander having represented to the Synod the foresaid
Procedure of the Presbytery against him, and having craved that the Depositions
of the Witnesses, might be read before him, and that he might have a Copy of
the Aditional Libel, which he had never seen; and that conform to the Act of
Parliament, the Depositions of the Witnesses might be made patent to him, to
the end that he might have a Copy thereof, to the effect he might the better
clear himself, from any thing that may seem to be deponed against him; yet
notwithstanding thereof, (and contrare to Law) the same was also refused by the
Synod, and undoubtedly for this Reason, That the Probation was weak, and might
not abide the Light nor Trial, for Veritas non quaerit Angulos.

Thirdly, The said Mr. Alexander represented to the Synod, That he was informed
that one of the Articles deponed against him, was, That he should have danced
about a Bonfire the 14th of October 1688; And that the same was the only
Article proved against him, which he instantly redargued, for the said 14th day
of October 1688 fell upon a Sunday, and that the Witnesses and whole
Inhabitants of Dalkeith cannot but declare, that there was never Bonfires at
Dalkeith upon a Sunday, so that they deponed flalsly. And the Dancing about a
Bonfire being so public an Act, that not only the Witnesses that have deponed
it, but likeways many others would have seen it, and all the Inhabitants of
Dalkeith would have heard of it, if it had been true: Yet notwithstanding
thereof, all the Neighbors to that Bonfire, and whole Inhabitants of Dalkeith
will declare and depone, that they neither saw nor heard of their Minister
dancing at that, or any other Bonfire; yet notwithstanding of that clear
Conviction, and redarguing of that Article, the Synod had no regard thereto,
affirming that there was no help for it now, it being so deponed, which is no
other thing than as if they had said, that they were not concerned though it were
false, for it was so deponed; and which is so consequential to a clear and
positive Redarguing, and Improbation of the Article, and Probation thereof,
that the prejudice and design of the Synod to proceed against the said Mr.
Alexander upon whatever was alleged, although without Probation, or upon a
Redargued Probation, is evidently manifest.

4thly. The said Mr. Alexander represented to the Synod, that he had formerly
appealed from the Presbytery, and that it was but too evident from what is
above narrated, that they were Party against him. And which was further
demonstrate from this, That the said Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood, did
in face of the Synod not only interrupt the said Mr. Alexander when he was
speaking; but likeways debated and reasoned against him as his opposite
Parties, so that it could not be expected, but that they would do more when he
was removed out of the Synod, and therefore the said Mr. Alexander declined the
Presbytery, and Alexander Calderwood as his Judges, and craved that they might
not sit to judge him; yet notwithstanding thereof, against all Law and Justice,
they were not removed.

5thly. Several Members of the Synod interrupted the said Mr. Alexander, while
he was vindicating himself, in the face of the Synod, and craving a sight of
the Additional Libel, and Deposition of the Witnesses; And cried out, That the
same should not be granted to him, as if every one of them had had a Decisive
Voice, and which is without Example in any Judicatory, for any of the Judges to
interrupt the Defenders speaking, and to cry out their Opinion, or rather
Sentence, before the Defender be removed; and which openly discovers their
Prejudice, Design and Resolution of proceeding against the said Mr. Alexander,
although without just cause.

6thly. The Prejudice and design of the Synods proceeding against the said Mr.
Alexander, on the said lame, weak, and null probation, is evident, in so far as
several Members of their Number did speak and deal with him to demit, or that
otherways they would depose him. And there is nothing more certain, than that
they would never have Dealt with him to demit, if the Probation against him had
been good; Their malice to the Regular Clergy being such, as that they would
rather Depose them for Immoralities, and Errors in Doctrine, to expose them,
than suffer them to Demit, and get off without stain, when they are guilty of
the same. But Mr. Alexander being Conscious of his own Innocence refused to
Demit, but rather to suffer their Extremity, from which he hoped GOD in his
good time would Vindicate him. And therefore it being evident from the Grounds
foresaid, that the Synod has behaved themselves most partially, and against all
Law and Form: The said Mr. Alexander does therefore Protest against the Synods
further Proceeding in the said Matter, and appeals from them, and from any
sentence they shall give therein, to the next lawful General Assembly* And to
their MAJESTY'S Protection, for Justice, and Relief in the mean time; And
Protests, That the said Libels, and Witnesses Depositions taken thereupon, may
be preserved, and not put out of the way, That so the ^^me (and not Copies
thereof) may be produced to the next General Assembly; Or to any their
Majesty's shall be pleased, out of their Royal Authority, to appoint to
consider the same: And that as the said Mr. Alexander will publish and disperse
his Appeal, and his Answers to the first Libel; Which he only did see for his
own Vindication from any sentence that shall follow hereupon; So he expects,
and earnestly Desires, that the said Synod may Print both the Libels against
him, and Depositions taken thereupon, for vindication of their Justice, (if
they can conceive they have done right:) But which Mr. Alexander hopes will
rather vindicate his Innocence. And further, Mr. Alexander Craves, and
Protests, That this his Appeal may be insert in the Books of the Synod.

Notwithstanding of the Appeals foresaid, the Synod proceeded, and Deposed the
said Mr. Alexander from his Ministry, and thereupon the Eldership of the Parish
was invaded, and some few (severals of them scarce worth to be noticed as
Residenters) have usurped the power of electing Elders, and have elected many
more than the number formerly used, purposely as they think, to make the greater
Figure; although but of the most inconsiderable of the Parish; and of Design to
Call, Impose, and Obtrude a Minister upon the Rest against their will, contrary
to the Laws of Charity, Practices of Christian Churches, and profession of
Presbyterians. Notwithstanding that the said Mr. Alexander Heriot his Appeal
does in Law preserve his Right, and keeps all in statu quo, the time of the
Appeal, while it be discust.

Whereupon, not only the said Mr. Alexander Heriott, but likewise the Heritors
and Parishioners of Dalkeith have given in a Petition to the Lords of their
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That they may be pleased to forbid the
Calling of a Minister until the Appeal be discust; And that in the mean time,
he may be restored to the Exercise of his Ministry. And that the Presbytery of
Dalkeith; And others who had the Libels given in against him, and Depositions
of the Witnesses, may make the same known to him, as Law appoints; That he may
know what is libelled, or may seem to be proved, to the effect he may the
better clear himself of the same, which is nothing but false lies and
calumnies: And whereof several of the Presbyterian Ministers, who have seen the
Libels and Depositions, Affirm, that there is nothing pretended to be proved,
But the dancing about the Bon-Fire; which is not only clearly redargued to be
false as said is, there being no Bonfires either on the foresaid day, nor for
several months either before or after; But likewise if the persons who have
deponed it were known, and re-examined, it will be found, they have deponed
falsely; And that they have been dealt with so to Depone; And that this Falsehood
may not be discovered, not only are the Depositions kept up, contrary to
express Law and Acts of Parliament; But likewise, no notice can be gotten who
were the persons who have deponed it, that they may be insisted against.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council, are
not Judges competent to the sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, and that as they
cannot put in Ministers in Churches, so they cannot meddle with sentences of
Depositions. It is answered, That by the 1. Act 8 Parl. Ja. 6. It is Statute
and Ordained, That his Majesty, and Council shall be Judges competent, To all
Persons Spiritual and Temporal, in all matters. And to pretend, that the
Council is not Judge competent to sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, is no
other them to affirm, That these Courts have an Arbitrary power, and may do
wrong at their pleasure without Remeed or Control. For it is evident, That Mr.
Herriott is most unjustly pursued and Deposed. And it is also evident, that if
it be not Redressed by the Council, he will never be Restored by those
Ministers, who have dealt so unjustly with him.

And whereas, it is alleged, That as the Council cannot put in Ministers, so
they cannot meddle with sentences of Deposition. It is answered, That the
Council has not the power of Admission and Ordination of Ministers. But if a
Minister having a lawful Call, the Presbytery should refuse to admit and
Ordain him, albeit they have nothing to object against him, upon Application to
the Council or Session, Letters will be directed to Charge the Presbytery, to
Admit and Ordain him, but multo magis in this case, where a Minister is Deposed
from his Ministry, as likewise from his Benefice, (which is his Livelihood and
Maintenance) and yet most unjustly, and without Ground or Reason; The Council
is most proper Judges, for Restoring him against the foresaid Oppression,
Injury, and Unjust Sentence.

And for a further evidence of this unjust Sentence, it is Humbly desired, that
the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council will be pleased to take notice, That
in the first Libel there are many Articles which are not to be admitted in Law;
And it is said, that there is none of them proved, but the Dancing about the
Bonfire: And yet the Presbytery by their Sentence, found the Libel Relevant and
Proved, which must be understood as to the whole Articles of the Libel
complexlie, than which there is nothing more false, as will appear by the
Libels and Depositions, if they were produced. And yet thereupon Mr. Heriott is
first suspended by the Presbytery, and referred by them to the General Assembly
for further Censure, as if great Immoralities in Life, and Errors in Doctrine,
had been proved against him. And the Synod (to which the Assembly remitted him)
following the steps of the Presbytery, deposed him. Now when Presbytery and
Synod, have acted thus contrary to express Law, and have done open and manifest
Unjustice; (and whereof all that heard of it are convinced and sensible) And
having stated themselves Parties against him, there can be no Remedy expected
from the said Unjustice, Injury, and Oppression, unless the Lords of Their
Majesty's Privy Council interpose their Authority.

If it be alleged, That the late Act of Parliament, The Act of Supremacy in
Church matters is Repealed; It is answered, That the Act of Parliament 1669 is
Rescinded, which extended the Supremacy, to the Ordering and Disposal of the
External Government and Policy of the Church, and to the Enacting of
Constitutions, Acts, and Orders in the Church. But the foresaid Act of K. Ja.
6. his 8 Parliament, is not Rescinded, which is only as to the Judging of
Ecclesiastic Persons in matters complained upon; and which power is inherent
in the Crown, otherways there should be Regnum in Regno; and Church
Judicatories should have arbitrary Power, without Redress or Control, as said
is.

In Regard whereof, The Lords of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council are Judges
Competent, to this Injury, Injustice and Oppression; And the Desire of the
Petitions ought to be Granted.

ACT of the General Assembly, anent a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation,
with the Causes thereof.
At Edinburgh, November 12. 1690. Postmeridiem, Sess. 25.
THE General Assembly, Having taken into their most serious Consideration, the
late great and general Defection of this Church and Kingdom, have thought fit
to Appoint a Day of Solemn Humiliation and Fasting, for Confession of Sins, and
making Supplication to our Gracious God, to forgive and remove the guilt
thereof: In order whereunto, they have Ordained the Confession of Sins, and
Causes of Fasting following, to be duly Intimat and Published; Recommending it
most earnestly to all persons, both Ministers and others, That every one of us
may not only search and try our own hearts and ways, and stir up our selves to
seek the Lord; But also in our Stations, and as we have access, Deal with one
another, in all love and tenderness, to prepare for so great and necessary a
Duty, that we may find mercy in God's sight, and He may be graciously
reconciled to our Land in our Lord Jesus, and take delight to dwell among us.

Although our gracious God has of late, for his own Names sake, wrought great
and wonderful things, for Britain and Ireland, and for this Church and Nation
in particular; Yet the Inhabitants thereof have cause to remember their own
evil ways, and to loath themselves in their own sight for their Iniquities.

Alas! We, and our Fathers, our Princes, our Pastors, and People of all Ranks
have sinned, and have been under great Transgression to this day: For though
our gracious God showed early kindness to this Land, in sending the Gospel
amongst us, and afterward in our Reformation from Popish Superstition and
Idolatry; and it had the Honor, beyond many Nations, of being after our first
Reformation, solemnly devoted unto God, both Prince and People, yet we have
dealt treacherously with the Lord, and been unstedfast in his Covenant, and
have not walked suitably to our Mercies received from him, nor obligations to
him: Through the mercy of God this Church had attained to a great purity of
Doctrine, Worship, and Government, but this was not accompanied with suitable
personal Reformation, neither was our Fruit answerable to the pains taken on us
by Word and Work; We had much Gospel-preaching, but too little Gospel-practice;
too many went on in open wickedness, and some had but a form of Godliness,
denying the power thereof; many also who had the Grace of God in truth fell
from their first love, and fell under sad languishings and decays; and when for
our sins the anger of the Lord had divided us, and we were brought under the
feet of strangers, and many of our Brethren killed, others taken Captive and
sold as slaves, yet we sinned still, and after we were freed from the yoke of
strangers, instead of returning to the Lord, and being led to Repentance by his
goodness, the Land made open Defection from the good ways of the Lord: many
behaved as if they had been delivered to work abomination, the floodgates of
Impiety were opended, and a deluge of wickedness did overspread the Land, Who
can without grief and shame remember the shameful debauchery and drunkenness
that then was? And this accompanied with horrid and hellish cursing and
swearing, and followed with frequent Filthiness, Adulteries, and other
Abominations, and the Reprover was hated, and he that departed from Iniquity
made himself a reproach or prey. And when by these, and such like corrupt
practices, men's Consciences were debauched, they proceeded to sacrifice the
Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Privileges of his Church to the lusts
and will of men; The Supremacy was advanced in such a way, and to such an
height, as never any Christian Church acknowledged; the Government of the
Church was altered, and Prelacy (which has been always grievous to this
Nation) introduced, without the Churches consent, and contrair to the standing
Acts of our National Assemblies, both which the present Parliament has
(blessed be God) lately found; And yet nevertheless, of the then standing
Ministry of Scotland, many did suddenly and readily comply with that alteration
of the Government, some out of Pride and Covetousness or Man-pleasing, some
through infirmity or weakness, or fear of Man, and want of Courage and Zeal for
God, many faithful Ministers were thereupon cast out, and many Insufficient and
Scandalous men thrust in on their Charges, and many Families ruined, because
they would not own them as their Pastors.

And alas! It is undeniable, there has been under the late Prelacie, a great
decay of Piety, so that it was enough to make a man be nicknam'd a Phanatick,
if he did not run to the same excess of riot with others.

And should it not be lamented, for it cannot be denied, there has been in
some a dreadful Atheistical Boldness against God, some have disputed the Being
of God, and his Providence, the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, the Life to
come, and Immortality of the Soul, yea and scoffed at these things.

There has been also an horrid Profanation of the Holy and Dreadful Name of
God, by Cursing and Swearing: Ah! there has been so much Swearing and
Forswearing amongst us, that no Nation under Heaven have been more guilty in
this than we; some by swearing rashly or ignorantly, some falsely, by breaking
their Oaths, and imposing and taking ungodly and unlawful Oaths and Bonds
whereby the Consciences of many have been polluted and seared, and many ruined
and oppressed for refusing and not taking them.

There has also been a great neglect of the Worship of God, too much in
public, but especially in Families, and in secret.

The wonted care of Religious sanctifying the Lord's Day is gone, and in many
places the Sabbath has been, and is shamefully profaned.

The Land also has been full of bloody Crimes, and Cities full of Violence,
and much innocent Blood shed, so that Blood touched Blood; yea, Sodoms sins
have abounded amongst us, Pride, fullness of Bread, Idleness, Vanities of
Apparel, and shameful sensuality filled the Land.

And alas! how great has been the Cry of Oppression, and Unrighteousness,
Iniquity has been established by a Law, there has been a great perverting of
Justice, by making and executing unrighteous Statutes and Acts, and sad
persecutions of many for their Conscience toward God.

It is also matter of Lamentation, that under this great Defection there has
been too general a fainting, not only amongst professors of the Gospel, but
also amongst Ministers; yea, even amongst such, who in the main things did
endeavor to maintain their Integrity, in not giving seasonable and necessary
Testimony against the Defectons and Evils of the Time, and keeping a due
distance from them, and some on the other hand managed their Zeal with too
little Discretion and Meekness.

It is also matter of Humiliation, that when Differences fell out amongst
these, who did own Truth, and bear witness against the Course of Defection,
they were not managed with due Charity and Love, but with too much heat and
bitterness, injurious Reflections used against pious and worthy men on all
hands, and scandalous Divisions occasioned, and the success of the Gospel
greatly obstructed thereby, and some dangerous Principles drunk in: And after
all this, there were shameful advances toward Popery, the Abomination of the
Mass was set up in many places, and Popish Schools erected, and severals fell
to Idolatry.

And though the Lord has put a stop to the Course of Defection, and of his
great mercy given us some reviving from our Bondage; yet we have sad cause to
regrate and bemoan, that few have a due sense of our mercy, or walk answerable
thereto, few are turned to the Lord in truth, but the wicked go on to do
wickedly, and there is found amongst us to this day shameful ingratitude for
our mercies, Horrid impenitency under our sins, yea, even amongst those who
stand most up for the Defense of the Truth: and amongst many in our Armies,
there is woeful Profaneness and Debauchery. And though we profess to
acknowledge, there can be no pardon of Sins, no Peace and Reconciliation with
God, but by the Blood of Jesus Christ; yet few know Him, or see the Necessity
and Excellency of the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; few see their need of
Him, or esteem, desire, or receive Him, as he is offered in the Gospel; few are
acquainted with Faith in Jesus Christ, and living by Faith on Him, as made of
the Father unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; and
few walk as becomes the Gospel, and imitate our Holy Lord in Humility,
Meekness, Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness, Zeal for GOD, and Charity toward
Men: But as there is even until now, a great contempt of the Gospel, a great
Barrenness under it; so a deep Security under our Sin and Danger, a great want
of Piety toward God, and Love toward Men, with a woeful Selfishness, every one
seeking their own things, few the things of Christ, or the public Good, or one
another welfare: And finally, the most part more ready to censure the sins of
others, than to repent of their own.

Our Iniquities are increased over our heads, and our Trespasses are grown up
into the Heavens, they are many in number, and heinous in their nature, and
grievously aggravated, as having been contrair to great Light and Love, under
signal Mercies and Judgments, after Confession and Supplication, and
notwithstanding of our Profession, Promises and solemn Vowing, and Covenanting
with God to the contrair.

Have we not then sad cause of deep Sorrow and Humiliation? And may we not
fear, if we do not repent, and turn from the evil of our ways, and return to
the Lord with all our hearts, that He return to do us evil, after he has done
us good, and be angry with us, until He has consumed us?

Let us therefore humble our selves by Fasting and Praying, let us search out
our sins, and consider our ways, and confess these, and other our sins, with
Sorrow and Detestation; Let us turn unto the Lord with Fasting and weeping, and
with mourning; Let us firmly Resolve and sincerely Engage to amend our ways and
doings, and return unto the Lord our God, with all our heart, and earnestly
pray, that for the blood of the Lamb of God, our sins may be forgiven, and our
backslidings healed, and we may yet become a righteous Nation, keeping the
Truth, that Religion and Righteousness may flourish, and Love, and Charity
abound, and all the Lord's People may be of one mind in the Lord: and in order
to all these, that the Word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified,
and that the Preaching of the Word, and Dispensing of the Sacraments, may be
accompanied with the wonted presence, Power and Blessing of the Spirit of the
Lord; That the Lord would preserve and bless our gracious King and Queen,
William and Mary, and establish their Throne by Righteousness and Religion, and
grant to these Nations, Peace and Truth together; and for that End, bless and
prosper His Majesty's Councils, and Forces by Sea and Land, and those of the
Princes and States his Allies, for God and his Truth, that Inferior Rulers may
rule in the fear of God, and Judges be clothed with Righteousness, and that
many faithful Laborers may be sent out into the Lord's Vineyard, and they who
are sent, may find mercy to be faithful, and be blessed with Success, that
Families may be as little Churches of Christ, and that the Lord would pour out
His Spirit on all Ranks of People, that they may be holy in all manner of
Conversation, and God may delight to dwell amongst us, and to do us good.

And while we pray for our selves, let us not forget our Brethren in Foreign
Churches, with whom, alas* we had too little Sympathy; Nay, let us pray, that
all the ends of the Earth, may see the Salvation of God; and that He would
bring his ancient people of the Jews to the acknowledgment of Jesus Christ; and
that he would hasten the ruin of Romish Babylon, and advance the Reformation
in Christendom, and preserve and bless the Reformed Churches; That he would
pity His oppressed People, the French Protestants, and gather them out of all
places, whither they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day; and that
he would be the Defense, Strength and Salvation of any of his People, who are
in War or Danger by Infidel or Popish adversaries, in Europe or America. And in
particular, that the Lord would be Gracious to Ireland, and sanctify to his
People there, both their distress and deliverance; and perfect what concerns
them, that he would convert the Natives there to the Truth, and reduce that
Land to Peace; and appoint Salvation for Walls and Bullwarks to Britain.

For all these Causes and Reasons, The General Assembly has appointed the
Second Thursday of January next, to be Observed in all the Congregations of the
Church and Nation, as a day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, and Prayer;
Beseeching and Obtesting all, both Pastors, and People of all Ranks to be
sincere and serious, in Humilitation and Supplication, and universal
Reformation, as they would wish to find mercy of the Lord, and have deserved
wrath averted, and would obtain the Blessing of the Lord upon themselves and
Posterity after them; and that the Lord may delight in us, and our Land may be
as Married to him. And Ordains all Ministers, either in Kirks or Meeting
houses, to read this present Act publicly from the Pulpit, a Sabbath or two
before the said Day of Humiliation: and that the several Presbyteries take
care, that it be carefully Observed in their respective bounds. And where, in
regard of Vacancies, the Day hereby appointed, cannot be observed, the Assembly
appoints the said Humiliation, to be kept some other Day with the first
convenient opportunity: And appoints the Commission for Visitation, to apply to
the Council, for their Civil Sanction to the Observation thereof. Extracted out
of the Records of Assembly, by

JO. SPALLING.
Cls. Syn. National.
A PROCLAMATION Anent a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To

Macers of our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part,
Conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as the
General Assembly of this Church, by their Act, of the date the twelfth day of
November instant, has appointed a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation, to be
Observed in all the Kirks and Meeting Houses of this Our Ancient Kingdom; and
appointed their Commission for Visitation, to apply to the Lords of Our Privy
Council, for Our Civil Sanction, to be interposed thereto; And they having
Applied accordingly: Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of our Privy
Council, Do hereby Command and Enjoin, That the said Solemn Fast and
Humiliation be Religiously observed, by all Persons throughout this Kingdom,
both in Kirks and Meeting Houses, at the Dyets, and in the manner as by the
abovementioned Act of Assembly, hereto prefixed, is appointed; And that the
same be read by all the Ministers, in manner therein mentioned. And to the end
that so Pious and necessary a Duty may be punctually performed, and Our
Pleasure in the Premises fully known: Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you
straightly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of the several Shires and Stewartries, within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and
Authority, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance.
And we do Ordain Our Solicitor to dispatch Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the
several Shires and Stewarts of the Stewartries, or their Deputs, or Clerks, to
be by them Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon receipt
thereof, and immediately sent to the several Ministers, both in Kirks and
Meeting Houses, to the effect they may read and intimat the same from their
Pulpits, and may seriously exhort all Persons, to a sincere and devout
observance thereof, as they Regard the Favor and Blessings of the Almighty
God, the Safety and Preservation of both Church and State, and would avoid the
Wrath of God upon themselves and their Posterity, and as they will be
answerable at their peril. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed with the
said Act of Assembly, and these Presents to be Published in manner foresaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty first day of November. And of
Our Reign, the second year, 1690.
Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.

FINIS.

