AT THE Council Chamber WHITEHALL the 16th of July 1679.
PRESENT

Lord Archbishop of Canterbury

Lord Chancellor

Lord President

Lord Privy Seal

Marquess of Worcester

Earl of Bridgwater

Earl of Sunderland

Earl of Essex

Viscount Fauconberg

Viscount Halifax

Lord Robarts

Mr. Secretary Coventry

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer.


IT was this day Ordered by their Lordships in Council, That the Depositions
and Letter of Robert Jenison Esquire with the Attestations of Sir Michael Warton,
George Booth, Robert Bows, William Burnet Esquires, and Ralph Marshal
Gentleman, together with the Narrative of Charles Chetwind Esquire (relating to
William Ireland lately executed) Be Printed by such Persons as Mr. Chetwind
shall appoint, the same having been examined and approved by Mr. Treby late
Chairman to the Secret Committee of the House of Commons.

John Nicholas.

By virtue of this Order, I do appoint Henry Hills, Thomas Parkhust, John
Starkey, Dorman Newman, Thomas Cockeril, Thomas Simmons, and Jacob Tonson, to
Print this Narrative, and that no other presume to Print the same.

July the 17th 1679. Charles Chetwind.

A NARRATIVE OF THE DEPOSITIONS OF Robert Jenison Esquire With other Material
Evidences, plainly proving THAT Mr. William Ireland, Lately Executed for HIGH
TREASON, Was in London the Nineteenth of August, 1678. Notwithstanding his
Confident DENIAL thereof both at HIS Trial and Execution.

Collected by CHARLES CHETWIND Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Henry Hills, Thomas Parkhurst, John Starkey, Dorman
Newman, Thomas Cockeril, Thomas Simmons, and Jacob Tonson. 1679.

The Publishers PREFACE.
IT is not unknown to all considering and judicious Persons in this Kingdom,
that, upon the happy Discovery of the late horrid Popish Plot against his
Majesty's Person and Government, and the Established Protestant Religion; and
upon the Apprehension, Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation of several of the
Conspirators, many Artifices have been used by Persons of the same Persuasion,
to defame the Witnesses produced for the King, and to invalidate their
Testimonies; in order whereunto, several Witnesses have been procured, first at
the Trial of Ireland, and after at the Trial of White alias Whitebread, etc.
(many of them Scholars belonging to the English Seminary at St. Omers,
instructed no doubt, and sent over to act viis and modis, for the preservation
of their Conducters and Leaders) to testify that Dr. Titus Oats, one of the
principal Witnesses for his Majesty, was at St. Omers, at the same time when he
upon his Oath affirms himself to have been in London; other Witnesses have been
also produced, to prove that Mr. Ireland (lately Executed) was in
Staffordshire, at those days and times when Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, and one
Sarah Pain, attest upon their Oaths, that they saw him in London, as by the
Printed Trials of Ireland, and Whitebread, etc. does appear such a failure in
Circumstance of time and place, is of so great consequence in this case that if
made out, it would render the said Persons unworthy, the names of just and
lawful Witnesses; and for that reason their Adversaries put so much stress upon
it, that (not contented with the determination of the matter, at the Trial and
Condemnation of Ireland) they again resume it at the Trial of Whitebread, etc.
and by their St. Omers Youths, endeavor to fasten falsehood on Dr. Oats, and
by consequence to impeach the credit of his Testimony, and the justice of their
Condemnation. As to the first particular concerning Dr. Oats, his Testimony is
justly secured, and he himself indubitably proved to have been in London, at
the times by him mentioned and deposed, by the concurrent evidence of diverse
creditable Persons, given in upon Oath at the Trial of Whitebread; so that the
Stratagem which his Antagonists did use, to destroy or at least depretiate his
Testimony, has by a gracious emergency of Divine Providence, turned to a
strong confirmation thereof, and for ever set him, as to this point, Rectus in
curia, a good and lawful Witness, in reference to all the Evidence already
given, and which hereafter may be given by him in any future Trials. Their
design failing herein, their next attempt was to entrap him and the rest, in
relation to Mr. Ireland, whom the Witnesses they produce, affirm to have been
in Staffordshire, and other places out of London, all the Month of August, from
the fifth of August, to the fourteenth of September; whereas Dr. Oats, Mr.
Bedloe, and Sarah Pain, depose, that they saw him in London within that time.
To clear the Truth of this Particular, and to justify the Evidence of Dr.
Oats, and the rest, the Testimony of Mr. Jenison is a pregnant demonstration,
which I thought truly to deserve my utmost diligence to bring to light; and in
order thereunto, communicated the same to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and by his appointment to Justice Warcup; before whom Mr. Jenisons
Depositions, and the Attestations of the worthy Gentlemen hereafter mentioned,
were taken; and in whose hands, if not transmitted by him to the Clerk of his
Majesty's Council, the Originals of the ensuing Papers are to be seen, and
whose joint endeavors for the Discovery of the Truth in this, as well as other
particulars relating to the Plot, deserve an honorable mention.

The occasion of what is here published arising from several passages in the
Trials of Ireland, and Whitebread, etc. those passages are here extracted and
presented to the Readers view; that having the case before him, he may apply
this evidence thereto; whereby his judgment will be clear.

The Reader will find this short discourse divided into three parts.
The First relates the means and manner of obtaining the Letter and Depositions
of that worthy Person, Mr. Jenison.
The Second exhibits the Letter and Depositions.
The Third, some observations thereupon, for the full satisfaction of all
unbiased minds in the matter Controverted.
THE NARRATIVE.
UPon the 15th. of June in this present year 1679. Charles Chettwind of
Westminster Esquire had occasionally some discourse with a Gentleman till then
unknown to him; to wit, Mr. Griffith of Grayes-Inn, Barrister at Law,
concerning the five Traitors that had been condemned the Saturday before, and
their attempt to prove Mr. William Ireland, alias Ironmonger, lately executed
for High Treason to have been in Staffordshire, and on his Journey thither from
the 5th. of August 1678 till the 7th. of September following, and not to have
been within that time in London, which as Mr. Oats and others, had upon his
Trial affirmed him to be there, about the 12th. of that Month, and to be
returned thither again about the beginning of September: whereupon the said Mr.
Griffith, told Mr. Chetwind, that Sir Michael Warton of Beverly in the County
of York Knight, a Worthy Member of the Honorable House of Commons in the last
Parliament told him, that since the execution of Ireland, Mr. Jenison (a
Gentleman of very good Quality, and a Student in Gray's Inn, who was a Romanist
till about January last) affirmed, that Mr. Ireland was in London about the
middle of August, and that he was with him then at a Scriveners at the Sign of
the White-hart in Russel Street in Covent Garden, which relation he confirmed
with several other notable circumstances. Mr. Chetwind, having heard this, went
to Whitehall, and there attending on the Right Honorable the Earl of
Shaftsbury, Lord President of his Majesty's Privy Council, acquainted his
Lordship with what Mr. Griffith had told him; upon which, the said Earl of
Shaftsbury told Mr. Chetwind, that it would be very considerable, if it could
be made out. Mr. Chettwind thus encouraged by the said Earl, did by his order,
make it his business the next morning, being Tuesday June the 16th. to find out
Sir Michael Warton, and coming to the Coffee House in Covent Garden, where Sir
Michael used to be when in Town, Mr. Chetwind met there with Mr. Ralph Marshal
Secretary to the Earl of Craven, who upon discourse told Mr Chetwind that Sir
Michael lived at Hampstead this Summer. Mr. Marshal, understanding something of
the business for which Mr. Chettwind enquired after Sir Michael, said, that Sir
Michael had often related to him, and he was sure he would justify it, that
the said Mr. Jenison of Gray's Inn (who was lately come over to the Protestant
Religion, a person of considerable quality, and Heir to a good Estate, his
elder Brother being a priest, and in Newgate) told him, the said Sir Michael,
in the presence of several other Gentlemen of Quality presently after the
execution of Ireland the several following particulars which they had hitherto
taken no care to discover, because they expected not that the evidence given in
the Trial against him the said Ireland, would after his execution come into
question or debate.

The Particulars were these.

That in the month of August 1678. when His Majesty was at Windsor, Mr. Jenison
going to Windsor on Saturday the 17th of August and returning the 19th,
immediately upon his return that night, he went to give Mr. Ireland (the same
person who was afterward executed) a visit, and found him at the Sign of the
Heart in Russel Street in Covent Garden, and after a Salute, Mr. Ireland asked
him several Questions, as, What news from Windsor? how his Majesty spent his
time? and what recreations he followed? and whither he walked abroad much, and
how guarded? to which Mr. Jenison answered that his Majesty delighted much in
Hawking and Fishing, but most in the latter, which his Majesty followed early
in the morning with some few persons attending him; upon which Mr. Ireland
replied, I wonder his Majesty is no better guarded, he were easily taken off,
whereupon Mr. Jenison said God forbid, or words to that effect, which made Mr.
Ireland stop his discourse. Mr. Marshal reporting this to Mr. Chetwind in
presence of Mr. Ash and Mr. Spicer, two persons of unquestionable reputation;
Mr. Ash replied, that he was last night in company with Mr. Griffith, and Mr.
Booth, Son to my Lord De la More, where he heard them discourse of this very
Business; Mr. Booth saying that he heard Mr. Jenison speak the same things,
whereupon Mr. Marshall undertook to go that very Day to Hampstead to Sir
Michael Warton, and give Mr. Chetwind an account of it the next Morning. Mr.
Ash and Mr. Spicer also, before Mr. Chetwind and they parted, having promised
to go to Mr. Booth, met him, who justified every syllable of what he had said,
and withal, remembered very well that when Sir Michael Warton took some
particular Notice of it, Mr. Jenison seemed to be surprised, and was sorry he
had uttered those Words, and began to recall them, as to the time only of
Ireland's being in Town: But says Mr. Bows, (who was there present, a Person
of Quality of Grayes-Inn, and well esteemed in your House) Jenison you cannot
retract your Words, for I have a Letter under your own Hand which will put you
in mind of the Time, and repeats the very same thing.

The Friday following being the 20th. of June, Mr. Booth and Mr. Bows met with
Mr. Jenison, and discoursed the matter with him, who then owned all the
Questions which Ireland asked him, namely, What News at Windsor? how his
Majesty spent his time? etc. But, says he, I desire a days time to consider,
that I may be exact as to the Day when they were spoken; for several Persons
have told me of a great many out of Staffordshire, who upon the Trial of the 5
Traitors, Whitebread, etc. had proved Mr. Ireland to be in Staffordshire from
the 5th of August to the 7th of September; and therefore I must seriously
consider what time it was that I saw him in London; upon which they appointed
to dine together on Saturday following, being the 21 of June. Which Day being
come, there met Sir. Michael Warton, Mr. Jenison, Mr. Bows, Mr. Booth, Mr.
Griffith, and Mr. Marshall, and there they showed Mr. Jenison his Letter, which
he acknowledged to be writ by his own Hand; and further told them, that upon
the 15th of August he came to London from Tunbridge, that upon the 17th he went
to Windsor, and upon the 19th he returned to London again, and either that
Night or the next Day, he had this Discourse with Mr. Ireland at the Sign of
the Heart in Russel Street in Covent Garden; further he related that on the 4th
of September following he went from London into the North, returning back to
London in the ensuing November, and so presently after removed to Reading, from
whence he writ the forementioned Letter of Mr. Bows. This Confession of his
Mr. Marshal took in Writing at that very Time (when they dined together) all of
them being present, as also a true Copy of his Letter writ from Reading, both
which he brought to Mr. Chetwind the same Night; immediately upon which Mr.
Chetwind and he carried them to my Lord of Shaftsbury, his Lordship the next
Day (being the 22d of June) communicating them to my Lord Chancellor and
several others of his Majesty's Privy Council. The following Day (viz.
June23d.) Mr. Chetwind brought Mr. Bows and Mr. Marshall with the Original
Letter to the Earl of Shaftsbury, before whom Mr. Jenison acknowledged the
Letter to be his own, with the circumstances thereunto referring concerning
Time and Place.

These things will receive a sufficient Confirmation if we do but seriously
peruse all the ensuing Informations taken before one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Middlesex; as you will see by his Subscription
at the Close, as also the Subscriptions of those that gave the Informations.

The Information of Sir Michael Warton Knight.
About the month of February last Mr. Bows and Mr. Burnet of Grayes-Inn and my
self, went to dine together at the Mirmaid at Grayes-Inn Gate in Holborn,
whither Mr. Jenison, an Acquaintance of Mr. Bows, accidentally came into the
Room, so that we dined together; and upon general Discourses at Dinner, we were
talking of Mr. Irelands Trial or Execution, whereupon Mr. Bows begun the
discourse of a Letter he had from Mr. Jenison which (he thought) if he had
received timely enough might have very much cleared the Point of Irelands being
in London in August last; Mr. Jenison owned the Letter, and continued the
Discourse; sometime after I saw the Letter, and by the reading judged it might
have been very Material, the matter of the Letter being perfectly owned by Mr.
Jenison.

June 26th 1679. M. Warton.

The Attestation of George Booth Esquire
I do attest this Matter that Sir Michael Warton has here attested.

George Booth.

The Information of Mr. Burnet.
What Sir Michael Warton has here said, I know to be true; the Day that Mr.
Jenison went to Windsor, I do believe to be the 17th of August last, it was on
a Saturday, the day of Dochets Horse-race, for I met him riding to Windsor as I
came from the Horse-race.

W. Burnet.

The Information of Robert Bows Esquire
About the latter end of December last I received a Letter from Mr. Robert
Jenison, which a little time after I showed to Mr. Savill and Mr. Ewers of
Lincoln's Inn, and have now by me: Mr. Jenison has owned it all along, and does
so still. I have several times since discourst with him upon it; I went to
Windsor on the 12th or 13th of August last, and staid a Night there, and from
thence to Henly, where I staid until the 6th of September following or
thereabouts.

June 26th 1679. Rob. Bows.

The Information of Ralph Marshal Gent. is,
That in or about the Month of February last, being in discourse with Sir
Michael Warton, concerning Mr. Irelands being about that time Executed, and
concerning his denying his being in London in August last, Sir Michael told
this Informant, That if Mr. Ireland were to be Tried again, it would be proved
that he was in Town in August, by Mr. Jenison, a Gentleman of Quality of
Gray's Inn; Sir Michael then telling him also, what discourse Mr. Jenison, and
Mr. Ireland had at that time together, which discourse is particularly
mentioned in a Letter, in the hand of Mr. Bows of Gray's Inn, which Letter I
have read, and heard Mr. Jenison own to be his own hand Writing. And this
Informant further says, That he has often heard Mr. Jenison say, that he
believes the time he had the discourse with Mr. Ireland, mentioned in his said
Letter, was the 19th of August last, in the Afternoon, he being come that
morning from Windsor, and that it was at one Mr. Coynoes house, at the
White-Hart in Russel Street.

Ralph Marshal.

These Informations above written, were all Written and Subscribed by the
Parties above named, on the 26th of June 1679. Before us, Edmond Warcupp.
Charles Chetwind.


Not to put you off with the Informations of Others, concerning Mr. Jenisons
Letter and Words, we shall in the next Place give you the true Copy of the
Letter, and also of Two differing Informations of his, both of them full as
much, if not more home to the purpose than what had been reported by others.

Mr. Jenisons Letter from Reading in Barkshire, upon his return from the North.
To Robert Bows, Esquire Son to Sir Francis Bows. (Mr. Jenison then being a
Papist.)
Reading December 19. 1678. SIR,
YOurs I have, bearing Date the 15th instant, and have not missed a Post I
could send to you; I am not ignorant of the offer made by His Majesty's
Proclamation, and lay hold on nothing but Pardon for concealing that
Circumstance I have known so long; yet I did not altogether conceal it neither:
for I told my Cousin Smith of it within Two or Three days of the breaking out of
this damnable Conspiracy, which how much it weighs I am not a fit Judge of; and
I would not, were it to gain a Million, Nay, a Million of Worlds, if possible,
draw the least drop of innocent Blood upon me; for I know it is a crying sin,
therefore I pray God avert it from me. All that I can tell you, as I hope for
forgiveness of my Sins and Eternal Salvation, is, (if you will distinguish
between the times) what follows.

Being come from Windsor, where I promised my self the happiness and
satisfaction of seeing you, that I might take my leave before my journey for
the North, (which to the best of my Memory was about the latter end of August,)
I went to do the same to Mr. Ireland, whom then, (with all the rest,) I did
believe to be a man of the best Conversation and Life in the world, (for you
know the Law does presume every man good until it be proved otherwise.) After
my salute, and I had told him I had been at Windsor, his Interrogatory, or
Question was, what News? My teturn was the usual no News, but good; then he
proceeds to ask me to the best of my memory, how his Sacred Majesty and the
Court were diverted? I replied, that I heard, his Majesty took much delight in
Hawking and Fishing, but chiefly in the latter, which his Majesty followed
early in the morning, as I heard, accompanied only with Two or Three Lords, or
other Attendants: I wonder, said Mr. Ireland, why his Majesty should be so thin
Guarded, he were easily taken off or removed, or some words to that purpose, so
sounding; God forbid, I returned; No, subjoyns he, I do not say it is Lawful,
and something else I cannot call to mind that did qualify the former words,
that I did then think his meaning was, he was then sorry his Sacred Majesty
should go so weakly guarded; I then took it by that handle, having no other
Reason; for I did believe him a Saint, never hearing him, nor any of them, as I
hope for everlasting life, Defend or Maintain in the least, That damnable
Doctrine of deposing Kings; But now I know that passage may be taken by the
other handle; and I am not fit to judge how far, yet you know words are to be
taken in the milder sense unless they be positive, which these, with their
qualifications as they were spoken, are not. I suppose there is clearer
Evidence from Mr. Oats, that better know it than I. There is only another
thing (and I have cleared my Soul,) has run in my fancy ever since this, ever
to be detested Immergency happened, which applied to these times has an ill
sound with it; you know whom I accuse now, Tho. Je. but in other times is
capable of a good Construction, viz. He had some business to acquaint me with,
and this for two or three times at our parting; for I did not see him above
Four or five times, as I remember the while I was in London. Once I urged him
to tell me the business, he replied, he would take some other occasion; now I
did believe he meant somewhat about my settling in the world as a Match, having
propounded one to me of a Knights Daughter half a Year before, or of that sort
of business; and it is capable of that Construction still, if there be no
clearer Evidence to give a Luster and a great Light on the other side. We have
a good Author that commands us to give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God,
who is Truth it self, what belongs to him, which I would do to the dividing the
minutest Atom in the presence of that Truth which made me. But I can now
remember no more if I were to gain Heaven, unless my Cousin Smith put me in mind
of a word or two more relating to one of these two passages, that now I don't
remember, which I will own if I said it, otherwise not; for I will have nothing
to do with their blood, further then what I can with a clear and safe
Conscience swear, which I am ready to do, if sent for, as far as I have
declared; I am in the mean while, Sir,

Your assured Friend, and Faithful Servant, ROB. JENISON.
This be pleased to show to Colonel Tempest, our Knight of the Shire, or whom
you please to acquaint with it. POSTSCRIPT.
I Hear since I have writ this, that 4 of the Jusuits are Condemned, which if
the included 2 be in, this might be spared, only for your satisfaction I send
it; and what I have said in this Letter is all I can justly Swear except my
Cousin Smith remember a word, or more about one of these passages, the former I
mean; as for the latter, all what I have said is by all that is Sacred, (and I
hope it is no offense to swear to the Truth) all, and some, I say, of what I
know, if it were the last moment I have to live, I could confess no more.




The information of Robert Jenison of Gray's Inn Esquire Son of John Jenison, of
Walworth in the County Palatine of Durnam, Esquire taken upon Oath this 26th. day
of June, 1679. before me Edmund Warcup Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, in the County of Middlesex.
Mid. ss. This Informant says, that he went from London to see Windsor, and to
meet Mr. Robert Bows, at or about the 17th. of August last past, and returned
back to London the 19th. day of the same Month; on which day in the afternoon,
he made a visit to Mr. William Ireland, alias Ironmonger, at his Lodgings in
Russel Street, who was this Informants Relation; at which time and place, he
(this Informant) had the discourse with the said Mr. Ireland, mentioned and
contained in this Informant; Letter to the said Mr. Bows, and now showed unto
him, being all of this Informants own hand writing, dated at Reading in
Barkshire, on the 19th. day of December last past. And this Informant does very
well remember, that he went from London into the North, in the York Coach on
the 4th. day of September last past, and came thence back to London, in October
following; and thence went to Reading in obedience to his Majesty's
Proclamation, from whence he wrote the Letter aforesaid to Mr. Robert Bows,
and further at present says not.

Jur. die and anno supr. dict. Cor. me

Edm. Warcup.


Reb. Jenison.

The further Information of Rob. Jenison of Gray's Inn Esquire taken upon Oath this
2d. day of July, 1679. before me Edmund Warcup Esquire one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, in the County of Middlesex.
Mid. ss. This Informant says, that he being returned from Windsor upon the
19th. day of August last, went to Mr. William Ireland's Lodging in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, to visit him; and passing through the Entry,
went directly two pair of Stairs to the said Mr. William Ireland's Chamber, the
Door whereof being somewhat open, he entered, and there found the said William
Ireland, whom this Informant having told, that he came just then from Windsor
upon a Hackney Horse, hired at 3s. per diem, which had much tired him; the said
William Ireland replied, that he was then newly arrived from Wolverhampton in
Staffordshire by Post, and was not weary; Upon which this Informant replied,
that he thought that Scholars, as he was, had rather choose to ride ambling
Horses, than to ride Post.

And this Informant further says, that he very well remembers, that about the
beginning of October last past, Sir Edward Smith came to Walworth in the County
of Durham, and then read a Letter newly come from London, purporting the
discovery of the Plot, and that the King was to have been killed at Windsor;
which made this Informant call to mind the expressions of the said William
Ireland, on the said 19th. day of August, viz. Why his Majesty should be so
thin guarded, he was easily taken off or removed, or words of that sounding,
etc. And thereupon this Informant did the next day after the reading of the
said Letter, relate all the passages between this Informant and the said Mr.
Ireland, to this Informants Father, and the said Mr. Smith, as they are
contained in this Informants Letter to Mr. Bows, dated on the 19th. day of
December last; and so the said Mr. Smith has lately by Letter signified to the
said Mr. Bows. And this Informant further says, that in the year 1678.
several Papists have in this Informants hearing declared, that they doubted
not, but their Religion would shortly be uppermost, or to that effect; And
further at present he says not.

Observations deducible from the aforesaid Letter and Testimony, and from the
manner of obtaining the same.
1. It is a remarkable instance of Divine providence, that this latent evidence
casually discovered to Mr. Chetwind (when he had not known or heard of Mr.
Jenison) should be thus recovered by him; and that in his pursuit thereof, so
many worthy Persons likewise unknown, should accidentally occur to him, and
contribute their great assistance.

2. The 'foresaid Mr. Jenison at the writing of his Letter to Mr. Bows was of
the Romish Church, and in obedience to the Kings Proclamation for Banishing
Papists out of London, had retired from London to Reading, so that the
Discovery made by his Letter cannot rationally be imputed to any other
inducement, or incitement, save only the Power of Truth; especially considering
that Mr. Ireland was related to him.

3. The main Plot is evidently confirmed, not only by the Papists expecting
some great Change and Alteration, mentioned in one of Mr Jenisons Informations,
given in upon his Oath, but also by those suspicious Questions proposed by the
said Ireland to Mr. Jenison after his return from Windsor to London, as, What
news from Windsor? How is the King guarded? And especially those Dangerous
Words of his, Then he may easily be taken off, or to that effect; which do
sufficiently argue, not only his being Privy to the Design, but go far to prove
his being an Instrument therein.

4. For the Readers fuller satisfaction concerning this Subject, these
Particulars are to be noted, viz.

That the King went to Windsor about the 13th of August 1678. as appears by Sir
Tho. Dolemans Testimony at the Trials.

That Mr. Jenison came from Windsor the 19th of August, and went into the North
the 4th of September following.

As to the Latter, his going into the North, the Books of Entries of Passengers
in the Northern Coach have been examined, and the 4th of September is found to
be the very day he took Coach for the North at London; his going to Windsor is
proved by Mr. Burnet, who met him the 17th of August as he came from Dochets
Horse-race, which was on that day.

That Mr. Jenison in his Letter writes thus, Being come from Windsor, I went to
take my leave of Mr. Ireland before I took my journey into the North, and Mr.
Ireland asked me what News from Windsor? How does the King pass his time? etc.
Which notoriously proves, that his Discourse with Mr. Ireland, was when the
King was at Windsor, and also that it was after Mr. Jenison came from Windsor,
and before he went into the North, viz. betwixt the 19th of August and the 4th
of September, and it implies that it was immediately after his coming from
Windsor, by the question, What news from Windsor? and seems also to intimate,
that Mr. Ireland had not long been in London, as being eager of News from
Windsor, which at that time he might if resident in London have had every 2d
Day by Bedingfield's, and other Letters. That this time does nearly agree with
Sarah Pain's Evidence at Irelands Trial, who swears that she saw Ireland here
in London about the Time the King went to Windsor; and there is not above 5 or
6 Days difference, see Whitebreads Trial, Fol. 87. There as Gavan repeats their
Evidence, Sir Jo. Southcot and his Family staid with Ireland till the 19th.
which 19th was the very day he came Post from Staffordshire to London, and was
seen by Mr. Jenison.

That Ireland was tried the 17th of December, and Mr. Jenisons Letter was writ
from Reading the 19th following; and it is clear by the Letter, that Mr.
Jenison had then no notice of Irelands being tried.

That Mr. Smith (a Priest) has since by his Letter to Mr. Bows confirmed the
Truth of what Mr. Jenison relates, viz. That he told his Father and Him at his
Fathers House at Walworth, immediately upon the first Discovery of the Plot
those very Words Mr. Ireland had spoken to him; then certainly it remains
scarcely possible to imagine that unless the matter were exactly true, Mr.
Jenison, a Gentleman of a very fair Temper and Sober life, should report such
Words as delivered by Mr. Ireland, his Kinsman, and a Kinsman very dear in his
esteem, and report them to his own Father old Mr. Jenison and Mr. Smith, and
that at that time when they were all Romanists, and Ireland highly valued by
them all; nor is it less absurd to conceive, that Mr. Smith, as is said, a
Priest as Ireland was, should confirm the Words of Mr. Jenison, so long after
spoken, and that when to witness to them, was even to cut the throat of
Irelands Reputation and Truth, and give a very severe stab to the Romish Cause.
Certainly the thing seems to look as it writ with a Sunbeam.

5. It appears then an undeniable Truth, that Mr Ireland was in London the 12th
or 13th of August 1678. and thence taking a journey into Staffordshire; he
returned and was seen in London and discoursed by Mr. Jenison the 19th of the
same Month, from whence it is probable, having transacted something of the
Matter in Hand, he might immediately return.

Neither do I know any rational Objection against the clearness of the truth
evidenced thereby, unless the three following Objections weigh with some.

Obj. 1. The credit and quality of some of the Witnesses, who testify, they
saw Mr. Ireland in Staffordshire on those Days, wherein he is affirmed to have
been in London.

Ans. To this I shall only answer, that the Credit of the Witnesses, of both
sides may be so far salved, as it is possible to affirm, one and the same person
may be in London and Stafforshire some part of the same Day; the distance being
not so great betwixt both Places, but the journey (especially by Post) may be
easily performed; neither is it improbable, that Mr. Ireland, who was so
actively concerned in the Plot, and in the nature of a Treasurer therein,
should have frequent occasion to travel by Day and by Night betwixt London and
Staffordshire, his Presence being equally necessary to both places, especially
in such a critical time of Expectancy, as that of the Kings being at Windsor
then wa^. Add hereunto, that Mr. Ireland himself confessed in his Discourse
with Mr. Jenison, that he had rode post from Staffordshire to London that day,
yet was not weary: a journey, which many other Persons have performed in less
then the space of one Day, part of the Night being also, in that usually very
hot month of August, more convenient for traveling then the Day; now If such a
Journey were undertaken by Ireland one day? why not another? why not many days,
according as the Urgency of his grand Affairs, and the teeming pregnancy of
them might require?

Obj. 2. If this Evidence be true, why was it not produced before, or at the
Trial of Whitebread, etc. being so material for the clearing of the Truth?

Ans. The matter was a long time kept secret in the Breasts of young Mr.
Jenison and his Father, being both (then) Romanists, and Smith a Priest, and
secured from the knowledge of any Protestant; neither did Mr. Bows receive Mr.
Jenisons letter of Discovery (though often pressed by him to declare his
Knowledge, upon the Kings Proclamation of Pardon) till December 19th 1678.
which was two days after the Trial of Ireland, Now the matter having received
it is Determination in the Arraignment and Condemnation of the said Ireland, no
probability appearing, that it would be again resumed and reinsisted on, no
further Divulgation was made thereof; And unless new provocation had been given
by reviving the matter at Whitebreads Trial, it had possibly lain asleep for
ever; so that what of Indecency may be imputed in combating the Ghost of the
deceased is more properly referrable to the importunate arguings or instances
of his surviving Friends, then then even to the just Vindication of the Truth.

Obj. 3. The confident asseveration of the said Ireland, and the solemn
protestation of his innocence, and of his continuing in Staffordshire the days
he was alleged to be here in London, shall have the room of the third and last
objection.

Ans. 1st. I confess this had not a little influence upon me; for I acknowledge
myself subject to the compassionate sentiments of humane nature; but the same
evidence above mentioned which convinced me, will I doubt not, banish all
hesitation as to this matter from the minds of others, except of those, who out
of guilt or interest are resolved to shut the door against all kind of
satisfaction whatsoever.

2 How far equivocations, falsities, mental reserves, and other Salvoes may be
allowed, even to dying persons, in the Roman Church, provided they contribute
to the advancement of the Catholic Cause, as they phrase it, would require a
large field of discourse; but the clearness of the Evidence justifying Mr.
Ireland's being in London, notwithstanding his and his witnesses affirmations
to the contrary, does give just ground of scruple, that a large freedom is
allowed to them on that account; but it would be too tedious to turn over the
Popish Casuists, for the deciding of that controversy; leaving therefore the
Scholastical and skirmishing part to abler pens, I shall content my self to
exhibit one passage (relating to the matter in hand) mentioned in a Book called
the Jesuits Catechism, composed (almost 60 years since) by a Member of the
Roman Church, but not of the Ignatian Order. His words mentioned, lib. 3. Cap.
12. at the end of that Chapter are there. They (says he, speaking of the
Jesuits) have a rule in practice, that men are bound to accuse themselves to
their Confessors, and not themselves only, but all their Confederates also; and
(for the Magistrate) the Malefactor being condemned to die, after he has once
made Confession of his sins to his Ghostly Father, he is not tied to reveal it
to his Judge, nay it is lawful for him to stand in stiff denial thereof at the
time of his Execution, as being clear before God, though he persist in a lie,
after he has once discharged the depth of his conscience to his Confessor. A
thing (that the same Author subjoyns) that breeds much scruple in the mind of
a Judge, who otherwise is greatly quieted in conscience, when an offender
adjudged to die, howsoever he have beforetime stood in denial of the Fact, yet
at the time of his death confesses the Truth.

An Abstract of the Material Passages at the Trials of Mr. Ireland and Mr.
Whitebread, relating to Mr. Ireland 's being in London about the middle of
August 1678. tending to clear much of the matter of Fact mentioned in the
foregoing Papers.
The things for which Ireland was indicted, were, The conspiring the King's
Death; also, That he did endeavor and contrive to change and alter the
Religion established in the Nation, and introduce Popery in the room of it.
(page 13. of Ireland's Trial) And in order thereunto that Pickering and Grove
should assassinate the King (p. 19.) which Resolve Ireland signed about the
24th of April. 1678. (p. 19, 20.) Pickering and Grove failing, in August
following, Mr. Ireland and others met at Harcourt's Chamber, and their held a
close Consultation how to accomplish their Design of killing the King, which
they determine should be by Four Russians, whom they actually hire and dispatch
away to Windsor, in order to the accomplishing that most Barbarous and most
Treasonable Project: where Dr. Oats saw Mr. Ireland present. (p. 26. and 40.)
The Russians also failing to kill the King at Windsor, they determine, That
Pickering and Grove should go on, and that Conyers should be joined with them,
to Assassinate the King in his Morning-walks at New Market; this they had taken
so strongly upon them that they were very eager to accomplish it. (p. 41.)
These things Ireland was accused of by Mr. Bedlce; Dr. Oats affirming that he
took his leave of Mr. Ireland in his own Chamber between the Twelfth and Four
and twentieth of August, Ireland being then Writing a Letter as Dated from St.
Omers, and that afterward when Dr. Oats went to Fenwicks Chamber, Ireland came
thither also; so that he saw him twice about a Fortnight within August. (p.
60.) Sarah Pain Confirmed both their Evidence by Swearing, that she saw him
about the same time at the Door of his own House: (p. 57.) These things Mr.
Ireland denis, and endeavors to disprove their Evidence only as to time,
because not in London in August last, (i. e. in A. D. 1678.) but in
Staffordshire; (p. 46. and 56.) and this he attempts chiefly to prove against
Dr. Oats, in Order to the Nullifying his Evidence, and so confidently affirms
himself not in London, for the whole of that August, this he offers to prove by
Twenty Witnesses, (p. 44. and 56.) and says, First, he would endeavor to prove
that there was not Two Witnesses against him; for that which Mr. Oats said of
his being at Harcourts Chamber in August, was false for he was all August long
out of Town in Staffordshire; upon the Third Day he went down to Staffordshire,
with my Lord Aston, and his Lady, and his Son, and Sir John Southcot, and his
Lady; and says he, all these can Testify that I went down with them, here is
Mr. John Aston in Town, if he may be found, who was in my Company all August in
Staffordshire, (p. 56.)

But to save him that Labor, the Kings Evidence offered to prove that he was
in Town at that time, for which they Swore Sarah Pain, who affirmed she knew
Mr. Ireland, and that she saw him in Town in August last at his own House,
(which was at a Scriveners in Russel Street in Covent Garden) about a week
before she went with my Lord Arlington to Windsor, which was about a week after
the King was gone thither; which Sir Tho. Doloman said, was about the 13th of
August. How she knew him, was, because he came often to her Masters house, that
was Mr. Groves, the Person Condemned with him, averring that he was the Man
that broke open the Packet of Letters, That her Master carried about
aterwards; and he Sealed all the Pacquets that went beyond the Seas, and he
opend them still when the Answers returned them back again. p. 57.

Against whose Evidence he opposed that of his Sister Ann Ireland, and his
Mother Elinor Ireland, who both said, that on Saturday the Third of August he
set out to go into Staffordshire, and he continued there till it was a
Fortnight before Michaelmas, which (says the Sister) I remembered by a very
good Circumstance, because on the Wednesday before, my Brother, and my Mother
and I were invited out to Dinner, we staid there all night, and all Thursday
night, and Friday night my Brother came home, and on Saturday de set out for
Staffordshire. p. 58, 59.

Sarah Pain being again asked, if she was sure that she saw him in the Place
she mentioned, and about the time? She answered, yes, I am sure I saw him at
that very Place and at that time; but Mr. Ireland then confidently professed he
never knew her, although she was Mr. Groves Servant, and used to carry him
Letters from her Master's; his words are, I profess I do not know her, 20
people may come to me, and yet I not know them, and she having been Mr. Groves
servant might have brought me Letters, and yet I not remember her. p. 58, 59.

But my L. C. Justice thus recapitulates Sarah Pains Evidence against him: she
says that she saw you in London about the 10th or 12th of August, and she makes
it out by a Circumstance, which is better Evidence, then if she had come and
Swore the precise day wherein she saw you; for I should not have been
satisfied, unless she had given me a good account why she did know it to be
such a Day. She does it by Circumstance, by which we must calculate she saw you
about the 12th or 13th day; she went to my Lord Arlingtons at such a day, a
week after the King went to Windsor, and that was about the 13th, and she saw
you a week before she went to my Lord Arlingtons, which must be the 12th or
13th. You say you went out of Town the 3d of August, who can Swear you did not
come back again? To which Ireland says, all the house can testify I did not
come to my Lodging; his Mother also affirmed it, but they were Parties. p. 59.

Dr. Oats, here comes in with his Information, and reports it to my Lord C.
Justice thus.

My Lord, whenever we had a mind to come to Town, we commonly writ our Letters,
and let them come to Town two days after us; so that we might prove by the
Writing of such Letters, if any Question did arise; that we could not be at
such a Place at a such time; And when we pretended to go into the Country, we
have gone and taken a Chamber in the City, and have had frequent Cabals at our
Chambers. There Mr. Ireland writ a Letter as Dated at St. Omers, when I took my
leave of him at his own Chamber, which was betwixt the 12th and 24th in London;
he was there; and afterward when I went to Fenwicks Chamber he came thither, a
Fortnight or Ten Days at least, I am sure it was in August. -- p. 60.

Upon which, and what went before my Lord Chapter Justice Reflects as follows.

Here are 3 Witnesses upon Oath about this one thing: Here is Mr. Bedloe, that
Swears the Fact upon which the Question arises to be in August; that you deny,
and say you were out of Town then; he produces a Maid here, and she Swears that
about that time, which by Calculation must be about the 12th or 13th, she saw
you going into your own house. And here is a 3d Witness, who Swears he knows
nothing of the matter of Fact, but he knows you were in Town then, and that he
took his leave of you as going to St. Omers. p. 60.

In the next place Ireland produces one Harrison, a Coachman, to testify that
he was in his Company from the 5th of August to the 16th, and at that time he
was with him 3 or 4 days at my Lord Astons House at Tixall in Staffordshire, p,
62. [In which time Mr. Ireland might easily steal a Journey to London, and
return without notice being taken of it; and this might be the time in which
Sarah Pain saw him.] Also Harrison affirmed that he was with Mr. Ireland at
Westchester, and that there he left him; [And here let it be remembered that Mr.
Ireland confidently averred himself to be in Staffordshire all August, p. 56.
and one of his own Witnesses declared him to be even in another County, which
he granted to be true, but came off with this Evasion, in Staffordshire or
thereabout. P. 61, 62.]

You may here take a view of Irelands Dying Words, concerning the thing in
Hand, delivered January 24. at the Common Place of Execution.
We are come hither upon the Theater of the World, and we do conceive we lie
under an obligation to speak. And 1st we do confess that we do pardon all and
every one whatsoever that had any Interest or Concern, or Hand in the taking
away our Lives. 2dly. We do here profess and acknowledge, we are obliged, that
if we were Guilty of any Treason, or knew any Person faulty therein, although
he were our Father, we would detect and discover him. And as for our Selves, we
would beg a thousand and a thousand Pardons both of God and man; but seeing we
cannot be believed, we must beg leave to commit our selves to the mercy of
Almighty God, and we hope to find a pardon of Him.

As for my own Part, having been twenty years out of England, and then coming
over, I was resolved to take a Journey into Staffordshire; and setting out in
August, and not returning back to this Town until before the 14th day of
September, as many Witnesses can testify: for I believe an hundred or more saw
me there; Therefore now, how in this time we should be accused of Treasonable
Stratagems, I do not well know or in any wise understand.

Thus much out the Trials of Ireland, etc.
But because Mr. Ireland's not being in London, from about the beginning of
August till about the beginning of September, A. D. 1678. is urged and
prosecuted with more importunity in the Trials of White alias Whitebread, etc.
I shall here present you with the whole that referred to this matter, as
debated in the Court, only leaving out every thing that had not a special
Reference to the thing Intended, to wit, the Proving Mr. Ireland out of Town
for the whole forementioned time.

Whitebread. My Lord, I have only this, and I desire to be heard in this point,
to prove that Mr. Oats was mistaken in his Evidence that he gave at the last
Trial against Mr. Ireland.


L. C. J. Look you. I must break in upon you; you have been told so often, all
of you have been told it, and yet you are upon the former Trials again. You are
now upon your trial for your Life, if you could have disproved any thing that
he said at a former Trial, you should have taken a legal way and convicted him
of Perjury; but now to charge him with a Printed paper is not fair. You must
speak to what he says now.


Whitebread. He says the same now. But all that I say is this, if he be not
honest, he can be witness in no case. I suppose if any one can prove him not
Probus Testis, his Testimony is not to be received in any case.


L. C. J. But how will you prove that? Come on, I Will teach you a little Logic:
If you will come to contradict a Witness, you ought to do it in a matter which
is the present debate here; for if you would convict him of any thing that he
said in Irelands Trial, we must try Irelands Cause over again. But if you will
say any thing against what he says now, do.


Whitebread. That which I would aledge is this, if he be convicted of Perjury
in one Case, he is not to be believed in another.


L. C. J. You say right, if he be convicted.


Whitebread. He is not only then an incompetent Witness, for he cannot be said
to be Probus Testis. but he is Improbus. Now this is that I can prove.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Nay, you must show it by a Record.


L. C. J. You cannot have so little understanding, you that have been, and were
to be so great a Man among them, had been Provincial, and was to have been
somewhat else. I have told you already that to prove him to be a man that has
no Faith in him he must be convicted. You must have indicted him, and convicted
him, of the thing wherein he did commit Perjury, and then he had been prepared
to justify himself. But shall you come now, and at this your Trial, and prove
what he said at Staley's Trial, and Colemans Trial, and Irelands Trial? And
must we examine what matters have received a Verdict and a Judgment there? for
consider what will be the consequence of it; if it should be false, you there
arraign a Verdict: You should have convicted him of the falsehood first.


Whitebread. I desire the Jury to take notice, that he does not stick to the
Testimony that he gave then, for if he does it was false.


L. C. J. They must not take notice of any thing that was done at a former
Trial, unless it be spoken of now. P. 69.


L. C. J. North. Do not call any witnesses to prove what he said then, but to
disprove what he has said now.


Harcourt. Mr. Oats did accuse me of paying Fourscore pounds at my Chamber,
and he did say afterward it was at Wild-house. I have Persons to justify what
was done at my own Chamber; and he says, Mr. Ireland was by; now here are
Witnesses to prove that Mr. Ireland was in Staffordshire all the month of
August, therefore he could not be present. P. 70.


Mr. J. Pemberton. That was urged before; pray do not insist upon that, it has
received a Trial.


L. C. J. I Will tell you what he says, and I Will ask him the question: Dr. Oats,
it is supposed by your Testimony, that Mr. Ireland and Mr. Harcourt were
together when this Fourscore pounds was paid, for the Villains that went to
Windsor to murder the King.


Dr. Oats. I never said such a word.


Harcourt. Here it is in the Trial.


L. C. J. I stand not by the Printed Trial, it is no Record in Law. In short,
Were Mr. Ireland and Mr. Harcourt together at that time?


Dr. Oats. No, they were not.


Gavan. He did then say, that he did receive of Mr. Ireland, the 2d of
September, 20s. that he borrowed of him: now the 2d of September he was at
Boscobel.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I was not positive as to the Day; but as near as I
remember (those were the words I said) it was the 2d of September; but whether
it was the First, Second, Seventh, Eighth or Ninth, I would not be positive in
it.

Then the Prisoners called Pendrel and his Wife, and Gifford and his Wife; and
Gifford stood up.
Gifford. My Lord, I was here the last Sessions, where I did testify the
Seeing of Mr. Ireland in Staffordshire on the 24th of August, Bartholomew-day,
and the next day after; at which time Mr. Oats said that he saw him here in
Town. But Mr. Oats could not be particular in every thing; but at last he came
to a circumstance, and averred that the first or second of September he did
receive 20s. of Mr. Ireland in Harcourts Chamber; he said it was about the
Fast Day.


Dr. Oats. That was as near as I remembered.


Gifford. Here is in Court at least six People that know it; I saw him several
other of those days there; but these six People conversed with him every day.


Mr. J. Pemberton. How do you know all that?


L. C. J. North. Come, come, you must not speak as to what he said in Irelands
Trial.


L. C. J. What time was it that Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Ireland conferred together
about this same business?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I do not charge Ireland, but I charge Harcourt with being
at Wild-house, and that there Coleman met him, and that there was greatest part
of the money, which was carried back to Harcourts Chamber, and given to the
person that was to carry it down to Windsor; but Mr. Celeman was gone away
before, and had left a Guiny behind him, which was given to the messenger for
Expedition.


L. C. J. I am mistaken if you have not testified that Ireland was in Town in
August and September with Harcourt.


Dr. Oats. Ireland took his leave of London betwixt the 8th and 12th of
August, as to go to St. Omers, p. 71.


Lord Chapter Just. Here is the matter, they must have right, though there be never
so much time lost, and patience spent: say they, we must prove and contradict
men by such matters as we can; People may swear downright things, and it is
impossible to contradict them; but we will call witnesses to prove those
particulars that can be proved: say where Mr. Ireland was in August?


Dr. Oats. He took his leave of us in Town in August, and that was between the
Eighth and Twelfth at Harcourts Chamber


L. C. J. What do you infer from Irelands being there then?


Dr. Oats. I Will tell you what I design in it; your Lordship may perceive that I
did methodize my Evidence according to the time; for I said this was our
business in April, this in July; and now we come to the business of August,
said I, we took our leaves of Mr. Ireland between the eighth and twelfth. I
said in July Mr. Fenwick was out of Town, but then if your Lordship remembers I
said he was in Town, and took his leave of Mr. Ireland between the eighth and
the twelfth of August.


L. C. J. Was Mr. Ireland in Fenwicks company at that time in August?


Dr. Oats. Yes my Lord he was when he took his leave.


L. C. J. Did they talk then of this business.


Dr Oats. They took their leaves one of another, but as to what particular
things of the Plot they spoke about, I do not remember.


L. C. J. Look you now, mind what he says, Ireland and Fenwick were together in
August between the eighth and the twelfth, but b^ing (...), Whether they were
met on purpose to talk of the Plot? he says he does not remember the Particular:

Here the Lady Southcot, her Son, and her Daughter, were called.
L. C. J. Did you say that Fenwick there at the Bar, had converse with Ireland
in August, for the carrying on of the Plot?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. My rule is this in doubtful cases; when men are upon their Lives, I
had rather hear what is impertinent, than not ^^ them make a full defense.


L. C. J. North. I had rather hear things at a venture, than forbid things at a
venture.

Lady Southcot stood up.
L. C. J. How long were you in Mr. Ireland; company?


Lady Southcot. From the fifth of August to the sixteenth.


L. C. Just. What every day?


Lady Southcot. Yes every day.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, here is Sarah Pain, who before has testified what she
has known in this matter. If your Lordship (...), I desire she may be called
in readiness to speak to it.


L. C. J. Are y^^ sure it was the fifth?


Lady Southcot. Yes, as sure as I can be of any thing.


Mr. Recorder. D^. Oats, you had best keep your Evidence entire till the last.

Then Sir Jo. Southcot was called, and appeared.
L. C. Just. Did you know Mr. Ireland?


Sir Jo. Southcot. Yes, I did know him by face.


L. C. J. Where did you see him?


Sir Jo. Southcot. I saw him the 5th. of August at Sir. Albans.


L. C. J. And did he travel along with you?


Sir Jo. Southcot. Yes, he did travel along with us, the sixth, seventh,
eighth, and ninth.


L. C. J. How many days did he travel along with you?


Sir Jo. Southcot. He traveled along with us, four days together, I am sure.


L. C. J. What from the fifth to the ninth?


Sir Jo. Southcot. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. Is this all that you can say?


Sir Jo. Southcot. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. But we would know where he was afterward; did you see him after the
ninth?


Sir Jo. Southcot. My Lord, I saw him at St. Albans, and we went from thence to
Northampton, and from thence to Coventry, and from thence to my Lord Astons,
that is four days; and I saw him Thursday, I saw him Friday, Saturday, and
Monday following: Tuesday, I had occasion to go further into the Country, and
he went along with us; so I saw him Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday,
afterward.


L. C. J. Why then, you saw him at least twelve days?


Sir Jo. Southcot. Yes.


L. C. J. Have you any more.

Then Mr. Edward Southcot stood up.
L. C. J. Were you here, when Ireland was tried?


Sir Jo. Southcot. No.


L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Ireland in August last?


Mr. Southcot. The third of August, he came down to my Lord Astons at Stanmore,
they said so; but I cannot swear he came that night, but I saw him very early
the next morning; the 5th. we went to St. Albans, and we kept on till we came
to Tinall, and I was in his company from the 4th. to the 16th.


L. C. J. Why, you hear what he says, he was in Company with him every day from
the 4th. to the 16th.


Gavan. Call Mrs. Harewell and her daughter, Mrs. Gifford, and Mrs. Pendrel.

Then Mrs. Harewell stood up.
L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Ireland in August last?


Harewell. I saw Ireland in August last, the 17th. day; he came then to my
house at Wolverhampton, and there he continued every day, and lay in my house
every night till the 26th. day.

Then young Mrs. Harewell stood up.
Harewell. Mr. Ireland came to our house in Staffordshire the 17th. of August,
and stayed there till the 26th. I saw him every day, unless it was Friday, the
day before Bartholomew-day, when he went to Litehfield, and returned again.


Gavan. My Lord, there is a Prisoner now in Newgate that can testify the same.


L. C. J. North. Would you ask your fellow if you be a Thief? he is in for the
same offense.


Gavan. My Lord, I desire to know, if a man be not convicted of the same
offense, whether he be not a good witness?


L. C. J. North. If he stand charged with the same Plot, his Evidence is of
little weight.

Then Elisabeth Keiling stood up.
L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Ireland in August?


Keiling. Yes, my Lord, I did. p. 73.


L. C. J. Where did you see him?


Keiling. I saw him at Wolverhampton, there he was from Saturday the 17th. to
Monday, and then I went to see my Mother, and came back again on Thursday, and
found him there, and there he was till the 26th.

Then stood up Mr. Gifford.
L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Ireland?


Gifford. My Lord, Mr. Ireland came to Wolverhampton the 17th. of August, and
he stayed there till the 26th. it was of a Monday, I remember it by several
circumstances.


L. C. J. Did you know Mr Ireland?


Gifford. I never saw him before.


L. C. J. Do you know it was the same that died?


Gifford. My Lord, here was my brother in Town, who saw him executed, and he
did assure me he was the same. I saw him again the 2d of September, and the
7th. of September again, and the 10th. and the 11th. my Lord, he was the same
man I believe, because my brother told me so. p. 74.


Sir Cr. Levins. Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Prisoners, and they
have had a great deal of time to make their defense; but the greatest part of
their defense has been to invalidate the Testimony of Mr. Oats; and what is
the Evidence they have brought against him? they tell you first, that he did
not come over in this Company that he says he came over with. And whereas he
has sworn he was here the 24th of April, they have taken a great deal of pains
by fifteen or sixteen Witnesses, to prove that he was all the time at St.
Omers. -- P. 76.


Sir C. Levins. -- Now as for Mr. Oats Testimony, and what they have to say to
him; in the first place, they have brought a young Gentleman, Mr. Hilsley, and
he says he did not come over with him, and there it is one against one, but Dr.
Oats has Sworn it, and has given you such convincing Circumstances how he
lost his money, etc. so that I leave it to you, which of the two is in the
right, and ought to be believed. But then, my Lord, as to the rest of the
Witnesses, here are a great many brought over to prove that Dr. Oats was all
the while at St. Omers; but I shall bring you a considerable number of
Witnesses, to prove that Dr. Oats was then in London, and that all these
Persons are mistaken: They do all pitch upon the first of May, to six it upon a
time, wherein he says he was here in Town: But Gentlemen, I hope you did
observe, that as to other things and time that were not so necessary as to this
matter, there they were pleased to mistake, and to differ one from another, to
contradict one another; for some of them said he went away and left St. Omers
the 10th of June, others the 23d others, which was the same Flemish Gardener,
that he stayed till July: Truly half that variance in the time which is
necessary, would serve our turn, we are but for eight days time, that is, he
was not above eight or ten days here; truly these Gentlemen will be sure to
speak punctually to all those eight days that hurt the Prisoners, but they will
vary thirty days at another time, that hurts them not: Why may they not be
mistaken as well with that portion of time, as they were in the other, wherein
they so much differed one from another? But I shall give you most infallable
proof by and by, that Mr. Oats was in England at that time, that he said he
was in England: This he does in the Trials of Whitebread, etc. from Page 79. to
Page 85. to which the Reader is referred. Page 77.


Sir Chapter Levins. -- Then truly, my Lord, they are fixed upon another great
matter to blemish Dr. Oats as to Mr* Ireland, a person that is dead and out of
the way. Mr. Ireland has been hanged upon that Evidence, so far it was
believed, but now after all this will these Gentlemen come to question the
Evidence that was given against Mr. Ireland. They have likewise, my Lord,
brought my Lady Southcot, and some other persons who give you an Evidence
concerning Mr. Ireland, that he should not be here at this time; but Gentlemen
under favor, Mr. Oats has sworn before, and he has now sworn it again, that
Mr. Ireland was at that time in London, and Gentlemen, I will confirm him in
that by another Witness that did see him here in Town at that time. And when
you have two Witnesses for the King upon their Oaths come and testify it, I
hope you will believe them, rather then other persons that testify only by
Hearsay. It was the matter then in Issue, and had saved his Life if it had
been true, but though it be now settled, and none could think it would be again
started, they would make that an Objection, but by chance we have a Witness
still to give you satisfaction, that Mr. Ireland was in London at that time
that Mr. Oats did swear him to be. We will begin with that Witness about
Ireland. And then we will call our Witnesses to prove that Mr Oats was in
England, and did come over when he said he did. Call Sarah Pain (who was sworn)


Sir Chapter Levins. What time did you see Mr. Ireland in London? did you see him
in August last?


S. Pain. I saw him about 7 or 8 days before I came to my Lord Chamberlain, and
that was about a week before the King went to Windsor.


L. C. J. Where did you see him?


S. Pain. At his own door in Russel Street.


L. C. J. Did you speak to him?


S. Pain. No; I knew him very well, and saw him as I came by.


Sir Chapter Levins. Had not you carried many Letters to him?


S. Pain. Yes, several Letters, p. 78.


Sir Chapter Levins. But where did you live before?


S. Pain. I lived at Mr. Grove's.


Sir Chapter Levins. Did not Mr. Ireland use to come there too?


S. Pain. Yes, he did often.


L. C. Just. Was any one talking with Ireland then?


S. Pain. No.


Sir Chapter Levins. How long did you look upon him? did you see him go in? did you
see his face or his back?


S. Pain. I saw his face, and made him a Courtesy.


L. C. J. This she said to Irelands face.


Mr. J. Dolben. Your Evidence is, that Mr. Ireland went out of Town the 5. of
August, and she says she saw him about that time, which must be the 12th or
14th of August.


Gavan. How does she prove it? she does not say she spoke with him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. She swears it.


Sir Chapter Levins. Now we must prove what time the King went to Windsor.


L. C. J. Sir Tho. Doleman, what time in August did the King go to Windsor last
Summer?


Sir Tho. Doleman. I believe (I cannot charge my memory so well) it was the
13th, it was about the 12th or 13.


L. C. J. Was my Lord Chamberlain there then?


S. Pain. My Lord Chamberlain went after the King.


L. C. J. And when do you say, you saw Ireland?


S. Pain. I saw him seven or eight days before I went to my Lord Chamberlains,
which was before my Lord went to Windsor, and that was a week after the King
went thither.


Sir Chapter Levins. Now I Will tell you what she says; she says she saw Ireland a
week before she went to my Lord Chamberlain's, and she saw him go into Grove's
House, where he did usually go for Letters. She says she saw his face, and made
him a Courtesy; and that this was a week before she went to my Lord
Chamberlains, and that was a week after the King went to Windsor. Now the time
that Mr. Oats pitches upon, is between the eighth and the twelfth of August,
which by computation is the time she speaks of. P. 79.


Gavan. -- My Lord, we have here 16 at least Staffordshire Witnesses, who give
you an account of Mr. Ireland's being out of London from the 3d of August till
14th of September. So that in these two things he has been contradicted
without any answer, for he says, the 12th of August he was with him, when they
say he was in Staffordshire.


L. C. J. You have forgot the maid that saw him in London the 12. or 13th.


Gavan. No, my Lord, I have not. And this is it, I answer to it; she is a
witness that only says, she just saw him, but did not speak to him.


L C. J. She made a Courtesy to him. P. 86.


Gavan. We were talking now of seeing Ireland in August, and we prove by Sir.
Jo. Southcot and all his Family, who say they began their journey with him the
5th of August; and staid with him till the 19th, after the particular Day that
she speaks of, you find 7 or 8 of them swear that they saw him all the time. P.
87.

I will close up the Whole with a little of my Lord Chief Justices Speech, at
the end of the Trials of Whitebread, etc. p. 92, 93. Which though it may not at
first seem to answer our particular design, the demonstrating Ireland's being
in London, yet it truly answers our general design, to con^^^^ the reality of
the Plot, and in order thereunto it is a most noble Argument, and really merits
not only the transcribing into this Tract to fill up an empty space, but even
into the memories of all true Protestants.


L. C. J. I will challenge all the Papists in England to satisfy any man that
hears me this day of one piece of Evidence, which will turn every Protestants
heart against the Papists. If so be, they murdered Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, the
Plot even by that is in a great measure proved upon them, by that base murder.
And what can be a plainer proof of it, than the evidence of this Day, which Mr.
Dugdale produces? Who had notice (says he) on Monday night, that on the
Saturday before it, Sir Edm. Godfrey was killed (which falls out to be that
very Saturday he was first missing) which notice was given in a Letter writ by
Harcourt to Ewers' another Priest, that same Saturday night, wherein were these
words, This night Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey is dispatched; and I am sure if this
be true, then no man can say but they murdered Him. Now the question is,
whether it be true or no? To make it out, he produces Mr. Chetwind, whom I hope
you will not deny to be a Gentleman of one of the best Families of his Country,
and of honest Reputation, who says; that on the Tuesday following that Saturday
Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey was miss't, he and another were walking together in
Staffordshire, and that the other Person asked him if he knew of the Death of
any Justice of the Peace at Westminster, and when he told him, he had heard of
no such thing; No, said he, that is strange, you living sometimes about
Westminster; for said he, the Wench at the Alehouse says, That this morning
Mr. Dugdale said to two other Gentlemen, there was a Justice of Peace of
Westminster killed; and Mr. Dugdale swears, That was Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey;
now if Dugdale be fit to be believed, that he saw such a Letter, as he must be
if he be not a very great Prophet, to be able to foretell this: or if the Maid
that said this, did not invent it (a thing then impossible to be done:) or Mr.
Chetwind feigned that he heard the Man make his report from the Maid; this
thing could not come to pass, but by these men. Nay, if Mr. Dugdale could not
do as great a Miracle as any are in the Popish Legends, how could he tell that
it was done on the same Night when it was done at London? or speak of it on the
Monday night after, when it was not known in London till the Thursday
following? This will stick, I assure you (Sirs) upon all your Party.

For my own part, this evidence of Mr. Dugdals, gives me the greatest
satisfaction of any thing in the World, in this matter, and whilst we rest
satisfied in the Murder of that Man, and are morally certain you must do it,
knowing of what Principles you are, you cannot blame us, if upon such manifest
reasons we lay it upon you.

And this is occasional Evidence, which I for my part never heard before this
day; nor can I ever be more or better satisfied, then I am upon this point,
viz. The Testimony that I have received this afternoon, concerning the murder
of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey: As to the defenses they have made, they are
exceptions in point of time, but do not effect Mr. Dugdale; for they have
hardly the confidence to deny the things he says to be true against them.

They fall foul indeed upon Mr. Oats: He appears to have been their Agent; and
whilst so, bad enough; but if he had not had a mind to have become a good man,
he would not likely have done us that good that he has done, in discovering
the Design you had engaged him in: let any man judge by your Principles and
Practices, what you will not do for the promoting of the same.


FINIS.

