THE HISTORY of POPERY; OR PACKET OF Advice from Rome.

The Fourth Volume.

CONTAINING The LIVES of Eighteen POPES, AND The most remarkable Occurrences in
the Church, for near One hundred and fifty Years, viz. From the beginning of
Wickliff's Preaching, to the first Appearance of Martin Luther.

Intermixed with several large Polemical Discourses; as whether the present
Church of Rome be to be accounted a Church of Christ; whether any Protestant
may be present at Mass: and other Important Subjects.

Together with continued Courants, or innocent Reflections weekly on the
Distempers of the times.

Cujus aures clausae Veritati sunt, ut ab Amico Verum audire nequeat, hujus
salus desperanda est -- Cicero Rhet. 1. LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold
by Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, near Fleet-Bridge,
1682.

THE PREFACE.
PRefaces are many times more for fashionsake than necessity, and being
esteemed rather as Complements than serious matters; are as slightly passed
over by the Reader, as superfluously added by the Author. More especially we
might seem excusable, if we should not comply with the Tyranny of Custom
herein, before this Volume, having preambled at large to the other Three; and
given not only an account of the reason and design of this work, but answered
most of the Objections and Scandals commonly cast upon it.

This 4 th Volume, it is true, is not large in bulk, yet contains the History of
a very remarkable period; viz. From Wickliff's dawning, to the daybreak of
Luther; and exhibits not a few choice Occurrences, and most fit to be known, as
by the Table may appear.

Especially it demonstrates us to what a desperate degree of Corruption the
Roman Church was degenerated, and what a Chaos of Errors, Superstition and
Impiety she was become; insomuch that complaints were daily put forth by all
those that had any Sparks of Grace and Virtue in them, though yet joining with
her in communion: and as these abuses showed the need and necessity of a
Reformation, so they both led people to desire it, and also did justify the
same when effected.

But still some envious Carpers will come with Judas's Objection, -- Quorsum
perditio haec, what need so much wast of Paper? What occasion have we for your
paltry Sheets? (...) all these matters better and more copious^^^^ (...) by a
multitude of diligent Historians (...) accurately handled by many Learned
Divine^ (...) ^^nfess, men of Letters and leisure, are or may (...)
sufficiently accommodated with Books of that kind; but many of them writ in
Foreign Languages, and either unintelligible to our common Countrymen, or too
dear for their Pockets, or too voluminous for their time to peruse. It Is to
serve these, that our Labors are designed; nor have they we hope, been
altogether unprofitable on that Account, but have given the vulgar Englishman
as much Insight into the Mystery of Iniquity, perhap as any one single work
whatsoever. Besides, though, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius, the matter be
not new, yet there may be (...), a handling of the same things in another
manner, and when diverse persons treat of the same subject, something may be
found in one which is not in another; and in one Packet, you have many times
the substance and choicest notes of several Authors, like a Posy made up of
several Flowers.

Before the late Troubles in England, or the date of forty one, several Godly
learned men have either expressed (as Mr. Archer, of Christ's personal Reign on
Earth, p. 50. and 55.) or Intimated (as Mr. Mede on Rev. 11. 7.) That (in their
opinion) Popery shall yet again for a while universally or very generally
prevail in many or most of these Countries and Nations out of which it has been
expelled. With whom as to this particular, the most profound and Reverend
Archbishop Usher did dot only concur in opinion, but seems to be very much
assured, or to have had a kind of particular foresight of the sharp
persecutions that shall attend this last effort of Antichrists, if that Paper
called his Prophesy may be credited, which I never yet heard disproved: to
which we may add that dismal prospect of affairs which our eyes behold, it
being certain that the Protestant Interest throughout Europe, was never lower
since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, than it is at this Instant. And
therefore certainly since the danger is so near and so great, it concerns all
Protestants to Arm themselves for the Encounter; to study the points in
Controversy between us and the Papists as far as their Leisure and Abilities
will give them leave, and both to establish themselves in the truth, and be
acquainted with the Sophisms, specious pretenses and enticing Fallaces of the
Romanists, that they may the better avoid and confute them.

More especially to warn people from Hypocrisy and sinful compliances, in case
Superstition should ever prevail to a public Establishment (which God forbid)
we have at large in this Tome evinced the present Synagogue of Rome, not to be
a Church of Christ, and the extreme hazard all those run of their Eternal
Salvation, who continue therein; as also the Sin of frequenting their
Idolatrous Mass, though only in formality, and outward Complaisance or
Curiosity.

There are too many Errors of the Press, which thou may meet with in this
Volume, which I desire thee to Correct and pardon; being generally very obvious
to a Considerate Reader, by the sense and words foregoing and subsequent. And
if there happen any more material mistakes, I beg the same exercise of thy
Candor; our Books are like our selves -- Vitio sine nemo nascitur, optimus
ille Qui minimis urgetur --.

I shall detain thee no longer, but praying unto the Lord to preserve his
Church from Errors without, and to purge it from Errors within, I rest

Thy Friend and Servant, In what I may, HEN. CARE.

Some of the principal Contents of this Fourth Volume.
A.
ABhorrencies of the Association considered. p. 26 Academy, a new one for
correcting Grammar and Logic. 249 Addresses, Mr. L'Estrange's sentiments of
them. 87 Advice from Geneva (a Libel so called) censured. 7 Aeneas Sylvius, how
he got to be Pope. 250 Notable Sentences of His. 254 Amurath the Turk, appeals
to Christ against the King of Hungary, for breaking his faith with him by the
Popes Instigation, and obtains a great victory. 76 and 242
B.
BAstards, Pope Innocent the eighth had sixteen. 262 Bazil, The Council held
there, decree that the Pope ought to obey a General Council. 220 Bohemians, the
Pope consents they shall enjoy the use of the Cup in the Sacrament. 229 Burning
of Heretics, the first Law for it in England. 84
C.
CAlvinists, the Papists call the Church of England so. 7 Calvin vindicated
from Rebellion. 175 Care, (the Author of this work) Burnt in Effigy by the
Tories at Norwich. 207 Captains (of the Blew-Apron) complemented. 263 Cardinals
will choose a Protestant Pope, and the Divan a Christian Grand Seignior: a very
significant allusion. 150 Church of Rome no Church of Christ, from p. 137. to
158 Church established, what it signifies in the Papists Dictionary. 136
Clemangis, his Advice to depart out of Babylon. 218 Council of Constance,
depose Pope John the 23d, and declare a Council to be above the Pope. 58
Constantinople taken by the Turk. 238
D.
DEgrading a Priest, the manner of it. 70 Dispensation from a Pope, for a man
to marry with his own Sister. 214 To practice Witchcraft. 244 To commit Sodomy.
261 Dissenters, a French Case put, touching the Prosecutions against them. 16
Dowdal, a Popish Priest in the Gate House 1681, his Complaints of his
Fellow-Priests and their Rogueries.
E.
EMperor of Greece comes to Italy. 221
F.
FAction, the word interpreted. 223 Feasts of ^^^ception and Visitation of the
Virgin Mary (...) 230
The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Dec. 23. 1681.
Magnus ab Integro seclorum nascitur Ordo.
A Preliminary Discourse to this Fourth Volume. The History of John Wickliff,
his Parts, Doctrines, etc. with a brief Draught of the Complexion of those
Times.
IN our three foregoing Tomes we have traced the Roman Lucifer from his very
Cradle, and pursued him in all his subtle windings, 'till we found him mounted
aloft, exalting himself above all that is called God, disposing of the Crowns
and Kingdoms of Princes at his pleasure, and trampling their Royal Necks under
his audacious Feet. We have also particularly considered the Rise and Progress
of the Apostasy, under what pretenses the respective Errors, Superstitions, and
Idolatries crept into the Church, and how they were entertained and promoted
from time to time by the Pope and his Clergy, in order to gratify their own
Pride and Covetousness.

Thus have we followed the Thread of the Story to the 14 th Century, at which
time it pleased God to raise up Wickliff an Englishman, who, more loud than
any before him, sounded the Alarm-Bell of Reformation, and by continual
preaching and writing against the lazy Friars and their Fopperies, that the
Impression; (although his wicked Enemies burnt the good Man's Bones long after)
made in the Minds of Men by his Doctrines, could never be totally effaced, but
remained more or less in several parts, even 'till Luther's days: And indeed it
wa^ high time for some such burning and shining Light to arise, for (...) all
the World sat in darkness, and the shadow of Death. The name of Christianity
was left, but scarce any thing else; the true and lively Doctrine of our
Blessed Lord and Savior, was for the most part as unknown to those who called
themselves after his Name, as to the Heathen themselves. The vileness of our
natural State, the strength and turpitude of Sin, the end and use of the Law,
the Offices of Christ, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, the Nature of Faith,
the true works of Grace, and liberty of a Christian Man, etc. were Points
neither understood, nor enquired after. There was rarely a word of Scripture
mentioned; Divinity and Learning were both confined close Prisoners to the
Schools, and there miserably perverted into Cobweb Notions, and wrangling
Sophistry. Instead of reading the Evangelists and St. Paul, Men spent their
time and Brains in studying the crabbed perplexities of Scotus, and the Master
of the Sentences, and the World forsaking the vivifying Power of God's
Spiritual Word and Doctrine, was altogether first blinded, and then led with
external gaudy Pomp, dazzling Ceremonies, and multiplied humane Traditions.
Scarce any thing else being seen in the Churches, heard in their Sermons, or
intended in all their ^evotions; so that the People were taught to worship
nothing but what they saw, and they saw almost nothing which they did not
worship: Witness the multitudes of Images, Crosses, Pictures, Relics,
Shrines, Tombs, Altars, etc. all the Objections of their foolish Devotions.
Instead of the Poverty and Purity of Christ, here was Pride and Superfluity,
and all kinds of abomination of Life; instead of the Apostolical Labors and
Humility, Sloth and Ambition had seized upon the Priests. The simple and
unlearned being far from all knowledge of the Holy Scripture, thought it enough
for them to know only these things which were delivered them by their Pastors
and Teachers, who were almost as ignorant themselves, and taught nothing but
what they received from the Court of Rome, whereof the most part tended more to
the profit of their Order, advancing the Pope's Interest, or filling with Money
his Coffers, than to the Glory of Christ, or real advantage of Souls. The
Christian Faith was counted no other thing than to know, That Christ once
suffered, that is, 'twas enough for us to know what the Devils also knew; Men
were so addicted to the Hypocrisy of outward shows, that the Religion and
Holiness, even of the most Learned and Pious, seemed altogether to consist in
the observing of Days, Meats, Habits, and such vain circumstances: Hence arose
so many different Orders of Religion, or Fraternities of Monks and Friars, with
Vestures of several fashions, and various colors: Hence likewise came your
Pilgrimages to Loretto, to Rome, to Compostella, etc. As if St. James at
Compostella would do that, which Christ could not do at London or Canterbury;
or as if our Omnipotent Omnipresent Jehovah were not of like power or strength,
and pity and compassion in every place; or could not be found, unless by
running and gadding hither and thither contrary to his own Requirements. (
Neither at Jerusalem, nor in this Mountain, but in Spirit and Truth shall ye
worship the Father, for such he seeks to worship him. John 4. 22.) The
Holiness requisite all the year was put off to Lent. No Country to be counted
Holy, but Palestina, because thereon Christ had walked with his corporeal Feet.
Instead of taking up the true Cross of Christ by Patience, Humility,
Self-denial, Mortification, etc. people go together by the Ears about the
material Cross whereon Christ suffered; and though they knew not where to find
it, yet upon an imagination that it was in those Parts, all Christian Kings and
Princes are set agogg, many of them ruined, and it is believed, some millions of
Men slain and destroyed in these pretended Holy Wars; who though otherwise
never so debauched and wicked, are yet assured to go to rights to Heaven, the
meritoriousness of this Expedition expiating all their Villainies.

This was the state of Christendom in those days; and wanted not the World then
an Hercules to purge such an Augaean Stable? Yes certainly; and Providence
provided him, even Wickliff, a valiant and well-appointed Champion, for whom I
may borrow that Encomium which Syracides bestows on Simon the Son of Onias,
Eccles. 50. 6. He was as the morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, and as the
Moon being Full in her Course, as the Sun shining on the Temple of the Most
High, and as the Rainbow diverting our fears of a Deluge, as the Flower of
Roses in the early Spring, as Lillies by the Rivers, or as the Branches of the
Frankincense-Tree in the time of Summer.

Touching Wickliff's Parentage, all we can find, is, That he was born about the
farthest part of Yorkshire; and Mr. Birckbek who was Minister of Gilling in
those Parts, in his Learned Treatise, Entitled, The Protestants Evidence,
printed 1632. Centur. 14. assures us, That some of the Family remained there
then, and probably may continue to this day; his words are these: Our
Countryman John Wickliff was born in the North, where there is (near to the
place where I live) an ancient and worshipful House bearing the name of
Wickliff of Wickliff. But in what Year he was born, is not Recorded, only it is
certain, that he was liberally Educated, and became Learned beyond that Age,
and flourished about the year of our Lord 1371. in the Reign of King Edward the
Third, being then Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford: (A happy Foundation,
Illustrious for breeding many most famous Men, as Friar Bacon, Burley, Scotus,
Occham, Peccham, Bradwardine, etc.) He was afterward Master of Baliol-Colledge
in Oxford, where he commenced Doctor, and was chosen Reader in Divinity: In
which public Lectures he showed himself a deep Schoolman, as in his ordinary
Sermons a faithful Pastor of the Church, for whose Edification he spared no
pains, for he Translated the whole Bible into the vulgar Tongue, one Copy
whereof, written with his own hand, is, or lately was, extant in St. John
Baptist College in Oxford. He was beloved of all good Men for his holy Life,
and admired even by his Adversaries for his Learning: For we find Walden, his
professed and spiteful Enemy, in a certain Letter to Pope Martin the Fifth,
forced to acknowledge, That he was wonderfully astonished at his most forcible
Arguments, the various and pertinent Authorities he had gathered, with the
vehemence and smartness of his Reasonings. Nor was he unacquainted with
Humanity, or polite Civil Learning, (especially he is observed to have been
well read in our English Laws) and wrote so many large Volumes, as well in
Philosophy as Divinity, as the same is almost incredible.

He seemed to follow in the course of his Studies the method of the Schoolmen,
and amongst them was a professed follower of Occham, by reading of whose Works,
and sundry others who lived about the same time, or not long before, as
Bradwardine, Marsilius, St. Amore, Abelardus, Armachanus, and that great and
godly Learned Man Rob. Grosthead, and especially and above all by diligent
perusal of the Holy Scriptures, God gave him grace and understanding to see the
truth of his Gospel, and by seeing it, to loath all superstition, and the ill
precepts and practices of the then pretended Rules of the Church. In
particular, by Occham and Marsilius he was informed of the Popes Intrusions and
Usurpations upon Kings, their Crowns and Dignities. Guido de S. Amore, and
Armachanus, showed him the sundry abuses of Monks and Friars in upholding this
usurped Power. By Abelard and others he began to have a right Apprehension
touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Bradwardine taught him the Nature
of a true sole justifying Faith, against Meritmongers and Pardoners: Finally,
by Grosthead's Work, with which he seemed most conversant, he descried the
Popes to be the very Antichrist, by hindering the Gospel to be preached, and
placing unfit and unworthy Men in the Church, and in making all Religion
subservient to his damnable Policy.

Being thus enlightened, it is no wonder if in his Writings and Preachings he
delivered many things against the then corrupted Doctrine of the Church; but
his Positions were chiefly directed against the several Orders of Begging
Friars, (who were his professed Persecutors) and all Foreign usurped
Jurisdiction of the Pope. By which he purchased some favor, or at least
connivance at Court, and got his other Complaints against them for other
matters, the more easily heard and regarded, for at that time the Friars
Orders, by their manifold and notorious Disorders, were become exceeding
odious, and the Popes pretenses of Jurisdiction by Provisions, Reservations,
and Collations, not only grievous, but utterly intolerable. This made way unto
those excellent Acts of Parliament of Praemunire, against any that should
appeal to Rome, or draw the Subjects of England, ad aliud Examen, To any
Foreign Jurisdiction; as also against Provisors, and the Abuses of Begging
Friars, which fobridled and restrained the Pope's Authority, that he could but
little prevail in England, during the Reign of King Edward the Third, or
Richard the Second. Toward making which Law, Wickliff had no small Interest,
by disposing several of the Nobility and the Body of the Commons thereunto;
maintaining no less Loyalty, and Magnanimously than Learnedly, the King's
Jurisdiction, Crown, and Dignity, by the Laws Civil, Canon, and Common. For
which reason, the Learned Dr. James, in Wickliff's Life, tells us, That he was
by one King sent Ambassador into Foreign Parts, and by another consulted here
at home. But amongst all his Arguments, he most insisted upon those, drawn from
the common Municipal Laws of England, (the best Bull-works for the Prerogative
and Imperial Right of our Kings, against all the Usurpations and Encroachments
of any Exotic Claim) for the maintenance of his Opinions; and the better to
enable him therein, he had good Directions and Advice from time to time from
the Reverend Judges and Sages in the Law.

He was not so much hated of the Monks and Clergy out of Self-interest, because
he opposed their lewd Practices; but he was much indulged and favored by the
Temporal State for his Piety, Learning, and Virtue: For not only many of the
Nobility, but the City of London, and the University of Oxford, were his
Friends; which makes Walsingham the Monk angry who upon all occasions vomits
out his Gall against poor Wickliff) that that famous Academy, where (as he
says) was the very height and top of Wisdom and Learning, should so kindly
entertain him. Nor were they Freshmen, or younger Fry of Students there, that
were his Admirers, but even the Heads and Chief of the University; for Mr.
Robert Rigge Vice Chancellor, and the two Proctors, took part with him; as also
Nicholas Herford, John Ashton of Merton College, John Ashwarby of Oriel
College, Minister of St. Mary's Church; these all being Preachers, and
Batchelors of Divinity, joined with him, and were put to Trouble for the same.

THE COURANT.
Tory. NAY! now I think you are met with; what say you to that ingenious Piece
published last week, Entitled, A Postscript of Advice from Geneva.


Truem. I shall not say much to it, let my Lords the Bishops look after it; for
as Governors (under His Majesty) of our Protestant Church, I humbly conceive
it concerns them abundantly more than me, since it is plain, the Libel is the
^pawn of some rank envenomed Popish Priest; and whether Not. Thompson or Gammer
Turner (a professed Papist, or a masqueraded one) Midwif'd it into the World, is
not much material. It pretends indeed to fall soul on the Calvinists, which
possibly Striplings in Divinity, or some of the short sighted Laity, may think
at this time of day a mighty Service to the King and the Church. But whoever is
conversant in Roman-Catholic Authors, cannot but know, that they frequently
Nickname the Church of England, and her truest Sons, with that opprobrious
Title. I appeal to all the Learned moderate Divines of our established English
Church, if this be not true; nay, I my self at two hours warning could give
more than 100 Instances of it: But I shall be content at present only with one,
but it is of a Pope (who you know is Infallible in his Rogueries) in a Bull
against Blessed Q. Elizabeth, we have these words, Impia Mysteria and Instituta
ad Calvini praescriptum, etc. The wicked Mysteries and Institutes, according to
Calvin' s prescription, by her received and observed, she has commanded to be
embraced by her Subjects. In a word, it is evident this skulking Author's
business is to scandalize all the Learned pious Instruments, which God has
made use of for the first Reformation: As not only Calvin, Zwinglius, and Beza,
p. 1 and 2. but Luther, Melancton, Bucer, etc. p. 5. Therefore with what Notion
would a Cranmer, or a Ridley, or a Latimer, (those glorious Martyrs) or even
Patient Hooper himself, or Reverend Jewel, and suchlike famous Lights of our
Church (some of them the very Compilers of the Venerable Liturgy) have beheld
such a virulent Pamphlet? Or can any Man that has a value for the Protestant
Religion, but feel his Blood curdle, to see it sold with Impunity at the
Royal Exchange, and through the Streets of a Protestant City, which by the very
same devilish Hands was within these 16 years laid in Ashes.


Tory. Come, come, you are hot and peevish; I doubt it is only because it
presses you too close; for only those that know not how to answer Books, would
stifle and have them suppressed.


Truem. Nay then, let it go on, for I am sure the matter of it has been
answered 150 times: There Is nothing in this Pamphlet but Parsons, that Bastard
of a Jesuit, ('it is the Complement his own Brother-Priests gave him) printed
long ago. You may find it too in a Book, Entitled, The Image of both Churches,
written by one Musket a Jesuit, and printed in King James's time; or you may
have the effect of it in a Pamphlet, Entitled, Philanax Anglicus, scribbled
soon after His Majesty's happy Restoration by a Popish Doctor of the Civil
Law; to which, the Reverend Du Moulin, one of the Prebends of Canterbury,
returned an Answer. But if no such Refutations were extant (as 100 are) yet all
the World knows your Bolsec was a most prostituted Liar, and the rest of your
Authors forged and Counterfeit. Nor will, I hope, any that are truly of the
Church of England, be bubbled with such stale Shams; but rather take notice who
they are that thus blow these Coals, and keep such a noise against Calvinists,
such a stir against Ignoramus Juries, and are so overjoyed at the prosecution
of Conscientious Dissenters; and if they find them at bottom no other than
either Papists, or Atheists, or Debauchees (who are half one half the other) they
may then competently judge whose Interest is promoted by these Intrigues.


Tory. Well there is no talk to you now; but I Will warrant you L'Estrange will
Crow bravely this fortnight for the other days work in the City.


Truem. What! because his old friend John Starkey is made one of the
Common Council? I tell you, Sir, I value Roger's Observatorisms, no more than I
do Eustace Commyne's Narrativisms; they both pretend to serve the Royal Family
and the Bishops, and in truth they both perform it at the same Rate. Nor will
you find much more reason upon the whole matter to thank St. Thomas, than you
have to Sacrifice to Madam Address, who, it is forty to one when you come to try
her, will prove as Errand a Jilt, and as Insignificant as an Irish Evidence.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Dec. 30. 1681.
Potentes in Clero qui Religionem Christi dissipant sub pallio Sanctitatis, vel
punientur hic per praepositos suos, aut Laicos, vel destruentur per vastationes
Hostiles, vel congregant facinora in ultionem Divini Judicii. -- Wickliff de
verit. Script. p. 432.
Objections against Wickliff, answered. An Example or two of his writing in his
own ancient Style. His Troubles. The University like to reject the Popes Bull,
etc.
THE Papists (who are most exquisite and ready forgers of Lies and Scandals on
all that oppose or go about to detect their Villainies) have raised several
Aspersions and Calumnies against honest Wickliff.

As first, they affirm, That his Preaching was not out of Conscience, but spite
and desire of Revenge, because (forsooth) he was put by the Bishopprick of
Worcester, which he aimed at -- Therefore he declaimed so fiercely against the
Church.

Answ. This is only the malicious suggestion of Parsons and Brerely, and such
upstart Pettifoggers for the Church of Rome: There is no ancient Author (tho
most of them, as being Monks, rail horribly against poor Wickliff) that
mentions any such matter: Nay, Parsons himself gives himself the Lie, for in
his three Conversions, Part 3. Cap. 5. Numb. 14. he says, Wickliff condemned
all temporal Goods -- How then should he so greedily affect the Bishopprick of
Worcester? And elsewhere he confesses, That Wickliff was in great favor with
the Duke of Lancaster, who bore chief sway during the time of King Edward the
Third; so that if Wickliff had been so fond of a Bishopprick, sure that Duke's
Interest might have got him one.

2. They object, that Wickliff taught, That so long as a Man is in deadly Sin,
he is no Bishop or Prelate, neither does truly Consecrate or Baptize.

Answ. If Wickliff did say so, what more did he say, than what St. Ambrose had
said before him -- Unless thou embrace and follow the good works of a Bishop, a
Bishop thou can not be. -- Ambr. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 4. Nay, there is a
Vote of a Council (if that will help the matter) in a Case almost to the same
effect -- Quicunque sub Ordinatione Presbyterii vel Episcopatus, mortali
Crimine se dixerint esse pollutos a supradictis Ordinationibus submovendos esse
Censuimus: Whoever coming under Ordination of the Presbytery or Eiscopacy,
shall be polluted with mortal Sin, we think it fit, That such be removed from
those Orders, says the Synod of Valentia, held under Damascus, cap. 4. It must
be remembered, that Wickliff lived in a most corrupt Age, when the Clergy were
so seared in Impiety, that it required sharp Launcings, and good store of
Vinegar to make them sensible. It was only their abuses he inveighed against so
tartly, for elsewhere he reproves those that would not obey their lawful
Prelates; and in his Book of the verity of the Scripture, he thus explains his
meaning: Nomen non facit Episcopum sed vita, etc. It is not the Name, but the
Life that makes a Bishop. If a Man have the Name of a Prelate, and does not
answer the reason thereof in sincerity of Doctrine, and integrity of Life, but
live scandalously in open Sin, he is but a Nomine-tenus Sacerdos, A Bishop or
Priest in Name, not in Truth. Yet still Wickliff did not deny, but that such an
ones Ministerial Acts were valid; for so in the same Treatise, p. 138. he says
-- Unless the Christian Priest be united unto Christ by Grace, Christ cannot be
his Savior; Nec sine falsitate dicit verba Sacramentalia, Nor can he pronounce
the Sacramental words without Lying; Licet prosint Capacibus, The
notwithstanding they are available so far, that the worthy Receiver is thereby
nothing hindered from partaking of the Grace signified.

Obj. 3. They pretend, that Wickliff maintained, That it was not lawful for any
Ecclesiastical persons to have any Temporal Possessions, or property in any
thing.

Answ. This is falsely imputed to him; he only taxed the Abuses of the Revenues
given to so many Abbeys, Priories, and Monasteries, tending only to
Superstition, and the keeping so many Drones in idleness: And therefore he was
of opinion, That our Kings might dispossess them thereof, and give them Genti
facienti Justitiam, to good and godly Uses. The Poverty he exhorted to, was no
other than that which St. Paul recommends, viz. Having Food and Raiment,
therewith to be content. He did not debar Ministers from actual having, but
from Covetous affecting the things of this World, which are to be Renounced
(says he) Per Cogitationem and Affectum, in the Mind and the Affections.

Obj. 4. They charge him with asserting, That God ought to obey the Devil.

Answ. This is so senseless and improbable a Slander, that no Man in his Wits
can believe it. And on the quite contrary, Wickliff in his Commentary on Psalm.
112. Expressly affirms, That the Devil can do nothing without God's permission.

Obj. 5. Well, but if they cannot fix Blasphemy upon him, they will charge him
with Treason. This is a frequent Stratagem of the Devils and his Instruments --
If thou suffer this Man, thou art not Cesar' s Friend, said the Jews of old;
not that they cared for Caesar, but only to gratify their own Revenge. Thus the
Papists charge Wickliff as a Teacher of Sedition, and an opposer of
Magistrates; and that if a Civil Magistrate be in a mortal Sin, he is no longer
to be obeyed.

Answ. There is much craft and malice, but very little truth and no reason for
this Slander. Wickliff indeed, in several of his Works, admonishes the King
(and all other inferior Officers and Magistrates) that he bears not the
Sword in vain, nor has his Office for naught, but to discharge well and truly
the part and Office of a King, by seeing wholesome Laws duly executed, and
Justice impartially administered: And tells him, That if he be defective in
such his Duty, by suffering the Sword of Justice to rust in its Scabard, and
his People to perish for want of good Governance, then he is not properly and
truly a King, that is, in effect and operation, for so the words must
necessarily be understood, being spoken by way of Exhortation. But otherwise,
so far was Wickliff from mutinying himself, or persuading others to any act
that was Rebellious, that never any Man in those times did so stoutly assert
the King's Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, against all usurped foreign Jurisdiction, for which
(amongst many others) he gives this reason: That otherwise our Sovereign should
not be King over all England, but Regulus parvae partis, a petty* Governor of
some small parts of the Realm. -- Nor does any thing, tending to countenance
Rebellion, appear in any of his Works that are extant. But the Friars and proud
Clergy having an inveterate spleen against Wickliff, and there happening to
fall out about the same time a grievous Insurrection of the Commons under Wat
Tyler; occasioned chiefly upon a civil score, about Taxes, Commons, and
Servitude, but much augmented by one John Ball a Priest, (and one of Baal's
Priests too for ought I know, for he does not at all appear to be any of
Wickliff's Followers) therefore, in spite to Wickliff, they cast the odium of
that Frantic Tumult upon him and his Doctrine.

But indeed as Wickliff was a person of extraordinary Learning and Piety, so
that in substance he held and taught the very same Doctrines as are at this day
maintained by the Church of England, is demonstrated by the Learned Dr. James,
Oxford Librarykeeper, in his Book, Entitled -- An Apology for John Wickliff,
showing his Conformity with the now Church of England, etc. Printed Anno 1608.

However to the end the vulgar Reader may better judge of this reverend man and
his Works; I shall here produce some few passages out of two of his Books,
Printed by the said James from the Original Manuscripts, remaining one in
Bennet College Cambridge, the other in the Public Library at Oxford. The
English being excusable considering 'twas wrote above 300 years ago in his
complaint to King Richard the Second, and his Parliament. Article 2. He has
these words -- Nothing ought to be damned as error and false, but if it favor
error or unrightewiseness against Gods Law.

And Article 4. He prays. That Christ's teaching O beleave of the Sacrament of
his own Body, that is plainly tawght by Christ and his Apostles, in Gospels and
Pistles mayen be tawght openly in Churches of Christen People, and the
contrary teaching and false beleave is brought up by cursed Hypocrites and
worldly Priests unkunning in Gods Law, which say they are Apostles of Christ
but are Fools.

And he concludes that Article with these words -- As Christ saved the wordle
by writing and teaching of four Evangelists, so the Fiend casts to Damme the
wordle and Priests, for letting to Preach the Gospel by these four; by feigned
Contemplation, by Songs, by Salisbury use, and by worldly business of Priests.

And in his Treatise against the Orders of Friars, Ca. 4. runs thus:

Friars sayen, that if a man be once professed to their Religion, he may never
leave it, and be saved, though he be never so unable thereto; for all time of
his life, and they will need him to live in such a state ever more, to which God
makes him ever unable, and so need him to be damned. Alas, out on such heresy
that Man's Ordinance is holden stronger than is the Ordinance of God. For if a
man enter into the new Religion against man's ordinance, he may lawfully
forsake it; but if he enter against Gods Ordinance, when God makes him unable
thereto, he shall not be suffered by Antichrist's power to leave it. And if
this reason were well declared, since no man wot which man is able to this new
Religion by Gods dome, and which is not able, no man should be constrained to
hold forth this new sect, and thus this new Religion may not last, but if it
be by this Blasphemy to constrain a man unable by Gods dome to hold this new
sect, and suffer him not to come to freedom of Christ's Order. And Chapter the
4th. Friars saien, if a man be professed to there holy Order, he shall not
Preach freely and generally, the Gospel of Christian men without en license
of his Sovereign, for virtue of obedience be his Sovereign never so cursed man
of life and uncunning of Gods Law and enemy to Christian men souls, and in
case a foul Devil of Hell; thowgh this man professed have received of God never
so much cuninge of Gods Law, and power, and will, to work after this cuninge;
and so this man shall needs be damned for misspending of Gods treasure. For
since Gods Law says, that he is out of Charity that helps not his Brother with
bodily Alms, if he may in his need, much more is he out of Charity, that
helps not his Brothers soul, with teaching of Gods Law, when he sees him
run to Hell, yea by ^gnorance. And thus to magnify and maintain their rotten
sects, they neden men by Hypocrisy, falseteaching, and strong pains, to break
Gods heasts and leese Charity. Out on this false heresy and tyrantrie of
Antichrist, that men be neded strangely to keep more his Laws and obaye more
to them then to Christ's Commandments ever rightful.

And Page 17. Thus -- As Christ saved the wordle by writing and teaching of
four Evangelists, so the Fiend casts to Damme the wordle and Priests for
letting to Preach the Gospel by these four; by fained Contemplation, by Songs,
by Salisbury use, and by wordly buysiness of Priests.

The COURANT.
-- Illa propago
Contemptrix Superum, Saevaeque avidissima Caedis
Et violenta fuit; Scires e Sanguine Natos.
Ovid. I. Metam.
Tory It Was bravely done to 'ther day in the West. I love people that will go
thorough stitch with their Business; I can show you a French Author, Naudaeus
by Name that affirms, the Bartholomew-Massacre at Paris, had been one of the
most glorious acts of Christianity, if it had not unluckily been performed but
by halves.


Truem. Ay -- but destroying of BIBLES (if that story be true) was sure
attempted a little too soon; such Exploits would be time enough under a Popish
Successor. It Is our present happiness and comfort (under God,) that we live
under a Prince who is a Defender of the Protestant Faith, content his loving
Subjects should have English Bibles, and much averse in his Royal Nature to
such Sanguinary Rigours, as some hotheaded people (men of as little Estates or
Interest in their Country, as of Brains, Piety, or real Loialty) would fain be
practizing, to imbroil us in Confusions and help forward the Popes Design, by
weakening the Body of Protestants with unnecessary and unnatural Heats amongst
themselves.


Tory. Well, I am sure our Parson, and he is a Gentleman that wears a Scarf
already, and hopes to be a Right Reverend ere long, told us last Sunday, that
it was a Duty to teize and worry Dissenters, and that it was their own faults if
their Brains were beat out, for why the Vengeance don't they Conform?


Truem. Prithee present my Service to his Reverence, and desire him from a
Friend of mine, to return an answer to the Case following -- Suppose his
Doctorship were a Minister of the Reformed Church in France, whether at
Charenton, Caen, or Saumurr, it matters not.


Tory. Hold, hold, do you think our Doctor will suffer himself to be supposed
into a Damned Presbiterian, a Traitorous Villain of a Calvinistical Hugenote.


Truem. Patience Man! The supposition I Will warrant you shall not infect him,
therefore still I say for once suppose him so, and that Monsieur the Intendant
of that Province, should thus accost him -- Sir being your Neighbor I am so
far your Friend, as to pity and advise you, (for though you are an Heretic,
you are yet one of humane Race, and may easily make a good conformable
Catholic,) the King our Master will have but one Religion in his Dominions,
and you must comply, or you are undone. He is resolved all his Subjects shall
Worship God in the same Mode, therefore go to Church, or your Estate, Liberty,
and perhaps your Life will be Sacrificed to his Royal Indignation and your own
obstinate Folly.


Then Imagine he should answer thus. -- Monsieur! I conserve a profound Respect
to our Puissant and invincible Monarch, am ready to obey all his just Commands,
but in this particular I pray have me Excused, I dread his Majesty's
displeasure, but am much more apprehensive of God's; the one may hang, or break
me upon the Wheel, but the other will Damn me to Eternity. I beseech you
therefore interpose with his Majesty, on the behalf of me and my Brethren, that
we may Enjoy the same liberty of Worshipping God as we have hitherto had under
him and his Royal Predecessors; we vow all Duty and Allegiance to his Person
and Government, we will defend him with our Lives and Fortunes. Nothing is so
dear (unless our Consciences) which we will not Sacrifice to his pleasure and
Honor, but in the Matters proposed we cannot comply without the offense of God
and our Souls.

The Catholic Gentleman (like any Observator) replies; -- These are only Flams
to color Hypocrisy, Rebellion, and Disobedience, His Majesty is advised to put
an end to all Religious Feuds amongst his people, thereby to render his
Government more firm and secure; He is weary of the everlasting Squabbles of
different Persuasions. The Temple of Janus shall therefore be shut, he will
have no more Religious Wars amongst his Subjects. To grant or connive at any
Liberty of serving God after your own own way, is not a course to end
Differences but to perpetuate them, for should you be gratified, others may
succeed with newscruples, and under pretense of Conscience carry on differences
as high as ever, to the weakening of his Authority and Empire, etc.

Now let the Doctor but tell us, what in this case he would Rejoyn to such a
Catholic Monsieur, and if from the same Topics our Protestant Dissenters
cannot fairly excuse themselves; the Doctor shall have all the Money that the
Devil and Thompson found out the other day under the Holy-Bush in Mannock-Hill,
and a sine Cure into the Bargain.

Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 6. 1681-2.
Optarem quod omnes Ritus nostri forent a Deo Confirmati. -- Wickliff de verit.
Script. p. 581.
An Omission in the last, supplied. The means how Wickliff's Doctrine was
spread into Bohemia, etc. His Death. His Bones dug up and burnt.
BY a mistake at the Press last week, there was not only some things mentioned
in the Contents more than there was room for in that Sheet, but also four or
five Lines happened to be twice repeated: For the latter, we beg the Readers
pardon; and as to the former, shall endeavor now to satisfy him, which is,
Touching the Troubles and Opposition that Wickliff met with.

If the strength or policy of Man could have stifled those Truths which he
delivered, his Doctrine had long since been extinct; for the Pope was soon
alarmed therewith, and bestir'd himself amain to get Wickliff silenced; but
such Esteem had he by his Virtues and Learning obtained, that when Gregory the
Eleventh, in the year 1378. sent his Bull to the University of Oxford,
expostulating with them for suffering him there to spread his Tenets,
Walsingham the Historian tells us, That the Heads of the University were long
time in suspense, whether they should receive such the Pope's Bull with Honor,
or reject it with Contempt. Yet at last, the Reverence they bore to his
Un-holiness, prevailed with them to entertain his Bull with Respect: However,
we do not find, that they did any thing effectually against Wickliff. But the
Archbishop of Canterbury was very violent against him; twice he was actually
convented before him and other Bishops, and thrice summoned to appear. The
first time he escaped by the favor of the Duke of Lancaster, who would needs
have a Chair for him that he might sit, which the Bishops would not admit in
their presence, and so a Quarrel arose, and nothing then was done. The second
time he got off by means of a Messenger, who, just as they were about to pass
Sentence upon him, came in from the Queen, charging them immediately to desist.
The third time he prudently absented himself, and did not obey their Summons,
because he had intelligence, that the Bishops had plotted his Death, by the
way, devising the means, and encouraging certain Russians thereunto. However,
in his absence, the Bishops, with the Rabble of Friars to assist them, took
upon them to examine and censure his Writings, meeting for that purpose at the
Gray-Friars, London, where, just as they were going about their business,
happened a most terrible Earthquake, which much daunted them; yet at last they
proceeded to pick out 9 Articles or Propositions, which they condemned as
Heretical, and 23 others as Erroneous: And then they got the King's Letters
forbidding his Books and Doctrines to be published; yet still he remained firm
and constant, and laboriously, both by preaching and writing, propagated the
Gospel, and God wonderfully preserved him out of the hands of his Enemies,
continuing Parson of Lutterworth in Leicestershire, and so died in peace in a
good old Age in the year 1387.

Nor was his Doctrine confined only to England, but shone and gave light into
Regions far remote. Some say, that to avoid the fury of the Clergy, he himself
for some years withdrew into Germany, and there preached the Gospel; but I do
not find sufficient Ground for that opinion, but rather believe, the Truth
might be propagated there by some of his Followers; and in particular, Cochleus
in his History of the Hussi^es, l. 1. tells us, Petrus Pain Anglus, Discipulus
Wiclephi, Pragam cum Libris illius profugerat; One Peter Pain an English^man,
one of Wickliff' s Scholars (who was sent with other Legates to the Council at
Basil, where he disputed for three days together touching the Civil Dominion of
the Clergy) fled into Bohemia, and carried with him some of Wickliff' s Books.
Some of which were Translated by John Huss into the Bohemian Language, as the
same Cochleus relates, who also affirms, That one of the Bishops of England
wrote him word, Esse sibi adhuc ^odie duo maxima Volumina Wiclephi quae mole
sua videantur aequare opera B. Augustini, That he had then by him two Volumes
of Wickliff' s, which were almost as large as St. Austin' s Works. Of which,
many it seems are since lost or destroyed by the Papists; but diverse of them
are yet extant.

What opinion the University of Oxford had of the Learning and Piety of this
good Man, appears by that Testimonial which they publicly gave of him under
their Common Seal, dated October 5. 1406. which you may read in Mr. Foxes Acts
and Monuments, fol. 112.

And now being in his Grave, one would have thought he had been beyond the
Sphere of Activity of the most inveterate Malice; but such is the nature of
Papal Cruelty, that its Rage extends almost to the other World, and with a
Barbarity more than Heathenish, violates Sepulchers; for 41 years after
Wickliff's Death, the Council at Constance, the very same Conventicle that
Decreed, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, made an Order for taking
up his Bones and burning them, in these words:

For as much as by the Authority of the Sentence and Decree of the Council of
Rome, and by the Commandment of the Church and the Apostolical See, after due
Delays granted, this Holy Synod has proceeded unto the Condemnation of the
said John Wickliff and his Memory, having first made Proclamation, and given
Commandment to call forth whosoever would defend the said Wickliff or his
Memory, (if any such there were) but none did appear. And likewise Witnesses
being examined by Commissioners appointed by Pope John and his Council, upon
the Impenitency and final Obstinacy of the said John Wicliff, (reserving that
which is to be reserved, as in such Cases the Law requires) and his Impenitency
and Obstinacy even unto his end being sufficiently proved by evident Signs and
Tokens, and also by lawful Witnesses of Credit, therefore the Sacred Synod
declares, determines, and gives Sentence, That the said John Wickliff was a
notorious obstinate Heretic, and that he died in his Heresy, Cursing and
Damning both him and his Memory.

This Synod also Decrees and Ordains, That the Body and Bones, if they may be
discerned and known from the Bodies of other faithful people, be taken out of
the Ground, and thrown away far from the Burial place of any Church, according
to the Canon Laws and Decrees.

Pursuant to this worshipful Decree, The Archdeacon and Official of the Diocese
shortly after came with their Officers to Lutterworth Church where Wickliff lay
buried, and having disinterred his Bones, they with much Formality burnt the
same, and turned his Dust into Ashes, which Ashes they also took and threw into
the River, as if they would Interest all the Elements in their Inhumane
Pageantry.

Touching which, I find in a most Learned Treatise, written by Dr. Hoyle,
Professor of Divinity in Dublin College, Entitled, A Rejoinder to Mr. Malone'
s Reply concerning the Real Presence, p. 654. this remarkable passage* The
Doctor having discoursed of the taking up the B^nes of Bucer and Fagius, adds
these words -- I cannot upon so good an occasion but glance at the like more
than Savage usage of Wickliff, and signify to the World a strange Accident not
yet observed ( in Print) by any, and which my self learned of the most aged
Inhabitants, and they within a few hands from the very Eyewitnesses, and is a
common Tradition in all Lutterworth: A Child finding one of Wickliff's Bones
which in have was left or forgotten, running with it to carry it to the rest in
the Bonefire, brake his Leg. Here was Lex Talionis, Bone for Bone. And to this
day for a perpetual Monument, in the very place where they burnt his Bones, tho
the Townsmen for their own profit have often essayed to bring the Water that
way, it never holds, but still makes a Bank. -- Thus far the Doctor.

I shall conclude this Weeks Task with a Copy of John Wickliff's Answer or
Resolution to King Richard, touching the Right and Title of the King and Pope,
which was as follows.

It being demanded, whether the Kingdom of England may lawfully, in case of
necessity, for its own defense, detain and keep back the Treasure of the
Kingdom, that it be not carried away to foreign and strange Nations, the Pope
himself demanding and requiring the same, under pain of Censure, and by virtue
of Obedience.

To which, Wickliff returned this Answer -- Setting apart the Minds of Learned
Men, what might be said in the matter, either by the Canon Law, or by the Law
of England, or the Civil Law, It rests, says he, not only to persuade and
prove the Affirmative part of this Doubt, but the Principles of Christ's Law.
And first, I prove it thus: Every natural Body has Power given it of God, to
resist against his Contrary, and to preserve it self in due Estate, as
Philosophers know very well; in so much, that Bodies without Life are endu'd
with such a kind of Power (as it is evident) unto whom hardness is given to
resist those things that would break it, and Coldness to withstand the Heat
that dissolveth it. For so much then as the Kingdom of England (after the
manner and phrase of the Scriptures) ought to be one Body, and the Clergy with
the Commonalty, the Members thereof; it seems that the same Kingdom has such
Power given it of God, and so much the more apparent, but how much the same
Body is more precious unto God, adorned with Virtue and Knowledge. For so much
then as there is no Power given of God unto any Creature for any end or
purpose, but that he may lawfully use the same to that end and purpose; it
follows, that our Kingdom may lawfully keep back, and detain their Treasure
for the defense of it self, in what case soever necessity do require the same.

Secondarily, the same is proved by the Law of the Gospel, for the Pope cannot
challenge the Treasure of this Kingdom, but under the Title of Alms, and
consequently under the pretense of the Works of Mercy, according to the Rule of
Charity.

But in the Case aforesaid, the Titel of Alms ought utterly to cease; Ergo, the
Right and Title of challenging the Treasure of our Realm shall cease also, in
the presupposed necessity: For so much as all Charity has his beginning of
himself, it were no work of Charity, but of mere madness to send away the
Treasures of the Realm unto Foreign Nations, whereby the Realm it self may fall
into Ruin, under the pretense of such Charity. It appears also by this, that
Christ the Head of the Church, whom all Christian Priests ought to follow,
lived by the Alms of Devout Women, Luke 7. 8. He hungered and thirsted, he was a
Stranger, and many other Miseries he sustained, not only in his Members, but
also in his own Body, as the Apostle witnesses, 1 Cor. 8. He was made poor for
your sakes, that through his Poverty you might be made rich, whereby in the
first endowing of the Church, whatsoever he were of the Clergy that had any
Temporal Possessions, he had the same by form of a perpetual Alms, as both
Writings and Chronicles do witness.

Whereupon St. Bernard, in his second Book to Eugenius, that he could not
challenge any Secular Dominion by Right of Succession, as being the Vicar of
St. Peter, writes thus: That if St. John should speak unto the Pope himself,
as Bernard does unto Eugenius, were it to be thought that he would take it
patiently? But let it be so, that you do challenge it unto you by some other
way or means; but truly, by any Right or Title Apostolical, you cannot so do:
For how could he give unto you that which he had not himself? That which he
had, he gave you, that is to say, Care over the Church; but did he give you any
Lordship or Rule? Ha^k what he says: Not bearing Rule (says he) as the Lords
in the Clergy, but behaving your selves as Examples to the Flock. And because
thou shall not think it to be spoken only in Humility, and not in Verity, mark
the Word of the Lord himself in the Gospel, The Kings of the Gentiles rule over
them, but thou shall not do so.

Here Lordship and Dominion is plainly forbidden to the Apostles, and dare
thou then usurp the same? If thou will be a Lord, thou shall lose thine
Apostleship; or if thou will be an Apostle, thou shall lose thy Lordship; for
truly thou shall depart from the one of them. If thou will have both, thou
shall lose both, or else think thy self to be of that number, of whom God does
so greatly complain, saying, They have Reigned, but not through me; they are
become Princes, and I have not known it. Now if it do suffice to Rule with the
Lord, thou have thy Glory, but not with God; but if we will keep that which is
forbidden, let us hear what is said: He that is the Greatest among you, (says
Christ) shall be made as the least; and he which is Highest, shall be as the
Minister; and for Example, set a Child in the midst of them, so this then is
the true form and institution of the Apostle's Trade. Lordship and Rule is
forbidden, Ministration and Services commanded. -- Thus far St. Bernard, as
cited by Wickliff upon this occasion.

THE COURANT.
Tory. NAY, now all is out -- I thought this 'twould come to at last, for D --
me if I did not always suspect as much. I ever looked upon Catholics as fine
civil Gentlemen, and for their Church, I have a great Veneration, because she
is a true Church, and a Mother Church, and their Worship is very glorious and
decent. What an absurd thing it is to imagine, that ever such Holy Loyal Men as
their Priests are, should be guilty of Treason? Yet I did but say a
Twelvemonth ago there was no Popish Plot, and a Whiggish Son of a Whore gave
me a slap in the Face, and threatened me with Newgate, for presuming to give the
King and Three Parliaments the Lie. But it should seem Tempora mutantur, I hope
e're long a Man may say, and swear too, That there never was any such Plot at
all, with Impunity and without Control.


Truem. Prithee, what makes you so merry about the Gills this Morning? Have
thou been at Breakfast with the Painter at Aldersgate on his Whig-Pye, whose
Crust was made of Gammer Celier's Meal, and baked in the red hot Oven of Dr.
Tantivy's Skull?


Tory. No, no, but on a better Dish by half; have you not seen Not. Thompson's
Loyal Intelligence. Numb. 98?


Truem. Honest! and Loyal! quotha? If to invent and publish continual Lies and
Scandals, be honest; if to abuse Government with false Reports, engage
publicly to vindicate Papists in all Cases, divide His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, and in a word, to do all that the Devil can suggest to imbroil the
Nation, be to be Loyal; then your Thompson may claim those Titles.


Tory. Pshaw! this is only spite, because he there openly tells all the World,
That the pretended Popish Plot was nothing in the World but a mere Contrivance
of old Dr. Tongue's.


Truem. Yes, and he contrived the Gunpowder-Treason too, and brought in the
Spaniards in 88. He murdered Sir Edm. Godfrey, [or else he killed himself, as
L'Estrange modestly hi^ts in his last Observator.] 'Twas Tongue writ all the
Letters from Coleman, and the rest of the folks at St. James's, to La Chese,
and the Devil knows who besides. 'Twas Tongue --


Tory. Leave your Fooling -- young Tongue out of pure Remorse of Conscience
will prove it.


Truem. Leave your Roguing, and your pitiful ridiculous Shammings; has not this
very young Tongue set forth at large how he was at first Trapan'd to suggest
that Story against his Father, in a Book printed by Mr. C -- in the New
Exchange, but, for I know not what reasons, stifled, and never suffered to be
published? Has not this young Tongue an hundred and an hundred times, with Tears
in his Eyes, bewailed and repented of that unnatural Villainy? Nay, but a
fortnight ago he voluntarily declared, That the sense thereof lay so heavy upon
him, that if ever he got out of Prison, (where he was like to starve, and had
scarce Clothes to cover his Nakedness) he would forthwith Transport himself to
the West Indies; for his shame for that false and wicked Accusation was so
great, that he should not be able to walk the Streets. And is this pitiful Tool
again furbusht up to make a new Attaque? But on the contrary, what if this be
only a Contrivance of the Popish Traitors, and their Implement Not? What if
herein he most impudently abuses both old Tongue and young Tongue, and the
public? Then no doubt His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, the Judges,
and all Inferior Magistrates, and every Protestant Englishman, will think it
necessary to punish exemplarily the Villain, that in Print has broached such an
horrid Scandal on the Honor, Justice, Prudence, and Safety of the Nation. For
what that desperate pragmatic Huszy Celliers published in her Libel, for which
she was deservedly Pillory'd, was nothing so mischievous in its Nature and
Tendency, as that which Thompson in this Paper does audaciously affirm; for
which, if he escape Scot free, it must be by the strength of that Proverb -- The
Devil helps his Children.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 13. 1681-2.
Imperante and florente Nequitia Virtus non solum Praemiis caret, sed etiam
sceleratorum pedibus Calcatur and supplitia luit.
The horrible Schism between Popes and Anti-Popes, for fifty years together.
HAving dispatched what we thought necessary to say touching Wickliff, it is now
time to return to the prosecution of our History of Popes, having left off with
Pope Gregory the Eleventh, [See our Third Volume, Numb. 67.] who died Anno Dom.
1378.

The attentive Reader cannot but have observed in the course of this History,
many Schisms in the Papal Chair, that is, several pretenders at one time, each
of them bearing himself as the true and only Infallible Head of the Church. But
now we come to speak of Schisma omnium gravissimum, The most grievous of all
Schisms, as the Jesuit De Bussieres tells it; for it lasted half an hundred
years, Pope against Pope, and the States of Europe, and all the Churches of
this part of the World, divided, or rather rent and torn asunder, whilst these
scuffling Fathers repeal the Acts one of another, and Condemn each others
Canons and Ordinances, yea Curse and Excommunicate, and openly pronounce one
another to be Antichrist; and all this in Books published, and yet extant
concerning that matter. And therefore the Relation of this so famous quarrel,
which we shall recite as briefly as the matter will bear, cannot but be well
worthy the Reader's considerate notice.

Gregory being dead, the people of Rome flockt to the Cardinals, pressing them
by all means, that they should choose an Italian to succeed him, for if a
Frenchman should be Elected, 'twas odds but he would remove the Papal Seat
again to Avignion, and then Rome would be undone, St. Peter be dishonored,
devout People leave off their coming in Pilgrimage to his Shrine, and twenty
other mischiefs would follow. The Cardinals promised them fairly all should be
done to the Glory of God, but were no sooner got into the Conclave, but they
were all in a confusion, instead of being assisted with the Holy Ghost; for
there were 14 French Cardinals, who stickled might and main to have one of
their number chosen; but then a new Contest happening amongst themselves which
should be the Man, and the people abroad crying no French man, no Frenchman,
and threatening to cut all their Throats if they did not elect an Italian,
partly through fear, and partly in spite to each other, and a little bribing
too in the case, they at last chose one Bartholomew, Archbishop of Barry, a
Ne^politan, who was then absent, but made have to Rome, and took upon him the
name of Urban the Sixth. Theodoric a Nyem, who was his Secretary; l. 1. c. 1.
tells us, That before his Popedom, he was a very honest fellow, but Magistratus
indicat virum, Preferment strangely alters a Man, and commonly for the worse;
for as soon as he was in the Chair, he was as proud as Lucifer, in so much,
that when one day Otho Duke of Brunswick, Husband to Joan Queen of Naples, (who
immediately on his being chosen, had sent him 40000 Ducats in Gold and Silver
to defray his first Expenses) making a Collation for his Holiness, drank to him
on his Knees; this ^^scally Servant of Servants, out of mere Pride, would not
for a long time take the Cup out of the hand of so great a Prince kneeling
before him, 'till one of the Cardinals blushing for him, cried, Holy Father, it
is time to drink, and then the insolent Pre^ate vouchsafed to accept it.

But his Pride had quickly a check, if not a fall, for within 3 Months, the
French Cardinals requested Leave of him, that because the weather was very hot,
they might for change of Air retire to Anagnia, which being granted, they
appoint their Rendezvous at Fundi, and to reinforce their Party, wheedle
thither three Italian Cardinals, by promise privately made to each of them,
That they would make him Pope, alleging, That the Election of Urban was not
free, but obtained by the Tumults of the people, etc. But at this Consult they
chose indeed the Cardinal of Genoua by the name of Clement the Seventh. And
now* Arma Armis, and Tela minantia Telis.
Pope jostles Pope, and Curse at Curses spreads,
Two Triple-Crowns are got to Loggerheads.
Each of them labors to draw as many Princes and States of Christendom to his
obedience as he can. Most of the Italians, all the English, Germans, and
Portuguese, acknowledge Urban for Pope Canonical, but the Kings of France and
Spain were all for Clement, and some were so wise, as not to admit either of
them. To strengthen himself, Urban in one day created 26 Cardinals, a jolly
Company of Red capp'd Gentlemen! who were obliged to espouse his Quarrel;
otherwise their Honor would be in the Dust, since it was derived from him. He
also besieged the Castle of St. Angelo, wherein there was a French Garrison,
and took it, sends for Charles, a Noble Hungarian, and gives him the Kingdom of
Sicily, and engages him to be his Champion. And because this Charles had no
Money, the Pope not only sold to several of the Roman Citizens, the
Proprietaries and Rights of many Churches of Rome, to the value of above
Fourscore thousand Crowns, but also exposed to sale the Gold and Silver
Chalices, Crosses, and other precious Ornaments of the Churches and
Monasteries; nay, he made bold with his very Gods, for he melted down many
Silver Images of Saints, and coined them into Money, to pay the Soldiers of the
said Charles's Army. So little do these Popes themselves make of that Bugbear
Sacrilege, when their own Ambition is concerned!

Charles thus encouraged, marches to Naples, and through the Treachery prepared
by Pope Urban, is received into the City, for he had inveigled to his Interest
most of the best Families there, by his liberal promotion of them to the
Dignity of Cardinals: But Joan the lawful Queen of Sicily (that had been so
kind to assist him with Money) seeing him thus most ungratefully, as well as
unjustly, invade her Dominions, retired to the New Castle; in order to whose
rescue, her Husband Otho Duke of Brunswick, comes and besieges the City;
whereupon the Popes Creature, Charles, counterfeits the Hand and Seal of the
said Queen Joan, and sends a Letter as from her to Otho, entreating him to come
to her with six only of his dearest and most faithful Friends, to Consult
together in so great extremity what was best to be done; Otho suspecting
nothing, goes thither by night, accompanied with the Marquess of Montferrat,
his Cousin Balthazar, Duke of Brunswick's Brother, Son in Law of the Earl of
Fundi, and three Captains, in whom he greatly trusted; but they fall into an
Ambuscade prepared for them, who killed the Marquess and the three Captains,
took Duke Otho and his Brother, and carried them Prisoners to Charles, who
commanded Balthasar's Eyes to be put out in the public Marketplace, where the
innocent young King Conradine, by the commandment of Charles the First, had
been Beheaded, and kept Otho full 3 years under Custody. Queen Joan, when she
heard that her Husband was taken, hoped that in yielding the Castle, which
besides was in distress for want of Victuals, she might at least redeem her
Life; but he sent her presently Prisoner into a certain Castle of Abruzzo, in
the Chapel whereof, as she was kneeling at Prayer before the Altar, by his
Command she is strangled by four Hungarian Soldiers. All this was done by the
council of Pope Urban, for his Legate a Latere was the Cardinal of Sangro, who
was with Charles during all these Butcheries, and thought he offered to God
good Sacrifice, when he had destroyed them that had been faithful to Queen
Joan, as well of the Clergy as Laity, either depriving them of their Goods, or
deposing them from Ecclesiastical Dignities, without any respect of Age,
Condition, or Merit; in so much, that in one day he created 32 new Archbishops
and Bishops, and many Abbots, all Neopolitans and Followers of Charles's part.
Our Author adds, That he used the Enchantments of a certain Vagabond, who named
himself a Knight, and a little after was burned by commandment of Lewis Duke of
Anjou, whom he would have deceived.

Neither was our other Pope, Clement, in the mean while idle; a Man (says the
Author) of a large Conscience, and of great Experience, and very needy, whom
Gregory the Eleventh, by reason he could not otherwise maintain his
Prodigality, had appointed Legate in the Marca de Ancona and Lumbardy, more
perhaps, that he might by that means have wherewith to live, from the
Inhabitants of those Regions, under pretense of his Legation, than for any
quiet or safety that he might procure unto them. Nevertheless he was covetous,
or rather a greedy Griper, by reason of his Prodigality: For Otho Duke of
Brunswick, having taken Verseil and 40 Castles in those parts from Viscount
Barnabo, then Commander of Millan, who had delivered them to Gregory, Clement
being at that time Legate, sold them all to Barnabo for ready Money, who
exercised against them all sorts of Cruelty, and exacted from them the Money he
had disburs'd to Clement; and being come to the Popedom, he retained still the
same humor, granting in fee for a very small yearly Revenue without any
difficulty, the Lands and Demesnes of Cathedral Churches and Monasteries, to
oblige great Men to his Faction, and giving (says the Author) large Thongs of
other Men's Leather. And when he saw that Urban had at his pleasure created a
King of A^ulia, he resolved to give him a Competitor: This was Lewis Duke of
Anjou, whom he crowned and sent into Italy with an Army of sixty thousand Men.

Upon which, Urban thought fit to leave Rome, and to go into the Kingdom of
Naples, whom Charles met not far from Aversa, and did unto him the office of a
Groom, or Yeoman of his Stirrup, and many Country people came and kissed the
said Vrban's Feet; but before they did so, they had thrice kissed the Ground.
But yet for all this Complement, Charles, under color of showing him the
Castle of Aversa, kept the silly Pope prisoner, suspecting some ill Design from
his Journey into those parts, and so much the rather, for that he himself had
not fulfilled his promise of putting Pregnan the Pope's Nephew (or as some
rather thought, Bastard) into possession of the Duchy of Capua. But soon
after, at the Entreaties of the Cardinals upon terms, set him at Liberty, and
brought him to Naples.

The before^mention'd Pregnan was a notorious Villain, and addicted to all kind
of Vices, and yet this Pope was so fond of him, that when his Debaucheries were
complained of, he was always wont to cry, He is young, and yet he was then
forty years old: Amongst other of his Pranks, he Ravished a Nun of the Order of
St. Clare, at which the people being much incensed, he fled to a Church under
protection of his Uncle, the King having according to Law convicted him,
sentenced him to dye; but the Pope interposed, alleging, That he was a
superior Lord, in whose presence the King could not punish any Nobleman,
without his consent: And so the Criminal for this horrid Act escaped the reach
of Justice. Quia sic placuit Papae, (says Theodoric of Neym) because it so
pleased the Pope to have it.

THE COURANT.
Tory. WHat says little Harry (as the great Heraclitus calls him)? Does he not
Triumph about Friday's work?


Truem. Not at all, as I hear of; tho if some people might have their will, it
would be almost matter of wonder to see Right at any time take place. But still
I think, tho the Turky-Printer bustled as much as the best Powder-monkey,
Extortioner, Soap-Chandler, or Splitter-splutter Suborner in the Pack, yet your
Gang had no great cause of boasting, for some of the forlorn White Friars
Troops I hear were cut off by the Shoulder-dabbers in their Retreat. But
prithee what have got in thy paw there? Thou art always (like the Observator)
sumbling of Papers.


Tory. It Is an odd thing I took up in the Street, and I know not what the Devil
to make on it -- However, for once I Will read it, just as Parson Whip-spur does
his Sermon, which he never perused before he came into the Pulpit.


The Copy of a Letter from a Roman Catholic in Albania, to a Popish Priest in
Albionia.
May it please your Reverence!
WHat is every where admired, I joyfully congratulate; the wise and a live
Conduct of our Vice Master, who by his unwearied pains and care, has gained
such a Senate as unanimously has recognized his pretensions; and tho never so
much a Papist, he shall be so far (they declare) from being opposable, that he
must not be questioned, which gives us great confidence (if our Friends could
at last procure such a complying Assembly in your parts) we may once again have
in prospect the Advancement of the Romish Catholic Religion (tho poor Ned, our
grand Agitator, were most wretchedly Sacrificed to the Glory of the Design)
over this whole Island, without much opposition.

But we are even now startled (besides the late indignity of burning our Holy
Father in Essigie) at some Rumors which are spread amongst us, for it is
averred, the greater assurance we have of the Gentleman's faithful Adherence to
his Holinesses Supremacy and the Sea of Rome, the less hopes we have of his
coming to the Imperial Dignity, or getting such a Senate as will bring our holy
Enterprise to perfection in your Nation.

For it is diffused as a Maxim, and generally received, That no resolved Papist
can be admitted as a lawful King there, according to the Rules of their present
Government; They pretend to prove it thus -- Every King of Albionia, according
to the Law, is to be in all Causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, Supreme Head and Governor: Therefore no resolved
Papist can according to Law there be King, for be that owns the Popes
Supremacy, disclaims his own Supremacy, consequently has already renounced his
Title, and agreed an Act of Exclusion against himself.

And as for procuring such a Senate by the Laws established, (which are, and
have graciously been declared to be our Rule) every Popish Recusant must be
questioned, discovered, repressed, and debarred from any Office; and no man is
to conceal, maintain, abet, aid, or assist a Popish Recusant, in advancing him
to any place of Trust, Authority, or Government; but it shall be construed to
signify his consent to overthrow King, Religion, and Government established, in
so much, that he shall incur the dang^^ and penalty of a Praemunire, if not of
Treason: So that it cannot reasonably be supposed, that ever the more
considerate part of the Commons can be surprised unwarily to choose such Men,
(as lie under the suspicion of the Guilt beforementioned, or that have been
Abhorrers, Antipetitioners, or Addressers, against Legal Senates) to be their
Representatives in any future Assembly of the States.

To these gauling Objections of the Heretics which obstruct our hopes, I humbly
implore of your fatherly Wi^dom some Sal^e and Satisfaction, that so at once we
may silence our Adversaries, and confirm our Friends. Thus doing, you may
contribute much to the carrying on the holy Design, which has been, and will
be, the Desire and Endeavors of,

Paradisopol^s, Dec. 5. 1681. Your most obedient Son, etc.


Tory. Now would I give a Guinney to have this Priest's Answer; for tho I don't
understand what this Letter is about, yet I love Replies extremely: For
certainly, he that has the last word, must be the wisest Man.


Truem. For that very reason, Sir, I tell you -- I am Your Servant.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 20. 1681-2.
Asperius nihil est misero cum surgit in Altum.
The Cardinals vote, That if a Pope be negligent or unfit to govern, he may
have Curators placed over him. Pope Urban the Sixth drowns five Cardinals in
Sacks. He dies. Boniface the Ninth succeeds him.
POpe Urban the Sixth being seemingly reconciled at Naples with his Hector
Charles the Titular King of Sicily, did with his precious Nephew, Pregnan,
retire to Lucera, (between Naples and Salerno) a place no less pleasant than
safe for their persons, where he devoted himself to Sloth, and all kind of
sensual Voluptuousness, whilst the Affairs of the Church every day ran to
wrack, and the Cardinals were continually alarmed and in danger between the
Forces of the said Charles on the one side, and those of Lewis of Anjou (who,
we told you, was with a great Army, entered into Italy, on the behalf of the
other Pope, called Clement the Seventh); Therefore at the instance of Cardinal
Reatino, their Eminencies held a Consult together, where, after a long debate,
it was resolved by the opinions of many Doctors -- That if a Pope should happen
to grow negligent, or be found unfit to govern the the Church, or to be one so
self-willed and conceited, as to refuse all wholesome Advice, and thereby brought
the Church (St. Peter's Bark) into danger, or were so ungovernable a Cockscomb,
That without the counsel of his Cardinals, he would rashly do all things
according to his own Fantasy and Lust; that then and in such case it was lawful
to substitute by the Election of the Cardinals, some fit Curator or Curators,
(Governors or Guardians) by and with whose direction and advice the Pope
should be obliged to manage all affairs of moment in the Church.

This was concluded by the Conclave, as you may see in the History of Theodorie
a Nyem, l. 1. c. 24. (whose Testimony is so much the more to be valued, for
that he was Secretary to this very Pope.) Now was not this a hopeful most holy
Infallible Ghostly Father fit for a Bib and Muckinder, that must have Tutors
and Curators to direct him? Did these Cardinals (think you) believe, That their
Pope was not subject to Error, when they conclude him such a Natural, as to
need Managers and Guardians?

But the truth is, How much a Sot soever he were, he proved too cunning for
them, for having smoakt their Consult and Design, next time they came
(according to Custom) to Complement him, he seized seven of the most busy of
them, and without any color of Law, presently confiscated all their Estates,
and thereby so terrified all the rest, that no man of them durst think any more
of the Curatorship. These seven that he had snapt, he with a Cruelty suitable
to a Pope, thrust into a miserable Dungeon, and without any respect to their
Age or Quality, put them to the Rack, and all manner of Tortures, his gracious
Nephew, Pregnan, standing by to see Execution done, and upbraiding them whilst
in Torments.

But King Charles soon after (by reason of some Insolences offered to him by
the said Pregnan) coming to besiege Urban himself in the said Castle of Lucera,
his Impietyship was forced to fly over the Mountains, and with much ado got to
Salerno, carrying his Captive-Cardinals under a Guard along with him, and one
of them, broken with Tortures, not being able to follow him farther, he
commanded his Hangman to knock out his Brains, and left his Body in the Fields
without Burial; the other six he dragged with him, (all but Cardinal Adam, a
poor Monk, whom he gave to King Richard the Second of England) First to Sicily,
and then to Genua, and at last, that he might not be troubled with them any
longer, he caused them (says the Author) all in one Night to be beheaded: But
Platina says, they were sown up in Sacks, and so flung into the Sea, after the
manner of punishing Parricides of old, which is probable, since no doubt the
Pope would call their Crime Rebellion against their Spiritual Father. But which
way soever he disposed of them, all Authors agree, That they were never seen
afterward.

Lewis King of Hungary dying, the beforementioned Charles his Son was forced
to go home thither to settle Affairs, where, by the Treachery of the Queen, he
was beheaded, but had left two Sons, Ladislaus and John (Children very young)
at Ferrara; whereupon the Pope thirsting after Revenge, and to wreck his Spleen
on these two innocent Babes for the Injuries he pretended to have received from
their Father, thinking he had a fit opportunity, departs from Genua to Lucca,
then to Sena and Perusium, with a desire, as he pretended, to see Naples, but
in truth with a design to defeat the young Princes of their Inheritance; but by
the prudence and faithfulness of some Counselors to whose Charge they were
left, their Lives and Estates were preserved from his malicious Fury.

Then he returned to Rome, and made in one day 29 Cardinals, of whom 26 were
Neopolitans. In the last year of his Popedom, calling to mind of the vast Gain
that the Jubilee had brought to Clement the Sixth, in the year 1350. He would
needs (tho against all Reason, except only that of private Lucre) abreviate the
Term, and have it kept every 30 years, yet so, as that it should begin at
Christmas, Anno Dom. 1388. and continue a year Inclusive.

But tho he had laid his Bait for Money, yet he did not live to see the Fish
caught; for being bruised by a fall of his Mule as he was riding to Perusium,
he was carried to Rome, where after few days he died. Paucis admodum utpote
hominis Rustici and inexorabilis flentibus. Hujus autem Sepulchrum adhuc
visitur cum Epitaphio satis Rustico and inepto. Very few (says Platina)
lamenting his Death, for he was a clownish Fellow, and inexorable. His Tomb is
seen to this day with a very Rustical and foolish Epitaph.

And there is an end of one of our Popes, and if he were (as Roman Historians
bear us in the hand) the Right and most Legitimate of the two, we may very well
say, Bad was the best; for amongst other of his meritorious Feats he caused a
Book to be written by one John de Therano his Chamberlain, the beginning
whereof is, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar' s, and to God the
things that are God's; wherein he affirms, That these words of our Savior have
place only for a time, namely, until his Ascension, but afterward they were
out of Date, and of no force, seeing that himself says, John 12. When I shall
be taken up, I will draw all Men after me, that is, [Pray mark the Wit and
Divinity of the Interpretation] All Kings and Kingdoms shall be under the
Empire of the Pope, etc. Likewise John the Ligni wrote a Book in favor of this
Pope Urban against his Rival Clement; as on the other side, the Abbot of St.
Vast wrote one for Clement against Urban, wherein they call each Pope, Heretic,
Schismatic, Tyrant, Thief, wicked sower of Sedition, Son of Belial, and it is
believed they were not either of them much mistaken.

Pope Urban (you have heard) left the hopeful Crop of his intended Jubilee to
be reaped by his Successor, who was one Peter de Thomacellis, a Neopolitan, who
was called Boniface the Ninth; Ignorant he was (says our oft-quoted Author
Theodoric a Nyem, l. 2. c. 6.) of writing and singing, and so unfit for
Administration of the Affairs of the Court of Rome, that whilst he lived, he
hardly understood the Propositions made before him by the Advocates in
Consistory, in so much, that in his time, Inscitia fere venalis fuit in ipsa
Curia Ignorance was almost buyable (as a main step to preferment) in the Roman
Court. Yet in all kind of Simony, so far he excelled all his Predecessors, that
not one Cardinal or Bishop was promoted, without extorting great Sums of Money
from them. And indeed such an unreasonable Griper had Urban before found him,
(who only for his Personage and goodly Stature, had from a Vagabond Clerk
preferred him to be a Cardinal) That he, for mere shame, was about to degrade
him, if he had not been prevented by Death.

Of this godly Gentleman's Invention (as some Authors report) were the payments
to the Pope, called Annates; concerning which, it may not be wide of our mark
to inform the vulgar Reader, what by that word is understood.

Annates (derived from Annus, a year) are no other than ( Primitiae) the first
Fruits, or profits of every Spiritual Living for one year, to be paid by the
Parson that is invested in it, at his first entrance thereupon; and near of Kin
hereunto are Decimae, Tenths, (take it in a strict sense) viz. The Tenth part
of the first Fruits, or of one years value of all Spiritual Livings, and these
were anciently paid to the Popes, not only in England, but throughout the
Western parts of Christendom; for the Pope as Pastor pastorum, claimed Decimas
decimarum, and that Jure divino too, (tho never thought of 'till about, or some
small time before, this year 1399.) by Example (forsooth!) of the Jewish
High Priest, who ( Numb. 18. 16.) was to have Tenths from the Levites.

But tho Jure Divino (as in many other cases of Clergy-cheats) were the Gloss,
yet Interest was the Text; for Polydere Virgil (one of the Pope's own
Publicans, or Peter Pence Collectors) is not shy to insinuate, l. 8. c. 2. (tho
he refers them to a more ancient Original) That the first Rise of them was for
the maintenance of the Pope's Grandeur, and that this Income was one of the
fairest Flowers in the Triple Crown: But when once the payment of them had
continued some competent time, it was politickly done upon any questioning of
the Right to refer them to a Divine Original, which was sure to satisfy such,
as used (in those times) to take the Pope's bare word for far greater matters.

Yet the payment of these, with others, so much impoverisht the Kingdom of
England, (for we are willing to sum up all here that we have to say,
occasionally on this matter) that notwithstanding such Allegation of Divine
Right, the ancient Kings of England made no scruple sometimes to forbid the
payment of them; as King Edward the Third once discharged the Pope's Nuncio
from Collecting the first Fruits, etc. and many Prohibitions were granted
against the Pope's Collectors, on Complaints made by the aggrieved Commons in
Parliament, as appears in my Lord Coke's Jurisdiction of Courts, c. 14. and
several Statutes, where it is termed once an horrible Mischief, and damnable
Custom; and another time it is called a very Novelty; see the Acts, 2. H. 4. c.
1. and 1. R. 2.

But so subtle was the Court of Rome, that when sometimes the Kingdom
complained of these Burdens, and withal, the Kings in Exigencies pressed for
aids from their Subjects, they would in a frolic of Bounty yield or assign the
First Fruits, etc. for a certain time (a year or more) to the King, whereby
they both inured the People to the payment, and the Prince to the continuance
of it.

But in the 26 th of Henry the Eighth, they were given to the King and his
Heirs and Successors for ever; and in the 32 d of his Reign, a particular Court
was erected for recovering them, which being dissolved in the first of Queen
Mary, the thing was revived again by 1. Eliz. c. 4. but the Court not restored,
only the First Fruits were ordered to be within the Rule and Adjustment of the
Exchequer, and a new Officer, viz. A Remembrancer erected of the First Fruits
and Tenths of the Clergy, who both takes all Compositions for them, and makes
out Process against such as make default in payment. So that every Spiritual
person must pay, or secure by Bond, his First Fruits, before his actual
possession of his Benefices, which Bond is of like force with a Statute-Staple.

The mode of Composition now, is for the Parson with Sureties to enter into
four Bonds, each conditioned for payment of the fourth part of the First
Fruits, (according to the rate of his Living, as it was Taxed, anno 26. H. 8.
(for that is the Standard) which is called, being so much in the King's Books,
but yet with a deduction of Tenths) the first Bond payable at half a years end,
the second at a Twelve months end, the third at a year and half's end, and the
last at the expiration of two years.

This we thought fit to add, out of the Respect we have to the young Clergy
that are hankering after Benefices, to whom this Discourse at least (whatever
our other Writings (through sinister Informations) may be) will probably prove
not unacceptable.

The COURANT.
Trueman [Solus.] NOw shall not I see my old Correspondent, Tory; for he was drunk
last night at the Queens Head with toping Confusions to the City Charter: But
no matter -- here is Ben. Tooks Goblin, Heraclitus, will do as well. He dashes
through thick and thin, and flings dirt on as good Scarlet as any in the City.
Alas poor fool! Their Reputations Crystal, none of the filth will stick, but
Reverts to your own face, and will (one day) infallibly sink the pitiful and
already Crazy Shipp it is squirted from. However by this the World may take
notice, what respect the Tories pay to Authority, if their Magistrates don't
humor them, presently they will affront them to their faces, Hiss, Revile,
slander and Libel them. Having been thus saucy to his Superiors, it is no news
if he snarl at the Courantier, who, he says, is much unacquainted with
Guinnies; poor heart? I Am sorry for it, but the truth is, he has no Faction nor
party to Bribe or Encourage him; nothing but God and the King, Truth and a good
Conscience to protect and support him; and so long, he sings (as to the
Guinnies) Nec habeo, nec Careo, Nec Curo; let Pimps and flatterers and
L'Estranges, boast their hundreds of Guinnies sent 'um from the Devil knows who
-- He has enough, in being Honest. Yet sure the Milk and Butter and Cheese was
the conceit of some Hunger-starved Curate of the Club, that lives on small
Tyths, and is fain to make shift with such, Commons when every Monday morning
he Trudges from near Dartford to London. Popish Not still drudges on, but of
late more bare faced; what abundance of little Tricks have his managers been
trying, to raise some pretense of sl^r in Dr. Oatses Evidence, but I know not
whether with more malice or folly? Is not yesterdays Sham a rare one, Mr. Oats
swore He was Informed, Parson Elliot was Circumcised, yet upon a Commssion of
Inspection (a nice business I Will promise ye) It appears -- Not says, that the
man's twigg of Life has all its apurtenances; well, but does it follow that the
Doctor might not be Informed otherwise? Away you ridiculous Scoundrels! --
In The next place, Godfry's Murder (O that is a bone in some peoples throats)
must be represented uncertain; prithee, dear Not? tell us (if thou dare) in
thy next the inquisitive Gentleman of Sarum's true name, I Will warrant he is as
good a Protestant as thy self.

And now Enter Observator, who fiddles to the old Tune, For in earnest, the
fellow has not Composed above one sheet (bating his Translations) these 20
years, tho he has blurred ten thousand Ream of Paper. He Is much troubled, that
Mrs. Joan should be questioned, and to bring in the Chat, tells two or three
notorious Lies, in a breath, viz. That Care was Cited (as he call it) to
Guild Hall, that Janeway desired Joan might be sent for, etc. which is all
utterly false. But above all, where is Rogers Wit or Modesty to Revive a
sluttish story little to the Credit of the Parties Concerned. But since you now
twice together have Raked it up -- I tell thee Roger once for all, that the
debauch in the Church you mention was favorably told in Janeway's Mercury, and
there are better men than you or I, that are or may be satisfied of the Truth
on it. Nor was it first Published for any such base end as you maliciously
suggest, but only to the Intent; that the Actors might be brought to just
Punishment. For not a few good Churchmen think those Swine deserved to be Cast
out of the Sacred Temple which they had so vily profaned, more than (or as
much at least as) the 5 honest Protestants that were given to the Devil 'tother
day near Ludgate, for not receiving the Sacrament at Easter; when they made it
appear before, that they have since received it (and by the Doctors leave too)
according to the form of the Established Church of England. -- But why may not
we have a Query or two as well as Heraclitus?

1. Q. Whether the Churchwarden that first presents men on his Oath for not
coming to Church, and afterward Acknowledges to one of them before 4
Witnesses, That for his part, he did not know but he (one of the defendants)
did use to come to Church, etc. have not a pretty Implicit vein of swearing?

2. Q. Whether a Parsons Wife, that when her Husband came to his Lodging at 12
a Clock on a Sunday Night, and told her he must go out a Hunting next morning?
Swore twice, by God he should not go, may not for all that be a good daughter
of the Church; Or whether her Husband be not thereby barred from all hopes of a
Bishopric by that old Canon, 1 Timothy 3. 4. because he can rule his Wife no
better.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 27. 1681-2.
-- Depravant publica Jura, Justitiamque fugant, Divum nil verba verentes.
Pope Boniface makes the people of Rome entirely his Vassals, sets up another
Jubilee (besides that Ordained by Urban, Anno 1388.) in the Year 1400.
Complaints of his horrid Covetuousness.
POpe Boniface the Ninth (whose Life we are at present concerned with) came to
the Chair, in the Year One thousand three hundred eighty nine. Platina says, He
was then but Thirty years old: (But Onuphrius Snibs him for that Error, and
affirms, He was five and forty,) and highly commends him for his Continency,
etc. But how well he deserved those Praises, you will by and by be better
enabled to Judge. Of his Ambition, and Tyranny the same Author in the very next
words gives us an Instance, Primus Populi Romani vim Omnem in Pontificem
transtulerit Creatis suo nutu Magistratibus omnibus, etc. He was the first that
transferred all the Power of the People of Rome unto the Popes, Creating all
their Magistrates at his pleasure; It seems before, though the Popes bore a
great sway amongst them, yet the Citizens retained some part of their Ancient
Liberty, and Elected their own Officers, which made several of the Popes not
endure to keep their Residence there. But this bonny Boniface taking the
advantage of the Feuds and Disorders amongst them, and by the means of a
Jubilee, which they Courted him to hold in their City, as you shall hear
presently, ordered matters so cunningly, that he got to himself alone the
Domination In Al^o and Basso, (As Feudal Lawyers speak) in High and Low; or,
absolutely in All and over All: So that henceforth, the Pope must be Dominus
Fac totum, Chief Master of Misrule, and becomes (forsooth) a Temporal Prince,
and from hence our small Hucksters for Popery, little disguised Factors of
Romes Braided Wares, such as L'Estrange, etc. draw their Argument. O! you must
not call the Pope, the Antichrist, Man of Sin, etc. (which are Titles the
Spirit of God in Holy Scripture invests him with,) but you must (blasphemously)
call him his Holiness, and the Western Patriarch, and give him Complemental
Language and terms of Respect, For he is a Civil Prince: Thus you must first
Reverence a Traitor, a Rebel, an Usurper and a Murderer, as a Lawful Sovereign
in Civils, and Honor a Blasphemous Villain, and Enemy to Christ, not only as a
true Christian Bishop, but a Patriarch too, and Metropolitan of all the Western
Churches. And having got you so far, 'twill be no difficult matter to persuade
you to alter this Reverence to Adoration, and make you believe, he has as much
Right in Spirituals as in Temporals, and as good a Jurisdiction over all the
other Churches in the World, as over those of these Western Kingdoms, and then
the Business is done, and you will quickly prove as errant a Batt-blind
Bigoted Papist as any in Spain.

To maintain his ill-acquired Sovereignty, he grievously fleeced the Clergy
with Subsidies and Exactions; But to make them part of amends, gave them leave
to Extort what they could from the Laiety; He likewise Re-edified the Castle of
St. Angelo, and the Capitol, and therein placed a Garrison, and Fortified the
Bridges over the Tiber, the more to keep the people in Awe and Subjection.

You heard before how his Predecessor Urban had for Lucresake Anticipated the
Jubilee, and appointed it to be kept almost Twelve years before it came in
Course; but the said Urban dying, Boniface so far approved thereof as to let it
go on, and take the Money that accrewed thereby, amounting to a vast Sum* But
Ten years after, when the year 1400. began to approach, (which was the year on
which the Jubilee should customarily be kept, as being the Fiftieth year,) He
pretended, that what Urban did was Irregular; and therefore he must have it
solemnly kept according to the Original Institution: so here were two Jubilees
held in a dozen years space.

But a little before the beginning of the said year, Boniface subtlely removes
to Assise, pretending to stay there for a considerable time; this Alarmed the
Romans, fearing least by reason of his absence whose Business it was to give
the Blessing, the great Jubilee would not be kept at Rome, or at least not so
much frequented, and so they should lose the profit of the Solemnity:
whereupon, they very humbly Petition him to return to the Mother-City. But he
had another Game to play, and therefore they more Entreat, the more Coy he
seems, and upbraids them with their Disrespectful Carriage, and expresses much
Aversion to the City; particularly he Charges them with that they had refused
to take Senators at his Nomination, and that of their own humor they had
appointed certain Magistrates called Conservers of the Chamber, who were
insufficient men, and had suffered the Banderesii (a Faction not favoring the
Pope) to have their will in all things, etc. So that at last to please him, and
get the Jubilee at their Town, the Romans were glad not only to Banish the
Banderesii and take such an one for their Senator (which Office in those days
appears to have been somewhat like that of our London Majors) as Boniface
appointed, but likewise to give the Pope a great sum of Money, which making all
friends, he comes to Rome, and thence forwards Ruled them at his Arbitrary
pleasure as aforesaid.

We are Arrived at the Year 1400. and the Great Jubilee is Proclaimed, Quo
innumera fere hominum multitudo ad Urbem Religionis causa venerat. Whereupon a
multitude of People almost Innumerable flock to the City on the Account of
Religion and Devotion, says Platina. But Theodorica Nyem l. 1. ca. 68. Tells
us more at large, That innumerable Strangers out of diverse Provinces and
Kingdoms came thither, and exceeding rich Offerings were presented to the
Churches of the City and Shrines of Saints, the greater part of which came to
the hands of Boniface and others that were his Creatures; and yet the insatiate
Wretch, not Content with these voluntary Presents, although they amounted to an
incredible Sum, yet (being himself a bottomless Gulf, and in Covetousness, none
like him,) sent his Money-Hucksters, or petty Chapmen abroad into diverse
Kingdoms to sell Indulgences to any that would give as much for them as it
would cost them to go to Rome to fetch them. The cunning Extortioners choused
simple and Barbarous People of vast Sums of Money, so that by this Spiritual
Pedlery they sometimes brought away clear out of one Kingdom or Province more
than an hundred thousand Crowns, for they would undertake to forgive all Sins
to all Men that would pay them, and that too barely on Confession, without
imposing any Penance; for money they Dispensed with all Irregularities,
saying, they had all the Power so to do, that Christ had given to Peter of
binding and loosing on Earth; and by this means these Chapmen being well
fatted, returned back to Rome with many fair Horses, and laden with Treasures,
and gave an Account of all their Collections to Boniface, wherein he was so
exact and severe, that if he detected any fraud or concealment, he punished it
with Death. Thus far Theodoric. -- Nay Platina himself relates, That in this
Popes time, plenary Indulgences were every where sold so cheap, that the
Authority of the Keys and Apostolical Letters grew Contemptible; and that
Boniface Indulging too much his kindred, [perhaps from hence we may date the
mischiefs of the Nepotismo] many Simoniacal Acts were Committed. And (for a
third Evidence) Crantzius, l. 11. ca. 10 and 12. testifies, That under his
Popedom were made many and frequent Translations of Bishops, a super-abundance
of such kind of Indulgences as were never so much as heard of before; and what
he easily granted, he as slightly revoked, causing himself to be generally ill
spoken of throughout all Christendom, as one never satisfied with Gold.

How sad and calamitous the face of these times was, Froissard the Historian
Vol. 3. Ca. 24. will inform us, -- Men (says he) will in future Ages wonder by
what means the Church could fall into such troubles, and be bewildred in them
so long: but sure this was a wound Inflicted by the Almighty to admonish the
Clergy in what excess and superfluity they lived. But none took notice of these
Divine warnings, being all blindde with Pride and Arrogance, each man striving
to be equal, or superior to another, so that all things daily became worse and
worse, etc.

It was about this time, that Tamberlain who had Conquered the Turks, and
carried about in Triumph their Emperor Bajazet in an Iron Cage, departed this
Life, thereby leaving the Armenians, Persians, Egyptians, Assyrians, and other
Paynim Nations without an Head, whereby a great and easy door of Advantage was
opened to the Christian^ to have recovered the (long and dear-sought)
Possession of the Holy Land, had not the Pope instead of a Common Good, rather
consulted his own private Interest and that of advancing his beggarly Kindred.

For not regarding that glorious Enterprise, he fell to persecuting a certain
sort of People, who from their Habit, were called the Albi, or White ists;
concerning whom, Platina thus tells the Story, -- Ex Alpibus descendisse, etc.
In this Popes time, as I have heard from my Father who saw the very man, there
came down from the Alps into Italy, the year before the Jubilee, a certain
Priest attended with a great Multitude of folks; and he being arrayed with
white Cloth, did show both in his words and behavior so much modesty, that by
all he was reputed a Saint. In Italy he found or made a world of Proselites of
each Sex; who being clothed with white Linen without any distinction whether
Men or Women, Clowns or Citizens, Freemen or Slaves, marched about the Countty,
and like Beasts, where Night over-took them, there in the open fields they took
their natural Repose. In the Villages they publicly eat together, bringing
forth their Victuals as to a sacred Feast; the before mentioned Priest in the
Head of them carried the Crucifix, which he said wept for the Sins of Men, and
as often as that happened, all the Company fell a mourning and lamenting, and
begging pardon of God: when they marched or stood still, they Sung the Praises
of the Blessed Virgin, in Hymns of their own, aptly Composed for that purpose.

Thus they stroul'd along through ^truria, Pisa, and other Parts, the opinion
of their Sanctity continually increasing, and not only surprising the ignorant
and credulous Rabble, but also drawing in Princes and Bishops to admire them,
and favor their Proceedings; at last being wearied with Rambling his Gang made
an halt at Viterbium, but gave out, That he would go on to Rome to visit the
Sacred Places and Bodies of Saints. But Boniface was jealous that this
superstitious Pilgrim intended to play him a trick, and had a Design to make
himself Pope, having such a vast Crew following at his heels, and altogether at
his Devotion; and therefore clandestinely sends some Troops of Soldiers, who
unexpectedly surpised our devout vagrant, brought him to Rome, and there (for
ought we find) he was put to Death. Platina himself half blushes at his
Execution, and can scarce refrain telling us, That he fell a Sacrifice merely
to the Popes Envy and Jealousy: and adds, that immediately after followed a
dismal Plague or mighty Mortality at Rome.

Boniface dyed in the Fifteenth year of his Popedom, Annoque Dom. 1404. But in
the mean time his Rival the Antipope, Clement at Avignon in France, departing
this Life, Peter de Luna a Spaniard was by that Faction Elected Pope by the
name of Benedict the Thirteenth.

The COURANT.
Tory. It Was a Bill 'ile assure you on a Goldsmith for a Hundred Guinnies.


Truem. Guinnies, or Pistoles? I have heard some of those Gentlemen deal much
in French Commodities for all the Statute.


Tory. No, no, Guinnies was the word, I could tell you the Complements that
passed, the very names of the Club, and the Healths that were Huzza'd.


Truem. Well, but what ails Rabbi L'Estrange to be so furious (all on a sudden)
against young Tongue, and anticipate his Observa-Tory day, and kick and wince
and bounce and drivel as if he were possessed?


Tory. O Sir! you must note our old Granny Lane, and friend Hodge (Captain
Ely's Bail-procurer,) and bloody Natt. etc. lately renewed their Acquaintance
with Mr. Tongue, and endeavored a fresh Intrigue of the old stamp; but finding
upon Recollection, that he would not Correspond further with them, and fearing
all their Roguery would come out, the Reverend Clergy-guide sound himself
obliged to cry Whore first, and so forcing (as he used to do) his poor Printers
to Case it away on Sunday for Expedition, out dropped Mondays Observator; do'nt
you know the Policy of prevention?


Truem. Yet methinks it plainly appears, L'Estrange holds Correspondence not
only with the What-dyee called Court, and the pelting Parson, and Natt.
Thompson, but with Mrs. Lane, and the open Papists too, else how came he by all
those vouchers he Cites?


Tory. No matter for that, Tros Rutilusve, Papist or Devil, as long as it is
under pretense of serving the Church of England. -- But do'nt you see how he
Claws off, The Letter of the old Common Council-man to the New one?


Truem. Spiders turn all things to poison; he talks there, of a Common practice
of Canvasing to make an Interest, sure he means the Cats-turd^ Merchant's
Printing of Bills to beg Votes for Common Council-men.


Tory. Out, away! we never tax our Friends, for to us that call our selves the
Loyal, Libelling and affronting Magistrates and every thing is Lawful. But if
the Whiggs do never so modestly assert just Rights, it is exposing the
Government, fomenting of Discords, a scandal to the Church, and the Devil and
all. -- But still I think he has justified Parson Pelling to purpose.


Truem. Yes, and much to his Honor that he has such a Champion; for wherever
he had that Account, it will be proved to the Observators teeth and the Parsons
too, that there are several Gross notorious Lies in it: besides, that it may be
Scandalous as well as False; he falls foul on a Reverend Divine (no way
inferior to his Client, for learning, Soundness of Doctrine, Holiness of Life,
or just Conformity;) who he says, sits on his Breech at the Gloria Patri,
(observe how the Fellows fingers itch after Latin Service) the Creed, etc. Now
suppose this had been true, it is as true, That Mr. Pelling Counter-marches with
his Second Service to the Altar, practices bowing to the Altar, teaches his
Flock to respond in reading the Psalms, etc. contrary to express Law -- Jam
sunt ergo pares. -- One it seems is an Under doer, and the other an Over-doer.


Tory. But these Excommunicati were Sinners of a long standing --


Treum. Goodly! goodly! and what a Saint is he that says it! -- I knew a fellow
lived most scandalously several years about Puddle-dock as Stallion to an Old
Lady, and another whose common Conversation is interlarded with horrid Oaths
and Execrations, yet I never heard either of them were ever Presented or
Excommunicated.


Tory. Pish, those are Venial Sins, nothing so heinous as not paying the Parson
his Easter-Offerings. -- Did you ever hear of the man that first Whor'd the
Mother, and then made the Daughter an honest Woman by Marrying her?


Truem. No, but I knew a Popish Blade in Holbourn, that for almost Twenty years
together never came at any Protestant Church or Sacrament at all, yet so far
from being questioned, that he is reputed not only a special Member, but a main
Pillar of the Church -- But now lets go to Queries.

1. Whether the Parson that accused his Neighbor and Brother Minister of the
Church of England for not Christening with the Cross when it was altogether a
^ye, might not deserve Excommunication on that Authentic Canon -- Thou shall
not bear false-witness, etc.

2. If a Parson when he comes from Reading over a Sermon shall say, He thanks
God his Drudgery for that Week is over. Whether such a one can be supposed to
make the Gospel his delight, or be likely to Preach in season and out of season?

3. Whether Paul would ever have Excommunicated any Christian, because he
received the Sacrament of Barnabas, and not of himself?

4. Whether it might not be as Lawful and satisfactory for these Gentlemen
Excommunicated by Mr. Pelling, to receive the Sacrament of another Minister in
the same Diocese, as for Roger L'Estrange to Receive it in another Nation at
the Hague, when he fled from Justice, and (for all his vapor of being so good
a Church-babe^ cannot make it appear, he had for many years, (if ever) received
it before?


Tory. Hold your prating! else I^le say to you, as our Churchwarden did last
Sunday to the Constable -- Come away to Church, or I Will Excommunicate you.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 3. 1681-2.
Vt nemo doceat Fraudis and Scelerum vias Papatus docebit. --
The wickedness of Pope Innocent the Seventh, and Gregory the Twelfth. The
horrid Perjury of the latter. Three Popes at once, and the Scuffles between
them. The wickedness of Pope John the Twenty fourth. An Owl disturbs a whole
Council.
TO Boniface the Ninth, succeeded at Rome (for you may please to remember,
there was another Chair, and another Succession, all this while in France) Pope
Innocent the Seventh. Concerning which Gentleman, Platina gives this account --
Dum adhuc Cardinalis esset Carpere negligentiam, etc. Whilst he was but a
Cardinal, he used always to be taxing the former Popes of their Negligence and
Cowardice, affirming, That it was through means of their sloth, that this
terrible Schism of the Church of Rome was not long e're this removed and
extinct; but as soon as he had once got the Popedom himself, he followed those
very Courses which he blamed in Urban and Boniface, and was so far from doing
that which before he so much applauded, that he hated any that durst mention it
to him. His Government was insolent, cruel, and tumultuous; the Inhabitants of
Rome Addressing to him one time, That their Liberties might be restored, and
the Garrisons in the Capitol, etc. removed, and that he would use some
Endeavors for taking away the beforementioned Schism in the Church, and join
with the French King, who offered his assistance toward so good a Work; the
proud Pope was not only deaf to their just Petitions, but sent Eleven of the
principal Citizens Prisoners to his Nephew Lewis, who murdered them, and caused
their dead Bodies to be flung out at the Windows.

Enraged with these Tyrannous Barbarities, the people of Rome take Arms, and
call in Ladislaus King of Apulia, to their and, resolving to be revenged on the
said Lewis; but he with the Pope flies to Viterbium, where having in some time
raised considerable Forces, they send them against Rome; whereupon fearing
greater mischiefs, they are content to receive the Pope, and invite him back to
the City, who then created several Cardinals to strengthen his Party, and made
his butcherly Nephew Lewis, Marquess of Pisa, and Prince of Firma. And soon
after he himself died in the second year of his Papacy.

But some time before his decease, the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and Orleans,
(a Triumvirate which at that time, by reason of the King's indisposition, did
govern the Kingdom of France) went all of them to Pietro di Luna, (who we told
you took upon him the name of Benedict the 13 th, and Pop'd it at Avignion)
beseeching him to rectify this disorder, that the Church might no longer
appear as a Monster with a pair of Heads, and people not know which to obey as
Chief Pastor, and therefore were importunate with him to renounce the Papacy,
urging that nothing could be more glorious than an abandoning his private
Interest for the advantag^ of the public: And the rather was this to be
expected from him, since at his Election he had promised to lay down,
whenever things should be adjusted with Rome. In order to which, he assured
him, That that Pope which should be made in Rome after Innocent, should do the
like; every one concluding, That if those Favorites (one of France, and the other
of Italy) were but once dispossessed of the Keys, which they both exercised at
that time, (tho sure one of their Keys at least must needs be but a Picklock)
and a third indifferent person chosen, he would every where be acknowledged the
certain and undoubted Pope.

Benedict gave them the hearing, but gravely answered, That he (alas good Man!)
valued not the honor, and was weary of the trouble, but could not, without
offending God, consent to the Proposals, for renouncing the Church, and
abandoning the Flock of Christ, which by the common consent of so many good and
worthy Electors, was committed to his cure and custody, and was unwilling to
bring a thing into question, which he had so legally obtained. But as for what
respected the removal of the Schism, and restoring Concord to the Church, there
was nothing which he more passionately desired; and he would condescend to any
Assembly or Council for the debating or settling thereof, provided in a secure
place in which every one might speak his mind freely: For his own part he
declared, and swore to it too, That in case the Schism could not be taken away
by any other means, he would Renounce, upon condition the other at Rome would
do the same, for otherwise it would be to no purpose to solicit it.

The three Princes were not so short-sighted as not to see through Benedict's
Veil of Hypocrisy, and how loath he was to quit the Chair; and he on the other
side apprehending, lest they should make use of more powerful Arguments of
Force to oblige him to comply with their Requests, fortified himself in his
Palace, and was besieged there for five or six Months, 'till being weary of so
close and tedious a Confinement, he embarked on certain Galleys on the Rhosn,
and so escaped into Catalonia, which was his own Country: And indeed many
suppose the beforementioned Princes were instigated by the French Cardinals to
get him removed chiefly for that reason, because he was a Catalonian, not a
Frenchman, and that they might bring in one of their own Countrymen to
succeed him.

Upon the death of Innocent, which happened in November, 1406. the Italian and
other Cardinals which were at Rome, entered into the Conclave, and all solemnly
swore upon the Holy Evangelists, which their Dean held in his hand, That every
of them respectively would, if he were chosen, renounce the Papacy, provided
the French or Catalonian Antipope renounced his Anti papacy first. This was
done to satisfy the French, who having brought up a custom of Pope-making,
according to their own mode, it seemed an unsurmountable difficulty to bring
them out of it, with Reputation, unless the Italians would thus meet them half
way. At last in the Conclave at Rome, Angelo Corraro a Venetian, and Cardinal
of St. Mark, was chosen, and assumed the name of Gregory the 12 th. And to make
(as they thought) sure work, before he came out of the Conclave, they made him
promise in Writing under the hand of a Public Notary, and also gave him his
Oath, to perform the forementioned Condition.

But ( see the Faith of Popes!) no sooner was he settled in his Pontificial
Gears, but he found too much sweetness in the place to leave it so easily; and
indeed in this matter only, his Brother Antipope were well agreed, for he too,
notwithstanding his said solemn Promise, did not care for leaving the Seat of
Infallibility, and so each of them shuffled and cut about the place of
Congress, and whatever Town was named, the other side wanted not Objections,
and so no Agreement was like to succeed. Whereupon the Cardinals finding
themselves shamm'd, declared against them both as Faith breakers, and unfit for
the Holy Chair. And now the Cardinals of the French Faction resolved to abandon
Benedict, and the Italians, Gregory; and to get another indifferently chosen.
In order hereunto, the Cardinals both of Avignion and Rome met at Pisa, and by
common consent Deprive both Gregory and Benedict, all the Nations (except
Catalonia and the Scots, and some few petty Princes) concurring with them
therein; and having so done, they proceed to elect a new Pope, and make choice
of Peter Philargo a Friar Minor, and Archbishop of Milan, who took upon him the
name of Alexander the Fifth, who was wont to say, he had been a rich Bishop, a
poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope.

But for all this Decree of the folks at Pisa, the two old ones would still be
Popes, alleging, That the Convention at Pisa, was neither a free nor a general
Council, and that Matters were not there fairly and Canonically Transacted, and
therefore they would not abide by their doings, but would appeal to a general
Council: And to secure themselves, Gregory fled toward Romagna, and stayed
some time at Rimini, where he was magnificently entertained; And as for
Benedict, he having held a Conventicle in the City of Perpignan by the
intervention of his own Friends, retires into the Castle of Panischola.

So that now we had no less than three Popes all in view, and at the same
instant, for still the condemned Popes desisted not from exercising their Papal
and Ecclesiastical Functions; they consecrated Bishops, and created Cardinals,
and particularly Gabriel Condolmero, who was afterward Pope by the name of
Eugenius the Fourth, was by Gregory made Cardinal at Lucca. Now if a Succession
from right and lawful Popes and Bishops be necessary, it must be granted, That
if the Roman Church is not such, but miserably interrupted, vitiated, and
confounded by these Popes, of whom no Man can say which was the Right, and yet
their several Ordinations passed in the crowd, and multiplied no doubt in time
into many thousand Descendents, deriving Episcopacy and Priesthood from this
corrupt Fountain, which seem indeed (according to the Notions which these Men
advance at another time) to be but so many Nullities: And yet where is there
any Bishop or Priest in all Italy or France that is Infallibly sure, that he
himself holds not by the same cracked Title?

But to return to the Story -- Alexander (says Theodoric a Nyem) was one that
loved to live delicately, and to drink strong Wines; he was wholly ruled by
Balthazar Cossa Cardinal Deacon (the most profligate Villain that one shall
read of) who succeeded him by the name of John the 24 th. (or as some reckon,
the 23 d) The said Alexander died when he had held the Chair 8 or 9 Months, and
Baptista Panaetius of Ferrara, a Cardinal, in his 56 th Sermon, tells us, That
the said Balthazar caused him to be poisoned by Marsilius de Parma his
Physician, bribed thereunto with a vast sum of Money, on purpose that he
himself might follow him in his Papacy.

And how the said Balthazar got it at last, as to the manner, is very pleasant;
for as soon as Alexander was dead, being at Bononia, and having by his former
Administration got the chief Power into his hands, he commanded the Cardinals
to Elect a Pope such as he might approve of; and they offered several to him,
of whom he thought none fit enough: At last they requested plainly to show who
he was for? Give me (then says he) the Cloak of St. Peter, (a Garment which
they fling upon the new elected Pope) and I will give it to him that shall be
Pope: Which being done, he put it on his own shoulders, and said, Papa ego sum,
It is I am Pope; and was as good as his word: For tho several of the Cardinals
muttered and grumbled, yet none durst oppose him. This Prank of his is credibly
related by Johannes Stella, in his Book De Pontificibus.

To fix himself firm in his Seat, he courts Sigismund King of Hungary, and gets
him elected Emperor, and summons a Council at Rome, where a very odd accident
fell out, which Nicholas Clemangis Archdeacon of Bayeux, a Man famous in those
times, delivers as follows -- At the first meeting of the Council, Mass being
said after the accustomed manner to invocate the Holy Ghost, no sooner was the
Council sat, and Balthazar himself in a Chair provided for him higher than the
rest, but bo^eld a dreadful ill-favored Screechowl, the presage (they say) of
Calamity, with an horrible voice flew over their heads, and seated her self
upon the middle Beam of the Church, with her Eyes directly fixed upon the Pope.
Behold, said some of the lewd Italian wits, the Spirit in the form of an Owl!
Balthazar the Pope himself seeing how she glar'd at him, at first blushed for
shame, then began to sweat, and by and by in confusion broke up the Council.
And at the second Session she was there again in the same manner, and the Pope
would have drove her away by noise and clamours, but she would not stir, 'till
assaulting her with Pikes and Staves; having received several blows, she fell
down dead before them all.

THE COURANT.
Tory. BUT do'nt you perceive by the last Observator, that old Roger has a
Months mind to stand, next Election, one of the Candidates for his n'own
Country of Norfolk, when it shall please God and the King to bless us with a
Parliament?


Truem. No truly; for tho the doting fellow talks a little freakishly, yet we
understand true English Norfolk Dumplings as well as himself, and are
satisfied, That the generality of Freeholders, not only there, but throughout
the Nation too, are (to use his own phrase) more clarified in their
Understandings, than to choose either Knaves or Beggars. Besides, that Gentleman
has the same Antipathy to Parliaments, as some folks have to Cats, he sweats,
and swouns, and is ready to run away at the sight or very smell on it. Nor has
he any reason to ambition a place in an Assembly, which he has so grossly and
impudently abused, That when ever They meet, he knows his Ears will not be able
to make Atonement for the petulancy of his Tongue, and the French Itch of his
Fingers. It Is true, he has already dubbed himself a Body Politic, sometimes his
own silly self is (forsooth!) the Government, sometimes the Church; and in his
own conceit makes as great a Figure in the World for Loyalty as Mother
Celliers, or her younger Sister Mrs. Elianor James, with her Sham-Pape^s of
Adviso's. Alas. Man! he has places enough already; is he not Mouth Extraordinary
of Faction? Principal Forger of Flams and Shams? Grand Engineer for Bedaubing
all Evidence of the Popish Plot? The mighty Artist at Blanching of Blackamoors?
Supreme Scavenger of the Town, into whose Cart all the Popish Kennel-rakers
that cannot find Stowage in Took and Thompson, empty their Dirt, which he most
industriously two or three times a week subtlely unloads at Protestants Doors:
-- And then, For the whole Gang we hair-brained Tories call,
He Is Knight of the Shire, and represents you All.



Tory. Well! But he tells you, the French King does not make all these Advances
into Flanders merely to pick up Cockle-shells, or catch Whitings.


Truem. No, I Will warrant him; nor does he contrive the mighty Haven at Dunkirk,
and expensive Fortifications there, to make a Retreat for Herring-Busses: But
that wise and haughty Monarch has (no doubt) an Eye on enlarging his Empire,
and in subserviency thereunto, prosecutes the poor Dissenters, alias Huguenots,
or Protestants, within his Dominions, that he may the more plausibly engage the
Pope to favor his Enterprises, and lull Princes of that Communion asleep: Nor
is it my business to enquire why the Progress of his Arms were not stopped long
since, when means (however diverted) were not wanting; or to look over old
printed Letters, to find who it was talked of Interests inseparable: This I
will only say, That whether in other Parts of a different Religion and
Interest, where a Popish and French Plot is apparently discovered to be working
in their very Bowels, it may be of use toward obviating his Designs, to divide
Protestants, and worry one another to the undoing of many thousands, nay,
hundreds of thousands of Families, damping of Trade, consequently lesse^ing the
Revenue, and embroiling Affairs, and all this, for a parcel of (acknowledged)
Trifles, or imaginary Stories, forged by a knot of ill Men, who have no other
means to screen themselves from the Justice they apprehend out of conscious
Guilt; may still be a Question.


Tory. Pish, you are harping on the Popish Plot, but the same Author frankly
tells you, It Is nothing but a Vision of Dragons in the Moon.


Truem. Right! he is indeed pleased to call it so; but I humbly conceive, The
King, the Nation, and especially (as it is worded) the City, has little reason
to thank him for that Complement.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 10. 1681-2.
Quem mihi dabis de numero Praelatorum, qui non magis invigilet subditorum
evacuandis Marsupiis, quam extirpandis vitiis. -- Bernard ad Eugen.
The calling of the Council of Constance. The horrible villainies there proved
against Pope John, he is Deposed. A Council is above the Pope: The two other
Popes likewise casheir'd, etc.
WE are Remarking on the life of Pope John the 23 d. (or 24 th. as others call
him, for the business of Pope Joan, has made such a confusion amongst the
John's, that the best Historians disagree in their reckoning) how he wheadled
himself into the Popedom you have heard; nor have you I hope forgot, that at
the same time there were actually Reigning two other Popes or Popelings, viz.
Gregory, whom the French set up, and Benedict, whom the Spaniards supported;
and each of these had his Court, and his Cardinals, and Princes, and Nations
that owned his Authority and obeyed him. But growing weary of this ridiculous
Confusion, and the Emperor Sigismund having taken the pains to Travel almost
all over Europe, to persuade them to some expedient for healing this Schism: It
was at last agreed, That a General Council should be called, nor did Pope John
seem much to oppose it, hoping to get himself confirmed therein by the Interest
of Sigismund, whom he had procured to be made Emperor, and you know one good
turn deserves another; but whether the Emperor found him so scandalously
flagitious that he was ashamed to appear in his favor, or whether his
solicitations could not be heard I know not, so it was, that in the Conclusion
things fell out quite contrary to his Expectation.

The place agreed upon (after much bandying) for this Congress was Constance a
City of Switzerland, Situate on the Lake Bodenzee over against Lindaw. Whither
Anno 1414. repaired Pope John, and the Emperor, and a vast conflux of People,
for there were present 4 Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Archbishops and Bishops,
564 Abbots and Doctors, Ten Thousand secular Princes and Noble Men, 600
Barbers, 320 Fi^lers and Merry-Andrews, and (to accommodate the Holy Father)
Four Hundred and Fifty common public Whores, (besides all their private ones)
the whole Company of strangers Men and Women, that were then at one time found
in that City, being Threescore Thousand and five Hundred: A fine jolly Company;
and if you will believe them they had the Holy Ghost present with them too, but
there are several reasons to question that, tho this merry one which follows be
none of them; when on the first day of opening the Council, they were singing
according to the mode, Veni spiritus sancte, etc. Come holy Spirit, etc. Some
arch wags at the same time clapped up a Label in the Church, containing these
words as an answer from Heaven -- Alijs rebus occupaii, nunc adesse vobis non
possumus: We are a little busy at present about other affairs and cannot attend
ye.

This Synod held for the space of four years, and did more than a good deal of
business, we shall not afflict the Readers patience with a recital of all their
Worshipful Canons and proceedings, they that have a mind -- Male Collocare
bonas Horas, may read them in the Volumes of the Councils; what is remarkable
we shall not forget to acquaint you with. And as a Prologue thereunto, cannot
omit that judicious Repartee of the Emperor Sigismund, some discourse happening
touching the Reformation of the Spiritua^y, a grave old Cockscomb that had a
spite against a parcel of poor Friars, said, Quod oportea^ incipere a
Minoritis, that they should begin first with the Minorites, meaning the Order
so called; No, quoth the Emperor, Non a Minoritis sed a Majoritis, not with the
Minorites, but with the Majorites, meaning, the Reformation ought first to
begin with the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and Superior States of the Church, and
so descend afterward to regulate the inferiors. The Council had not sat long,
before Articles were Exhibited against Pope John, who fearing the worst,
unknown to the Cardinals, in a disguise one night flies out of the City to
Schaffuze, where he was sheltred by the Duke of Austria for a while, but the
Emperor being therewith incensed, he was glad to bring back the poor Run a-way
Pope, who was committed to safe Custody. And now they proceed judicially
against him, Henricus de Pira and Johannes de Scribanis, Procurators of the
Council, undertake to prove him Guilt^ of abundance of horri^ Crimes both
before and during his Popedom; the Charge against him was contained in 54
Articles, of several Murders, Poysonings, Sacrilege, Heresy, Tyranny, Simony,
Infidelity, Notorious Atheism, etc. and in the same, this most Holy Father is
styled Diabolus Incarnatus, A Devil Incarnate, particularly they proved, That
he had committed Incest with Nuns, Ravished several Virgins, That he was
frequently Guilty of Adultery; That he had caused Pope Alexander his
predecessor to be Poisoned, to make way for himself to usurp the Papacy. That
he had sold many Lands of the Churches Patrimony, yea he had sold Churches
themselves in the City of Rome: Nay their very Holy Relics, as for Example he
had truck'd away the Head of St. John Baptist for 50000 Ducates [For my part I
wonder where he found out such a silly Chapman that would offer half the Money
for a forged Skull] which had been delivered and carried out of the Nunnery of
St. Sylvester where 'twas kept, if some Citizens of Rome had not discovered it,
and stopped it by force; for which he cast them into Prison and fined them
unmercifully: That he had Conferred Benefices and Ecclesiastical Charges upon
his Bastards, and mere Children not above Five years old. That to fill up the
measure of his wickedness by the persuasion of the Devil he obstinately said,
affirmed and held an opinion, That there is no Life Eternal, or future
Existence after this Life: Yea he said and obstinately believed, That the Soul
of Man dies and is Extinct, together with the humane Body after the manner of
bruit Beasts, and that he had said and declared, That being once dead, even in
the last day there should be no Resurrection. These and many other the like
Crimes being fully proved against him, and he being allowed liberty, not being
able to make any tolerable defense for himself, but on the contrary being
Convicted by the Confession of his own mouth, they proceeded to pronounce a
definitive Sentence against him; That he should be deposed. Having first in the
^ th. Session passed the following Canon.

That a Synod Congregated in the Holy Ghost making a general Council,
representing the whole Catholic Church here militant, has power immediately
from Christ. To which power of theirs every Person of what State or Dignity
soever he be, even tho it be the Pope himself, ought to be obedient in all such
things as concern the general Reformation in the Church, as well in the Heads,
as in the Subjects. And the said Sentence being sent to John, he himself (our
Authors say) approved thereof and declared, that he deserved it, and so was
Deposed after he had been a Pope 5 years and 15 days. After which he was for
some years kept Prisoner, but at last in the time of Pope Martin the 5 th. who
succeeded him for a great sum of Money, got not only his Liberty, but also to
be made a Cardinal of Tuscany, and in that quality died in the year 1419. --
And there is an end of quondam Pope John. And now it is time to see what our Holy
Council does with the two other Imps of Infallibility.

As for Gregory the 12 th. he being abandoned by Ladislaus King of Sicily, and
seeing it was impossible for him to stem the tide of opposition, thought it
would be more Honorable for him to seem to part with his pretended Popedom
freely of his own accord, than to be turned out; And so sends Charles Malatesta
his Proctor, to make a Renunciation for him, who to perform the Pageantry, came
into the Council all arraid in the Pontifical Robes, and was seated in the
Chair of state, wherein Gregory's name, he solemnly Renounces the Papacy, and
in token thereof, pulls of all his Trinkets decently and in order, which so
pleased the Reverend Gray beards, that they presently made Gregory Legate of
Pisa. -- And so good Night poor Pope Gregory.

But the third Gamster, stout Benedict defies the People at Constance and all
their works. He swears he is Christ's Viccar, I marry is he, and so he will
continue, in spite of their Teeth. He says, Constance is not a place fit or
free, and therefore none of his Subjects shall come there.

However the Synod at Constance, Cite and cite him again and again to appear
before their Worships, but he seemed to reguard them no more, than Parson
Hickeringal in our times does the Gentlemen of Doctors Commons. And tho after
several Messengers in vain, the Emperor himself undertook a tedious journey to
persuade him to submit, yet still he stood it out, not only contemning their
Authority, but thundering out Curses, Deprivations and Excommunications, and
abundance of such Church-Granados at them; all which they declare Null and
void, and proceed against him very vigorously, and in the up shot, declare him
to be a Perjurer, a S^^ndalizer of the Church, an Abetter and promoter of
Schism, (...) Heretic wandering out of the way of Faith, etc. And for these and
the like offenses, they sentence him not only to be deprived of his Papal
Dignity, but also to be cut off from the Church as a dried and withered Member,
and withal forbid all Persons to obey him, on pain of Excomunication.

But all this would not do, for tho almost all his Consorts of Eminency and
Power, had abandoned him, (for Rats always fly from a falling house) yet he
still persisted in his pretensions to the Popedom, continuing (says Crantzius
in Metrop. l. ^. c. 1.) Idolum cum Idolis suis Cardinalibus, An Idol with the
Idol Cardinals of his own making: Yea in ipso mortis articulo, when he was just
going out of the World, Anno 1414. he adjur'd the Cardinals that remained with
him in the Fortress of Paniscola (whether for safety he had retreated) that
they should forthwith choose him a Successor.

Which accordingly they performed, Electing one Giles Munion, a Chanon of
Barcelona whom they called Clement the Eighth, but this pitiful shadow of a
Pope, about 4 years after, Renounced his Charge, was content to style himself
Pope no longer, and what afterward became of him, we do not at present meet
with, in the Histories of those times.

Having thus cleared the decks of the Three contending Popes, and for 2 years
or upward there having been never an one at all, (during which time the Council
looked upon themselves as keepers of the Liberties, etc.) They now began to
bethink themselves of choosing a new Pope, but first to prevent such Rogues as
the last John was from vaulting into the Chair, they contrive a Test to be
taken by all succeeding Popes in the words following: ^ N. Elected for Pope,
profess with heart and mouth unto Almighty God, whose Church I take upon me to
Govern by his help, and to blessed St. Peter the prince of the Apostles, so
long as I shall continue in this frail life, firmly to believe and hold the
holy Catholic Faith after the Traditions of the Apostles, of general Councils
and of other holy Fathers, and namely of the 8. general Councils, the first of
Nice, the second of Constantinople, Ephesine the third, (...) the fourth, the
fifth and sixth of them of Constantinople, the seventh of Nice, and the eighth
of Constantinople, and also of the general Councils of Lateran, Lions and
Vienne, willing to observe the same Faith inviolate even to the uttermost, and
to Preach and defend the same, even to the spending my Blood and Life; as
likewise by all means possible to prosecute and observe the Rites of the
Sacraments Canonically delivered to the Catholic Church. And this my
profession and confession, by my command being written out by the Notary of the
Arches of the holy Church of Rome, I have subscribed with mine own hand, and
sincerely with a pure mind and devout Conscience, I offer it to Almighty God
upon such an Altar, etc. In the presence, etc.

Then they appoint a Committee to proceed to the Election, who in 4 days agree
upon one Columna, who being chosen on St. Martins Eve would needs call himself,
Martin the 5 th. and being brought in before the Emperor and Council, was
Enthroned with mighty Pomp and Solemnity.

THE COURANT.
Tory. BUT were not you too rash last bout in stiling Mrs. J. Mother Cellier's
younger Sister?


Truem. I hold my self as much obliged to retract any thing that may seem a
Scandal on the innocent, as I do esteem it my duty to Advertise the public of
ill Peoples designs. Now tho there were probable inducements that the Paper
emitted in her name might be put upon her, as the Narrative which Celliers
owned is known to have been seen in Gadburies Handwriting before 'twas in
Print, yet since I am satisfied that Mrs. J. has always professed her self of
the Church of England, and never that I can find Herded with the Romanists, but
on all occasions has expressed a superlative Zeal and Affection to His
Majesty's Person and Government. I must wish a Deleatur on that passage, for as
I am resolved ever to oppose and detect the designs of Papists, so never in the
least to reflect on any (tho of never so inferior quality) that are His
Majesty's Friends.


Tory. I wish the Observator would practice the same Candor, for in the midst
of his pretended concern for his native Country Norfolk, he most scurrilously
reflects on a Reverend Magistrate by calling him (tho unhappily true) short
sighted Pug, and we expect (by his ungrateful returns) that in his next he will
reproach him too for taking Bail for Murder, and living Litigiously amongst his
Parishioners and Neighbors, but if he do, the Devil a Penny more of
Contribution shall he get from the Crape-Gowns of Dumpling-shire.


Truem. This to me is all Arabic; prithee no riddles, how go matters in the
Town?


Tory. Hanged, I know not what to think on it. It Is pity that excellent Writ De
Haeretico Comb^rendo is out of date, some Friends of mine in the West would
have made brave use on it; is it not pity that those who can send an honest
Christian to the Devil, for not paying an Easter-twopence, cannot plague him
for the sin of not putting off his Hat? But have the folks at Farringdon
without yet surveyed the Books?


Truem. Don't mention that affair, you will get no Credit by it if ever a Factious
Spirit appeared, there he was visibly on your side.


Tory. Well, well, prattle what you please, I Will wager Cockpit Law, that we
Nick many of the Common Council.


Truem. Why man? I believe there is not one in the whole City, but is Legally
Qualified, you know Heraclitus and Observator upbraided them with receiving the
Sacrament.


Tory. No matter for that, the Statute of 25 Car. 2 C. 2. requires (we say) not
only the receiving of the Sacrament: But the certifying the same on Record
withing three Months after their being Chosen into the Courts at Westminster,
or the Quarter Sessions, on pain of being disabled as therein is ordered and
forfeiting 500 l. Now if they have received the Sacrament never so often, yet
unless they do so certify on Record the Term ending, and no Quarter Sessions
happening after within the three Months limmited, we will pretend they are
Excluded, so shall we neatly turn them out and get 500 l. a Man to boot.


Truem. I have neither read the Statute you mention, nor pretend to be capable
of judging of Law. But however those concerned may no doubt find a Church in
London, where the Sacrament is Administered next Lord's Day, or I think no
Minister can deny it to a Competent number, then may they lodge their
Certificates on Monday in the Courts above, and so defeat your Malicious
expectations, who I perceive do not so much desire your Neighbors Conformity
to the Church, and Obedience to the Laws, as their Ruin.


Tory. Nay Pax -- don't talk so lowed, if you do for ought I know the Ten
Guinnies we gave for this very Stratagem, may prove of no advantage to us.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 17. 1681-2.
Fragenti fidem, Fides frangatur ^idem.
A brief Account of John Hus, and Jerome of Prague: The Burning of those two
Martyrs: The Council of Constance declares, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics.
WE have told you how the Synod of Constance ordered their Triplicity of
Popes; but it was not only that, they sat four years about: For they likewise
Condemned and Burnt those two Noble Servants of the Lord John Hus and Jerome of
Prague, of whose excellent Lives and Honorable Deaths, it will be necessary to
inform (briefly) the vulgar Reader.

In our last Volume, we acquainted you with the Preaching of John Wickliff here
in England, (Almighty Providence honoring this Nation so far as not only to
have the first Christian King in the World, viz. Lucius, and to give Birth to
the first Christian Emperor in the World, viz. Constantine: But also to lead
the van in the Reformation, and 'twas from our Torch many other Regions that
sat in darkness borrowed their Light) these two Boh^mians had embraced several
of those Truths which Wickliff had revived in the World. For King Richard the
Second's first Wife, being Ann the Daughter of the Emperor Charles the 4th.
and Sister to the Emperor Wenceslaus, a Bohemian by Birth, diverse of her
Countrymen followed her into England, whom some becoming Students at Oxford,
where Wickliff then flourisht, they were not only hearers of his Preaching but
carried when they went away, several of his Books home with them into their own
Country, as these de Realibus Vniversalibus, de Civili Jure and Divino, de
Ecclesia, de questionibus variis contra clerum, etc. It chanced about the same
time, a Noble Man of the City of Prague in Bohemia, had founded a great Church
Dedicated to Matthias and Matthew, but commonly called Bethlem, Endowing it
with large Revenues, for two Preachers every day (Holy day or Working day)
throughout the year. Of these two Preachers John Hus was one, a Person of great
Learning in those times, and of excellent Wit; but especially reverenced by the
People for his blameless life and holy Conversation. He happening on some of
these Books of Wickliffs, was presently convinced of the Truth of them, and
began to defend the same, not only in the Schools, but likewise in his Sermons.
At this the Pope and Clergy were mightily nettled, and wrote Letters to the King
of Bohemia to punish him, whereupon he was for some time Banished the City of
Prague, but the People murmuring that he was unjustly dealt withal, and the
King himself not finding in him any Crime, he was restored; and this general
Council coming on, to purge his Teritories from the scandalous suspicion of
being infected with Haeresy; the Emperor who then was Sigismund, Son of
Charles the 4th. would needs have Mr. Hus appear there, and in order thereunto
granted him his safe Conduct, both in the Latin and Dutch Language, in these
words:

Sigismund by the Grace of God, King of the Romans, of Hungary and Denmark,
Croatia, etc. To all Princes as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, Dukes,
Marquesses and Earls, Barons, Captains, Burgoermasters, Judges and Governors,
Officers of Towns Boroughs and Villages, and in General to all the Subjects of
our Empire, to whom these Presents shall come, Grace and Goodness. We Charge
and Command you all, That you have respect unto John Hus, who is departed out
of Behomia, to come unto the General Council, which is shortly to be held at
the Town of Constance, which said John Hus we have received under our
Protection and into the safe Guard of the whole Empire; desireing that you
would cheerfully receive him, when he shall come toward you, and that you
treat him friendly, and show him in all things favor and good will, for the
expedition, ease, and safety of his Journey as well by Land, as by Water.
Further ordaining, That he and all his Company with their carriage and
necessaries shall pass through all Ports, Bridges, Lands, Liberties, Towns,
etc. Without paying any Custom, Toll, Tribute, etc. We will also that you
suffer him to Pass, Rest, Tarry, and Sojourn at Liberty, without doing him any
manner of hindrance, trouble or molestation; and that if need require, you
provide a faithful Company to Conduct him, for the honor and reverence which
you owe unto our Imperial Majesty. Given at Spire the 18th. of October. in the
year of our Lord, 1414.

On the 3d. of Nov. 1414. Hus came into Constance, of which two Noble Men of
his Country gave notice to Pope John, desireing his Protection, who promised
the same very freely, adding that if Hus had killed his Brother; yet no outrage
nor hurt should be done him in that place.

Yet for all this he had not been there a Month before they seized upon him,
and put him in a base and loathsome Prison, and this too, before his cause was
heard in the Council.

The substance of the Articles at last exhibited against him, was as follows:

1. That he had taught Error and Herisy about the Sacraments of the Church, and
especially about the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, saying that it ought to
be Ministered in both kinds, and that after the words of Consecration pronounced
there still remains material Bread in the Sacrament.

2. He does Err as touching the Church, for that he does not allow and admit
that the Church signifies the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops and Clergy, but
says this signification was drawn from the Schoolmen.

3. That he has said, That Tempral Princes and Lords may take away the
Temporal possessions of the Church and Clergy, without any offense.

4. He teaches that all Priests are of like power, and therefore affirms, That
the reservations of the Popes Casualties, the ordering of Bishops and the
Consecration of the Priests were invented only for Covetousness.

5. That he erreth concerning the Church, forasmuch as through Contempt, he
does not fear Excommunication.

6. He erreth by holding, That a Man being once Ordained a Priest or a Deacon,
cannot be forbidden from the Office of Preaching, etc.

Upon these and other the like Articles, the Council proceeded against him in
his sickness, and tho he often offered to defend his Cause, yet they would
neither allow him any Advocats, nor permit him publicly to be heard. And in
their Ninth Session they declared -- Quod non obstantibus salvis Conductis
Imperatoris, Regum, etc. Possit per Judicem competentem de Haeretiea pravitate
inquiri. That notwithstanding any safe Conduct granted by the Emperor or any
Kings, Inquisition many be made against any Man for Haeresy by a Competent
Judge, and process to be made according to Law.

To relate the whole proceedings would be too tedious, how malicious and unjust
his accusers were, how stout and faithful to him were several Bohemian Noble
Men representing his Innocence to the cruel Fathers, but all in vain, nothing
but his Blood would satisfy; and so they proceed to pass the following sentence
upon him.

The most sacred General Council of Constance, Congregated together and
representing the Catholic Church, for perpetual memory of the thing. As truth
does witness, that an evil Tree brings forth evil Fruit, so it comes to
pass, that the Man of most damnable memory John Wickliff, through his
pestiferous Doctrine, not through Jesus Christ by the Gospel, as the holy
Fathers in times past, have begotten faithful Children, but contrary to the
wholesome Faith, as a venomous root has begotten many wicked and pestilent
Children, whom he has left behind him successors and followers of his perverse
and accursed Doctrine, against whom this Sacred Synod of Constance is forced to
rise up, as against Bastards, and diligently with a Sharp-knife of
Ecclesiastical Authority to cut up Errors out of the Lords field, as most
hurtful Brambles and Briars lest they should grow up to the destruction of
others. Forasmuch then as in the holy General Council lately celebrated at
Rome; it was decreed that the Doctrine of John Wickliff of most damnable memory
should be Condemned, and his Books burnt as Haeretical, yet (...) John Hus here
personally present in this Sacred Council, not the Diciple of Christ but of
Wicliff, an Arch Haeretick has taught and affirmed the Articles of Wickliff,
which were Condenm'd by the Church of God.

Wherefore after diligent Deliberation and full Information, this most Sacred
Council declares and determines; the Articles abovesaid (which are sound in
his Books wrote with his own hand, and which he has owned) not to be Catholic,
nor worthy to be taught but that many of them are erroneous, some wicked, other
some to be offensive unto godly Ears, many of them to be temerarious and
seditious, and the greater part of them to be Notoriously Haeretical; and does
condemn all and every the Books which the said Hus has wrote, in what form or
phrase soever they be, or whether they be Translated by others, and does
decree, That they shall be publicly burnt in the presence of the Clergy and
People, etc.

And the said Synod does pronounce the said John Hus an Haeretick, and a
Seducer and obstinate Person, and such an one as does not desire to return
again to the Lapp of our holy Mother the Church, neither to abjure the Errors
and Heresies which he has openly Preached and defended, wherefore this most
Sacred Council decrees and declares, That the said John Hus shall be deposed
and degraded from his Priestly Orders and Dignity.

Since this sentence mentions Degrading, it will not be amiss to consider the
manner how that Ceremony is performed: Which is thus -- The party to be
degraded is attired in all his Priestly Vestments, and holds in the one hand
a Chalice filled with Wine mixed with Water, and in the other a Guilt Paten
with a Wafer. Then kneeling down, the Bishops Deputy taking from him these
Trincats, Charges him to say no more Mass for the Quick or the Dead: Secondly,
scraping with a piece of Glass his fingers ends, he Enjoins him never to Hallow
or Consecrate any thing, and Thirdly, rasing his shaven Crown and stripping
(...) of his Priestly Vestments, he is Clothed in a Lay habit, and delivered
into the Power of the Secular Magistrate.

Thus was poor Hus served, and withal a Capp put on his head all painted over
with Devils, and this word Haerisiarcha (or Ring leader of Heretics) inscribed
thereon, and so was burnt in the Month of July, 1415. He behaved himself at his
Martyrdom with a wonderful Cheerfulness, and seems to have had a Spirit of
Prophecy; for whereas Hus in the Bohemian Tongue signifies a Goose, he told
them -- You now roast a Goose, but after a 100 years there shall a Swan rise up
out of my Ashes, which was fulfilled in Luther, who just 100 years after Hus's
Death began to appear in opposition to the Pope.

Likewise during the time of this Council, one Jerome a Learned Godly Man, of
the City of Prague, hearing of the manyfold injuries done unto Hus, voluntarily
came to Constance with an intent to defend his Cause, but not being able to
procure any safe Conduct there, was returning back again to his own Country,
but taken on the Road and brought bound into Constance; and there by the
Council Condemned and Burnt, and his Ashes thrown into the River Rhyne, as
Hus's likewise had been, so Industrious were the Romish Clergy to destroy all
Memorials of these faithful Servants of God, whose Names do yet survive all
their impotent malice, and remain Registered in the Book of Life in Heaven, and
precious to all good Men on Earth.

What esteem the godly Nobles of that Age had of Mr. Hus, may partly appear by
a Letter of 54 Noble Men of Morauia, under their Hands and Seals to the said
Council.

THE COURANT.
Tory. Prithee are Miracles ceased?

No, no, There Is a New Saint lately come over, called Cess Process that does
daily Wonders, Dam Ignoramus is an Ass to her.


Tory. What kind of Feats does she Profess? can she sham Godfryes Murder, and
Esquire Thin's; and make the World believe, That they both killed themselves,
or that it was done Justly?


Truem. Pish! Natt. Implement will undertake all that, and more: This unknown
Lady will in a trice Blanch ye a Blackamore, turn Swine into Sheep, make a
Hog-dog-rascally Villain as Innocent as a Sucking Devil; Nay, she will make
Subornation of Perjury Lawful: or (which is as good) render it Unpunishable:
and all this according to Law. Don't you know Bobbloody coat? the Sow sucker?


Tory. Yes, yes, but now you talk of Rogues and Miracles, did ever heard the
Legend of Longinus?


Truem. No, prithee let us have it.


Tory. Longinus you must Note was a Roman Red coat, and somewhat Purblind; They
tell you, that he was the very Man that with his Lance pierced our Blessed
Savior's side, and some of the Blood happening on his Eyes, presently cured
his sight; and his Soul being Illuminated as well as his Body, he was Converted
and Believed, and Lived Thirty eight Years a Monastic Life in Cappadocia, and
then was carried before one Octavius the President, to whom Preaching Christ,
Octavius commanded all his Teeth to be struck out; and after that, his Tongue
to be cut off: but still Longinus Preached on, -- -- And then without (...)
Spoke to good purpose when his Tongue was out,


And at last, had his Head Chopped off, and after that did a Thousand Miracles.


Truem. Well, and what of all this? This is word for word, in that ingenious
Treatise, called Devotions of the Roman Church.


Tory. It Is so, and likewise the same Author from the Roman Festival, adds the
following story; That the hand of Thomas the Apostle that was in Christ's-side,
would never go into his Tomb, but always lay without unburied, which hand had
such virtue in it, that if the Priest when he goes to Mass, put a Branch of a
Vine into that hand, the Branch presently puts sorth Grapes, and by that
time the Gospel be said, the Grapes will be Ripe; and then the Priest takes
them and wrings them into the Chalice, and with that Wine Honseleth the People.


Truem. A pretty way to get Liquor; But are these all the Miracles you have to
tell us?


Tory. Why, what would you have me talk Sense, and have an Information brought
against me?


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 24. 1681-2.
Scito, Te mortaliter peccare si servabis fidem datam Haereticis -- Pope Martin
the Fifth to the Duke of Lituania, apud Cochlaeum in Histor. Hussit. l. 5.
Further Observations touching that wieked Tenet of the Romish Church, That
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: That memorable Appeal of Amurath the
Turk, to Christ, against the King of Hungary, breaking his League by the Popes
Warrant, etc.
WE told you in the last how the Council of Constance wickedly caused John Huss
to be Condemned and executed, notwithstanding the safe Conduct given him by the
Emperor: If you would have the matter briefly summed up, you may find it in
Sleidan's Commentaries, l. 3. Aberat ^um forte Sigismundus, etc. Sigismund by
chance was then absent when the Council thus proceeded, and being informed
thereof, took it very ill, and came thither to expostulate about it; but when
once he was told by the Pope, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, he
not only said by his Resentments, (tho the Bohemians often interceded with him,
and requested the safe Conduct might be made good) but also was one of the
first that bitterly inveighed against him: Or if you will rather take it in the
words of Nauclerus, thus -- Incinerationem Johannis Huss Imperator non aequo
animo tulit, etc. The Emperor was much dissatisfied with the burning of John
Huss, because he had allowed him his safe Conduct; but the holy Synod answered,
That he could not be taxed with breach of Faith in the Case, for the Council it
self had not granted any safe Conduct, Et Concilium majus est Imperatore, and
the Council is greater than the Emperor, and therefore he could not lawfully
grant any such thing against the pleasure of the Council, especially in matters
of Faith.

B^canus and other Advocates for Popery, to excuse this Council from the odium
of allowing Breach of Promise made by Catholics to such as they are pleased to
call Heretics, in that Decree, wherein it declares, That no Secular Power, how
Sovereign soever, can hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal in
Causes of Heresy; and consequently, if the Emperor, or any other Secular
Prince, grants a safe Conduct, or engages by never so solemn Oaths or Promises
to do any thing which they account prejudicial to that Jurisdiction, it is not
obligatory, do allege the Reason thereof to be, for that, it is a promise made
of things out of and beyond the Power and Jurisdiction of such a Prince, which
is to say, That although in Cases properly appertaining to the Princes
Jurisdiction he is bound by his Word, Promise, or Oath; yet in case of Heresy,
or persons suspected of Heresy, (for all is one with them) he is not, because
the same is of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and what is this less than to say,
That Promises made to Heretics are not binding?

However, this to be the Doctrine of the Roman Church will further and
undeniably appear, from the Sentiments of her allowed Doctors in their
Writings, and from their Practices. Their famous Bishop of Symancha, in his
Catholic Institutions, cap. 45. tells us expressly -- Haereticis fides a
privato data servanda non est; Faith or promise made by a private person to an
Heretic is not to be kept. And a little after -- Any person is bound to reveal
an Heretic to the Inquisition, Non obstante side aut Juramento, the he has
bound himself by Promise or Oath to the contrary. And lest you should think
some restriction in the word private Person, it is plain he means All, for
presently after he affirms -- Nec fides a Magistratibus data est servanda
Haereticis: Faith made by Magistrates to Heretics is not to be kept. Now if it
be not to be regarded either by Magistrates or by private Persons, it follows,
that it is to be kept by no body at all.

That incomparable Historian Thuanus, l. 63. ad Annum 1577. tells us, That the
Popish Divines of France, Aperto Capite in Concionibus and evulgatis Scriptis
ad fidem Sectariis servandam non obligari principem, contendebant; allato in
eam rem Concilii Constantiae Decreto: They taught publicly, both in the
Pulpit, and from the Press, That Princes were not bound to keep touch with
Sectaries, alleging to warrant such their Assertions this Decree of the
Council of Constance. And what wonder is all this, when the Casuists justify
other grosser' Villainies? As the beforementioned Symancha, Instit. Cathol.
Tit. Is apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuerit non tenebitur post manifestam
Haeresim, rem depositam illi reddere: A person with whom one that is an
Heretic shall entrust any Goods, is not bound to restore them. Tolletus the
Jesuit in his Instructions for Priests on the Title Excommunication -- Non
tenentur reddere rem verbis contractam: They are not bound to make good
Contracts with Heretics. Nay, the Gloss of their Canon Law in Gratian, Cause.
15. q. 6. not only justifies the thing, but also assigns the reason of it -- Si
Juravi me soluturum alicui pecuniam, etc. If I have sworn to pay a man Money,
and he happen to be Excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it, because we ought
by all the means we can to vex ill men, that they may repent of their Evil. --
Very pretty Popish Divinity! Cardinal Allen resolves, Pater qui filium habet
Haereticum, etc. A Father that has a Son that is an Heretic, is bound to
disinherit him, and Parents sin mortally that bestow their Daughters in
marriage to Heretics: And of this too, the Gloss of Gratian, Decret. l. 5.
Cause. 23. q. 8. gives the reason, Because Heretics are not to be esteemed our
Brothers or Kindred; but tho he be the Son of thy Mother, or thine own only
Child, yet according to the Law of old, Thy hand must be upon him, that thou
may put him to death.

According to these Maxims, it is notorious, that the Apostate Church of Rome,
and Papists, have acted; how often have Popes put Princes upon the breaking of
their Treaties, Alliances, and Covenants? How remarkable is that Story of
Vladislaus the fifth King of Hungary, about the year 1440. who having concluded
a Peace with Amurath Emperor of the Turks, for ten years space, and sworn to
keep and observe the same inviolably, Eugenius the Fourth (who at that time was
Pope of Rome) hearing thereof, writes to Cardinal Julian then resident in
Hungary, to persuade the King to break that Peace, alleging and declaring.
That no Peace made with the Enemies of Religion, (and in their esteem
Protestants are worse than Turks) without first consulting the Pope, and having
his leave, was good or valid. And therefore commanded the King to fall into
Hostility, assuring him, That as for his Oath given at the Treaty, he had
dissolved the same: Hereupon the King, partly by Entreaties, and partly by
Threats, is prevailed upon, to become a most perfidious wretch, and to the
dishonor of the Christian name, treacherously to fall upon the Turk at
unawares, which Amurath observing, and seeing his Forces like to be
discomfited, he draws forth the Original Articles of their League, and looking
up to Heaven, cries out, Haec sunt, Jesu Christ! Foedera quae Christiani tui
mecum percussere, per nomen tuum Sancte Jurantes; Nunc, si Deus es, tuas,
measque Injurias, te quaeso, ulciscere. -- [ Bonfin. l. 3. Aenaeas Sylvius,
(afterward Pope) ^p. 81. Spondanus ad Ann. 1444.] Behold, O Jesus! these are
the Covenants which thy Christians solemnly swearing by thy name, made with me;
now therefore if thou art a God, revenge these Injuries to me and thy self,
upon their perfidious heads. -- And no sooner had he pronounced these words,
but the success of the Battle was changed, the Christians put to flight, and
the perjured King, together with the wretched Cardinal that put him upon it,
being both slain.

Pope Innocent the Third, in the year 1213. in a Letter to Peter King of
Arragon, charges him in the name of the Holy Ghost, and as he expected ever to
obtain Divine and Apostolical Grace, to abandon the people of Tholose, (certain
honest Waldensian Christians, of whom in our Third Volume we have given an
account) nor to afford them any Aid or Countenance as long as they continued in
their Heresy, Non obstante promissione vel obligation quacunque praestita:
Notwithstanding any promise or obligation whatsoever before passed to the
contrary.

In the Year 1538. Paul the Third, sends abroad a Roaring Bull against our King
Henry the 8 th. wherein he admonishes and requires all Christian Princes, That
they shall not under pretense of any Leagues or Obligations, although
corroborated by frequently repeated Oaths, yield the said King directly or
indirectly any Aid, Favor, or Assistance; and to take them off from any
apprehensions of their Duty, pretends to Absolve them all, from all Oaths or
Obligations by them made, or to be made; and pronounces them to be void and of
none effect. So likewise Pope Pius Quintus Absolved not only all the Subjects
of Queen Elizabeth, but also, Caeteros omnes qui Illi quomodocunque Juraverunt;
All others who in any manner had sworn unto her.

After Henry the Third of France was Barbarously Murdered, by Friar Clement,
all the World knew the Right of the Crown by Lineal Succession and Proximity of
Blood belonged to Henry of Burbon, but the Popish Doctors of the Sorbon being
entreated by the People of Paris to give their Judgment, whether it were Lawful
to submit to him? They answered, That Catholics by the Divine Law were
forbidden to admit to the Kingdom a Sectary and manifest Enemy to the Church;
That all that should Assist him were guilty of mortal Sin, and would infallibly
be Damned: And all that did Resist him unto Blood, would dye Martyrs, and enjoy
an Everlasting Reward in Heaven.

But to prove, That Popish Princes who have made never so fair Promises, did
notwithstanding Persecute their Protestant Subjects with the greatest Rigor,
and act quite contrary to those Solemn Engagements, our Native Island affords a
sad, and never to be forgotten Precedent; for when the Men of Suffolk upon the
pious King Edwards Death, requested, that bloody bigoted and treacherous Queen
Mary, to know, Whether she would alter the Religion Established in her Brothers
days? She assured them with all Asseverations, That she would never make any
Innovation or Change, but be contented with the private Exercise of her own
Religion. And on April the 12 th. she made a Public Declaration in Council,
That although her own Conscience were fixed in matters of Religion, yet she
would never Enforce her Subjects, otherwise than God should put into their
Hearts a persuasion of the Truth she was in. -- But no sooner was she settled
in her Throne, but slighting all these Engagements, she no less perfidiously
than cruelly, fell to Burning her Protestant Subjects, purely for their
Religion.

Nay, do we not at this Instant see the like Proceedings in our next
Neighboring Country? where, notwithstanding many Edicts and Solemn Promises
Ratified, with all the formalities of Perpetual Laws; yet the poor Protestants,
directly contrary to all these Privileges, without any color or shadow of
Crime, save only their Religion, (wherein their Persecutors deal much more
Generously, than if with fained Accusations and damnable Subornations: they
should falsely represent them as Rebellious and Disloyal,) are daily harassed,
Ruinated and undone.

Therefore the General Inference from these Premises is, That knowing so well
the Principles and Practices of the Romish Church; no Protestants or men of
sense should ever trust to any, though never so plausible Promises of any
person of that Communion: For with such, all the most Sacred Ties, (besides
those of Interest and present opportunity) are no more than Sampson's Bands,
Dissolvable, whenever their own Humor or their Ghostly Fathers Convenience
shall require it.

The COURANT.
Tory. HOw? Hodge, concerned in the Burning of London and Godfry's Murder?


Trum. No, I never said he was, nor do I believe it; but this I say, such a
wild suggestion might be maintained by as good Logic as any he uses to make
out the Protestant Plot.


Tory. As how? prithee a touch for Example; I Will engage not to believe the
Consequence.


Truem. I take it for undeniable, That London in Sixty six was designedly burnt
by Papists: the Law has determined it in the Execution of Hubert, who owned
the Fact, and that he was hired thereunto by Piedelon a French Papist. The Body
of the City have Recorded it in the late Inscription of the Monument; and that
great and sagacious Minister of State, the Right Honorable the Lord
Chancellor in his Speech before Sentence on the late Lord Stafford, makes no
doubt on it.


Tory. But you may remember, that Hodge was a little disgruntled at That
Inscription, and has endeavored to persuade the World, that they were the
Fanatics caused that Fire. But what if the Papists did do it, and Killed
Godfry too, what is that to him?


Trum. N^thing that I know on, -- But this one might infer according to Mr.
L'Estranges modes of Arguing, If they were Papists, and Hedge should happen to
be a Papist too; then he may altogether as fairly be Charged with both these
Exploits, as all and every the D^ssenters are by him Taxed with all the
Villainies of Forty odd, when the greatest part of them were not born.


Tory. Well, but what Color is there for Hodges being a Papist?


Truem. As many Colors as there are in the Rainbow. 1. Two of the Kings
Evidence have sworn his haunting of Mass, and another Gentleman deposes, That
he owned himself to be of that Church whereof the Pope is Head. Now you that
Rail and Ran^ at Juries, if they will not believe any lousie Witnesses, though
they swear D^ggers and Impossibility, ought methinks to Credit such
unexceptionable Evidence. 2 ly. The Gentleman has been often Challenged to prove
that for Eighteen years after the Restitution of the Liturgy, ( viz. till after
the Discovery of the Popish Plot, and that he was questioned as a Papist, he
ever usually frequented his Parish Church, or received the Sacrament.


Tory. Oh, he Answers that in his Preface to his first part of Dissenters
Sayings, referring people to one Mr. Gatford of St. Dionis Back Church, for
proof of his Receiving, etc.


Truem. Call you that Sham an Answer? It Is but his nude Averment, he produces
no Certificate from that Gentleman: Besides it is known Mr. L' lived many years
in St. Gileses Parish before the Plot, why does he not produce some Testimony
in all that time from thence? can it be imagined so intelligent a person, had
he been so zealous for the Church of England as he now pretends, would ever
have lived Eight or ten years together without her Ordinances, and in
disobedience and despite to her Laws and Canons.


Tory. -- But in particular as to the Fire-Jobb.


Truem. Mr. L'Estrange some time before the Fire Printed a Pamphlet, called A
Memento, wherein Chap. 6. speaking of some people put to death under Cromwell.
He uses these words -- London was made the Altar for these Burnt Offerings, God
grant that City be not at last Purged by Fire; I mean before the general
Conflagration. Now since, Roger I think pretends not to be a Prophet, and no
body takes him for a Conjurer: Ill will might on this occasion suggest him to
be a Conspirator: for it has been proved, That the mischief was intended long
before it was perpetrated, and if one would talk of him, as he does of the
Dissenters, -- one might say, his Prayer, God grant, is only to Cloak his
Malice. That here is a plain Prediction. It must needs be therefore, that he was
acquainted with the Design, and so bigg with Expectation, that he could not
forbear Blabbing on it, and warming his fancy with the very Conceit of the
Flames, just as Del Rio the Jesuit in his Magical Disquisitions could not
forbear giving a dark hint of the Gunpowder-Treason several years before it
happened. --


Tory. These are unjust and inconsequent Descants on such an Innocent
Accidental passage.


Truem. I grant it, -- But yet it is at this very rate, that L'Estrange Treats
others, wresting the most harmless Passages to odious and horrid meanings.


Quod tibi fieri, non vis alteri ne feceris. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 2. 1681-2.
-- Vmbraque errabit Thynnus inulta?
Of the first pretended Act of Parliament that ever was in England against
professors of Religion, how it was forged by the Prelates, and soon after
Repealed. The bloody Statute of 4. Hen. 2. ca. 15. for Burning of Heretics.
WE have pursued the Papal History beyond the Seas, down to the Council of
Constance, and burning of Hus and Mr. Jerome, that is, to about the year of our
Lord 1415. which answers to the Third year of the Reign of our King Henry the
Fifth. 'Twill therefore now be necessary to look back and gather what
Observables occurred in England relating to our Subject not already mentioned,
during the Raigns of King Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth. We gave you
before the Relation of Wickliff, whose Doctrines spread so fast, that the
incensed Prelates finding their Spiritual Thunders unable to repress them,
bethought themselves to pray in aid of the Secular Arm, and to that purpose the
King being young and dissolute, so extravagant to his Favorites, that he
always wanted Money, the Bishops either by fair words, or the Bait of a
Benevolence to be given him by the Clergy, prevailed with him in the Fifth year
of his Reign to consent to an Ordinance of their framing, in these words
following.

For as much as it is openly known, that there be diverse evil persons within
the Realm going from County to County, and from Town to Town, in certain
Habits, under dissimulation of great Holiness, and without the License of the
Ordinaries of the places, or other sufficient Authority, preaching daily, not
only in Churches and Churchyards, but also in Markets, Fairs, and other open
places, where a great Congregation of people is, diverse Sermons containing
Heresies and notorious Errors, to the great emblemishing of the Christian
Faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the Estate of the holy Church, to
the great peril of the Souls of the people, and of all the Realm of England, as
more plainly is found, and sufficiently proved before the Reverend Father in
God the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops and other Prelates, Masters
of Divinity, and Doctors of Canon and Civil Law, and a great part of the Clergy
of the said Realm especially assembled for this cause; which persons do also
preach diverse matters of Slander, to engender Discord and Dissension betwixt
diverse Estates of the said Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, in exciting of
the people, to the great peril of the Realm: Which Preachers cited or summoned
before the Ordinaries of the places, there to answer of that, whereof they be
impeached, will not obey to their Summons and Commandments, nor care for their
Monitions nor Censures of the Holy Church, but expressly despise them. And
moreover by their subtle and ingenious words, do draw the people to hear their
Sermons, and do maintain them in their Errors by strong Hand, and great Routs:
It is ordained and assented in this present Parliament, That the King's
Edmmissions be made and directed to the Sheriffs and other Miuisters of our
Sovereign Lord the King, or other sufficient persons Learned, and according to
the Certifications of the Prelates thereof to be made in Chancery from time to
time, to arrest all such Preachers, and also their Faitors, Maintainers, and
Abettors, and to hold them in Arrest and strong Prison, 'till they will
justify them according to the Law and Reason of Holy Church. And the King
wills and commands, That the Chancellor make such Commissions at all times,
that he by the Prelates or any of them shall be certified and thereof required,
as is aforesaid

This was the first pretended Statute that ever was in England for imprisoning
Christians for Religious opinions, and by color thereof, the Bishops committed
great Cruelties, I call it pretended Statute; for tho it be entered in the
Parliament Rolls, yet it was no Legal Act, for it never passed the Commons: And
therefore at the next Parliament in Michaelmas Term following, the Commons
preferred a Bill, ^eciting the same, and constantly affirmed, That they never
assented thereunto, and therefore desired, that the said supposed Statute be
annulled, and made void, for they protested, That it was never their intent,
that either themselves, or such as shall succeed them, should be farther
subject, or bound to the Prelates, than were their Ancestors in former times.
And to this the King gave his Royal Assent, in these words: Il plaist au Roy,
The King is pleased that it be so. Cook, 3 Instit. fo. 40. Foxes Acts and
Monuments, fo. 406.

But that you may more fully understand the fraud and subtlety of their
Reverences in this Affair, you must understand, That before the invention of
Printing, the usual way of publishing Acts of Parliament, was to engross them
in Parchment, and send them with the King's Writ into every County, commanding
the Sheriff to proclaim them. Now John Braibrook Bishop of London, being then
Lord Chancellor of England, he by a Writ dated 26 May, Anno Regni Regis R. 2.
quinto, sent down the before recited Ordinance of the King and Prelates,
amongst the Statutes that were then lately passed: But no less knavishly left
out in the next Parliamentary Proclamation the said Act of Revocation, whereby
the said supposed Statute was made void, by which means afterward the other
still passed as an Act, and was printed continually as such; but the Act that
disannulled it was by the Interest of the Prelates from time to time kept out
of the Prints, the better to give color to their imprisoning of the Laity at
their pleasure.

And farther, to make sure work, Henry the Fourth having usurped the Crown, to
gratify the Clergy who had chiefly assisted him therein, in the second year of
his Reign, he at their Instigation procured the following cruel and wicked Law
to be Enacted, commonly called, The Statute Ex Officio, which that the Reader
may the better observe the Spirit of Popery and Persecution, and compare the
Times and Actings of Men in past and more modern Times, I hope it shall neither
be thought tedious nor unuseful to recite the same at large Verbatim, it not
being now extant in Kceble, or any of our Common Statute Books.

ITem, Whereas it is showed to our Sovereign Lord the King, on the behalf of
the Prelates and Clergy of this Realm of England in this present Parliament,
That although the Catholic Faith builded upon Christ, and by his Apostles and the
holy Church sufficiently determined, declared, and approved, has been hitherto
by good, and holy, and most noble Progeni^ors of our Sovereign Lord the King in
the said Realm amongst all the Realms of the World most devoutly observed, and
the Church of England by his said most noble Progenitors and Ancestors, to the
honor of God and of the whole Realm aforesaid, landably endowed, and in her
Rights and Liberties sustained, without that that the same Faith or the said
Church was hurt or grievously oppressed, or else perturbed by any perverse
Doctrine, or Wicked, Heretical, or Erroneous Opinions: Yet nevertheless diverse
false and perverse people of a certain new Sect, of the Faith of the Sacraments
of the Church, and the Authority of the same damnably thinking, and against the
Law of God and of the Church, usurping the Office of Preaching, do perversely
and maliciously in diverse places within the said Realm, under the color of
dissembled Holiness, preach and teach these days openly and privily diverse n^w
Doctrines, and wicked, Heretical, and Erroneous Opinions, contrary to the same
Faith and blessed Determinations of the holy Church. And of such Sect and
wicked Doctrine and Opinions they make unlawful Conventicles and Confederacies,
they hold and exercise Schools, they make and write Books, they do wicked^y
instruct and inform people, and as much as they may excite and stir them to
Sedition and Insurrection, and makes great strife and division among the
people, and other Enormities horribly to be heard, daily do perpetrate and
commit, in subversion of the Catholic Faith and Doctrine of the holy Church,
in diminution of God's honor, and also in destruction of the Estate, Rights
and Liberties of the said Church of England; by which Sect, and wicked and
false Preachings, Doctrine, and Opinions of the said false and perverse people,
not only most great peril of the Souls, but also many more other hurts,
slanders, and perils (which God prohibit) might come to this Realm, unless it
be the more plentifully and speedily helped by the King's Majesty in this
behalf; namely, whereas the Diocesans of the said Realm cannot by their
Jurisdiction Spiritual, without Aid of the said Royal Majesty, sufficiently
correct the said false and perverse people, nor refrain their Malice, because
the said false and perverse people do go from Diocese to Diocese, and will not
appear before the said Diocesan; but the same Diocesans, and their Jurisdiction
Spiritual, and the Keys of the Church, with the Censures of the same, do
utterly contemn and despise, and so their wicked Preachings and Doctrines does
from day to day continue and exercise, to the hatred of Right and Reason, and
utter destruction of Order and good Rule. Upon which, Novelties and Excesses
above rehearsed, the Prelates and Clergy aforesaid, and also the Commons of the
said Realm being in the same Parliament, praying our Sovereign Lord the King,
That his Royal Highness would vouchsafe in the said Parliament to provide a
convenient Remedy, the same our Sovereign Lord the King graciously considering
the premises, and also the laudable steps of his most noble Progenitors and
Ancestors, for the Conservation of the said Catholic Faith, and sustentation
of God's Honor, and also the safeguard of the Estate, Rights, and Liberties of
the said Church of England, to the land of God, and merit of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, and prosperity and honor of all his said Realm, and for the
eschewing of such Dissentions, Divisions, Hurts, Slanders, and Perils, in time
to come, and that this wicked Sect, Preachings, Doctrines, and Opinions, should
from henceforth cease to be utterly destroyed, by the Assent of the States, and
other discreet Men of the Realm, being in the said Parliament, has granted,
stablished, and ordained from henceforth firmly to be observed, that none
within the said Realm, or any other Dominions subject to his Royal Majesty,
presume to preach openly or privily, without the License of the Diocesan of the
same place first required and obtained, Curates in their own Churches, and
persons hitherto privileged, and other of the Canon granted, only except. Nor
that none from henceforth any thing preach, hold, teach, or instruct openly or
privily, or make or write any Book contrary to the Catholic faith or
determination of the holy Church, nor of such Sect and wicked Doctrines and
Opinions shall make any C^nven^^cles, or in any wise hold or exercise Schools.
And also that none from henceforth in any wise favor such Preacher or maker of
any such or like Conventicles, or holding or exercising Schools, or making or
writing such Books, or so teaching, informing, or exciting the people, nor any
of them maintain, or any wise sustain, and that all and singular having such
Books, or any Writings of such wicked Doctrine and Opinions, shall really with
effect, deliver or cause to be delivered all such Books and Writings to the
Diocesan of the same place within 40 days, from the time of the Proclamation of
this Ordinance and Statute. And if any person or persons, of whatsoever kind,
estate, or condition, that he or they be, from henceforth do or attempt against
the Royal Ordinance and Statute aforesaid in the premises, or in any any of
them, or such Books in the form aforesaid do not deliver, then the Diocesan in
the same place in his Diocese, such person or persons in this behalf defamed or
evidently suspected, and every of them, may by the authority of the said
Ordinance and Statute cause to be arrested, and under safe custody in his
Prisons to be detained, 'till he or they, of the Articles laid to him or them
in this behalf, do Canonically purge him or themselves, or else such wicked
Sect, Preachings, Doctrines, and heretical and erroneous Opinions do objure,
according as the Laws of the Church do require, so that the said Diocesan by
himself or his Commissaries do openly and judicially proceed against such
persons so arrested, and remaining under safe custody to all effect of the Law,
and determine that same business according to the Canonical Decrees within
three months after the said Arrest, any lawful Impediment ceasing. And if any
person in any case above expressed be before the Diocesan of the place, or his
Commissaries canonically Convict, then the same Diocesan may do to be kept in
his Prison the said person so Convict for the manner of his default, and after
the quality of the Offense according and as long as to his discretion shall
seem expedient, and moreover to put the same person to the Secular Court
(except in cases where he according to the Canonical Decree ought to be left)
to pay to our Sovereign Lord the King his peculiar Fine, according as the same
Fine shall seem competent to the Diocesan, for the manner and quality of the
Offense, in which case the same Diocesan shall be bound to certify the King of
the same Fine in his Exchequer by his Letters Patents sealed with his Seal, to
the effect, that such Fine by the King's Authority may be required and levied
to his use of the Goods of the same person so convict. And if any person within
the said Realm and Dominions, upon the said wicked Preachings, Doctrines,
Opinions. Schools, heretical and erroneous Informations, or any of them, be
before the Diocesan of the same place, or his Commissaries, after the
Abjuration made by the same person pronounced, fall into Relapse; so that
according to the holy Canons be ought to be left to the Secular Court,
whereupon Credence shall be given to the Diocesan of the same place, or to his
Commissaries in this behalf, then the Sheriff of the County of the same place
and Mayor and Sheriffs or Sheriff, or Mayor and Bailiffs of the City, Town, or
Borough of the same County next to the same Diocesan, or the said Commissaries
shall be personally present in preferring of such sentences, when they by the
same Diocesan or his Commissaries shall be required: And they the same persons
and every of them, after such sentence promulgate, shall receive; and them
before the people in an high place do to be burnt, that such punishment may
strike in fear to the minds of others, whereby no such wicked Doctrine, and
heretical and erroneous Opinions, nor their Authors and Fautours in the said
Realm and Dominions against the Catholic Faith, Christian Law, and
determination of the holy Church (which God prohibit) be sustained, or in any
wise suffered, in which all and singular the premises concerning the said
Ordinance and Statnte, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Bailiffs of the said Counties
Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, shall be attending, aiding, and supporting to the
said Diocesans and their Commissaries.

The COURANT.
Tory. I Have read that passage we talked of the other day in Mr. L'Estranges
Memento; by the same token in the same page, he gives an account of Addresses,
in these words -- And now from all parts are to be procured Addresses -- Sweet
London leads the way -- The Commission Officers of the Militia in Suffolk,
Leicester, Sussex, and my Countrymen of Norwich, etc. These numerous and
pretending Applications were but false Glosses upon his Power, and Cromwell was
too wise to think them other; gained by Contrivement, Force, or at least
Importunity, half a score pitiful wretches call themselves the people of such
or such a County, and here is the Total of the Reckoning. -- Thus far
L'Estrange, Momentop. 30.


Truem. I marry; and he talks like a South-sayer -- But hanged, let us prorogue
the Discourse of him and his Achievements. Have you seen Father Dowdal's just
and sober Vindication?


Tory. No, what is he?


Truem. Even a worshipful Roman Catholic Priest, very lately (if not still) a
Prisoner in the Gate House for Religion forsooth! It Is a small Treatise of five
or six sheets, bound, printed 1681. and to be sold by William Downing in
Bartholomew Close. The design on it is to detect the Intrigues of five Priests
and Jesuits that were his Fellow Prisoners, but still you must note the Man
owns himself a stanch Catholic.


Tory. Hey-day! Is Satan's Kingdom then divided against it self? Do the
Brethren in Iniquity squabble?


Truem. Pish! that is no News; did you never read the feuds between the Fathers
in Wisbich Castle, and Parsons the Jesuit and his gang in Q Elizabeth and King
James's time? There you may learn the very Quintessence of Railing, the Elixir
of Billingsgate.


Tory. But what says this Reverend Father Dowdal?


Truem. Why it seems being in Gaol in the Gate House, the wily Jesuits, etc.
his Fellow Sufferers, Poor, Turner, Parsons, Mackarty, etc. cheated him of his
snack of the Charity (as he calls it) of abundance of devout Lasses,
Countesses, Ladies, and the Devil knows who, that had no better use for their
Money than to bestow it upon this Hypocritical Tribe of Traitorous Villains:
Hinc illae Lachrymae, Here Is the Root of the Quarrel. And p. 2. he affirm, That
although they are reputed Sufferers for Jesus Christ's sake, yet they have
practiced the greatest Injustice that could be, more becoming Heathens than
Christians, mor suitable to Infidels than Catholics, and much less to reputed
Priests and Jesuits. p. 60. (speaking of the same Holy Fathers his
Fellow Sufferers) he says -- Each of them could with Authority nobly treat one
young Woman or other of very ill Repute, all day long in their Rooms; it was
not worth taking notice of, if one of them sent for more Bottles of Wine and
Brandy in one day, than I drank Beer or Ale in a whole wee^: Either of them
might lawfully call two or three of their younger ^evotes, their Wives, and as
many more their Misses, who used to call them Husbands and Gallants in like
manner; the rest of the young Women must be their Sisters, and such as were
elderly, their Mothers; yea, our holy Patriarch Mr. Poor himself took the
liberty to lock himself up daily in his Chamber for some hours with a young
Woman he pretended to be his Niece, although a condemned Priest in Newgate, his
own Countryman, has openly assured, there is no such Relation between them. A
Gentleman of good Credit did assure me, That one of the Women this godly Man
used to have locked up in his Chamber, bore a Bastard to one of his
Acquaintance, who kept her for his Miss some years. -- p. 37. In all my Travels
in most Kingdoms of Europe, I never was Eyewitness to more Tricks and Knavery
than I have seen practiced by the forenamed Companions of mine in this Prison,
although reputed Priests and Jesuits, etc. -- This is a Popish Priest's own
Testimony of the practices and conversation of his Brethren Priests and Jesuits
but the other day in the Gate House; and that too, at a time when they
pretended to be Confessors and Sufferers, forsooth! for Religion. If the Goats
and Foxes are thus rampant and mischievous in the Pound, that kind of Creatures
must they be abroad in the Common? But, Tory, methinks you are asleep.


Tory. I am sorry our Loyal Friends, the Catholics, should be thus exposed by
a Bird of their own Feather: Could you but have told me such a Story (tho never
so Fictitious) of the Presbyterians, it had been worth hearing, and would have
made me as merry as Her^^litus Ridens, or Roger's Fiddle.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 10. 1681-2.
Et Ficta arguunt, fidemque faciunt.
A Letter of Thanks from the Devil to the Bishops and Clergy, for their
persecuting the old Dissenters.
WE showed you last week by whom, and with what Artifices the first Sanguinary
Laws, or Acts of. Parliament in England, against Religious Dissenters were
obtained. It remains that we should give you a brief Prospect of the Mischiefs,
Cruelties, and sad Effects which thereupon followed. But first, since both the
worth of the Matter, and surprizingness of the Form, and the series of Time, do
all invite us to it, we think it will not be unacceptable to recite here, a
certain Congratulatory Epistle then sent abroad, and by a bold Prosopopoeia
directed from Old Nick himself to his trusty and well-beloved the Prelates and
Clergy. For tho the Original has no Date, yet the Reverend and Laborious Mr.
Fox (who published it verbatim out of the Registry of the Cathedral of Hereford)
concludes it to have been written about the time of King Richard the Second:
The words whereof (Translated) are as follow.

I LUCIFER Prince of Darkness and profound Horror, Emperor of the high
Mysteries of Acheron, Captain of the Dung^o^ ^^ebus, King of Hell, and Lord
^omptroller of the Infernal (...): To all (...) Child on of Pride, and
Companions of our Realm, and especially to our dear Allies, the Princes of the
Church of this (...) Age (of which our Adversary Jesus Christ says to his
Proph^t, I hate (the Church, or) Congregation of the wicked) send Greeting, and
wish Prosperity to all that obey our Commandments, that ^^serve the Laws of
Satan already Enacted, and that are industrious to put in Execution our
Precepts and Decrees.

Know ye, That in times past certain Vicars of Christ following his steps in
Miracles and Virtues, living in Humility and a poor mean Life, converted (in a
manner) the whole World from the Yoke of our Dominion, unto their Doctrine and
Course of Conversation; to the great Contempt of our Prison house and Kingdom,
and no small prejudice of our Jurisdiction and Authority, they nothing dreading
to bid defiance to our Forces, and trample upon the Majesty of our Estate; for
then scarce did we receive any Tribute from the upper World, neither did the
miserable sort of common people rush in at the Gates of our deep Dungeon as
they were wont to do with continual rapping, but in those days the easy,
broad, and pleasant way which leads to Death, was unfrequented, and lay wast,
without the hideous noise of trampling Travelers, or being trod by the feet of
wretched Souls. So that our Courts being without Suitors, all (...) began to
howl, and as being robbed and spoiled, continued in anguish and heaviness.

All which considered, we could not without diminution to our Glory longer
suffer it, the impatient Rage of our Spleen was moved, nor would our Captain
General by a shameful negligence endure it any longer; and therefore seeking
out the Remedy to prevent like exclusion and inconveniences for the future, we
provided our selves of a most opportunate Expedient. For instead of these
Ap^stles, and other their Adhe^onts, who conduct themselves by the same Line
and Level, as well in Manners as Doctrine, and are odious Enemies unto us; we
have caused You to be their Successors, and preferred you in their steads who
are the present Prelates of the Church, whom we have advanced by our great
might and subtlety, as Christ has said of you -- They have Reigned, but not by
me. Once we promised unto Him all the Kingdoms of the World, if he would fall
down and worship us; but he would not, saying -- My Kingdom is not of this
World, and went his way when the Multitude would have made him a Temporal King.
But to You truly that are fallen from the state of Grace, and that serve us in
the Earth, is that my promise fulfilled, and all Terrene things by the means
which we have bestowed upon you, are under your Government. For he has said of
us ye know -- The Prince of this World comes, etc. and he has made us to
Reign over all the Children of Unbelief. Therefore our Adversaries
before-recited, did patiently submit themselves unto the Princes of the World,
and did teach Men so to do, saying, Be you subject to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lord's sake: And again, Obey ye them that are made Rulers over you,
etc. For so their Masters commanded them, saying -- The Kings of the Heathen
have Dominion over them, etc. But I on the contrary think it long 'till we have
poured out our Poison upon the Earth, and therefore fill your selves full with
the enjoyments thereof; and be you not only unlike those Primitive Fathers, but
also clean contrary to them in your Lives and Conditions. Neither give you to
God that which belongs to him, nor yet to Caesar that which is his; but
exercise you the Power of both the Swords, according to our Decrees, making
your selves doers in worldly Matters, fighting in our Quarrel, entangled with
Secular Labors and Business; and climb ye by little and little from the
miserable state of Poverty, unto the highest Seats of all Honors, and the most
Princely places of Dignity by your devised Practices, and false and deceitful
Wiles and Subtlety, that is, by Hypocrisy, Flattery, Lying, Perjury, Treasons,
Deceits, Simony, and other greater Wickedness than any which our Infernal
Furies can devise. For after that ye have by us been advanced thither where ye
would be, yet that does not suffice you, but as greedy Stravelings more hungry
than you were before, ye oppress the Poor, scratch and rake all together that
comes to hand, perverting and turning every thing topsy-turvy; so swollen, that
ready ye are to burst for Pride, living like Letchers in all Corporal
Delicateness, and by fraud directing all your doings, you challenge to your
selves names of Honor in the Earth, calling your selves Lords, Holy, yea, and
Most Holy persons.

Thus either by violence you Ravage, or else by ambition, subtlely ye pilfer
away and wrongfully wrest, and by false Title possess these Goods, which for
the sustentation of the poor Members of Christ (whom from our first fall we
have hated) were bestowed and given, consuming them as ye your selves list, and
therewith ye cherish and maintain an innumerable sort of Whores, Strumpets, and
Bawds, with whom ye ride pompously like mighty Princes, far otherwise going
than those poor beggarly Priests of the Primitive Church. For I would ye should
build your selves rich and gorgeous Palaces; that ye fare like Princes, eating
and drinking the daintiest Meats and pleasantest Wines that may be gotten; that
ye hoard and heap together an infinite deal of Treasure, not like to him that
said, Gold and Silver have I none: For why should you not serve and fight for
us according to your Wages? O most acceptable Society of Fellowship! promised
unto us by the Prophet, and of those Fathers long ago reproved: Whilst that
Christ called thee Synagogue of Satan, and liken'd thee to the mighty Whore,
which committed Fornication with the Kings of the Earth, the adulterous Spouse
of Christ, and of a chaste person made a Strumpet. Thou have left thy first
Love, and have cleaved unto us, O our blessed Babylon, and our Citizens, which
from the Transmigration of Jerusalem, come hither! we love you for your
deserts, we rejoice over you which contemn the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace
the practices of Simon Magus our friend, and have them at your Fingers ends,
and exercise the same publicly, buying and selling Spiritual things in the
Church of God and against the Commandment of God: Ye give Benefices and Honors
by Petition, or else for Money, for Favor, or for filthy Service; and refusing
to admit those that are worthy to Ecclesiastical Dignities, and preferring
those that are unworthy; you call into the Inheritance of God's Sanctuary,
Bawds, Liars, Flatterers, your Nephews, and your own Children, and to a
childish Boy ye give many Prebends; the least whereof ye deny to bestow upon a
poor good Man; ye esteem the person of a Man, and receive Gifts; ye regard
Money, and have no regard of Souls; ye have made the House of God a Den of
Thieves; all Abuse, all Extortion, is more exercised a hundred fold in your
Judgment Seats, than with any Secular Tyrant; ye make Laws, and keep not the
same, and ye dispense with your Dispensations as it pleases you; you justify
the wicked for Rewards, and you take away the just Man's desert from him; and
briefly ye perpetrate all kind of mischief, even as it is our will ye should,
and ye take much pain for Lucre's sake in our Service, and especially to
destroy the Christian Faith, for now the Lay People are almost in doubt what
they may believe, because if ye preach any thing to them at some times, (although
it be but seldom seen, and that negligently enough, even as we would have it)
yet notwithstanding they believe you not, because they see manifestly that ye
do clean contrary to that ye say; whereupon the common people doing as ye do,
which have the Government of them, and should be an Example to them of
well-doing: Now many of them leaning to your Rules, do run headlong into a
whole Sea of Vices, and so continually a very great Multitude flocketh at the
strong and well fenced Gates of our Dungeon; and doubtless ye send us so many
day by day of every sort and kind of people, that we should not be able to
entertain them, but that our insatiable Chaos, with her thousand ravening Jaws,
is sufficient to devour an infinite number of Souls. And thus the Sovereignty
of our Empire by you has been propt up, and our intolerable loss restored.

Wherefore most especially we command you, and give you most hearty thanks;
exhorting you all, that in any wise ye persevere and continue, as hitherto ye
have done; neither that ye slack henceforth your Enterprise: For why? by your
helps we purpose to bring the whole World again under our Power and Dominion.
Over and besides this, we commit unto you no small Authority, to supply our
places in the betraying of your Brethren; and we make and ordain you our
Vicars, and the Ministers of Antichrist our Son, for whom we have made a very
fair and expeditious way and passage. Furthermore we counsel you that possess
the highest Rooms of all other, that you work subtlely, and that you outwardly
and feignedly seem to procure Peace between the Princes of the World, but that
you cherish and procure secret Causes of Discord: And like as craftily ye have
destroyed and subverted the Roman Empire, so suffer ye no Kingdom to be over
much enlarged and enriched by Tranquillity or Peace, lest perhaps in so great
Tranquillity (all desire of Peace set aside) they disp^se themselves to view,
and consider your most wicked Works, suppressing on every side your Estate; and
from your Treasures take away such substance, as we have caused to be reserved
and kept in your hands, until the coming of our well-beloved Son Antichrist. We
would ye should do our Commendations to our entirely beloved Daughters, Pride,
Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belly-chear, and Letchery, and to all other my
Daughters, and especially to Lady Simony, which has made you Men, and enriched
you, and has given you suck with her own Breasts, and therefore in no wise see
that you call her Sin. And be ye lofty and proud, because that the most high
Dignity of your Estate does require such Magnificence. And also be ye Covetous,
for whatsoever ye get and gather, it is for St. Peter, for the good of the
Church, and for the defense of your Patrimony and the Crucifix, and therefore
you may lawfully do it; ye may promote your Cardinals to the highest seats of
Dignities, without any let, in stopping the mouth of our Adversary Jesus
Christ, and alleging again, that he preferred his Kinsfolks, who were of a
poor and base Degree, unto the Apostleship; but do not you so, but rather call
as ye do, those that live in Arrogance, in h^ughtiness of Mind, and filthy
Letchery, unto the state of wealthy Riches and Pride; and those Rewards and
Promotions, which the followers of Christ forsook, do ye distribute unto your
friends. Therefore as ye shall have better understanding, prepare ye Vices
cloaked under the similitude of Virtues: Allege for your selves the Glosses of
the Holy Scripture, and wrest them directly to serve for your purpose; and if
any Man teach or preach otherwise than ye will, oppress ye them violently with
the sentence of Excommunication, and by your Censures heaped one upon another,
by the consent of your Brethren, let him be condemned as an Heretic, and let
him be kept in a most strait Prison, and there tormented 'till he dye, for a
terrible example to all such as confess Christ. And setting all favor apart
cast him out of your Temple, lest peradventure the ingrafted word may save your
Souls, which word I abhor as I do the Souls of other faithful Men; and do your
endeavor, that you may deserve to have the place which we have prepared for
you, under the most wicked Foundation of our Dewlling Place. Fare ye well with
such Felicity as we desire and intend finally to Reward and Recompense you with.

Given at the Center of the Earth, in that our dark Conclave, where all the
Rabble of Devils were present, for this purpose specially called unto our most
dolesom Consistory, under the Character of our terrible Seal, for confirmation
of the Premises. THE COURANT.
Truem. BUT is Monsieur L'Estrange so very angry, say you?


Tory. You must note, this extreme cold March bears hard upon such Gentlemen as
have old Aches, and Necturnal Pains (the sharp Memento's of their youthful
Sins) about them; and therefore no wonder if friend Roger be now as petvish as
a sick Monkey, or any ill Minister of State in Parliament time. Consequently is
not at leisure to answer that small Objection of his not coming to Church, or
receiving the Sacrament for 18 years together. But let us leave him to his
Observatorisms, and praying for leisure to write against Papists; and tell me,
prithee, what think of the Abhorrencies of the Association which has made
such a Figure in modern Gazets?


Truem. I have heard from my Grannum an old Proverb -- A great Cry and a little
Wool. For my part I abhor all Treason and Rebellion, and all that tends
thereunto, as much as the best of you all; and I believe there is scarce one of
these Gentlemen Abhorrers, (they being for the most part such as are in present
Imploys) but have sworn, That they Abhor levying Arms without his Majesty's
Authority, or under pretense of his Authority against his Person, or any
Commissioned by him; which is the main thing Abhorred in this pretended Paper
of Association. Now what a ridiculous impertinent business is it, when not only
by common Loyalty we are obliged, but also have sworn a thing, (it may be
twenty times over) to come afterward, and importune His Majesty with a formal
verbose Complement to the very same purpose? I see no reason in the World for
this, unless a Man have a mind to intimate, either that his Oath is not to be
taken, or that he has a mind to get a Knightship, a place in the Custom house,
or some good Job or other.

As to the Paper called The Association, it may be a very ill Paper; but if it
were found at my Lord Shaf^sbury's (which whether it were or no, or how it came
there, is still disputable) yet since there is no offer or pretense of proof,
That it was of that Lord's writing; that he ever saw it, or heard it read; that
he or any body else ever promoted it, or attempted getting of hands to it, or
that any Mortal ever approved of, or signed it: How is that Lord concerned? Or
why such public Abhorrence and Clamor? If we must in solemn Addresses declare
our Abhorrence of every wicked Paper, why were you not, Gentlemen, as zealous,
and ready with your Abhorrencies of Coleman's Letters, and all the Contrivers
of them?

That there was an Association entered into by private persons in Q.
Elizabeth's time, when under color of advancing the Interests of the
presumptive Heir, Mary Queen of Scots (a Papist), Plots were continually hatched
against that good Protestant Queen's Life and Government is well known, and so
far from being ill resented, that at next Parliament it was confirmed. Now from
that wholesome Experience, there was something of the same kind proposed in the
House of Commons of the last Parliament (but never designed to be obtruded,
without the Concurrence of the Lords, and the Royal Assent). Now this noise of
Abhorrence seems at bottom not to be levelled so much at the Paper said to be
found in the E. of Sh's Closet, as under that name, to vilify and expose the
Proceedings of the Commons, and render them odious, as if they were all guilty
of that very Paper.


Tory. Well, but what say you to Godfry's Murder? Thompson says now, he killed
himself, and L'Estrange lends a lift that way too.


Truem. That Is such a Superlative piece of Impudence, as shows the Popish Plot
still goes on, else they would not dare thus affront the Justice of the Nation,
and outface our very senses, as if we were just ready to believe their absurd
Transubstantiation. In a word, it is such an impudent Calumny on the Dead, and
Abuse to the Nation, that I think it would not misbecome the whole Common
Council to express their Abhorrence of such Popish Shams and Lies, and to
Address to the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, That Thompson be called to
Account for it.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 17. 1681-2.
Plangunt Anglorum gentes Crimen Sodomorum
Paulus fert, horum sunt Idola Causa malorum
Surgunt nigrati Gierzitae Simone Nati
Nomine Praelati hoc defensare parati.
Qui Reges estis, populis quicunque praeestis
Qualiter his gestis, gladios prohibere potestis?
Versic. Parl. exhib. Anno 18. Rich. 2.
The Proceedings against Dissenters, in the Raigns of King Richard the Second,
and King Henry the Fourth.
WE have told you the severe Laws made against all those that in these dark
Times durst open their Eyes and see farther than Popery, the Church then, as by
Law established, thought fit to permit them; such Heretics were generally
called Lollards, they were the Puritans, the Fanatics, the Whigs, the
Brummingham's of those days, and how busy the Magistrates especially of the
Clergy, were to put the said Laws in Execution against them, will appear in the
following account.

It Is true, during the Reign of King Richard the Second we do not find any
burnt to Death for the profession of Religion, but many were imprisoned,
harrass'd, and in great trouble, and especially William Swinderby a Priest, and
Walter Brute a Layman, but Learned, and a Graduate of the University of Oxford,
the several Articles against whom, and their Answers thereunto, you may read at
large in Foxes Acts and Monuments, too tedious here to recite; I shall
therefore only note, That John Bishop of Hereford having by solemn sentence
denounced the said Swinderby to be an Heretic, Schismatic, and a false
informer of the People, and to be avoided by all faithful Christians, He the
said Swinderby did thereupon Appeal from such the Bishops Sentence to the King
and Council, by an Instrument under his hand, which, both in respect of the
Matter, and of the English wherein it is written, being such as was then
current, (now above 280 years ago) I shall trespass so far on the Readers
patience as to repeat it verbatim.

IN nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. I William Swinderby
Priest, knowledge openly to all Men, That I was before the Bishop of Hereford
the Third day of October, and before many other good Clerk^, to answer to
certain Conclusions of the Faith I was accused of, and mine Answer was this:
That if the Bishop or any Man cou^h^ show me by God's Law, that my Conclusions
or my Answers were Error or Heresy, I would be amended, and openly revoke
them before all the people; but they sayden singly with word, That there was
Errors in them, and bidden me subject me to the Bishop, and put me into his
Grace, and revoke mine Error, and showed me naught by God's Law, ne Reason, ne
proved which they weren. And for I would not knowledge me Guilty, so as I knew
no Error in them, of which I should, therefore the Bishop sat in Doom in mine
absence, and deemed me an Heretic, a Schismatic, and a teacher of Errors,
and denounced me accursed, that I come not to correction of the Church; and
therefore for this unrightful Judgment I appeal to the King's Justices for many
other Causes.

One Cause is, For the King's Court in such matter is above the Bishop's Court;
for after the Bishop has accursed, he may not fear by his Law, but then mote he
sech succor of the King's Law, and by a Writ of Significavit, put a Man in
Prison.

The second Cause: For in cause of Heresy there liggeth Judgment of Death, and
that doom may not be given without the King's Justices: For the Bishop will
say, Nobis non licet interficere quenquam; that is, It is not lawful for us to
kill any man, as they sayden to Pilate, when Christ should be deemed. And for I
think that no Justice will give suddenly and untrue Doom, as the Bishop did, and
therefore openly I appeal to hem, and send my Conclusions to the Knights of the
Parliament, to be showed to the Lords, and to be taken to the Justices to be
well adviset, or that they given Doom.

The third Cause is, For it was a false Doom; for no M^n is a Heretic, but he
that Masterfully defends his Error or Heresy, and stiffly maintains it: And
mine Answer has always been Conditional, as the people openly knows, for ever I
say, and yet say, and always will; that if they cannen show me by Gods Law that
I have erret, I will gladly been amendet, and revoke mine Errors, and so I am
no Heretic, ne nevermore in Gods grace will ben en no wise.

The fourth Cause is, For the Bishop's Law that they deem Men by, is full of
Errors and Heresies, contrary to the truth of Christ's Law of the Gospel. For
there as Christ's Law bids us Love our Enemies, the Pope's Law gives us leave
to hate them, and to sley them, and graunts Men pardon to werren again Heathen
Men, and sley hem. And there as Christ's Law teach us to be merciful, the
Bishop's Law teachs us to be wretchful; for Death is the greatest wretch that
(...) mowen done on him that guilty is. There as Christ's Law teaches us to
blessen him that diseazen us, and to pray for him; the Popes Law teaches us to
Curse them, and in their great sentence that they usen, they presume to Dam hem
to Hell that they cursen. And this is afoue Heresy of Blasphemy: There as
Christ's Law bids us be patient, the Pope's Law justifies two Swords, that
wherewith he smitheth the Sheep of the Church; and he has made Lords and Kings
to swear to defend him and his Church. There as Christ's Law forbideth us
Letchery, the Pope's Law justifies the abominable Whoredom of common Women, and
the Bishops in some place have a great Tribute or Rent of Whoredom. There as
Christ's Law bids to minister Spiritual things freely to the people, the Pope
with his Law sells for Money, after the quantity of the Gift, as Pardons,
Orders, Blessings, and Sacraments, and Prayers, and Benefices, and preaching to
the People, as it is known amongst them. There as Christ's Law teaches Peace,
the Pope with his Law assoiles Men for money to gader the People, Priests and
other to fight for his Cause. There as Christ's Law forbids Swearing, the
Pope's Law justifies Swearing, and compels men thereto. Whereas Christ's Law
teaches his Priests to be Poor, the Pope with his Law justifies and maintains
Priests to be Lords.

And yet the fifth Cause is, For the Pope's Law that the Bishops demen Men by,
is the same unrightful Law that Christ was demet by of the Bishops with the
Scribes and with the Pharisees; for right as at time they gaven more credens to
the two false Witnesses that witnessed against Christ, then they deden to all
the people that witnesseden to his true Preaching and his Miracles: So the
Bishops of the Pope's Law geven more Leven by their Law to two Heretics and
Apostates, or two comen Wymen that woulden witnesseden againes a Man in the
cause of Heresy, than to thousands of people that were true and good. And for
the Pope is this Antichrist, and his Law contrary to Christ's Law, fully I
forsake this Law, and so I reed all Christen men; for thus by another point of
this Law, they mighten conquer much of this World: For when they can, they by
this Law present a a man an Heretic, his Goods shulen be forfet from him and
his Heirs, and so might they lightly have two or three false Witnesses to
Record an Heresy again what true man so hem liked. Herefore me thinks, that
whatsoever that I am an Christen man, I may lawfully appeal from a false Dome
of the Law, to be Righteo^sly demet by the troth of God'd Law. And if this
Appeal will n^^serve, I appeal openly to by Lord Jesu Christ that shall deem
all the World, for he, I wot well, will not spare for no man to deem a troth.
And therefore I pray God Almighty with David in the Sauter Book, Deus Judicium
tuum Regi da, and Justitiam tuam Filio Regis, judicare populum tuum in
Justitia, and pauperes tuos in Judicio: That is, O God, give thy Judgment to
the King, and thy Justice to the King's Son, to judge thy people in Justice,
and thy poor ones in Judgment, etc.

What afterward became of this Swinderby, we find not in History; but as for
Walter Brute, having worried him a long time, they at last prevailed with him
to submit himself in a Scroll under his hand, in these words following.

I Walter Brute submit my self principally to the Evangelie of Jesus Christ,
and to the determination of Holy Kirk, and to the General Councils of the Holy
Kirk. And to the sentence and determination of the four Doctors of holy Writ,
that is, Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, and Gregory. And I meekly submit me to
your Correction as a Subject ought to his Bishop. -- Fox, fo. 461.

Touching the Deposing of King Richard the Second, and the Ill-Favourites and
Mis-government which originally occasioned that Princes Misfortunes, being
foreign to our Subject, we shall say nothing here. Those that desire to be
satisfied therein, may read an excellent, tho short, Discourse, Entitled, The
Life and Reign of King Richard the Second, printed not long since for the
Publisher hereof, wherein a more full and true account is given thereof, than
in any of our Histories extant in English.

As King Henry the Fourth, who was the Deposer of King Richard, was the first
of all our English Kings that brought into mode the cruel burning of Christ's
Saints for opposing the Pope and his wicked Doctrines, so as far as I can find
the first Martyr in that kind, was one William Santre Priest, (whom elsewhere I
find mentioned by the name of Sir William Chatris, Parish Priest of the Church
of St. Scithe the Virgin in London) who was consumed by the Flames in the year
of our Lord 1400. The Articles or Heretical Conclusions which he was charged to
hold, were these:

1. Imprimis, That he should say, That he would not worship the Cross on which
Christ suffered, but only Christ that suffered on the Cross.

2. That he would sooner worship a Temporal King, than the foresaid wooden
Cross.

3. That he would rather worship the Bodies of the Saints, than the very Cross
on which he hung, if it were before him.

4. That he would rather worship a Man truly contrite, than the said material
Cross of Christ.

5. That if any Man would visit the Monuments of Peter and Paul, or go on
Pilgrimage to the Tomb of St. Thomas or elsewhere for the obtaining any
benefit, he is not bound to keep his Vow, but may distribute the Expenses that
such a Journey would cost him in Alms to the Poor, and it would do as well.

6. That every Priest and Deacon is more bound to preach the Word of God, than
to say the Canonical hours.

7. That after the pronouncing of the Sacramental words, the Bread remains of
the same Nature it was before; neither does it cease to be Bread.

Are not these, Christian Reader! mighty Crimes? And yet for these this poor
Man was first very solemnly Degraded from all their pretended Holy Orders, and
then most barbarously burnt as aforesaid: Ought not such Examples make
Protestant Englishmen fond of a Popish Successor, who must infallibly act over
again the same Barbarities, when ever his bloody Clergy shall instigate him
thereunto, upon themselves or their Posterity?

The next dying Witness to truth was one John Badby a Tailor, of the Diocese of
Worcester, who was burnt in Smithfield, Anno 1409. His only Crime was for
asserting, That the Sacrament consecrated by the Priest is not the very Body of
Christ, but that still the Bread remained; and that when Christ sat at Supper
with his Disciples, he had not his Body in his hand, to the intent to
distribute it to his Disciples, etc. And it is remarkable, that when he came to
dye, and was put in a Tun or Vessel, and Fire put to him, he crying out (to the
Lord, not to Men, as by the Sequel appeared) Mercy, Mercy, the Prince (King
Henry's eldest Son) being present, caused the Fire to be stopped, and made him
large Offers, not only of Life, but of Preferment too, if he would change his
Opinion; but he with a glorious Constancy refused those Temptations, and chose
rather to Seal the Truth with his Blood, than betray it by a base Compliance
with such worldly Allurements.

King Henry to confirm his ill got Sovereignty, resolving in all things to
gratify the Clergy, the Empire of the Pope and his Party became so strong in
this Realm, that scarce any durst oppose them; the Bishops having got such an
Ascendant on the King, and besides being Armed with the Statute we formerly
recited, and with additional Constitutions of their own, power of Imprisonment,
Temporal Sword, Fire, and Faggot, Reigned and Ruled as uncontrollable; so puffed
up with Pride, that they thought all things subject to their extravagant Power,
and daily boasted how they would utterly extirpate Heresy, (as they called the
Profession of the Truth) out of the Land. And indeed to the Eye of Humane
Reason, nothing seemed more easy to effect, under such advantageous
Circumstances. But it is the nature of Truth to flourish by opposition, Premi
potest non suppremi, It may be oppressed, but never suppressed. All their kicking
was against the Pricks; Providence supported That, which they with united
Councils, and Force, and Fraud, and Policy, and Power, thought to overthrow, as
will appear in the Sequel of this History. A fair warning, would Men but be so
wise as to heed it, of the vanity of such or the like attempts to all
succeeding Generations.

The COURANT.
Truem. YES, I do aver, L'Estrange refusing on the 18 th of October, 1678. to
License Thompson's Narrative, touching the manner of finding Sir Edm. Godfrey's
Body assigned for a Reason, That he did not know but if he should License it,
he might offend some great persons at Whitehall.


Tory. O! but Thompson, Numb. 128. says, That Is a false and scandalous
Aspersion: And Observator, Numb. 111. says, It Is a damned Lie.


Truem. It Is not a Straw matter what those two Gentlemen say, their veracity is
notorious. Mr. L -- the Printer went with Thompson then to L'Estrange, stood
by, heard the words, and at that instant took particular notice of them,
because he admired what might be the mysterious meaning, and is ready to depose
the same upon Oath, when ever-lawfully required. And as for the reason
L'Estrange now gives, viz. [It was before the King and Council, and he durst
not meddle with it] That Is no reason at all, for tho the Inquiry after the
Murderers might be before the Honorable Board, as indeed it was before all the
Magistrates in the Nation, yet what harm or offense could it be in the mean
time to publish a true Narrative of the matter of Fact, when, how, and in what
manner, the Body was found. It might also be noted, That L'Estrange refused to
License two Elegies on the same Gentleman, which were both Licensable, as
appears in that one of them after his refusal was Licensed by my Lord Bishop's
Chaplain, who sure understood his business as well as Roger, and the other,
after a long ruffle and threatening to Complain, Roger made shift to License
himself, but not without 2 or 300 Oaths and Curses.


Tory. I confess I always observed Mr. L'Estrange mighty tender in Licensing
any thing that might reflect on the Roman Catholics: 'Twas sometime before the
discovery of the Plot, the Parsons Sons had a public Feast, and some body had
made a Copy of Verses on that occasion, wherein having reckoned up what
excellent Men in all Professions Clergy-mens Sons had proved, the Author
concludes thus:


Blush Romanists at your unjust Restraints,
Our Church fills Earth with Hero's, Heaven with Saints:
Whilst from your Cells a spurious Issue springs,
To ^ifle Subjects, and to Murder Kings.
These two last Lines were such an abomination to our Friend, that he would not
License the Paper, unless they might be crossed out, and cross them he did
before he would sign it, tho in some of the Copies the Printer ma^e bold to
insert them. Mr. Birch was the Bookseller, who is ready to attest this business
-- And so much at present for L'Estrange. Now here is Thompson's second Letter
to Mr. Prance; what have you to say to that?

Truem. I say, That Paper is the perfect Resemblance, or indeed a Demonstration
of the whole Genius and Nature of Popery in general, for what is Popery but
Lies and Nonsense, obtruded upon the World with the height of Impudence? And
just such is that Letter. The shameless Author of which opposes Legal Oaths,
and Judicial Records, with pitiful Surmises, and forged Flams. Affirms over and
over again with a ridiculous Effrontery things that half the Town know to be
false, and others which common sense can never admit, as that of his Shoes
being glazed with walking on the Grass, and the Hay seeds in the s^ams, and his
Face being Flyblown, etc. and all this in the midst of a very cold snowy
October. Is it not pleasant to hear him tell the world, That Mr. Brown the
Constable, who first moved the Body, and the Surgeons that viewed it, and the
Maid that washed the Clothes, who have all sworn there was no Blood, are no
competent Witnesses; and yet this Sir Nicholas Nemo, with his unknown Knights
of Bo peep on their bare Say so's, must be credited. Does not Thompson own
himself a prodigious wretch in putting his name to this Paper, so directly
contrary to what he himself printed, just at the time when the thing happened;
and yet now to take not one word notice thereof tho so home charged upon him by
the Ghost. Is it not absurd vapouring to cry, Such, and such and such things
shall be proved by undeniable Witnesses. and yet after so many Challenges not
be able to name one? It Is true, he intimates as if one Wren had something to
say, but sure I am it cannot be that Sir Edm Godfrey killed himself; for I my
self have many times heard that Wren say and swear, That he deserved part of
the 500 l. Reward, as being an occasion of the discovery of Mr. Prance's being
in the Murder; and that before ever Mr. Prance was seized, he had such violent
Suspicions, or Impulses, as he called them, that he was concern^d in it, that he
could not rest in his Bed a nights: And will this Man, after all this, swear,
That Prance knew nothing of it?


Tory. There is, I am told, another Gentleman, tho not named yet hinted at in
that Paper, that is to help on the Job with a civil Oath or two upon occasion,
a certain pragmatical primatical Tittle-tattlecal pretended Councellor at Law.
-- But we will Adjourn our Discourse of him 'till next bout.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 24. 1681-2.
Omne meum Nil meum.
An Apology in Answer to an Accusation of Plagiarism. Tolling of Ave's in
honor of our Lady. People forced to do Penance for not bringing Litter for a
Proud Prelates Horses as he would have them. The story of the Lord Cobham, and
Sir Roger Acton entered into.
It Is pleasant to consider how many little Artifices the Devil and his
Instruments, ill Men, have vented their Malice against this poor innocent
Weekly Sheet, and how Sedulous they have been, and are, either (if they could)
totally to suppress, or at least, to asperse and Calumniate It. This makes me
hope, It may have done some Execution against the Kingdom of Antichrist; or
that it may be of use to the Protestant Religion, since the Advocates of Popery
do so Rave and fret against it. But that which I shall particularly take notice
of at present, is, The Gentleman that calls himself the Observator, who, Numb.
14. has the Forehead to Affirm, That All the Pacquets are stolen. A charge so
general and apparently False, that it deserves no Answer, but Contempt or Pity.
But afterward he comes and Asserts, That out of Foxes Acts and Monuments, and
the Magdeburgh Centuries, I furnish this Weekly History. To this I Reply,

First, That if any body pretends to give the World an Account of things
Transacted Two or three hundred Years or more before himself was Born, it is
twenty to one, if he will deal like an honest Man, but he must Consult
Historians that have Treated of those Affairs; else what he Writes will be
Fiction and Invention, not History.

Secondly, If he means that I make use of no other Authors but Fox and the
Centuriators, it is notoriously False; I having for carrying on this Work,
perused many Hundred Authors, as any unbiased Learned Reader cannot but
observ^.

Thirdly, He notes several Passages in the Two last Pacquets, that are in Fox.
It Is very true, What then? Do not I there Cite Fox for them, where is the
Plagiarism? I Write to the Common People, and Publish it thus in Successive
sheets, that so it may fall into the more Hands; I pretend, not to Instruct the
Learned, but to give the Vulgar (such as perhaps never read Fox, and know
nothing of the Magdeburgh Centuries,) a general Prospect of Popery, that they
may know, and Abhor it: Those things which in Fox are tediously told, I
abridge, what is less material I omit, Remarkables I Transcribe, and fairly
tell the Reader where I have them: and what Felony and Treason is there in all
this?

Fourthly, Why may not I furnish my Matter from Fox and the Centuriators? I
doubt the Observator has some particular spite at them. The first continues the
Memory of many Glorious English Martyrs barbarously Butchered, even since the
Reformation, under a Popish Princses (of excellent Virtues, setting aside her
Blind, Bloody Zeal,) which perhaps the Observator would have had forgot; And
the Second's Learned Labors and Industrious Researches into Antiquity, have
wrested one of the Church of Romes boasted Weapons out of her hands, and taught
us to distinguish the real Testimonies of the Fathers, from Spurious Suborned
Knights of the Post, though in Gray Perriwiggs and Venerable Names. I wonder
what Authors the Gentleman would Advise us to; perhaps his friend Father
Cressy's Church History; or the Golden Legend: -- But he that regards every
bark of Cerberu^ may quickly be Deaf. Let us proceed in our intended Work, and
let Mr. Observator be never so angry at it, we will again make use of Mr. Fox,
and from thence observe to the Reader, That though the Church was already
overburthen'd and almost suffocated with a vast Mass of vain Superstitious
Ceremonies: yet Tho. Arundel Bishop of Canterbury, in the days of King Henry
the 4 th. about the Year 1410. took upon him to increase them, by Commanding,
That in all Monasteries and Collegiate Churches there should every Morning be
Bells Rung, in Honor of the Virgin Mary, which commonly was called Toling of
Aves: For the promoting of which, he sent his Mandate stuffed full of Wicked and
Blasphemous Expressions, to the Bishop of London; and toward the Close thereof
used these Words, We therefore desiring more earnestly to stir up the Minds of
all Faithful People to so devo^^ an Exercise, etc. do grant to all and every
Person that shall say his Pater Noster, and the Angels Salutation, Five times
at the Morning Peal, with a Devout Mind; as often as he shall do it, for each
time forty days of Pardon by these Presents. Given under our Seals in our
Manner of Lambeth, the 10th. of February, in the 9th. Year of our Translation.
-- Now we appeal to the Reader, if this were not a Lumping Pennyworth to have
Forty days Pardon of all Sin, whatsoever Villainy a man should in that time
Commit, merely for Muttering over Five Pater Nosters, and Five Aves, what a
kind good humored, pleasant, delicate inviting Religion is Popery.

Yet now I think on it, my Countrymen of Wengham did not find it so, under his
Predecessor William Courtney Archbishop of the same Province, when they were
forced to do a scurvy scandalous Penance for the horrid Sin of not bringing
Litter for his Graces Horses decently and in order. The Sentence against whom
being very notable I shall here Recite it, and (to spite the Observator) it
shall be out of Fox too. Erroris Matter Ignorantia, etc. Ignorance the Mother of
Error, has so blinded certain Tenants of the Lord of Wengham, viz. Hugh Penny,
John Forestall, John Boy, John Wanderton, William Hayward, and John White; That
at the coming of the Lord Archbishop to his Palace at Canterbury on
Palm-Sunday-Eve, in the Year 1390. being warned by the Bailiff to carry Hay,
Straw, and Littor [ Foenum Stramen sive Literam, it is in the Original, which
may be noted from an Archi-episcopal Elegancy] to the aforesaid Palace, as by
the Tenure of their Lands which they hold of the Sea of Canterbury they are
bound, refusing and disdaining to do their due Service, as they were
accustomed, brought their Straw not in Waines and Carts publicly and in
sufficient quantity, but sneakingly in Sacks, and hugger-mugger, to the
undervaluing of the Lord Archbishop, and derogation of the Rights of his See
of Canterbury. For which, being called, and personally appearing before the
said Lord Archbishop on Thursday in Easter week, sitting on his Tribunal in
his Castle of Statewode, they did humbly submit themselves to his Judgment,
devoutly craving Pardon and Mercy for those Crimes which they had committed in
this behalf. And then having sworn them to stand to the Commands of Holy
Church, and to perform the Penance that should be Enjoined them; his Grace did
Absolve them, imposing on them, and each of them, a wholesome Penance, after the
manner of the Fault, viz. That on the Sunday next, the said Penitent should
leisurely go barefooted and bare-headed, in an Humble and Devout Manner, a
Procession to the Collegiate Church of Wengham, each of them bearing on their
shoulders openly a Sack full of Hay and Straw, with the mouths of the Sacks
open, so as the Hay and Straw may appear hanging out.

And to perpetuate the Memory of this Foolery, the Pictures of these poor men
doing this Ridiculous Penance, were entered in his Graces Register, a Copy of
which taken from the Original you have in Fox, with this Superscription, being
as it is probable the Words they were to say in their Procession.

This Bagful of Straw I bear on my Back,
Because my Lord's Horse his Litter did Lack;
If you be not good to my Lord Grace's Horse,
You are like to go Barefoot before the Cross.
In the 11 th. Year of King Henry the 4 th. The Commons of England in
Parliament, perceiving how abominably the Clergy Monks, Friars, etc. abused
those vast Revenues which they Enjoyed to all kind of Pride and Licentiousness,
Preferred a Bill to the King, to take away their Temporal Lands, and to Employ
the same to the better Advantage and Safety of the Kingdom: Alleging, that the
Temporailties then in the Possession of Spiritual Men, amounted to Three
hundred and twenty three thousand Marks by the Year. But as the Clergy had
mainly Assisted that Prince to Usurp the Crown, so he did not think it safe to
disoblige them at that juncture: and therefore put off this Bill with a Le Roy
S'avisera. And about Two Years after, the said King Henry dyed, viz. the 2 d.
of March 1413. in the 46 th. Year of his Age: to whom succeeded his Son then
near 30 years of Age, by the name of Henry the Fifth.

By the Preaching of Wickliff and his Followers, the Eyes of great numbers of
the People were in some measure enlightened to see the Errors and False
Doctrines then obtruded in the Church, which much Incensed the Prelates with
Rage; and particularly observing, that Sir John Old-Castle, a valiant Religious
Knight of Kent, (and who in the Right of his Wife was Lord Cobham) to be a
great Favourer of that Doctrine, they resolve to take him to task; but first of
all, Complain of him to the King, in the first Year of his Reign, who sent for,
and discoursed him; to whom the Lord Cobham declared his Loyalty and Obedience:
but added, That as touching the Pope and Prelates he owed them neither Suit nor
Service, for that by the Scriptures he knew the Pope to be Antichrist, etc.
Upon which, the King would talk no further with him.

Then Arundel the Archbishop began to Cite him, before him, and not being
obeyed, Pronounced him guilty of Contumacy; at last the Lord Cobham, drew up a
Confession of his Faith, being an Explanation of the Apostles Creed, and very
Orthodox; with which he repaired to the Court, and humbly tendered it to the
King, but he refused to receive it; and by the Kings Commandment, he was sent
to the Tower: and in the 23 d. of Sept. 1413. Convened before the Archbishop,
and the Bishops of London and Winchester. The chief Objections against him
were, That he held Erroneous and Heretical Opinions in these Four Points, viz.
Touching the Sacrament. Touching Penance. Touching Images. And touching
Pilgrimages.

Therefore he delivered in to the said Bishops a Writing Indented, containing
his Opinion in each of these Particulars; which not being long, we shall here
recite Verbatim.

I John Old-Castle Knight, Lord of Cobham, Will, That all Christian Men, Weet
and Understand, that I Clepe Almighty God into Witness, that it has been, now
is, and ever with the help of God shall be, mine intent and my will to Believe
faithfully and fully all the Sacraments that ever God Ordained to do in Holy
Church: and moreover to declare me in these four Points, I Believe, that the
most Worshipful Sacrament of the Altar is Christ's Body in the Form of Bread,
the same Body that was Born of the Blessed Virgin our Lady Saint Mary, done on
the Cross, Dead and Buried, the Third Day Ros^ from Death to Life, the which
Body is now Glorified in Heaven.

Also as for the Sacrament of Penance, I believe that it is needful to every
man that shall be Saved to forsake Sin, and do due Penance for Sin before
done, with true Confession, very Contrition, and due Satisfaction as Gods Law
limiteth and Teaches, and else may he not be Saved: which Penance, I desire
all Men to do.

And as of Images I Understand, that they be not of Believe, but that they were
Ordained since they believe was zewe of Christ, by sufferance of the Church, to
be Calenders to Lews Men, to Represent and Bring to mind the Passion of our
Lord Jesu Christ, and Martyrdom and good Living of other Saints: and that who
so it be, that does the Worship to dead Images that is due to God, or puts
such hope or trust, in help of them, as he should do to God, or has Affection
in one, more than in another, he does in that the greatest Sin of Maumetrie.

Also I suppose this fully, That every Man in this Earth is a Pilgrim toward
Bliss, or toward Pain: and that he that Knows not, ne will not Know, ne Keep
the Holy Commandments of God in his Living here (albeit that he be go on
Pilgrimages to all the World, and he die so) he shall be Damned: he that
knows the Holy Commandments of God, and Keeps them to his End, he shall be
Saved, though he never in his Life go on Pilgrimage, as Men now use to
Canterbury or to Rome, or to any other Place.

The COURANT.
Papist and Tory. Tory. WEll, and how go Cases now?


Papist. Not altogether so well as we expected. The heat against Dissenting
Heretics in many places begins to Cool; not can we get the people to believe,
That Godfrey Murdered himself.


Tory. Murdered himself! Why Thompson Number. 131. talks as if he were still
alive, and expected next fair Wind. For he says, the Truth of his Two
Sham-Letters will be as effectually proved, as the Appearance of the
Viscountess Cambaen's Steward did clear that business. Which can no otherwise
so effectually, nor indeed, at all be done; without Sir Edmund Bury's appearing
alive again; and indeed, I have often wondered that the Church which boasts of
Miracles for one of her Notes, has not all this while wrought One, by raising
that Gentleman again to Life, which undoubtedly would destroy the suspicion of
the Plot for ever.


Pap. Tush! I may tell you as a Friend, we are better by half at Raising of
Lies, than at Raising the Dead. This Godfrey's Ghost always haunts us, and all
the skill of the South-sayer Gadbury, the Hagg Celier, or our Saterdotal
Conjurers cannot tell how to Lay it. How many Devices have we started to Evade,
not the Guilt, but the Scandal of having Murdered him. Once we would have put
it upon the Earl of D. to which purpose we scattered about a Libel, called
Reflections, etc. But that not taking, comes in Macgrath and his Crew, and they
were for Swearing, That he hanged himself, and his Man Mr. Moor cut him down.
This being likewise Confuted, we revive our first story, and Now we would make
the World think, he Murdered himself with his own Sword.


Tory. If you had left the Management of this Intrigue to Roger, he would have
dispatched it better by half, than Natt. for to speak Truth, all the Priests are
but Bunglers to him.


Pap. O, but he had formerly given it under his hand, That he did not in the
least doubt, but Sir Edm. Godfrey was Murdered by Papists.


Tory. No matter for That, He shall unsay it again for Two pence, and prove,
that they were Presbyterians killed him; and then we will have a new Set^ of
Abhorrencies go about, to Abominate, Detest, and Defy John Calvin and all his
Works. This were somewhat to ^he purpose; but to come as Natt. does, with Ifs
and ands, If Sir E. B. Godfreys Body were full of Blood. If his Nostrils, etc.
were fly blown. If his Body stunk, and Cakes of putrified Blood were found in
his Clothes, etc. Well, what then? Why then, if all this were true, Natt.
Thompson is a Liar, for Printing in October 78. a Narrative upon his own
personal view, quite contrary to all these Assertions. But Friend Natt. the
Whiggs have often told you, That these Suggestions are All notorious Lies,
forged out of a devilish Design to Conceal Murder, and stifle Treason, etc. and
they have Challenged you to produce the Witnesses that you boast of, and you
have not been able to name One, except it be Mr. W. and him the very next Week
you u^braid with Tankard stealing.


Pap. Well! well, a little patience, we have a parcel of Witnesses on the
Stocks, and as soon as we can Equipp and Rigg them something may be done.


Tory. Well, go on and prosper, I hear Natt. is like to have but a hard Bargain
of it. But I am for Sam's Coffee-house to wait on the Guide to the Inferior
Clergy, the Reverend Squire Roger; how neatly he comes off, about saying, That
he would not License a Narrative of Sir Ed. B. Godfreys Murder for fear of
offending some Great Persons at White Hall.


Pap. Well! what says he to that, I hear it is Sworn against him.


Tory. Why he says, What if the Printer do swear it, it is not the first time
that a Perjured Rascal has Sworn against L'Estrange.


Papist. Yes, and in the same Observator Number. 114. is very angry with some
body, for declaring, That he would rather believe Prance [he should have added,
and Three more] upon Oath, than Mr. L'Estrange's single Protestation on the
Sacrament. Well, if the World can meet with no better proofs than these, and
his Preface to the Proposals for Reunion with the Church of Rome, to prove,
L'Estrange no Roman Catholic, I shall still have the Charity to esteem him
One, and so my Service to him.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 31. 1682.
Nulla Ratione fieri potest, ut in recte factis effugias Invidiam. Quis enim
Umbram effugiet Invidiae, nisi pariter and Virtutis Lucem effugerit?
The Story of Sir John Old-Castle continued. A severe Law against Lollards. A
note touching the Oath of Sheriffs. The strange manner of putting Sir John to
Death. Tyburn, whence the Word derived. Sir John vindicated from Treason, and
the Imputation of Debauchery, the reason of that latter Scandal.
OUr last acquainted you with the Grounds of Sir John Old-Castle's Troubles,
and what an honest Christian Answer he gave in Writing to the Bishops, touching
the Four Articles whereon principally they accused him: yet therewith they were
nothing satisfied, but would needs have a more direct Answer, and giving him
time to consider of it, that he might know how to please them, sent him a silly
Blasphemous Scroll containing their Creed, and Determination in those Points,
which was as follows;

First, The Faith and Determination of Holy Church touching the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar is this; That after the Sacramental Words be once spoken
by a Priest in his Mass, the material Bread, that was before Bread, is turned
into Christ's very body. And the material Wine that was before Wine, is turned
into Christ' s very Blood. And so there remains in the Sacrament of the
Altar, from thenceforth no material Bread, nor material Wine which were there
before the Sacramental Words were spoken. How believe you this Article?

Secondly, Holy Church has Determined, That every Christian Man living here
bodily upon the Earth, ought to be shriven to a Priest Ordained by the Church,
if he may come to him. How feel ye this Article?

Thirdly, Christ Ordained St. Peter the Apostle to be his Vicar here on Earth,
whose See is the Holy Church of Rome: and he granted that the same Power which
he gave unto Peter, should Succeed to all Peter's Successors, which we now call
Popes of Rome; by whose Power in Churches particular, be Ordained Prelates, as
Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Curates and other Degrees more, whom Christian
Men ought to obey, after the Laws of the Church of Rome: This is the
Determination of Holy Church. How feel ye this Article?

Fourthly, Holy Church has Determined, That it is Meritorious to a Christian
Man to go on Pilgrimage to Holy Places; and there especially to Worship Holy
Relics and Images of Saints, Apostles, and Martyrs, Confessors, and all other
Saints besides, approved by the Church of Rome. How feel ye this Article?

I cannot say, whether the Lord Cobham on the Receipt of this Scrole did more
admire, or pity their Blindness. But on the Twenty fifth of September in the
before mentioned Year 1413. he was again Convened before them; where the
Archbishop telling him, That he was Cursed, and adviseing him to desire
Absolution: The Knight replied, God had said by his Holy Prophet, Maledicam
Benedictionibus vestris. Mal. 2. 2. Which is as much as to say, I will Curse
where you Bless. And afterward kneeling down on the Pavement, and lifting his
hands toward Heaven, he said, I here Confess me unto thee my Eternal Living
God, That in my frail Youth I Offended thee most grievously, in Pride, Wrath,
and Gluttony, Covetousness and Letchery, and many Men have I hurt in my Anger,
and done many horrible Sins, for which, Good Lord, I ask thee Mercy. And then
weeping bitterly, he said to the People, who in great Numbers flocked to hear
his Examination, -- Behold good People, for the breaking of God's Law, and his
great Commandments, they never yet Cursed me, but for their own Laws and
Traditions most cruelly do they handle me, and other Men. -- And being
questioned by the Archbishop about his Belief, he Answered, -- I Believe fully
and faithfully the Universal Laws of God; I Believe that all is true which is
contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Bible. Then proceeding to Examine him,
touching the Four Articles before specified, A Long Discourse happened, (which
you may Read (and worth reading it is) in Fox, but too tedious to be here
Recited,) his Answers were quick and pertinent, and amongst others he has this
Expression, -- Rome is the very Nest of Antichrist, and out of that Nest come
all the Disciples of him, the Pope is the Head, the Prelates, Priests, and
Monks are the Body; and these pil'd Friars are the Tail.

In fine, they proceeded to a Definite Sentence against him, whereby they
Condemn him, as a most pernicious, detestable, and obstinate Heretic; and
order him to be delivered over to the Secular Power to be put to Death: in
pursuance whereof, he was carried back to the Tower; from whence he made some
means shortly after to escape, and remained for near Four Years in Wales, till
he was taken and put to Death, as by and by we shall acquaint you.

This Escape of his enraged the revengful Clergy, and therefore a Sham-Plot was
set on foot to bring all his Friends, and whoever had any favor for Wickliffs
Doctrine into a general odium and danger. In those days it seems St. Giles's
Fields were a Woody lonesome place, full of Bushes and Thickets, and very
probably being so near the Town, many good People not daring for fear of
Discovery to Assemble in the City, might meet there for the Worship of God, and
hearing his Word: This (according to the Common Construction of Malice) is
Rumored to be a Conspiracy against the Government, and upon this suggestion
our Historians (who by the way, either were Monks, or such as borrow from those
that were) came thither at Midnight, and finding some persons there, caused
them to be Apprehended, and shortly after Sir Roger Acton, and several others
of them; ( Parsons in his Second Part of Three Conversions, page 197. says
Thirty seven; but Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle fo. 177. says but Twenty
eight) were Executed, for the pretended Treason.

And to push home the matter, in a Parliament held the next Year, They obtain
an Act of Parliament [2 Hen. 5. Ca. 7.] with this frightful Preamble -- For as
much as great Rumors Congregations and Insurrections here in the Realm of
England by diverse of the Kings Liege-people* as well by them which were of the
Sect of Heresy commonly called (...), as by other of their Confedracy,
Excitation, and Abetment now of late were made, to the Intent to Annul,
Destroy, and Subvert the Christian Faith, and the L^w of God, and Holy Church,
within this same Realm of E^gland; and also to destroy the same our Sovereign
Lord the King and all other manner of Estates of the same Realm of England, as
well Spiritual as Temporal; and also all manner of Policy, and finally, the
Laws of the Land: The same our Sovereign Lord the King to the Honor of God and
in Conservation and For^ification of the Christian Faith, and also in Salvation
of his Royal Estate, and of the Estate of all his Realm, w^^ling against the
Malice of such Heretics and Loll^rds, to provide a more open Remedy and
Punishment, etc. has Ordain^d, That the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of
each ^ench* Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, etc. shall take an Oath to Root
out, and Destroy all manner of Heresies and Errors, commonly called
Lollardries; And that all persons Convict of H^^esie, by the Ordinary, shall
forf^it all their Lan^^s and Tenements, Goods and Chattels.

So that by this Law, the poor People were in as bad ease for Heresy, as if
they had Committed Treason or Murder; they must lose both (...) and ^state,
only here was no Corruption of (...) and it is o^s^rvable, that pursuant to this
Act, there wa^ even since the Reformation this Clause in the Sheriff, Oath,
viz. -- Ye shall do all your pain and diligence to Destroy and make to Cease
all manner of Heresies and Errors ^^mmonly called Lollers within your
Bayliffwick. [See Book of Oaths, p. 27.] And so it continued to the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the First: and then, viz. the Fourth of December
1625. it was by direction of the Kings Council Reformed, and that Clause
omitted.

But now it is time to return to speak of Sir John Old-Castle, he had now
sheltred himself about Four years in Wales, and though the King at the Prelates
Instigation had set forth A Proclamation Promising a Thousand Marks, to any
that should bring him in; yet ( says Baker) so generally was his Doctrine
favored, that the Kings offer was not much regarded; till at last, he was
taken by the Lord Powis, and sent Prisoner up to London, and being in the
Interim Outlawed for the aforesaid pretended Treason, he was drawn to the Place
since called Tyburn, and as his Crime was represented double, so likewise was
his Punishment, being both Hanged and Burnt, the first as a Traitor, and the
last as an Heretic; and it is said, several others in those times, were served
in like manner; insomuch, That some have deduced the Etymology of Tyburn, from
those two Words, Ty and burn, the Necks of Persons being tied thereunto, whose
Legs and lower Parts were Consumed in the Flames.

Having given this Succinct Relation of this Affair of Sir John Old Castle, I
am not Ignorant what rubbs have been thrown in the way, and Scandals raised
upon his Memory, by Parsons the Jesuit, and others, which are reducible unto
Two sorts, viz. 1 st. That he was a Traitor to his Sovereign. 2 ly. That he was
a Drunken Companion, or Deb^uchee.

As to the First, being a very material and heinous Charge, we shall refer the
Confutation thereof to our next Packet. But this last being as groundless as
Trivial we will dispatch it at present.

That Sir John Old-Castle was a Man of Valor, all Authentic (though
prejudiced) Histories agree, That he was a Gentleman, both of go^d Sense, sober
Life, and sound Christian Principles, is no less apparent by his Confession of
Faith, delivered under his own hand, (Extant in Fox,) and his Answers to the
Prelates. But being for his Opinions hated by the Clergy, and suffering such an
Ignominious Death; Nothing was more obliging to the then Domineering
Ecclesiastic Grandee^, than to have him represented as a Lewd Fellow; in
Compliance thereof to the Clergy the Wits (such as they were) in the succeeding
Ages, brought him in, in their Interludes as a Royster, Bully, or Hector: And
the Painter borrowing the Fancy from their Cozen Poets have made his Head
commonly an Ale house Sign with a Brimmer in his hand; and so foolishly it has
been Tradition'd to Posterity.

Nor is this our private Conceit, but the Observation of that Learned and
Ingenious Divine, the Reverend Doctor Fuller, who in his Church History of
Britain, Lib. 4. fol. 168. has these words -- Stage-Poets have themselves been
very bold with, and others very merry at, the Memory of Sir John Old-Castle,
whom they have fancied a Boon Companion, a Jovial Royster, and yet a Coward to
boot, contrary to the Credit of all Chronicles, owning him a Martial Man of
Merit: The best is, Sir John Falstaff, has relieved the Memory of Sir John
Old Castle, and of late is substituted Buffoon in his place; but it matters as
little what petulent Poets as what malicious Papists have Written against him.
-- The spightful Calumnies of the Latter we shall wipe off in our next.

The COURANT.
Truman and Tory. Truman THe Business I was about to tell you, was this; --
After the Discovery of the late Popish Plot, a Gentleman at the desire of an
Eminent Bookseller in Fleet Street Wrote a Brief History of all the Papists
Bloody Persecutions, Plots, and Massacres throughout Europe: This Manuscript
was carried by the Bookseller to Mr. L' Estrange to License, which being
unwilling to do, he Cavill'd at it, after he had kept it some time in his
hands, that the Author had not Quoted the Authors or Books whence he had taken
the Relations, and unless that were done he would not License it. The Gentleman
at the Booksellers desire, made all the Quotations punctually and set them in
the Margent, and the Copy was again carried to L'Estrange, who nevertheless,
Resolving not to License it, put off the Bookseller with many delays near Three
Months; and at last, told him in plain terms, It was not fit to make the
Breach wider, betwixt the Papists and Us, and there were too many of such kind
of Books already: Neither could he get the Copy out of his hand.


Tory. Perhaps L'Estrange kept it, that he might prevent its being Licensed by
any body else.


Trum. This I Am sure, The Bookseller lost his Season, Copy, and Charge of
Writing it, for this Man's A^britary Pleasure.


Tory. But what then did the Author of the Book do?


Trum. The Gentleman followed the business so Close, threatening to take his
course at Law, that at last he got the Copy; and without any Alteration,
carried it to one of my Lord the Bishop of Londons Chaplains, who immediately
Licensed it; wondering Mr. L'Estrange should Refuse to License so useful a Book,
which was afterward Printed with that License at the Authors own Charge; under
the Title of -- The Antichristian Principle fully Discovered, in a Brief and
true Account of all the Hellish Plots, Bloody Persecutions, etc.


Tory. Prithee let us leave talking of L'Estrange, you do so worry him with
Pamphlets, that the Gentleman swears and vows has not time to Write against the
Papists; but if you would but let him alone, you should see how he would Swing
them off.


Trum. Yes, as he has done in his Preface to Proposals for Reunion. -- But Pray
have you seen a Sheet called, Reason^ why all good Christians should observe
the Holy Fast of Len^.


Tory. Yes, it is Printed for What-dee-call-him in Corn^^^ The Author is afraid
Care will Calumniate him for a Papist in Masquerade.


Trum. No truly, I heard Care say the other day at a Coffeehouse, That he does
not take the Gentleman for a Masquerader, but for a downright Popish Priest;
and besides, that if there were no Popery, yet there is abundance of Felony in
the Pamphlet: for you must note, in the Year 1677. There was a Book of Six
Sheets and an half, Entitled, The Holy Fast of Lent defended against all its
Prophaners; without any Printer or Booksellers Name to it, sold by Papists, and
owned by them. Now comes this little Squirt of an Author, and after a new
Preamble of half a score Lines, with a Relishing touch on Mr. Hickeringil and
Care, steals his whole Pamphlet out of That. As for Example, his Second page,
is page Nine; of the Large one. His Third page, is page Eleven; of that. His
Fourth, is page Twelve, and Thirteen; of the other. His Seventh page, is to be
found page Forty one, of the other: And so all the rest.


Tory. But have you seen my Lord of E's Book, called, The Paschal Fast?


Trum. Yes, I have seen it, and shall say nothing to That at present. But as to
this whissling Pamphlet, the best Answer methinks will be, that of the Statute
5 Eliz. Ca. 5. -- Be it Enacted, That whoever shall, by Preaching, Teaching,
Writing, or open Speech, notify, that any Eating of Fish, or forbearing of
Flesh is of any Necessity for the saving the Soul of Man; Or that it is the
Service of God, such Persons shall be Punished, as spreaders of False News.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 6. 1682.
In Bonos licet plerumque cadit Viros, ut Calumniis impetantur, non diu tamen
durant tales Eclipses; sed Sol veritatis illustrioribus apparebit Radiis; Et
Memoria Justi erit in Aeternum.
The Treason alleged against Sir John Oldcastle inquired into. Parsons the
Jesuit answered. Remarkable Circumstances Considered, evincing as well Sir
John's Innocence, as Sham-practice in the Proceedings against him.
I proceed now to Vindicate the memory of that (as I charitably believe)
Faithful Servant and Blessed Martyr of Christ, Sir John Oldcastle, from the
foul Guilt of Treason. Mr. Fox is very Elaborate on this subject, in answer to
Alanus Copus, but as I shall sum up the most material of his Arguments, so I
shall add several others which to me seem of great weight. Whereof some are
General and previous considerations. As,

1. It appears that before Sir John Old castle was questioned by the Bishops,
he was so far from being a Malecontent or addicted to Sedition or Disloyal
Conspiracies, that on the contrary he was much in the Kings Grace and favor,
so that the Prelates durst not Convene him without first complaining to the
King, for fear of his Majesty's displeasure, and when they had acquainted him
therewith, his Majesty kindly sent for him, and discoursed him, persuading him
to submit to the Bishops, etc. all which argue^ that he was then of
unquestioned Loyalty, else the King would never have Condescended to such a
particular care and familiarity.

2. There was no pretense then of any Charge of disloyalty, or any Treason or
Conspiracy brought or alleged against him by his Adversaries, but only for
Heretical Opinions. And presently after Sir John was sent to the Tower, and
there was kept close Prisoner, and so could have no time before, nor
opportunity then to Contrive such a ^ormidable Insurrection as is laid to his
Charge: Nor could he do it after he made his escape, for all Historians agree,
he fled into Wales, and lived there several years, so that he could not be
present with the pretended Conspirators in St. Gileses Fields.

3. It has in all Ages been the method of all Persecutors to blacken the
Servants of God tho suffering purely for the Testimony of a good Conscience,
with the odious Titles of Traitors, Rebels, and disturbers of the Civil
Government. Of our Blessed Lord himself, they reported that he was an Enemy to
Caesar; of his Holy and peaceable Apostles -- These are they that turn the
World upside down. So in the primitive and succeeding times, Nemesion an
Egyptian Martyr, was first accused for a Thief, and when that could not be
proved, was by the same Judicature, Condemned for a Christian, and yet was
scourged twice as much as the other Felons, and at last burned amongst the
Thieves, although he never was Thief or Felon. Against Cyprian it was
slanderously alleged by no less man than Galenus Maximus the Proconsul, Quod
diu Sacrilega, etc. That he had long lived with a mind full of Sacrilege, and
had gathered to him men of wicked Conspiracy.

4. The only Historians of those times were Monks, who were Sir John's most
bitter Enemies, and therefore no wonder if they draw him in an hideous and
frightfull shape. Some of their Lies you shall have particularly examined by
and by. -- But now let us hear the Effect of the story as they themselves (tho
much disagreeing in Circumstances) related it, and as the Indictment against
Sir Roger Acton and others imports, viz.

That after Sir John escaped out of the Tower (which Parson^ 2. part of the 3.
Conversions p. 247. says was about the Feast of St. Simon and Jude) several of
his friends and Favorers on the 10 of January 1413-14. Assembled in the
Thickets in St. Gileses* fields, with an intent to destroy the King and his
Brothers, and set up Sir John as Regent, and that the King keeping his
Christmas at Eltham in Kent about 6 Miles from London, having notice, went
PRIVATELY [ Parsons as aforesaid p. 197] at midnight, and took several of them,
amongst whom were, Sir Roger Acton, John Brown Gentleman, and John Beverly a
Preacher, who with about 30 more [for they do not agree in the number] being
forthwith Tried were Condemned of Treason and Hanged, and Sir Roger Drawn
hanged and Buried under the Gallows, and Sir John Oldcastle being put into the
same Indictment and not being found, was outlawed for the said Fact, and so
being taken 4 or 5 years after was upon that outlawry without any further Trial
or Judgment Hanged and Burnt. This is the Tale -- The Credit of which depends
partly upon the Testimonies of Historians, and partly upon that of the Records
of the Commission and Indictment. We shall consider each of these, whereby the
Reader will more clearly perceive how Improbable it is in all its parts and how
ill laid together in the whole.

1. As to the Historians, Thomas of Walsingham is the first whom all latter
Authors follow as a Flock does the Bell-weather, and when we have told you that
he was a Benedictine Monk of St. Albans, you may easily make Judgment of his
Sincerity, and what truth there is in those who take matters from him upon
trust. Amongst the rest I observe the Jesuit Parsons makes great use of John
Stow's Testimony, and indeed take notice of any Popish Author speaking of
modern English History, you shall find commonly Stow's Chronicle strutting his
Margin; this made me wonder why they should make choice of him, who was but a
mean Mechanic (being by Trade a Tailor, and ignorant of the Latin Tongue)
rather than so many other Learned Authors, till I suppose at last I hit upon
the reason, in a Treatise of Dr. Matthew. Sutclife, (afterward Dean of Exeter)
Entitled A Threefold Answer etc. to Parsons 3 Conversions; Printed Anno. Dom.
1606. where p. 3. That Reverend Author (who no doubt being Contemporary with
Stow had good grounds for his Assertions) says -- John Stow is a simple
Story-writer and a worse Protestant, For it is well known that certain crafty
Companions and enemies of Relion were too much Conversant with him to write
truly in these matters. And p. 24. Stow has the most part of his Lies
concerning the Lord Cobham, [ alis Sir John Old castle] out of Walsingham,
which understanding he understood (...), being Latin, and he a mere English
Tailer. -- Now it was no difficult thing if he Employed persons Popishly
Affected to Translate for him; for them to Impose upon his Ignorance what would
make for their Cause, and then twit us with the noise and pretended Testimony
of a Protestant Author.

Secondly that which might lead some Historians into an Error, was that in the
second year of this King Henry the 5. an Act was made (part of this we recited
in our last) That all Convicted of H^resy should forfeit all their Lands and
Goods, wherefore since they were to lose both Life and Estate, the noise went
that Haeresy was then made Treason, tho indeed it was not so. I will give an
Instance or two of such misled Authors. Thomas Walden in the Prologue of his
first Tome to Pope Martin has these words speaking of this very business, Nec
Mora Longa processint qui Statutum, etc. Nor was it long, but it was publicly
Enacted by a Statute, that all the Wicklevists as they were Traitors to God, so
should also be accounted Traitors to the King. So Roger Wall of the Acts of
King Henry 5. Statuit et decrevit ut quot quot Illius Se^tu quae dici^^r
Lollard^rum, invenirentaer aemuli et fautores, eo facto Rei Proditorij Criminis
in Majest^tem Regiam haberenter. He established and Decreed (says he) That all
that should be found Embracers or favorers of the sect which is called
Lollards, should for that only Fact, be Adjudged Guilty of the Crime of Treason
against the Kings Majesty: And Polidore Virgil in the 22 Book of his History,
harps upon the same string, declaring that all the Followers of Wickliffes
Doctrine were deemed Hosts Patriae, Enemies of their Country, which is all one
as to say Traitors. And yet all this while the Statute does not make them
Traitors, nor speak any thing of putting them to Death [for in case of being
Convict of Haeresy and refusing to Abjure, they were already to be burnt by the
Statute of 2 H 4. Ca. 15.] But it being so vulgarly taken, as appears by these
Examples, It Is no wonder that knowing Sir John Old-castle to be convicted for
what they called Haeresy and that he was Executed, they delivered to posterity
that he was Executed for Treason, as Imagining Haeresy to be Treason by the Law.

In the next place as to the Records, I willingly acknowledge there is no kind
of humane Testimony that ought to challeng a greater Reverence Probant et non
Probantur; yet even Records themselves are liable to be falsisied, and whether
sometime of that kind is not to be suspected here, may still be a question;
there being not a few Symptoms of Fraud and ill practice. As,

1. The Commission issued to Indict and Try them bears Date the 10 th of
Jannuary, 1414. which was on Wednesday next after the Epiphany [or Twelfth day]
And by the Record of the Indictment it not only appears, that they were the
very same day Indicted and the Bill found [which is very much that a Court
should sit the very same day the Commission Authorizing them, bears date; for
what time was there then for summoning a Jury,] etc. But also in the same
Indictment it is averred that the very same 10 th of January too was the day on
which the aforesaid Conspirators (to the number of Twenty Thousand) were so in
Warlike manner assembled in St. Gilses-fields. See both the Records in Fox
fol. 529. Which being so, one would expect rather to hear of Commissions Issued
not so much to try them, as to raise Forces to suppress them; Inter Arma silent
Leges, twenty Thousand Rebels got together where not like much to value a
Commission of Oier and Termener.

2. In the Record of the Indictment it is said, per Sacramenta duodecim
Juratorum exstitit presentatum, by the Oaths of 12 Jurators it is presented.
But the names of the Jurors are ommitted, whereas I humbly Conceive, if any
such Indictment had been really and bona fide framed and found, the Jurors
names (as in all other cases) would have been here particularly Inserted in the
Record.

3. The Crimes alleged in this pretended Indictment are of several sorts, some
of them Extravagant and all very observeable, for tho there be some matters
Treasonable, to color the process; yet the bottom of all appears to be that
they were Enemies to the Church -- But take the very words of the Record, and
Judge of them your selves -- By the Oaths of 12 Jurors it is presented, that John
Oldcastle of Coulingin the County of Kent Chevaleir [ Note, tho he were styled
Lord Cobham in Right of his Wife, yet he was no Peer of the Land and others
vulgarly called Lollards who long have rashly held diverse Heritical Opinions
contrary to the Catholic Faith, and other manifest Errors repugnant to the
Catholic Law, to maintain such their Errors, not being able to Accomplish their
design as long as the Royal power and Regal State of our Lord the King, as well
as the State and Office of the Prelatick dignity within the Kingdom of England
should continue in prosperity, falsely and Treasonably Contriving as well the
State of the Kingdom as the State and Office of Prelates and the Religious
Orders within this Kingdom utterly to Annul, and our Lord the King, his
Brothers, the Prelates and other great men of the Realm to Kill. And to compel
the Religious Orders to leave divine Worship and the Observation of Religion,
and to follow worldly Occupations, and demolish both Cathedrals and Religious
houses and spoil them of their Goods, and to appoint the said Sir J. O. Regent
of the Realm, and to set up many Governments in the Realm as a people without
an Head, to the final destruction as well of the Catholic Faith and Clergy as
of the State and Majesty of the Royal dignity, did falsely and Traitorously
order and propose that he with many other Rebels unknown, to the Number of
20000 men from diverse parts of England Arrayed in Warlike manner should
Privately Rise, and on Wednesday next after Epiphany in the first year of the
King at the Parish of St. Gileses, etc. in a great field they unanimously came
together and met to fulfill such their wicked Intent, persevering therein to
Kill the King and his Brothers viz. Tho. Duke of Clarence, John of Lancaster,
and Humphrey of Lancaster, and also the Prelates and great men aforesaid, as
likewise to disinherite the King of his Realm, they came Riding into the said
Field, Arrayed after the manner of an Insurrection against their Allegiance, to
subdue our Lord the King, unless by him with a strong hand they had Graciously
been hindered.

These are the very words of the Indictment, which we the rather have repeated,
because the same was not Translated by Mr. Fox.

The COURANT.
Truman and Tory. Tory. And how fares our Friend Not?


Truem. Why truly the Lords of the Council (to use his own insolent Expression)
have put him in a way to prove his Letters about Sir E. B. G. murdering himself.


Tory. As how prithee?


Truem. By justly sending him and his two Vouchers to Newgate. Every thing you
know naturally tends to its Center, hence no doubt the impudent lie first came,
begot by the Stallion Popish Priests and Midwif'd by Dame Celier, and thither
it is now returned.


Tory. I Will tell you this is a great disappointment. There were Te Deums
intended to have been Sung by our Catholic friends, and Hundreds of us were got
to the Tavern to be drunk for joy, and now to be thus Balkt, verily as Monsieur
Coleman said -- There is no Trust in Man? Will not this fadg; then what shall
we do now,
What sham is next? O Roger where art thou?



Truem. Never trouble thy head with Roger, he is playing at Cross purposes. For
Example.


The Question is -- Mr. L'Estrange why did not you for eighteen years together
come to Divine service and receive the Sacrament according to the Established
Church of England.

The Answer is -- the Parson of Dionis Backchurch.

The Question is -- M. L'Estrange why did you refuse to License a Narrative
touching the manner of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys being found, and say you did not
know but you might offend some great people at White Hall.

The Answer is -- it is not the first time.

The Question is -- Mr. Le' Estrange is you are no Papist, why did you go to
Mass, and own your self to be a Member of that Church whereof the Pope is the
Head?

The Answer is Brass Screws.

The Question is -- Mr. L'Estrange why did you refuse to License an Innocent
Copy of Verses merely because therein it was said -- That from the Cells of
Jesuits and Monks there proceeded a brood to Riffle Subjects and to Murder
Kings?

The Answer is -- Original Copy.

The Question is -- Mr. L' Estrange why did you refuse to License both an
harmless and useful Historical Collection of Popish Massacres and Cruelties,
and say 'twas not fit to make the breach between us and the Church of Rome
wider? and this since the Discovery of the present Plot?

The Answer is -- Forty Eight, and pordage.

The Question is -- Mr. L'Estrange with what face could you affirm such a
notorious lie, that there were never above 50 Quakers at a time in the noisome
Little-Ease of Bristol?

The Answer is -- Sir John Knight and 300 Horsemen.

The Question is --

Tory. Prithee leave thy fooling -- I wonder you dare talk at this rate at this
time of day; a Catholic friend of mine sent me a Copy of Verses last post out
of Lancashire, i will read a stanza or two of them.


We must not Blabb, but only hint,
If all things fail the Divel's in it
Wait but a little longer
Our Plot will prove that it is no wonder
For Bones well set, (if broak asunder)
After do grow the stronger.
For mark ye well although our Plot
In its first Tract succeeded not,
Yet much we have got by it.
The Haereticks by shams and fears
Are set together by the Ears
Whilst Whigg and Tory fight.
The Tory he Swag^gers and Sings
Drinks the Dukes health before the Kings,
And damns to be Emphatick,
When he expresses wish and hope
To Kiss the Gouty Toe of Pope
Ere he will endure Fanatic
Then for our hot Tantivy Boys
That more with Oaths than prayers make noise
They Are Birds de^ile their Nest
Whose Priestcraft is preferment merely
Which or to get, or save they clearly
Will pass through any Test.
Our Friends are numberless to think on
The Dammee Blades and those that drink on
And Whore without all shame
The Crack-farts, Hectors, Atheists, Bulleys,
The Bankrupts, Poets, Sots, and Cullies,
And some I dare not name.
Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 14. 1682.
-- Livor post Fata quiescat Tum suus ex merito quemque tuatur Honos.
Some further Remarks on the Story of Sir John Oldcastle. An Epitaph offered to
his memory: The miserable death of his persecutor Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury, who made a Constitution against Reading the Scriptures.
LEt us go on to Examine the Matter of Treason charged on Sir John Oldcastle,
etc. And must request the Reader to Remind the Record of the Indictment,
recited in English in our last, in which besides the unaccountable omission of
the Jurors names and the improbability that the supposed Fact should be
Committed, and Commission to the Judges, and their Session, and the Conviction,
should all bear date and happen upon one and the same Numerical day, there are
these other Observables that present themselves.

1. It Is therein alleged that the design of these Imaginary Traitors in St.
Gilses Thickets was to make Sir John Oldcastle Regent, and why not rather King?
since the same Indictment charges him with design to kill the King. And yet if
he had a mind to be Regent, why should he design to kill the King, for then
presently his Regency must needs expire. The truth is, this very expression
renders it suspicious, that this pretended Indictment was ^obbled up afterward
by the Clergy or some of their Agents, during the Kings Absence in France, at
which time the Notion of setting up for a Regent might be probable. But when
this supposed Insurrection happened, the King was not gone, but lay at Eltham.

2. The number of the Rebels are said to be Twenty Thousand, and Arrayed in
Warlike manner; now it is very strange and improbable how so great a Number
could get together, and more strange that they should all be routed and
dispersed merely by the Kings coming to them into the Thickets, for we do not
read of any Army leavied by the King to oppose them: Nor do we hear of one
person killed, nor so much as a Broken Pate or a Bloody Nose in all this
terrible Insurrection; had there been such a Forces, their designs so horrid
against the Kings Life, he would have hardly ventured himself amongst them so
ill provided.

3. It would seem by this Indictment, that these Twenty Thousand Rebels were
all Horse men, for it says proditorie modo Insurrectionis contra Ligeanceas
suas Equitaverunt, they Treasonably after the manner of an Insurrection came
Riding, etc. Now this increases the Miracle, for 'twas a work of great time and
vast Expense to raise an Army of Twenty Thousand Horse; But besides, if they
were Horse what did they do in St. Gileses Thickets? Sure that was none of the
best places to Randevouz in; again, if they came Riding thus in Battle Array
Twenty Thousand strong, how does the other part of the Indictment hold water,
where it is said Privatim Insurgentes, Privately Rising; a Clause which shrewdly
intimates, that some of the Clergy have been tampering with this Indictment,
and that it was not drawn with much Advice of the Kings Learned Council at Law,
for they would never have thus contradicted themselves or inserted such
impertinent words as Privatim Insurgentes.

4. Nor is it less pleasant to consider, that there should be Twenty Thousand
Horse levied in open Rebellion to perpetrate the most horrid Treason that could
be Imagined, and these should be all discomfited, and such vast Numbers of them
taken, that our Monkish Historians talk of all the Prisons about London being
filled with them, and yet none of all their names known but Sir John Oldcastle,
(wh^^at the same time by the general Current of History seems too to have been
at the same time in Wales) Sir R. Acto^, Mr. Brown, and Beverly the preacher,
for so the Indictment says, Quam pluribus Rebellibus Ignotis, etc.

5. A most material exception to this pretended Indictment is, that therein the
Kings Brothers are styled John of Lancaster and Humphrey of Lancaster, whereas
in truth they then were, and ever since the 13 th year of their Father Henry
the 4 th had been Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, as you may read in Caxtons
Chronicle; now can any wise man imagine, that the Kings Council if they had
drawn this Indictment upon so great an Important an occasion, would have been
so negligent a^ sto omit those Princes Titles and only with an unpardonable
Rudeness call them John and Humphrey? -- Credat Judaeus Apella.

6. If the matter had been Treason, why were not the offenders executed in such
manner as in cases of Treason the Law requires; but we do not find that they
were Hanged drawn and quartered but only Hanged, which is not the Judgment in
Treason.

7. As for Sir John Oldcastle himself, after he was taken and brought upout of
Wales, which was about the year 1417. There being then a Parliament sitting,
the Records thereof do give this following account, viz. That Sir John
Oldcastle of Cowling in the County of Kent, Knight, being Out-lawd in the
King's Bench, and being Excommunicated before by the Archbishop for Haeresy,
was brought before the Lords, and having heard his Convictions, [It seems the
Haeresy was charged upon him there as well as the Outlawry] answered not
thereunto for his Excuse, upon which it was Adjudged that he should be taken as
a Traitor to the King and the Realm, and carried to the Tower of London, and
from thence drawn through the City unto the New Gallows in St. Gileses without
[the old] Temple Bar, and there to be Hanged and burned Hanging. In which
Proceedings we may note,

1. That he was never tried by his Peers, that is by any Jury, for he was but a
Commoner, not a Peer of the Realm, and suffered upon the Outlawry and
Excomunication, and therefore when we said in our last p. 123. That without any
farther Trial or Judgment he was Hanged and Burnt, we desire to be understood,
intended, of any Legal, common or ordinary Trial or Judgment according to the
Course of the Laws. For,

2. If he were duly Out-lawed for Treason, upon his being taken, there was no
need for carrying him before the Lords in Parliament. For by the very Out-lawry
he would have been Attainted, and without more ado should have had Judgment in
the Kings Bench as a Traitor. But it may justly be suspected that the Judges of
that Court, perceiving what kind of practices there had been in this case,
declined to be so far concerned therein, and therefore Certified the Record
into the Parliament, which they did, together with the Bishops Sentence of
Excommunication filed* to the Record. A method very strange and unpresidented.

3. It Is observable, that after all this, the Lords did pass such Judgment on
him as was not due to a Traitor, and though it be true, the Parliament might by
Act have Attainted him, and thereupon Ordained a special Judgment as they
should have thought good; yet since they did not so proceed, since he was
before Attainted by the Out-lawry, and thereupon (or else without any Color of
Law) suffered, I conceive their Lordships could not lawfully vary from the
common Judgment of Treason.

4. It is further to be noted, that in the Records of the said Parliament it is
added, that a motion was made, that the Lord Powis [one of the Ancestors no
doubt of that Popish Lord now in the Tower for High Treason] might be thanked
and Rewarded, according to the Proclamation, for his great pains of taking of
Sir John Oldcastle Knight, Haeretick; But the Roll there does not mention,
Traitor; so that it seems pretended Haeresy was his greatest, indeed for ought
we can perceive main, and probably (Except breaking Prison) his only Crime.

Yet we are not ignorant that the Old Monks, and the Modern Jesuit Parsons,
bring several other most false Accusations against him, as that he was an
Anabaptist and would have had all things in common, but this Calumny seems to
have no other grounds, than his complaining of the superfluity of the Clergy in
those timer and wishing that their abundance had been distributed to better
uses; nay, they blush not to write, Tanta praeditur fuit dementia ut putaret se
post trid^um a morte Resurrecturus, He was so madd, that he persuaded himself,
that he should Rise again the Third day, as another Savior of his Sectaries;
as Parsons 2 d. of his 3 Conversions p. 250. relates from Walsingham, or (as
Stow botches up the story) The last words that he spoke to Sir Tho. Erpingham
Adjuring him, that if he saw him Rise from Death to Life again the Third day,
he would procure that his sect might beat peace and quiet. Now let any man read
his papers and discourses in Fox, savouring of such firm piety, prudence and
sobriety of mind, and then judge how unlikely he was to be Guilty of such a
phrensical Extravagance. But possibly he might at his Execution, say that
though they so severely persecuted those. Truths which he bore Testimony to,
and sought by all means to suppress and bury the same, yet they would Rise
again, and his Doctrine be Revived. And from some such true words the Father of
Lies and his Journy-men the Monks, might take occasion to raise that wicked
scandal.

And now having thus fairly represented Sir John Oldcastles Case to posterity,
we take leave of his Manes, but that we may do it civily, tho the prejudice of
those times would afford him neither Tombstone nor Grave, yet certainly we my
be allowed to offer an Extempore Epitaph to his Memory.

On Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham who suffered December. 1417.
Rome's Old new fraud in Cobhams Fate we view;
The Heretics must still be Traitors too;
All Popish Sham-plots are not hatched of late;
Long since their Interest Culli'd in, the State;
For God, and for the King the Prelates Cried
But only meant their own Revenge and Pride.
Had the sly Meal Tub fadg'd, or Irish Oaths
Been Jury-proof, old Churches hated Foe's
Ere now, had been Old-Castled, Hanged and Burned;
And Loyalst Patriots into Rebels turned,
But Midwife Time at last brings Truth to Light
For after Death each man receives his Right.
Then sleep, brave Hero! till last Judgments day
Raising to Glory thy twice-martyr'd Clay
Romes malice, and thy Innocence display
But here we may note, that before the Execution of this nobleman, viz. in the
year 1414. his bitter Persecutor. Tho Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, who
originally caused his trouble, and Condemned him for Haeresy, and who in a
synod had forbidden the Scriptures to be translated into, or read in the
English Tongue, was taken away by a strange death, His own Tongue being so
swelled that for many days he could swallow no sort of sustenance and so was
starved to death. A most remarkable Judgment, that he who by his Canons forbad
the Food to the Soul, and had pronounced Sentence of Condemnation on many
Innocents was now both famish't and struck Dumb together. Thomas, Gasconous in
his Theological Dictionary thus plainly tells the story. Tho. Aruudel Cant.
Archiepiscopus sic Lingua Percussus erat, ut nec deglutire nec Loqui per
aliquot dies ante mortem suam potuerit, et sic tandem obiit. Atque Multi tu
nofieri putabant, quia v^rbum Alligasset, ne suo Tempore praedicatur. Tho
Arrundel Archb. of Canterbury, was so smitten in his Tongue that he could
neither swallow, nor speak, and so died, which was thought by many to come upon
him for that he restrained the word of God from being preached in his days.

The COURANT.
A CHARM against ROGERISM.
Triceps est Cerberus, ter ego te Despuo
Triplex est Eumenis, ter te ego Despuo
Vomas, dico vomas, ter vome and Improbam
Pectore purgato Rabiem ad Phlegetonta Remitte.
Enter Jesuit solus. NOW shall I turn Heraclitus Ridens, and split my sides
with laughing, to see how sweetly matters go on. It Is the hopefullest Spring I
have known or read of, above 100 years, and all our Projects are blythe and
blooming. How kindly do our Councils work and cully in the hood-winked crowd;
the French Monarch (our mighty Patron) plays a Game at Tick-tack with his
Holiness, and the World stares and gapes as if they were at Sharps. What if he
clip the Wings of the duller Orders? Let him go on and prosper, Roma interim
crescit Albae Ruinis; No matter for those swarms of Drones, our active Society
(if the Fools prove peevish and stubborn) may beg their Lands. Nor need we fear
the gripes of his Talons, since we have twisted our Interests inseparable with
his, for Campanella has shifted the Scene, and it is resolved in spite of
Providence, one Monarch and one Religion shall govern the Europaean World. They
are pitifully read in School craft that cannot modelize Divinity to each
complexion of Affairs; there lies a little spot on the Northwest corner of the
Map that has cost us many a pangful Thought, Father La-Chese long since
undertook the Conversion of those Infidels, and tho he met with some rubs,
despairs not in time to accomplish it. If one Broadside does not sink a
Vessel, another may, the Needle's in, and the Thread must follow. O Beata
Maria! into what Confusions have we put the Heretics amongst themselves? Well!
let Whig and Tory scuffle 'till their Hearts ache, whilst we tour aloft, like
the Vulture hovering over the Lion and Wild-boar in their Combatings, as hoping
to devour the Carcases of them both. O the Church! the Church! the Church by
Law established! There Is Music enough in that very sound to supersede the
office of the Organs. But then not one in forty Dreams what those words
signify in our Dictionary. Pshaw! Pshaw! you Dolt-heads! Verity is Unity;
there is but one Church in the World, and that is the Catholic, and Catholic
is Roman, and there is the Riddle unfolded. But how is this Religion by Law
established? We Will make That out I Will warrant you, you shall have enough of
Magna Charta. Is there any prescription against the Church? Shall any Laws
prevail against St. Peter's Right? Or indeed what power have Excommunicated
Heretics to make any Laws at all? All such Provisions are still-born, Ipso
facto void, as errant Felo's de se as we would make Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and
holy Mother Church unjustly disseiz'd, may lawfully make a Re-entry. Let Us
first down with the Dissenters, crush them, maul 'um, hang 'um if we can, or
ruin them at least, and then their Church of England shall have Polypheme's
courtesy. O Bristol! Bristol! thou have done gallantly! I could not but
snicker the other day to see a parcel of Wooden-shoe'd French Heretics that
had fled thither for shelter, how sillily they looked when they saw a parcel of
English Calvinists dragged out of their Meeting, and hurried to Gaol. But we
have a greater work in hand, it is a Protestant Plot must do our business, and a
Protestant Plot we will have, if it cost us as much as we got by burning of
London. There are a fresh Cast of Beuk-blawers listed, spick and span new ones,
never yet baulkt or blasted by an Ignoramus; they only want a little
Documentizing as to matter, persons, times, and places, (for all the rest they
remember right well;) I must away and Discipline them, and if they prove such
incorrigible Bunglers as our Irish Rascals, let 'um be damned blacker than
Luther.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 21. 1682.
Quae si cum sociis Stultus cupidusque bibisset,
Sub d^mina Meritrice fuisset turpis and excors
Vixisset Canis Immundus, vel amica Luto Sus.

The Grand Question, Whether the Church of Rome be in any kind to be esteemed a
Church of Christ? entered into, the Reasons why the same is here discussed. The
definition of the Church, and how divided.
HAving deduced our History somewhat below the year 1400. and being Arrived at
those times wherein our Ancestors in England first of all were brought to
Capital sufferings for the purity of Religion, and were (to use the Apostles
phrase Hebr. 12. 4.) forced to resist unto Blood, the wicked Impositions of the
no less cruel than Idolatrous Papal Hierarchy. It will be convenient if not
necessary to inquire what opinion we ought to have of the Church of Rome in its
present state. A task we undertake not merely for diverting the Reader, tho
sure variety, in all other things delightful, will not here be offensive, nor
the intermixing Polemicks with History be censured, since we find precedents of
it in the best and most approved Authors. But we do it for his satisfaction
too, that he may make the truer Judgment of those many Tragical Scenes, all
filled with fire and faggot, Blood and horror, Popish fury triumphant, and Pious
Innocence torn and mangled and Butchered with a thousand Barbarities. For
though to each Judicious peruser the very prospect of these Cruelties is enough
to satisfy him that these are the Talons of the Vulture, not the sweet
Breathings of the Holy Dove, practices of the Synagogue of Satan, not of the
Church of the meek and merciful Jesus, yet some hot and superficial Readers,
especially in this debaucht and unhappy Age, may be apt to say, Here Is a
Clutter indeed with a parcel of Peevish Fellows, what if they were burned or
hanged out of the way; whose fault was it? why would they not conform, and
honestly come to Church? if the Church of Rome be a true Church wherein a man
may go to Heaven, why did they trouble themselves and the world, and make a
Schism, and disturb the Government? you make a stir and call them Martyrs, but
for ought I know they were Follies Martyrs rather than Gods, and I remember I
have seen a Book Entitled Semper Iidem, or a parallel betwixt the ancient and
modern Phanaticks, Printed here at London with (I think) Authority, I am sure
publicly and without any trouble to the Bookseller Richard Lownds at the White
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661. which renders Oldcastle, Bishop Latimer,
Woodman, etc. as errant Whiggs and Raskals as ever lived; a sort of turbulent
Heretics that interrupted the Churches Tranquillity, and would needs be turning
the world upside down, though they knew neither why nor wherefore, etc.

Suppose one should meet a Spark of this metal, (and such frequently now adays
at every Coffee-house you may meet with,) is it not fit my honest Country men
should be ready provided to Confute his Folly, and do right to those Glorious
Worthies, who did not sacrifice their Lives to a sullen Obstinacy or factious
Freake, but for the pure truths of God (worth a million of Lives) and departed
from Rome because she was so far departed from God, that if they had further
accompanied her (afterdivine Grace had opened their eyes to see her
Abominations) they must necessarily have fallen into Eternal perdition.

To Demonstrate this (therefore) it will I think be not unworthy your while
(and presently too, lest the Disease come upon us before the Medicine be
provided, and black darkness surround us, e're every body be sufficiently
Acquainted with it is Hellish Nature) to consider the three points following,
viz.

1. Whether the present Church of Rome ought in any sort to be esteemed a true
Church of Christ?

2. Whether any person Living and Dying in the Communion of that Church, and
understanding her Doctrine and practices, and joining therein may (ordinarily)
be saved.

3. Whether any person ( as suppose a Protestant out of fear, compliance, etc.)
may be present at Mass understanding the same without committing of grievous
sin.

These Three particulars, we shall endeavor in this and some following Sheets,
to discourse of with all plainness and Candor, so far from any violation of
Charity, that we thereby only design a most necessary Caution to prevent poor
missed souls from precipitating themselves into endless Ruin and Destruction.

As to the first Quaery, touching the present Roman Churches being a Church of
Christ, two things are to be premised and explained.

1. What we mean in this debate by, Church of Christ.

2. What we understand by the Church of Rome.

1. The word Church taken in its full Latitude signifies, the whole company of
all those whom God by his word and spirit calls to the knowledge and profession
of his truth, and from its members being called forth and separated from the
rest of the world, that live in gross and avowed Atheism or Idolatry, without
the knowledge and acceptance of those supernatural verities, the Incarnation
and Crucifixian of the Son of God for the sins of men, upon the terms held
forth in the Gospel, it is termed the Church, in Greek (...), derived from the
verb (...), Evoco, to call out, or from.

The Church thus absolutely and simply considered in this Latitude is but one,
as the State and Company of the Kingdom of great Britain is but one, since all
and every one called to this Grace, of how different estate, qualities or
condition soever, belong one way or other to this Company; but in this Church
thus considered there are sundry differences and respects, that is, the persons
called to the Faith of Christ are of diverse sorts; for some part of the Church
is already reduced from this mortal life, and Crowned with that Glory,
whereunto they were called when here on Earth, and thence styled the Church
Triumphant, the other part is that which is successively abiding in this world,
which for that time, is called the Church Militant, because it lies as it were
in the Camp always alarmed, and fighting against Hells Triple League, the
world, the Flesh, and the Devil, under the Banner of our Lord the blessed
Jesus, and patiently waiting for the victory.

But amongst these latter, there are again two sorts. First such as are
effectually called, and these are the Elect only, whom God not only calls, but
chooses, by his free Grace, inspiring them to obey that calling, and to live
Holily worthy of such their vocation, and who shall infallibly be Saved in the
life to come, and this Company, we call the Invisible Church; because only God
knows who are His, and tho we see the men and by their fruits charitably hope
they are Gods Elect, yet to speak precisely no mortal eye can infallibly
discern them to be such, since many times the Bristol-stone glitters as bright
as the Diamond, and Hypocrites make as fair outward show as the real Saint. The
second sort therefore of the militant Church, are Hypocrites and ^n^ound
members, who are not effectually called, but disobey the truth whereof they
make profession.

These distinctions being thus premised, we proceed to acquaint you what we
mean by a true Church of Christ, and we shall do it in the very words of our
mother the Church of England in the 19 th Article of her Faith, -- The visible
Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithful men, in the which the pure word
of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly Administered according to Christ's
Ordinance in all those things that of Necessity are requisite to the same. So
that here we see wherever the word of God is sincerely preached and heard, and
the Sacraments Administered according to Christ's Institution, there is a Church
of God, for those are the marks whereby the Church may be known. So that the
visible Church, which is also Catholic [or Vniversal] under the Gospel (not
confined to one Nation as before under the Law) consists of all those
throughout the world that profess the true Religion. And particular Churches,
which are members thereof are more or less pure, according the doctrine of the
Gospel is taught and embraced, Ordinances Administered, and public Worship
performed more or less pure in them. And not only the purest particular
Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture and Error, but some may and
have so degenerated as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagoges of Satan,
tho yet there shall to the end of the world be a Church on Earth to Worship God
according to his will against whom the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.

Now whether the present Church of R^me be not one of these Apostatized
Adulterous Churches against whom such a Divorce is sued out, we shall proceed
to Inquire, as soon as we have told you what we mean by the Church of Rome. And
that is, The whole Church of Rome as it is a Body consisting of one vissible
head the Pope, and of all Papists wheresoever, Clergy, and Laity, professing
themselves members of that Head, and owning the Faith and Doctrine thereof.

This Body or Company, I say, is not in any sort to be accounted a true visible
Church of Christ, which I conceive will appear by diverse Arguments of which I
shall give you one at present.

That Church which over throws the main and proper cause of our Salvation is
no true Church of Christ.

But the Church of Rome overthrows the main and proper cause of our Salvation.

Therefore the Church of Rome is no true Church of Christ.

The Major I presume no man will deny, and for the Assumption it is notoriously
evident, for they have overthrown the principal and fundamental Article of
Justification, which is the Head and sum of all Religion; they err in the
Efficient Cause of our Justification, which is the free Grace and favor of
God, which they deny building it upon man's merit of Congruity, or works
preparatory and dispository to Justification, etc. Coupling it with man's
free will. They Err in the material cause Christ; Obedience, this they deny to
be our Obedience or the matter of our Justification. They Err in the Form of
our Justification, which it the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us.
They Err in the Instrumental cause, to wit, the Justifying Faith, denying is to
be a certain particular trust or Assurance in Gods mercy for the Pardon of our
Sins. They Err in the very Meritorious cause Christ our Redeemer, several ways
overthrowing all his Offices. They Err also in the final cause of
Justification, being the free Gift of Eternal Life, while they say the same is
merited by the Condignaty. They overthrow the very Fundamentals of Religion, by
denying the sufficiency of the Scriptures for the Rule of Faith, and the
necessity of its being known to Gods people. They deny the right use of the
Sacraments whilst they attribute unto them Grace ex opere operato, and teach
that their efficacy depends on the Intention of the Priest. They deny the truth
of Christ's humane Body by their absurd whimsey of Transubstantiation, and the
virtue of His only and all alone sufficient Sacrifice, by their propitiatory
Masses, etc. So that it is plain they have Corrupted or abandoned the main and
proper Fundamentals of Salvation, consequently has no Claim to the Title of a
Church of Christ.

THE COURANT.
Tory. HAVE you seen the famous Panegyric, the Sacrific^ to the Rising-Sun?


Truem. No, nor can guess what you mean. But I have heard, that amongst all
sorts of Idolaters, they were only a parcel of forlorn, servile, debauched,
effeminate, Hen-hearted, Chicken-soul'd Persians, that worshipped the Sun
rising. And since you mention that word, it puts me in mind what I read the
other day in a Pamphlet, Entitled, A warning against the dangerous practices
of Papists, written by one Thomas Norton in good Queen Bess's days, Anno 1586.
Let it be well-weigh'd ( says he) what they mean to the Realm, That under
color of Succeeding, so far undermine the Head of our Country, that they
convey the countenance, favor, and supportation of a great corrupt number of
such as may frame themselves any hope of Gain that way, to persons that by such
kindled Ambition may be the more hastily emboldened: This to do, is to show us
a Sun rising, to whose Worship they would fain draw us, from our Sun declining,
as they suppose. No, no, our Queen is our true Sun, and whatever shining Thing
they would set up in her time, is no right Sun, but an unlucky Comet. And it is
not yet Noon, I trust, with our Sun; or if it be, I hope yet God will lengthen
the day to our Sun, for his Honour-sake, as he did to Joshua, and rather have
all good Subjects so to hope, if the residue of that day may be so spent as
Joshuah spent it, and for which God did prolong it, viz. To rid the World of
God's Enemies. Let it be considered what Hopes, Anticipation, and most dreadful
Mischiefs, which I fear and abhor to name, the encouraging of such succeeding,
(which is the work of Papists) may minister where the only Person of our most
dear and precious Sovereign stands between them, and (their desired Effect)
the utter undoing of us all; and specially where the power of Revenge may by
possibility fall into their hands, for whose sake it should be attempted. It is
no small mischief, danger, and appalling of our Faith and Courage, when our
Prince must be defended against those that by possibility may aspire to be our
Princes themselves, and to (...) it upon good Subjects. -- I dispute no Titles,
I have no reach beyond our Queen. I can see nothing beyond our Queen (...) a
Chaos of Misery, therefore I am loath to look so far; my only care is, and all
good Subjects ought to be, for our Queens Majesty's Preservation. What other
Title soever be pretended, be it good or bad, if it shall once threaten danger
to the Queen's Majesty, whose Title and Governance we know to be true, and have
felt to be good, I wish it destroy^d and put out of hope, lest it hope too
soon, too much, too high, and join with too many. -- Thus the very syllables of
that Author.


Tory. Well! and what the Devil does all this signify? The idle Dream, I Will
warrant ye, of some seditious Puritanical Whig.


Truem. The Book, Sir, was printed by Authority, and seems but to express the
general fears and apprehensions Protestants were then in, from the prospect of
a Popish Successor. But the truth is, Mr. L'Estrange was a little too young to
be Licenser in those days.


Tory. Why, there is the business; Tempora mutantur, Protestants dread a Popish
Successor? I must tell you, Sir! that whoever is cautious against such a
Blessing, is Ipso facto, to be reputed, stigmatized, and prosecuted as a Whig,
a damned Phanatick, a Rascal, a Traitor, and infallibly an Enemy to the Church
of England as by Law established; and all this, if need be, we will have proved
as plain as the way to Dunstable in the next Observator.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 28. 1682.
Papae tempus adest, magno cum optaverit emp^um,
Intactam hanc Gentem, and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit. --

Arguments proving the Church of Rome not to be the true Church of Christ.
IN our last we Explained the Notion of a Church in its several Acceptations,
as far as was necessary; and offered one Reason (then) why the Roman Church was
not to be esteemed a true Church. We now proceed to Consider the same a little
further: And our Second Argument shall for the greater Authority be taken from
the Professed, Public Doctrine of The Church of England, (if the Book of
Articles and Homiles be allowed to Contain her Doctrine, which some Men's
Heterodoxies and bold Preachments of quite contrary Tenets, whilst they yet
vapor and boast themselves as the only true Churchmen, has rendered a Quaere.)

Argument 2. The true Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithful
Men, in which the pure Word of God is Preached; and the Sacraments duly
Administered, according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

But the Church of Rome is not a Congregation of Faithful Men, in which the
pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments duly Administered according to
Christ's Ordinance in all those things, that of necessity are requisite to the
same.

Therefore the Church of Rome is not a true visible Church of Christ.

The Major is the Express Words of the Nineteenth Article of the Church of
England. And least any should say, That we may indeed from hence conclude
Affirmatively, not Negatively, viz. That where these Marks are, There is a
Church; but not, that where they are not, there is no Church; be pleased to
take notice, That the Church of England delivers these Words by way of
Definition of a Church, describing it by the proper Marks: Now a Definition,
all that understand the Art of Reasoning know, is not only positive in it self,
but Exclusive and Negative, in regard of that to which it is Opposed.

The Min^r is also declared, and asserted by our Church in her Homilies: As for
Example, in That for Whit-sunday (part 2 d.) We have these Passages -- First,
It [speaking of the Church of Rome] wants these true and proper Marks of a true
Church; [having before mentioned these very Marks] For neither are they Built
upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, retaining the sound and pure
Doctrine of Christ Jesus; neither do they Order the Sacraments, or
Ecclesiastical Keys in such sort as he did first Institute and Ordain them.
Again, They want the Spirit of God; if it be possible to be there, where the
true Church is not; then it is at Rome. Again, He that is of God, hears Gods
Word; whereof it follows, That the Popes in not hearing Christ's Voice, do
plainly argue to the World, that they are not of Christ, nor yet possessed of his
Spirit. Thus the Homily! whereby I think this Argument is sufficiently
supported; and will appear Cogent to all such as own themselves So^^ of the
Church of England; and indeed it is pity any such should now be to be Informed,
That the Church of Rome is no true Church.

Nor is this Argument less strong in it self against the Papists: For the
Proposition is St. Paul's, Gal. 1. 8. That Man or Angel (and by parity of
Reason That Church) which teaches otherwise than the Apostles taught is
accursed: and whether such Church offend herein by adding to Christ's Doctrine,
or by detracting or taking from it, it is all one, the Crime is the same^ It Is
(...) another thing, another Gospel. For as for taking away, as the Apostle
says, Whoever shall keep the whole Law and ye^ offend in one point he is
Guilty of all, James 2. 10. So most truly too, says St. Ambrose in his Sixth
Book upon Luke, Negat Christum qui non omnia quae Christi sunt, Confitetur. He
denies Christ who does not confess and acknowledge all that Christ taught. And
for adding unto, the same Father Writing upon those words, Be not the Servants
of Men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. thus testifies, Servi hominum sunt qui Humanis se
subjiciunt Superstitionibus; They are the Servants of Men that submit
themselves to Humane. Traditions: And if they are the Servants of Men, they are
not the Servants of Christ: So St. Paul concludes, Gal. 1. 10. So that the
Proposition, as it is Asserted by the Church of England; so is it likewise
Justified by the Authority of the Holy Scripture and ancient Fathers.

Then as for the Assumption, That in the Church of Rome neither the Word of God
is truly Preached, nor the Sacraments duly Administered, is notorious; for as to
Doctrine, they have added their own Figments, as Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
etc. and do Preach contrary Doctrines to the Scripture; and as touching the
Sacraments, they have not only Augmented the Number, and made Five new ones of
their own, which Christ never Instituted, viz. Confirmation, Orders, Penance,
Matrimony, and Extreme Unction; But also they have utterly Corrupted those Two
which our Lord Ordained: For in Baptism besides Water, they use Spettle, Salt,
Oil, Chrism, contrary to the Institution; and they lay such a necessity upon
this Institution, That all that dye without it (even Infants) they say are
Damned. [See Bellarm. de Baptism. L. 1. Ca. 4. and Rhem. Annot. on John the 3
d.] In the Lords Supper, they have turned the Sacrament to a Sacrifice, made an
Idol of Bread, changed the Communion into private Masses, taken the Cup from
the Lay People; and committed many other Abominations. Therefore I conclude
this Argument, The Church of Rome not having the Word of God purely Preached,
nor the Sacraments rightly Administered, according to the Institution, is in no
sort to be esteemed a Visible Church of Christ.

Argument 3. That pretended Church which overthrows, and denies the only
Rule of Faith, is no true Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome does so.
Therefore.

As to the Proposition; the only Rule of Faith is the Scripture or written Word
of God, John 5 32. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Now to overthrow this Rule, is to overthrow
the Foundation of the Church of God, which is built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. That is the Scriptures of the New and Old
Testaments.

As for the Assumption, That the Church of Rome has overthrown this Rule is
Evident: for First, She has added another Rule of her own; to wit, Traditions
and humane Inventions, which are contrary to the Scriptures, as Christ says,
Matt. 15. 16. Gods Ark and Dagon cannot stand together; what Communion has
Christ with Belial? What agreement has Divine Purity with bold Forgeries?
Secondly, they overthrow as much as in them lies, this only Rule of Faith,
whilst they subject the Authority and Sense of it wholly to the Church of Rome,
or the Pope; so that Gods Word is not received of the Church of Rome, as it is
the Word of God, but as the Word of Men; contrary to that of the Epistle, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

Argument 4. That Church which holds not the Head Christ, is no true Spouse
or Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome holds not the Head Christ.
Therefore.

The Proposition is undeniable, Ephesians. 4. 16. and 5. 23.

The Assumption may thus be proved, That Church which is wholly Idolatrous
holds not the Head Christ. For if Worshipping of Angels, which is but one kind
of Idolatry, separates from the Head, as it does by the Apostles Testimony,
Colloss. 1. 18. then much more all kind of Idolatry. -- But the Church of Rome
is drowned in all kind of Idolatry, as not only Worshipping of Angels, but
likewise of Saints, and Pictures, and Images, and of a piece of Bread, etc.
Besides, she adhereth to another Head, viz. the Pope; and not to the one only
true Head Christ: and what agreement has the Temple of God, with Idols, 2 Cor.
6. 16. And the member of an Harlot cannot be withal a member of Christ, See 1
Cor. 15. 16, 17.

Argument 5. The true Church of Christ is the true Flock of Christ. But the
true Church of Rome is not the true Flock of Christ. -- Ergo.

The Proposition is undeniable, from Cant. 6. 6. Acts 20. 28. John 10. 16.

The Assumption is proved, John 10. 3, 4, and 17 verses. There it is laid down
as the property and Characteristick Mark of Christ's Flock, That they hear his
Voice and know it, and follow it. But the Church of Rome hears not Christ's
Voice, nor acknowledges, or follows it; but the Voice of Antichrist, and the
Antichristian Synagogue: they hear not Christ's Voice, as Christ's Voice, but as
the Churches Voice; And this is likewise affirmed against Rome, by the Church
of England in the before Cited Homily for Whit-sunday.

Argument 6. That Church which practices not the true Baptism of Christ, is
not the true Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome does not practice the
true Baptism of Christ. Ergo --

The Proposition I suppose will be granted; Baptism being an Initiating
Ordinance, without which, none can be Members of the Visible Church. The
Assumption is thus proved;

True Baptism is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith and of the Covenant of
Grace made unto us in Christ: But the Baptism in the Church of Rome is not
such; for the Church of Rome denies the Righteousness of Faith, and the
Justifying by Faith: yea, she makes Baptism the Instrumental Cause of
Justification, so as that it confers Grace Ex opere operato (by the mere thing
done) and they require not Faith in Christ as necessary for the Party to be
Baptized, But only a Disposition [Conc. Trent. Sess. 7. Can. 6. and 8.] and
principally the whole Force of Baptism, and so of all their Sacraments, depend
upon their Priests intention. So that the Church of Rome has no more of
Baptism, but only the External Form of words (and those fullyed with abundance
of lewd Ceremonies,) together with the Element of Water. For a Sacrament is a
visible sign of an Invisible Grace; which Invisible Grace the Church of Rome
destroys, while she places the Grace in the Sacrament it self; -- denying
and Accursing [ Sess. 7. Can. 6.] only Faith in Gods Promise, to be sufficient
to receive Grace: Thus they destroy the Nature and use of Christ's Sacraments,
and of Baptism in special, while they separate it from the Doctrine of the Word
of God, and from the necessity of Justifying Faith. Thus their Church is quite
Removed from the Foundation, and built upon another Bottom. Thus Baptism to
them of that Church is nothing else, but a Seal to a Blank, or which is worse,
a Sealing up of their Condemnation, whilst their Sins are not washed, but their
Souls drowned in Error and Idolatry, as the Egyptians in the Red Sea, a Type
of Baptism: Yea, they make a very Idol of their Sacrament, and of the Priest
together, whilst to these they attribute that Grace, which the only Author and
Fountain of true Baptism can give, and present their Children in the Faith of
that Church which denies true Faith in Christ.

THE COURANT.
Jesuit. Prithee whither so fast my dear most obliging Friend?


Tory. I have just now seen an Express from his Eminency Cardinal H. (Patron of
our Nation at Rome) which assures, That all this Ruffle of the most Christian
King, against that Court, is only a Sham Contrived on purpose to wheedle in
Neighbors into a good Opinion of the French, whom you know our Common People
naturally hate, but yet (he says) at this Juncture it will be highly necessary
for a certain Gentleman's purpose (whose Interest is Inseparable) to set
Monsieur fair in their thoughts, under pretense, That he will prove (forsooth)
a Second Harry the Eight.


Jesuit. -- I hate a blabbing Tongue; It Is only taking wind makes things smell
strong: This ought to be kept a Secret; not but that we are long since
satisfied in the Intrigue, and know whose Influence at present Governs the
Sorbon, we must adapt Principles to occasions, vcer our Sails to catch the
Wind. It Is a thriving piece of Haeresie, prithee promote the Hint, That Lewis's
Arms shall Effect what one of his Predecessors Coin threatened -- Perdam
Babylonis nomen, and get our Observator and his Cullyed Pupils to advance the
Notion; nothing will be more advantageous as present Circumstances play; The
White Witch shall Unravel the Enchantments of the Black one; Let us alone to
Retrieve the Business at next favorable opportunity.


Tory. But I have further Intelligence; O most Swinging! Astonishing!
Confounding! Incredible! Blessed News! I promise you.


Jesuit. Is It possible! For Old Acquaintance sake let us have't.


Tory. I beg your Diversion, Sir! You that (they say) tell Lies so Dear, must
not expect to hear Truth Gratis. But yet to save your longing, I Will give you a
Taste, Poor old Odiscalchi, his Holiness, is Dead, as a Door-nail; The Cardinals
are shut up in the Conclave, and now they are Canvasing, Bribing, Intriguing,
Tugging like mad, for a new Infallible Noddle.


Jesuit. That Is News indeed, but preethee, who is like to carry't?


Tory. Ay! that! that! I cannot forbear laughing to think, how 'twill vex thee;
and I Will tell thee't for no other Reason, but because 'twill make thee Hang thy
self, They Are going to choose a Protestant Prince to be their Pope!


Jesuit. Then I le be Hang'd'


Tory. Ay! ay! So thou had been long ago if thou had had thy Deserts, and so
thou will at last, whether that be so or no! but this is certain, a Protestant
Pope they will have! The Flying Squadron are resolved on it; And Spain, Germany,
and France, (for all the Interest you boast of there) strike in with them: What
a blessed Reformation shall we have!


Jesuit. Why then say I, farewell Catholic Cause! shaw! shaw! He Will worm out
the Catholic Faith, and sapp the Church by degrees; and in a while we shall
have damned Conventicles held in the very Lateran.


Tory. No! no! There Is no fear of that neither; for the Pope Presumptive,
though he is known to be a Protestant, has promised a thousand times, and vowed
and sworn he will maintain the Roman Catholic Church as it is Established by the
Canons


Jesuit. Ay! there is the Knavery on it! The Fallacy, do thou not smell the
Raguery?


Tory. Not I, I protest Father, but to say truth, I never had a very subtle
Nose, and yet I can at any time scent a Presbyterian Plot as far off as Vtopia.


Jesuit. Why man? by the Church as it is Established by the Canons; he means no
doubt, the Church as it ought to be Reformed by the Canons of Scripture: For
can any Man be so Mad, so Bewitched, as to think a Protestant, will be true to
the Catholic Interest?


Tory. Why not Sir? As true I Will warrant you, as a Popish Successor will be to
a Protestant Interest.


Jesuit. Well! O my Conscience the Cardinals are a Pack of Knaves, they betray
the Catholic Cause: I am confident most of them are Heretics in their Hearts.


Tory. Why so? why so? good Sir! They have Subscribed the Council of Trent;
They have taken all the Holy Tests and Canonical Oaths, and given all the
Security of their Catholicism that is required by Law of Holy Mother Church, and
why should we be so uncharitable as to Censure them for Hypocrites?


Jesuit. Hang 'em! hang 'em! They Are rotten at Core, let 'em Swear their Guts
out, they that are so Zealous for a Protestant Pope, may well be suspected to
have an Hugonot in their Bellies.


Tory. Why now I Am vexed to hear one of your Order, Father, (whose Society
esteem themselves not only the most Learned and Politic, but Men of the best
Intelligence too) talk so like a Ninny. It Is the mode all over the World, since
the last Comet, and the Conjunction of Satura and Jupiter; Have you not seen
the News brought by a Post pidgeon to Scanderoon? The Grand-Seignior is lately
Dead too, (All Flesh is Grass, Turk and Pope must come to it,) and the Divan
being Assembled, because he left no Heirs of his Body Lawfully begotten,
nothing will satisfy them, but they will Elect a Christian Prince to the Ottoman
Empire.


Jesuit The Devil they will?


Tory. Nay never question the Truth on it, you shall see it shortly in Muddimans
Letter, and Infallible Natts Intelligence.


Jesuit. Then hey go mad! say I, The World is going out of its Wits, and the
Universe becoming an Entire Bedlam. What false to their own Religion, the most
Sacred of Ties? betray their own Interest? I Will be Flead if there be one true
Mussulman in the Divan, if this you told me last be true.


Tory. Come, come, Fiat Justitia ruat Coelum. Do think all the World
understands their true Interest? Mankind are often led by the Shadows, and
Fancies, and Humors, and Whims, and a Thousand Capricio's: I could tell thee
of another as great a Wonder as all this comes to.


Jesuit. Nay, nay, lets have the bottom o'th Bag, honest Tory!


Tory. What would you eat Sweetmeats with Shovels? come, come, enough's as
good as a Feast, either at Souters or Pedlars-Hall; what I have, will keep
cold, and I Will reserve it for another Collation: Father Adieu!


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 5. 1682.
Omnia amisit, qui veritatem amisit.
An Objection Answered, touching Baptism; The Church of Rome has no true
Ministry, etc.
IN our last we urged, That the Church of Rome does not practice the true
Baptism of Christ; whence an Objection may arise thus, If the Church of Rome
have not the true Baptism of Christ, why then are not Papists when Converted to
the true Faith of Christ, Rebaptized? How stands their former Baptism good?

To which I Reply in the words of the great Saint Augustine, ( Contra
Cresconium, Lib. 1. C. 30.) speaking of the External Form of Baptism used
amongst Heretics, such Baptism is not to be Repeated, but the Error thereof
Corrected. And in his Seventh Book against the Donatists, Chap. 40. He has
these Words, The Divine Scriptures in many places do show, all these to be
strangers from the Church, who are not in the Rock, and appertain not to the
Members of the Dove, and yet they Baptize and are Baptized, and have Sine
salute Sacramentum salutis: without Salvation the Sacrament of Salvation. And
L. 5. chap. 17. Heretics (says he) have Lawful Baptism (that is for the
External Form) but not Lawfully. And so Bellarmine himself determines the Case,
Cum veniunt ad Ecclesiam Baptizati ab Haereticis, agnoscendum est quod est
Ecclesiae, id est, Baptisma, corrigendus vero Error; When those that are
Baptized by Heretics come to the Church, the Church acknowledges what is her
own; that is, the Baptism; but the Error is to be corrected. The Sacraments
operate effectually, Non quia dicitur, sed quia Creditur: Not because the Words
are uttered, but because there is the Word of Faith purifying the heart as the
Apostle speaks, Act 15. And therefore the Church of Rome having denied the
Faith of Righteousness, and the Righteousness of Faith, and the saving Doctrine
of Baptism; She has consequently rendered Baptism to be of none Effect to her
unto Salvation; But yet still, when any Papist is by the Grace of God and the
Preaching of the Word, and of saving Faith Converted to the true Church of God,
the Seal of Baptism is not again affixed, but the Evidence of saving Faith and
Testament of the Gospel being written in his heart, is now added to the Seal,
and so it becomes completely authentic, as not being bound necessarily to
outward means. Nor do we here exclude Gods free Agency in Baptism, who in the
Party Baptized in that Heretical Church may (if it please him) work Grace,
finding his own Water and his own Words; finding, I say, his own Seal, he can
add his Covenant of Grace unto it; yet no Child there Baptized coming to the
years of Discretion (unless he Renounce the wicked Faith, and Relinquish the
Idolatrous practices of that Romish Church) can have benefit by his Baptism;
but to him it is Penal and Pernicious as Augustine speaks. -- And now I proceed
to another Argument: That the Church of Rome is not a Church of Christ.

Argument 7. That Church which has not a lawful Ministry, is not a true
visible Church of Christ. -- But the Church of Rome has not a Lawful Ministry.
-- Ergo.

I know this, to many will seem a Paradox, but it is a certain Truth, for if the
Church of Rome has not a Lawful Ordination, how can it have a Lawful Ministry:
But it has no Lawful Ordination. 1. In regard of the Efficient Cause, either
Remote, as the Pope, as Head; whence all their Ministerial Power is derived: or
immediate, as the Ordainer; on whose Intention their Gratia gratis data
depends: So that here is a Nullity in the very Foundation of the Papal
Priesthood. It is derived from the Pope, as Head of the Clergy and Church: a
Title Antichristian and Usurped; and so their Ministry is Antichristian. And
if the Pope, being Antichrist, and an Usurper, and Consecrating Bishops by
virtue of his Papal Supremacy, as Christ's sole Vicar, and Peter's Successor,
cannot convey any power of Order upon his Bishops and Clergy; what lawful
Ministry can we expect in that Apostolical Synagogue? So that Calvin (an Author
whom for Honor's sake I mention, in a lewd Age, when thousands decry him, that
either for Learning and Piety are no ways comparable to Him) was in the Right,
in his Book called, The Method of Reforming the Church. -- Nego sub toto Papatu
unum esse vere Episcopum; I deny that under the whole Popedom there is one
truly a Bishop; and what then shall we say of their Priests? neither have they
any Ministerial Grace, because it depends (according to their Belief) upon
their Ordainers Intention, and not upon Christ's Ordinance, Grace, and Promise.
But,

2 ly. They fail too in the Formal and Fixal Cause of Ordination: They have
quite altered and Corrupted the Form, and so the End thereof, adding a New
Form, which overthrows the Old, and imposes a New End, viz. making the whole
Essence and use of their Ministry to consist in Priesthood; that is, in
Sacrificing of an Idol, and so turning the Office of a Minister of the Gospel,
into an Idol-Sacrificing Priest. For in the Form of their Ordination set down
in their Tridentine Catechism, Part the Second; after Imposition of Hands with
the sign of the Cross on the Party that is to be Ordained; The Chalice with
Wine, and the Paten with the Host, is delivered into his hands with these
Words, -- Accipe potestatem offerendi Sacrificium Deo, Missasque Celebrandi tam
pro vivis quam pro defunctis, etc. Receive thou Power to Offer Sacrifice to
God, and to celebrate Masses as well for the Living as the Dead, etc. And this
praecipua Sacerdotis functio existimanda est, is to be esteemed the principal
Office or Function of a Priest. Ad Extremum vero, etc. In fine, Imposing hands
again, he says, Receive then the Holy Ghost, Whose sins soever ye Remit, etc.
Eique Coelestem illam, etc. And thus the Bishop gives unto the Priest that
Heavenly Power of Retaining and Forgiving of Sins, which the Lord gave to his
Disciples. Thus the very words of their Ordination. Now we know that this power
of Remitting and Retaining of Sins the Church of Rome places not in the
Dispensing and Preaching of the Word of God, but in their Sacrament of
Penance. Thus they have wholly perverted their Ordination, both for the formal
and final End. Nor do they less fail in the Material Cause, ignorant
unqualified Persons being ordinarily made Priests, and such as only are able to
Mumble over the Mass and Matins.

But it may be Objected, That in Popish Ordination there is a Power Conferred to
Preach the Word of God. It Is true, they do use these words of our Blessed
Savior which the Church of England uses, viz. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose
sins ye Remit, etc. Which we do indeed understand of the dispensation of the
Word and Sacraments. But the Church of Rome otherwise, meaning thereby the
Priests power of Binding and Loosing in their Sacrament of Penance. And it is
in vain for them to say, That their Priests in their Ordination have any Power
conferred upon them to Preach the Word of God, when their Practice is far
otherwise: Neither indeed is it lawful for them so to Preach the Word of God,
as it behooves faithful Ministers of the Gospel, viz. purely and soundly to the
saving of Men's Souls. For the pure and sound saving Doctrine of the Word of God
is branded for Heresy in the Council of Trent. Nor may their Bishops or
Priests deliver the sense of it otherwise than according to those Canons and
Decrees: In a word, See the Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 3. Si quid dixerit, etc.
If any one shall say, That those words of our Lord and Savior, [ Receive the
Holy Ghost, whose sins ye Remit they are Remitted, and whose sins you Retain
they are Retained] are not to be understood of the power of Remitting and
Retaining sins in the Sacrament of Penance, but shall wrest them contrary to
the Institution of the Sacrament, to the authority of Preaching the Gospel, Let
him be Anathema. Well therefore does the pious and judicious Calvin conclude,
-- Totum Sacordotium Papisticum non solum impia est vera Ministerii profanatio,
sed Execrabilis in Christum comumelia, and quisquis est sacerdos Papalis, d^nec
titulum illum abjecerit, Christi Servus esse nequeat. The whole Popish
Priesthood is not only an impious Profanation of the true Ministry, but an
execrable Reproach against Christ: So that whosoever is a Popish Priest, until
he renounce that Title, he cannot be the Servant of Christ.

True Ordination is a sacred Institution of Christ, whereby the Person Ordained
is Invested with a Power to Preach the Word of God, and to Administer the Holy
Sacraments according to Christ's Ordinance. -- But the Ordination used in the
Church of Rome is not according to Christ's Institution, to wit, whereby the
Person Ordained is Invested with a Power to Preach the Word of God, and to
Administer the Holy Sacraments according to Christ's Ordinance. -- Therefore in
the Church of Rome, there is no true Ordination; therefore no true Ordination,
Therefore no true Church.

The Assumption we have already Demonstrated, For first, for Administration of
Sacraments, the Priests Power is respectively and specially limited to their
Eucharist and Penance. 2 ly. That Eucharist is a mere Idol, and blasphemous
Sacrifice, and no true Sacrament at all. 3 ly. The very Words of Christ used in
true Ordination of all Orthodox Churches, which are understood of Dispensing
the Word and Sacraments, the Church of Rome perverteth and wresteth to
Absolution; and most impudently faith, That to understand it of Dispensing the
Word of God, is to wrest the sense contrary to the Institution of this
Sacrament of Penance.

But now a like Objection will occur thus, -- If in the Church of Rome there be
not true and lawful Ordination, why then, when any of their Priests are
Converted to the true Faith and Church of Christ, are they not Re-ordained?

To this we may Answer, That although their Ordination were altogether unlawful
and unwarrantable, according to the Institution of the Church of Rome, yet
coming to us of the true Church, after the paring and shaving off of their
Power of Sacrificing, and of Sacramental Binding, and Loosing, and Penance,
and Restoring to the Word of God (profaned and abused by them to a wrong
sense) its Original and true meaning, whilst the Priest so Converted openly
Renounces the Mass, and witnesses his Abhorrence and Detestation of all that
abominable Sacrifice, and subscribes to the Articles and Doctrine of our
Church; they are hereupon Received, and their Ordination now stands good, which
before was vicious and Antichristian. See for this more fully Mr. Francis
Mason's Book of Ordination, L. 5. Chapter 12. The same Reason is to be given of the
Ministry of the Church of England, which in times past was derived and
descended from that false and Corrupt Church.

Some will say, -- The Church of Rome is as a Diseased Body, which though never
so Corrupt is yet still a true Body: for he is really a Man to whom the
Definition of a Man agrees, endued with a reasonable Soul, though his Body be
never so much Diseased, as with the Plague or Leprosy.

I Answer, Many deceive themselves and others with this Comparison. They should
first prove the Church of Rome to be a Living Church, before they can properly
compare the Body of it to the Body of a Living Man; for else it is a mere
Petitio Principii, a shameful begging of the Question. For I deny the Church of
Rome to be an Organical Body; to wit, a Living Body, No, no, It is a mere
Corrupt and stinking Carcass: and as a dead corrupt Corpse is not to be
accounted an Organical Body, as wanting the Soul to Actuate it; and so cannot
be called truly a Man, or a Man's Body; but Cadaver a Corpse. No more is the
Church of Rome (no less Dead than Diseased,) a true Church, for a dead Member
can but Equivocally be called a Member. Nor will it follow, That because there
may be an hidden Church of God within the borders of the Church of Rome:
Therefore the Church of Rome is a true visible Church. For if any amongst them
be of the Number of Gods Sacred ones, before their Effectual Calling they are
Members of that Antichristian Church, but being Called they are no more of it,
but in it; and there being in it, will never prove it a true Church.

It may be alleged, That the Church of Rome has only added to the Foundation,
not taken away, or subtracted from it, and the Nature of an Addition is not
directly to deny, but by Consequence at most. I Answer, We have already proved,
That they have destroyed the Foundation, and that both by Subtraction and
Addition. As their Traditions and Decrees overthrow the Foundation of the
Scriptures; for if the Scriptures affirm one thing, and their Traditions
another, These are obeyed, and those rejected. What say you to Invocation of
Saints, does it not directly overthrow the pure Worship of God, and Faith in
him alone? Does not the Mass directly overthrow the one and only Sacrifice of
our Lord upon the Cross? And so of the rest.

The COURANT.
Tory. WEll! I Will say that for Roger, he is a brisk mettlesome laborious old
Wretch! He writes four or five Observators a week.


Truman. Do not call it writing, man, but casting; or say he is so often
troubled with the Hickup, or overflowing of the Gall. The old Gentleman
delights much in calling other people Monkeys, but sure 'twould make a Stoic
smile, to see how like an Ape he sits cracking of Nits on the Head of the Tory
Plot.


Tory. Why? What would you have him do, scribble all the year round about
Brass-screws and Antipendiums?


Trum. Now you speak of that old business, I can tell you a story that is
altogether as strange, and much more true than the transmutation of the Screws.
Some Years ago there was a very great parcel of English Rogues and Biddle's
Catechisms seized by a Friend of mine; the obscenity of the first, and the
Blasphemies of the second against the blessed Trinity, deserving a suppression.
But some Casuists resolve, That though Books be unfit to be sold, yet it may
not be unfit to take money for them. So it happened, that these very Books, by
Art Magic, were invisibly conveyed to Cambray-house, where a certain old Lady
then had Lodgings, and upon paying down a pretty round Sum to a Friend in a
corner, the self-same Books, of their own accord, came one Night out of a
Window into a Cart, and so disprsed themselves into most of the Stationers
Shops about Town. There is one J. S. still living, who they say can attest this
Miracle.


Tory. But what is all this to honest Roger?


Trum. Nothing, nothing at all. I only told it, to prove that there is such a
thing as Necromancy and Black-Art in the world. And therefore to return to Mr.
L'Estrange; what think you of his owning ( Observe. Numb. 129.) That he has been
forty times at Mass beyond the ^eas? I dare challenge him, and all his
Admirers, to p^o^e that he was so often at any Protestant Church in twenty
years time. And I cannot fathom the Policy of this Declaration, unless it were
to give old friends an Item, that for all his late sacramental Rant, he does
not forget them.


Tory. You must note, he did not trudge to those forty Masses out of devotion,
nor curiosity, but purely out of duty; for I have been told, that when he was
abroad, he was a little Retainer to Cardinal Van Hess, and officiated in his
Chapel in the way of his proper Calling, playing in Consort on the Base-Viol.
So that probably he was not at Mass under the Character of a Papist, but as
Fiddler in ordinary to his Eminence. -- But see how in his last Observator,
Numb. 132. he boxes about the Statute 25 Ed. 3. and will needs have the words [
Eldest Son and Heir] to be understood not only of the Eldest Son, but of any
other Heir.


Trum. Though some of the Inferior Clergy may take him for Guide, the Inns of
Court scorn to be his Pupils, for all he styles himself ( Observe. Numb. 84.)
Roger L'Estrange of Gray's Inn Labourer. The Man is as much out in his Law, as
he uses to be in his Divinity. For (tho God forbid any should be so wicked) to
imagine the Death of a collateral presumptive Heir to the Crown is not Treason
by this Statute. Coke 3 Instit. fol. 8, 9. (speaking of the same words) Before
this Statute some did hold, that to compass the Death of any of the King's
Children was Treason, but by this Act it is restrained to the Prince, the
King's Son being Heir apparent. If the Heir apparent to the Crown be a
collateral Heir apparent, he is not within this Statute. Roger Mortimer, Earl
of March, was Anno Dom. 1487. (11 Rich. 2.) proclaimed Heir apparent: Anno 39
H. 6. Richard Duke of York was likewise proclaimed Heir apparent, and so was
John de la Poole, Earl of Lincoln, by R. 3. and Henry, Marquess of Exeter, by
King H. 8. But none of these or the like are within the purvieu of of this
Statute. --

But since Roger will be dabbling with Statutes, prithee read to him the
following Clause of the Act of the 3d of King James, c. 4. -- And further be it
enacted, That if any person or persons, at any time after the tenth of June,
etc. shall either upon the Seas, or beyond the Seas, or in any other place
within the Dominions of the King's Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, put in
practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of the King's Subjects, or to
reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome; or if any person shall be wilfully
absolved or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly reconciled, or promise
obedience to any such pretended Authority; every such person and persons, their
procurers and counselors, aiders and maintainers, shall be to all intents
adjudged Traitors, and shall have judgment, suffer, and forfeit as in Cases of
High Treason.

From whence it is plain, that every English Subject that has bin brought up in
the Protestant Religion, and afterward revolts and turns Papist, and so is
reconciled to the Sea of Rome, is ipso facto guilty of High Treason.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 12. 1682.
Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur.
Popery is a kind of Atheism, proved in many particulars.
OUr Two last have contained some Arguments, proving the Church of Rome not to
be a true visible Church of Christ, which will further appear, if we can
Demonstrate the same to be Guilty of the horrid sin of Atheism; To know whether
she be or no, we must distinguish the several kinds of Atheism.

Atheism is Twofold, Open and Colored.

Open-Atheisme is, when men, both in Word and Deed deny God and his Word.
Colored Atheism is not so manifest, and has two Degrees. 1. When men
acknowledge a God, a First Cause of Causes, or Infinite Being, that made and
Governs the World, but yet deny or are Ignorant of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost Thus the Ephesians before they Believed the Gospel are called (...), Ephesians.
2. 12. and said to be without God, (when yet no doubt in their natural Judgment
they acknowledged) because they denied Christ. And in like manner though the
Samaritans Worshipped the God of Abraham, yet our Blessed Savior says, They
Worshipped they knew not what, John 5. 46. And the Psalmist says of all the
Gentiles, that their Gods are Idols.

The second Degree of this Colored Atheism, is when men do rightly acknowledge
the Unity of the Godhead in the Trinity of Persons; yet so as by necessary
Consequences, partly of their Doctrine, and partly of the Service of God, they
overturn that which they well maintained, And in this Respect, I say, That the
very Religion of the Church of Rome is a kind of Atheism. It Is true, every
Papist is not so shameless as one of their Popes, who, showing some of his
Confidents his Vast Treasures, Hellishly said, Quantas divitias nobis peperit
haec Fabula Christi! What a world of Riches has this Fable of Christ brought us
in! Yet the very Doctrines of their Church, if understood and believed,
directly tends to lead all those of her Communion to the like, or as desperate
Impiety. For,

1. Whereas the Church of Rome makes the Merit of the works of men to Concur
with the Grace of God, it overthrows the Grace of God, If it be of works, it is
no more Grace, Romans 11. 6. whereas in words they own those glorious Attributes
the Justice and Mercy of God to be Infinite, do they not by Consequents deny
both? For how can that be Infinite Justice which may any way be appeased by
humane satisfaction? And how is God's Mercy Infinite, when we by our own
satisfactions must add a supply to the satisfaction of Christ?

2. He that has not the Son, has not the Father, John 21. 23. and
consequently is an Atheist. Now the present Roman Religion has not the Son,
that is, Jesus Christ, God and Man, the Mediator of Mankind, but has
transformed him into a feigned Christ: For, instead of one Jesus Christ in all
things like unto us in his Humanity, Sin only excepted, They have framed a
Christ, to whom they Ascribe two kinds of Existing, one Natural, whereby he is
visible, touchable, and Circumscribed in Heaven, The other not only above, but
also against Nature, by which he is substantially according to his Flesh in the
hands of every Priest in every Host, and in the mouth of every Communicant,
invisible, untouchable and uncircumscribed, and thus in effect they abolish his
Manhood.

3. They Degrade our blessed Lord of his Offices, and have Committed High
Treason against the King of Glory, and will you contend that such Arch
Traitors are still true Subjects? For one Jesus Christ, the only King,
Lawgiver and Head of the Church, They join unto him the Pope, not only as a
Vicar, but also as a Companion or Equal in Government. In that they give unto
him power to make Laws binding Conscience, To resolve and determine infallibly
the sense of Holy Scripture, etc. For one Jesus Christ, the only real Priest of
the New Testament, they join many Secondary Priests, who pretend to offer
Christ daily in the Mass for the Sins of the Quick and the Dead. For one Jesus
Christ the All sufficient Mediator of Intercession, They have added many other
Companions to Intercede for us. And for the only. Merits of Christ, in whom
alone the Father is well pleased, they have devised a Treasury of the Church,
containing besides the merits of Christ, the Over plus of the merits of Saints
to be dispensed to men at the Popes discretion. By all which we see, That
Christ, and consequently God himself to be worshipped in Christ, is changed for
a Fantasy or Idol of man's conceit.

4. There is always, and will be a Proportion between the worship of God and
our persuasion of him; and men in giveing unto God any worship, have respect to
his nature, that both may be suitable, and he be well pleased. Let us therefore
now turn our Eyes, and behold with horror and detestation, what manner of
Worship the Roman Religion affords: It is for the greatest part, mere
Will Worship, without any allowance or command from God; as is in effect
acknowledged by their own Durandus in his Rationale, wherein he pretends to
give an Account of the Original, Reasons and Mystery of those Devises, and as
we in several parts of this Work have particularly proved. It is a fulsome
Carnal Service, consisting of Innumerable bodily Rites and Ceremonies borrowed
partly from the Jews, and partly from the Heathen, it is divided between God
and some of his Creatures, in that they are Worshipped both with one kind of
Worship, let them paint and dissemble it how they can with nice and
unintelligible distinctions. Thus then, if by their manner of worshipping we
may judge how they conceive (as most rationally we may) it will appear they
have plainly abandoned the true God, and have set up to themselves a Fantasy
of their own. For God is no otherwise to be Conceived than he has Revealed
himself in his Creatures and word, and specially in Christ who is (...), the
Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And (...) The Character or lively figure of his
person, Heb. 1. 3.

I proceed to another Argument. -- If the Church of Rome, which was once the
Spouse of Christ have Committed Adultery, and the Bill of Divorce be long since
sued out, she is no longer to be called or counted a Spouse or Church of
Christ. But she has played the Adulteress, and the Divorce is passed -- Ergo.

That the Church of Rome has long since, and still does commit Idolatry,
(which is Spiritual Adultery, Jer. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 23. 37.) is notorious; I shall
at present only Instance in three particulars. 1. Because they worship Saints
and Angels with Religious Worship, which without exception is proper and only
due to God; yea, they transform some of them into detestable Idols, making them
Mediators of Redemption, especially the Virgin Mary, whom they call not only
Lady, but Goddess and Queen, whom Christ her Son Obeys in Heaven, a
Mediatress, our Life, our Hope, the Medicine of the Diseased, etc. And pray
unto her thus, -- Prepare thou Glory for us, Defend us from our Enemies, and in
the hour of Death receive us, Loose the Bands of the Guilty, bring Light to the
Blind, drive away all Devils, show thy self a Mother, by thy Maternal Right
Command thy Son to receive our Prayers. See for this the Roman Missal and
Breviary, and Bellarm. L. 2. De Sanctis, Ca. 1. 6. 2. Their Idolatry is
manifest in that they Worship Images, or (at least to give them their Excuse
and Evasion into the Bargain) Worship in, at, and before Images, having no
Commandment so to do, but the contrary. They allege that they use and worship
Images only in Remembrance of God, but this it all one, as if an unchaste Wife
should receive many Gallants into her House in the absence of her Husband, and
being caught in Bed with them should answer, That they were friends of her
Husband, and that she was so kind to them only in remembrance of him. Would any
man accept of such an Excuse, much less will the great Jehovah, who is a
Jealous God, and has sworn that he will not have his Glory given to another.
3. They are Guilty of Idolatry, and that too more absurd than the Heathens
themselves; For they Worship a Breaden God. For if our Blessed Savior
according to his Humanity, be absent from the Earth, (...) undoubtedly he is;
For the Heavens must receive him until the times of the Restitution of all
things, Acts. 3. 21. Then the Popish Host is as abominable an Idol as ever was.

But you will say, a known Harlot may afterward remain a Wife, and be so
termed, if she be not actually Divorced? But as to that, in the second place, I
answer, the Bill of Divorce is long since Sued out; her Sins have separated
her, and her God: We have it expressly in the Word of God, 2 These. 2. You have
her Apostasy exactly foretold and described -- Deceivableness of
unrighteousness -- strong delusion, that they should believe a Lie, and what
follows -- That they all might be damned, v. 12. So in the 13. of the
Revelation, The Roman Apostatized Church is set forth by the name of the Beast.
And Ca. 14. 9. It is said, -- If any man Worship the Beast, and his Image, and
receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, he shall drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence
of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the Smoke of their
torment Ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no Rest Day nor Night,
who Worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the Mark of his
Name. And therefore Ca. 18. 3. It is said, -- I heard a Voice from Heaven
saying, -- Go out of her my people, etc. Since God has Commanded us to come
out of Her, we may conclude her utterly Divorced from God; for we may not
wholly forsake any people, till they forsake Christ. And therefore though an
Adultress, till publicly detected and cast off, may pass for a Wife, yet after
she is Convicted, and the Divorcement solemnly declared, she cease to be a
Wife, though she boast never so much of her Marriage in her youth, and though
she can show her Wedding Ring, yet all this will not prove her in any sort a
Lawful Wife; nor entitle her to any pretense of Claim to the Affections or
Estates of the Husband.

But the Truth is, though the Church of Rome have thus proved Disloyal to her
Lord, and committed Whoredom on every high Hill, and under every Green Tree,
yet with the Strumpet mentioned by the Royal Preacher, She wipeth her mouth,
and says, I have done no wickedness: For it has of late continually been her
cunning, to make the Adorable Jesus, (under pretense of being still his Spouse)
a Cover, and Cloak of all her Abominations, (as a Subtle and Unreclaimable
Adultress, deals with her too long suffering and patient Husband) That so she
may seem to be an honest Matron, though indeed she be a notable Strumpet. And
this indeed is the highest point of the Mystery of Iniquity.

The COURANT.
Truem. WEll! and how proceeds the worthy Mr. L'Estrange with his Translation,
of the French Jesuit?


Tory. What! do you mean The History of Calvinism, I have not feen it yet, but
am told it is Dedicated to the most Christian King, and that the honest Author
tells him, he doubts not but shortly to present his Majesty with the story too,
of its utter extirpation, [The Northern Heresy must down] They say it is an
excellent piece, and will Claw off the Whigs confoundedly.


Truem. Yes! yes! a very suitable Subject for such a Pen! our Churchmen have
great cause to thank him, and give him Guinneys for Blowing up the Church with
Jesuits Powder, under pretense of shooting Phanaticks. It Is mightily, no
doubt, for the Advancement of our Religion at home, and must be a most charming
invitation and encouragement to Protestant Princes and States abroad, to Love
and Honor England, if such Books shall be so kindly entertained amongst us, and
those Holy Men whom God raised up to be the First Reformers of his Church,
publicly exposed and ridiculed by the profane Buffonery of every mercinary
Rascal. -- But no matter for that till we see the Book abroad, -- where do
think I was to'ther night.


Tory. I Will be hanged if 'twere not some damned Conventicle, or
Treason-whispering Club.


Truem. Had Gadbury to solve the Question Tried,
That Louse-killer could not have guessed more wide,
No! no! Man, I was even at the Academy of Non sense S's Coffee-house.


Tory. I am glad of that however, for since peoples going to Church, though
driven thither in the Devils name, passes for a laudable Conversion, the very
entering into S's must be esteemed so many steps of Loyalty. -- But prithee how
did like the Conversation?


Truem. Why, the Room was large and crowded, and there was Fire and Smoke, and
Hobgoblings in black, and swearing and cursing, and gnashing of Teeth.


Tory. Why, thou describ'st it like the bottom of Hell?


Truem. No, no, Sir! only an Antichamber an't please ye! The Universal Buzz was
against the Whigs and Shaftsbury, one magnified Craddock for an Hero, another
Painted Wilmore blacker than the Devil, a third was telling who should be
Poculiz'd to, and a fourth who should be Hanged first after that man entered
into his Office, a fifth was arguing how expedient it was to make a Bonefire of
the City Charter, etc. when all on a sudden entered the Observator. Bless us! I
shall never forget it, what cringing, and complementing, and Sir-reverencing
was there! It put me presently in mind of the Play called The Lancashire
Witches, where in one Scene the Haggs being Assembled at Sabbatt, when the Foul
Fiend makes his appearance, they all start up and cry, Now, now our Great
Master's come;
Arise, prepare, salute his Bum.
And so they go and each reverently kisses the Tail of the Goat.


Tory. Leave your fooling, and tell us what said the Oracle.


Truem. Nay, you may now have all his Discourse in Print for Twopence, he and
the Company only predicted a brace or two of Observator-sheets to us.


Tory. Now thou talk of predicting Sheets, I Will tell thee how thou shall get
to predict next Tuesday's Heraclitus.


Truem. Though it is grown so horrid silly of late, that it is hardly worth a
Stratagem, and the attempt will not bring half so much honor as attacking the
Smyrna Fleet, yet let us hear it however.


Tory. Go but on any Sunday Night to the Sun in Aldersgatestreet, and send up
Half a dozen Bottles of Claret to the Select Cabal, and tell them a Gentleman
below drinks the Duke's health to 'um, you shall presently be admitted, and
hear the whole Manuscript read, canvass'd, debated and corrected.


Truem. Well! I do not know any body so fond of a Goose Egg. That Paper had
formerly some Wit with its malice, a little Salt now and then as well as
Roguery, but now it is become a mere Caput Mort; The very Dreggs of Impertinence.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 19. 1682.
Ite truces Animae, and Letho Tartara vestro Polluite, and totas Erebi
consumite poenas.
Whether Salvation may be obtained in the Church of Rome? The uncharitableness
of Papists toward Protestants. The desperate Hazards ran by Roman Catholics,
etc.
IN our Packet N. 18. We stated Three Questions, which we proposed to treat of
in Order. 1. Whether the Church of Rome were a Church of Christ? 2. Whether
Salvation were therein attainable? And 3 ly. Whether a man may be present at
Mass without sin?

The First of these, in that, and Three other Pacquets since, we have
dispatched. Now we proceed to the Second; a point nice and difficult, and which
ought warily to be handled, That neither excess of Zeal consume our Charity,
nor conceits of Charity violate Truth, and encourage Error.

The Papists look upon it as a Ruled Case, extra Ecclesiam non est salus, out
of the Pale of the Church there is no Salvation, and He that has not the
Church for his Mother; neither has God for his Father; which Axioms are very
true, if by Church they would suffer us to understand the universal Church of
Christ, but they restrain that Term to the present Ecclesia malignantium, the
Apostatized Congregation of Romanists, united to the Pope as their Head, and
guided in their Faith according to the Canons of the Conventicle of Trent, and
averr that all are Damned eternally that do not join with them therein. It Is a
notable Rant to this purpose, of one of their Tribe, in a Book called The
Reconciler of Religions, Printed Anno 1663. and Dedicated to Mr. Laurence
Dibusty of London, Merchant, p. 51. The Sacrilegious, Illicit, and Invalid
Ordination, (says he) of or by Story ( which was the first pretended Holy
Mission of Protestants, and from whence they hitherto derive their Orders, was
not worth a straw, and consequently their pretended Holy Orders [he speaks of
the Church of England) are not worth a Pins head; therefore they are no true
Preachers. What are they then? Forsooth, Intruders, Thieves and Robbers,
Hypocrites, Ravenous Wolves and Murderers, Sons of Belial, false Prophets and
Priests of Baal, which is their Heresy, Rebellion, and stubbornness against
the Church. Now if the Protestant or Sectarian Preachers [pray observe, he
makes no distinction between Churchmen and Presbyterians] be such, what must
the Protestants and Sectaries themselves be? If the Blind lead the Blind, shall
they not fall both into the Ditch? Sure enough they shall, even into the Ditch
of everlasting burning Brimstone and Fire. -- But yet more remarkable is that
of Costerus the Jesuit, in his reply to Osiander, Proposit. 8. p. ult. --
Fieri nequit ut Lutheranus moriens salvetur, Gehennam evadat, ex Aeternis
Ignibus eripiatur. Si mentior damner ipse cum Lucifero. It Is impossible that
any person that is a Lutheran should be saved when he dies, or can escape Hell,
and be snatched from Eternal Fire. If I lie in this assertion, let me my self be
damned with Lucifer. -- Nay in the Irish Massacre, and during the Bohemian
Persecutions: The Papists several times told the Protestants, that they killed
their Bodies in pure kindness to their Souls; for, say they, since we know all
you Heretics must certainly be damned. And that the longer you continue in the
Errors in this Life, the greater will be your torments; therefore we cut you
off thus betimes, that your pain may be the less, etc. -- The mercies of the
wicked are cruelties, and this is the charity which Roman Catholics so much
boast of.

But God forbid Protestants should entertain such Sentiments, we dare not pry
into the Ark, the Lord, and the Lord only knows who are his, we will not
therefore presume to pass a peremptory doom, or affirm that no Papist can be
saved, but this we may maintain with truth and safety, that none by that
Doctrine, which at this day according to the Canons of the Council of Trent, is
taught in the Papists Assemblies can come to Salvation. Though still we doubt
not but in such their Assemblies there have been from time to time, and still
are, not a few, who although out of weakness they have Communion with them, yet
either they never gave an hearty Assent to those more grievous and fundamental
Errors which are therein taught, or were ignorant of them, or before their
death renounced them, and in the true Faith of Christ, though fullied with many
infirmities, they dye and are saved. For as of old in Jerusalem, when it was
most corrupt, there were still many there, who bowed not their knee to Baal,
but did sigh and cry out, by reason of those Abominations which were committed
in the midst thereof. So there is no doubt but under the Papacy such at this
day may be found, who though they dwell in the Tents of Kedar, may yet be Heirs
of Canaan; but these are not properly said to be of the Roman Church, though in
it.

Nor is this any thanks to the Church of Rome; she prohibits the true Doctrine
of Salvation to be Preached, and advances Errors that utterly make void the
Gospel, and suppose some Predicant Friar or so, should transgress the Rules of
the Council of Trent, and so Preach the Word of Life to the People, as that
Souls come thereby to be saved. For Example, say he shall Preach unto them,
that they must believe to be saved by nothing but the merits and righteousness
of Christ imputed unto them. That they must not look to be saved by their
inherent righteousness, but by the only mercy of God to them in Christ. That
every one must have a particular Faith and Affiance of his own, for the pardon
of his sins. That they must Worship God only, and pray unto him, and that in
Christ's name only. That there is no Sacrifice for sin, but that of Christ once
offered upon the Cross. That Christ's Blood does so purge away sin, as there
remains no stain, nor punishment after this Life, etc. I say, if any Friar
shall dare Preach thus, I deny not, but he may be an instrument of saving many
Souls. But in the mean time does not he fall under the heavy Curses of the
Tridentine Canons? Is not the Inquisition ready to clapp him up for an
Heretic? Do these that have imbibed such his sound Doctrines dare avouch them,
or are not they forced to recant and do penance for the same? So that if any
by some special providence, secret power, and unlimited mercy of God, in the
Church of Rome shall come so to believe, as thereby to be saved, both he and
his Faith are disavowed, as not being the Faith of the Church of Rome, but
accounted and accursed by her as Heretical.

Therefore as we deny not but some particular persons, that outwardly seem of
the Church of Rome's Communion, may enjoy everlasting Life, so we cannot but
look upon the generality of them in a very deplorable case, and their Souls in
unspeakable danger; for the reasons following.

1. God says expressly in his word, Rev. 14. That if any man worship the Beast,
and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, he shall
drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God. And afterward, he says, all such shall
be tormented in Fire and Brimstone. Now whoever is joined or reconciled to the
Pope, and submits himself to the Laws and Kingdom of Antichrist, does
Worship the Beast and his Image. Whoever openly professes Popery, receives
the Popes Mark in his Forehead. Whoever yields to the practice of the Romish
Religion, receives his Mark in his Hand. Let them therefore consider how they
will avoid the Judgment threatened.

2. Our Blessed Lord and Savior Matthew. 15. Teaches us that such worship God
in vain, as teach for Doctrines the Precepts of men; But the Doctrine of
Popery, as it adds to Ancient Catholic Religion, is nothing but a Mass of
humane Inventions, Devises and Precepts. Their Decretals are the Popes
conceits, their Forms of Worship contained in the Missals and Breviaries, are
merely Humane. From man's devise proceeded the Popish Worship of Angels, Saints,
Images, etc. Most part of their Resolutions of Cases of Conscience, is grounded
on the Popes Laws. Finally, the turnings, skippings, heavings, greasings,
spittings, and other Ceremonies of Mass-Priests, and their Followers, proceed
from man's invention. Popery therefore by Christ's rule is nothing but vanity,
weariness and vexation of Souls, whilst they seek to serve God, not according
to his appointments, but their own fond imaginations, and how shall a vain
Religion bring any man to heaven?

3. We read, Rev. 22. Without are Dogs, and that Enchanters, Whore-mongers,
Murderers, Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, shall be excluded
out of the Kingdom of God. Now, how like two Dogs do the Pope and his Adherents
refuse and bark at Gods word, and bite and tear those to pieces, who seek to
feed them with the Bread of Life. Not a few of the Popes have been Magicians
and Necromancers; as Benet the 9. Gregory the 6. and 7. Sylvester the 2. Paul
the 3, etc. And one of their Offices in their Church, is that of an Exorcist or
Conjurer. They permit public Stews, allow Concubines, and to Monks, Friars and
Mass-Priests forbid Lawful Marriage. They have murdered and Massacred millions
of Christians to erect and uphold their Antichristian Kingdom. They set up
Idols in Churches, and every corner of their streets, and in highways, giving
Divine Honor to the Cross, and to the Images of the Trinity, and calling the
Sacrament their Lord and God; and making Vows, Prayers and Confessions to
Saints, and burning Incense to Images, and saying Mass in Honor of Saints and
Angels. Finally, they do not only make and delight in Lies, as forging not only
horrid slanders against M. Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and other sincere
Preachers of Gods word, but also against all Protestants, asserting that we
teach, That God is the Author of Sin, That Christ despaired, That there is no
Hell but horror of Conscience, That good works are not to be practiced or
commended, etc. All which we expressly detest; Therefore these wickednesses in
Papists, not being so much the sins of particular private men, as the natural
consequences of their Tenets and general avowed Practices of their pretended
Church, must needs render the condition of any Soul in that Communion very
dangerous and hazardous.

4. No man can come to God the Father, but by Jesus Christ, as our Lord
testifies of himself, John 14. Who also shows, That he is the way, the truth
and the life: And by his holy Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. teaches us, That there is no
Mediator betwixt God and Man, but the Man Christ Jesus. But contrary hereunto
the Papists vainly hope and imagine to come to God, not only by Christ, but
also by the Virgin Mary, by Angels and Saints; They also seek out new ways, and
content not themselves with such as the infinite wisdom of our Lord prescribed
unto us, and do foolishly believe that the Pope by his Indulgences, and every
Hedg-Priest by mumbling over his Masses, is able to redeem men's Souls.

5. Whoever builds his Faith upon other foundation than the Doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets, does build upon the Sand, and not upon such a firm
foundation, as will abide in the day of the Lord. But the Papists generally
build their Faith upon the Popes Decretals, upon unwritten and uncertain
Traditions, upon false pretended Miracles, lying Legends, and silly Fables; do
they not then build upon ruinous foundations, and if so, what is like to become
of the Superstructure?

6. By their own Canon Law, Chapt. si papa. did. 40. it is affirmed, That the
Pope may be remiss and negligent in his Office, and silent in teaching, and
lead innumerable people with him into Hell: Now if the Papists are to adhere to
the Pope as their Head, and to follow him, how can they escape when he leads
them into Hell? So that if they know not, or will not believe the Scriptures,
nor any other Arguments, yet their own Decrees may teach them, that following
the Pope, innumerable Papists run blindfold and headlong into Perdition.

7. How is it possible that they should be saved, who are Ignorant of the means
of their Salvation, who hold damnable Heresies repugnant to the Apostles
Doctrine, whose Faith is Faction, and their Practices Idolatry, Perjury,
Treasons, Massacres, and all kind of Abomination, and this connived at,
promoted, excused, justified, nay commended and applauded by their Church, as
means to propagate the Gospel. But all this is too true of the Papists at this
day, and therefore what Scripture grounds have we of hope, unless they speedily
repent and depart from these Abominations.

But if any man shall ask, what then is become of all those, that either now
die, or in times past are dead in places where Popery is or has been
professed? We answer, secret things belong to God, we dare not pretend to
sentence those that are gone, but would caution such as survive. Of those that
held the foundation and lived good lives, we hope well; nor were several of the
most destructive errors ever enforced upon the belief of men, before the
Conventicle of Trent; and there may, and no dobut are many amongst the Papists
at this day, who though conforming to them in outward Ceremonies, yet hold not
the errors of Popery positively, but keep themselves to the old Apostolic
Faith, and of such persons Salvation we have no cause to despair. God grant
that the rest also may see their deformities* and upon what a dreadful
precipice they stand, and revoke their errors, and hearken to the call of God
to come out of Babylon, lest they are partakers of her plagues, and join
themselves with a sincere heart to the true Church of God, and so be saved.

The COURANT.
Tory. YOu see, our Reverend guide, disowns the Translation of The History of
Calvinism. Alas! good pious man! he declared it unfit to be turned into English.


Truem. Sure no more unfit than Pere Simon, which is sold in Paul's Church yard
as commonly as the Practice of Piety. They were L'Estranges own Pupils that
reported he was upon that Job, but possibly he may have dropped the Design,
finding it smell too Rank; or thought it unfit to be Englisht in wholesale,
That so he may more advantagiously retail the good Fathers notion in
Observator's four times a Week.


Tory. But for all that -- He Is satisfied, that John Calvin Introduced his
Government and Discipline by a Rebellion, [Observ. N. 139.]


Truem. Tho I have nothing to do with Calvin or his Discipline, yet I must tell
L'Estrange to his Beard, though he wore a Sword three Inches longer than he
does, That in this particular He lies ( to use his own Phrase) like a
Kidnapper, or any dying Jesuit. For the Bishop of Geneva had quitted that City,
and the Form of Government was popular before ever Calvin came amongst them.
The judicious Hooker ( a Testimony more valuable than a million of Observators)
in the Preface to his Ecclesiastical Policy, gives this account of that Affair.
At the coming of Calvin thither, the Form of their Civil Regiment was popular,
as it continues at this day! neither King, nor Duke, nor Nobleman has any
Power or Authority over them, but Officers chosen by the people, yearly out of
themselves to order all things with public consent: For spiritual Government
they had no Laws at all agreed upon, but did what the Pastors of their Souls by
persuasion could win them unto: Calvin being admitted one of their Preachers,
and a Divinity Reader amongst them, considered how dangerous it was that the
whole Estate of that Church should hang on so slender a thread, as the liking
of an Ignorant Multitude is; if it have power to change whatsoever it lists:
Wherefore taking unto him two of the other Ministers for more Countenance of
the Action (albeit all the rest were against it) they moved, and in the end
persuaded with much ado the people to bind themselves by Solemn Oath, First,
never to admit the Papacy again; and Secondly, to live in Obedience to such
Orders concerning the exercise of their Religion, and the former Ecclesiastical
Government, as those their true and faithful Ministers of Gods Word, had
agreeably to Scripture set down for that end and purpose.

Now prithee, where is the Treason or Rebellion in all this?


Tory. Come! come, have you observed Roger's Advertisement N. 138. What a
damnable kindness he has for Dr. Oats -- If any man will be so kind and
generous, as out of an affection to the Protestant Religion, etc. to call
Simson Tongue to a Legal account, etc. Roger L'Estrange out of a zeal to a
public good, will furnish Authentic Papers and Materials, etc. -- What in the
name of Nonsense is the meaning of all this?


Truem. Why, first here is Roger, honestly declares, that is he not a man that
has any affection to the Protestant Religion; for if he had, he might (being so
well furnished with Tools and Materials) call Tongue to an account himself,
without putting others upon it, if it be a business that will (as he pretends)
be a Service to the Protestant Religion. But 2 ly. There seems a greater
mystery* Roger has more than once been tampering with this Mr. Tongue, and at
Christmas last renewed his Intrigue with him, much about the same time,
Fairwell and Pain began privately to broach their Sham; now if Godfrey's Murder
could have been turned off, and people been made believe that Dr. Tongue and
Dr. Oats contrived and invented the whole Scheme of the Plot, so Artificially
that it deceived the King and four Parliaments, and all the Judges, etc. Then
how innocent would the poor Roman Catholics appear? and what glorious Martyrs
Whitebread, Coleman and the rest? But this trinkling with young Tongue taking
wind, Roger cries Whore first, and fills the World with Exclamations, that Mr.
Tongue forsooth! had a Plot upon -- But Roger! Roger! for all your Lapwinging,
there is more of this matter known, than you are aware of, and there will come
a day of Reckoning.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 26. 1682.
Quocunque aspicies nihil est nisi Terror and Orcus.
That the present Faith of the Church of Rome is to be refused upon pain of
Damnation. The Woes threatened to them that abide in her Communion. Greater the
Sin, and more sore the punishment of such as revolt unto her. The Judgment of
the ancient Divines of the Church of England in the Case.
TO reinforce and corroborate what we offered in our last of the extreme
hazard, all that continue in the Romish Church at this day, do run in Relation
to their Eternal State; We shall now advance, and endeavor to Demonstrate the
following Proposition, viz.

That the Faith of the Church of Rome, is to be refused upon pain of Damnation.

And First, For Explanation of the Terms. -- By the Faith of the Church of
Rome, is understood the Doctrine of the said Church, delivered to be believed
of all men that (...) to be saved, as matters revealed by God to that end. And
this is ^^^sidered as one individual or singular thing, for though indeed it be
divided into several Articles of which it consists, yet it is conceived by
themselves as one entire Body, because they are all knit together by the same
Bond; namely, by being assented to and believed upon one and the same reason,
and all to be received on pain of the same Anathema -- Thus Fisher the Jesuit
(under the Mask of A. D.) in his Treatise of Faith, Ca. 4. -- Faith must be
entire, whole and sound in all points, and it is not sufficient steadfastly to
believe some points, mis-believing or not believing other some or any one. --
For not to believe any one Point whatsoever, which God by revealing it, does
testify to be true, and which by his Church he has commanded us to believe,
must needs be damnable, as being a notable Injury to Gods Verity, and a great
disobedience to his Will. -- And that Chamaelion the Archbishop of Spalatto,
when he was returned to his Vomit in his Consilium Reditus p. 20. asserts the
same. -- All Articles (says he) of Faith determined by the Church are
fundamental, none of them may be denied without Heresy. -- Thus every Member
of the Church of Rome, must as steadfastly and absolutely believe the least
point of Relics, Images, Purgatory, etc. delivered by the Council of Trent,
as the greatest mysteries of the Godhead, Trinity, Incarnation, etc. And if he
deny any of the former, he is no less an Heretic, than if he denied any of the
latter: Yea, though he believe all that they propound to be believed, save some
one, he is for want of believing that one (if he know that the Church propounds
it to be believed) a Miscreant or Mis-believer: The reason of which is this,
that if the Church may err in one thing, it may err in another, and so can be
no sure foundation of Faith.

Now to refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome, is nothing else, but not to
acknowledge the Doctrine by her delivered to be true, but to abhor it as false;
not of every particular point, but of all jointly together: For we freely
acknowledge, that the Papists do hold several great mysteries of Divinity truly
and soundly, wherein we also agree with them, but yet we may not receive their
Faith for true, as it is by them delivered, for one Entire body of Divinity
revealed by God, to be believed by all men that will ^e saved. So that to
refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome is not to believe that it is true, or to
believe that it is false, and this we say is required by every man upon pain of
Damnation.

Which words, -- Upon pain of Damnation are not so to be understood, as if we
presumed to pronounce sentence of Condemnation against all that continue in the
Church of Rome, we have disclaimed such Temerity; but thereby is meant, that
the believing that Doctrine as a matter of Faith, is a thing in it self
damnable, that is, such as makes a man liable to damnation. How it shall fall
out with particular men in the event, we neither know, nor take upon us to
inquire, only we say, that their mis-belief is such a sin, as sets them in a
state of Damnation.

To prove this, we must consider,

That there are Two ways, by which sin leads a man into the state of
damnation: The one is, the desert or fitness it has to procure damnation: The
other is, the actual meriting or deserving of Salvation. Into the former, sin
casts a man off it self. Into the latter he falls as by sin, so by the
Ordinance or Decree of God who has laid the penalty of Damnation upon it.
Hence arises this Argument against receiving the Faith of the Romish Church.

That which makes a man unclean in Gods sight, has a fitness to procure
Damnation: For unclean things are unmeet for the presence of God, and
consequently meet for Damnation; -- But the Faith of the Church of Rome, makes
a man unclean in the sight of God: For it is erroneous in so high a nature (as
we have proved that it makes a man guilty of High Treason against God, by
Installing the Pope in the Throne of God, giving him Power and Authority to
determine as a Judge what is matter of Faith, and what not, without any
Commission or Warrant from God. Nor do they only give him authority to
Interpret the Scripures, but also allow him to set up a Forge [of Tradition]
where he Hammers what he lists, and Vends it to be received upon pain of
Damnation, for the word of the ever living God. What is it to fulfill that of
the Apostle, 2 These. 2. 4. To sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he
is God, if this be not? And must not all they needs be accessaries to this High
Treason, that acknowledge such his Usurped Authority, and yield obedience to
it? Or how can it be reasonably denied, that there is a worthiness and fitness
in the Faith of the Church of Rome to procure Damnation?

Therefore nothing remains but the Ordinance or Decree of God, to appoint
Damnation as a punishment of this sin, according to the desert thereof. But
that was passed long since by the Lord himself -- You shall put nothing to the
word which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4. 2, and 11. 30. There Is the Precept, and the
Penalty is expressed, Rev. 21. 18. If any man shall add to these things, God
shall add to him the Plagues that are written in this Book. But more plainly, 2
These. 2. 11, and 12. The Lord shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe lies, that all they might be damned which believe not the truth.
Here we see the Lord wrappeth them up in Damnation by his Sentence that believe
Lies (that is) false and erroneous Doctrine, nor agreeable to the Truth which
they ought to believe. -- What then is wanting to them to make the Faith of the
Church of Rome damnable, and the Professors thereof liable to Damnation, when
both the thing it self deserves it, and the Lord has decreed, that they which
believe it, should have according to their desert?

Since therefore it thus plainly appears, that every man is bound upon pain of
Salvation, to refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome, in what a desperate case
are those that continue in it? It Is not for nothing that the Almighty God of
Love and Compassion makes Proclamation by his Sacred Herald, Rev. 18. 4. Come
out of her people, lest ye perish with her, and partake of her Plagues. We have
a famous example in that depravation of the true Religion, and setting up of
Idolatry under Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14. The Levites [that dwelt amongst those
Revolted 10 Tribes] left their Suburbs and their Possessions that belonged unto
them [a great Act of self-denial] and came to Judah and Jerusalem, to do the
Service of the Lord in the Temple there. And after their example many people
out of all the Tribes of Israel (that abhorred Jeroboam's Idolatry) came
thither also for the true worship of God: They knew to abide amongst Idolaters
would bring them to destruction.

But if such wrath attend those that continue in that Communion wherein perhaps
they were Born and Educated, and to which sinkt by so many Chains of
prepossession, and hardened against truth with a thousand prejudices, what
Indignation may those expect, who were born in Goshen, within the daily sound
of the Gospel, and free tenders of the word of Life, in a Land of Bibles,
baptized into a Reformed Church, engaged for by Protestant Sponsors, Educated
by Religious Parents, and under the sweet distillations of Divine Manna, from
the Lips of sound and able Preachers, If such as these I say will be trudging
back to the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt, if these Apostatize after so much
light, and embrace Popish darkness, What remains -- But a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation which shall devour the
Adversary. He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy under two or three
witnesses; of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under Foot the Son of God [in his Sovereignty, Laws and
Ordinances] and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
Sanctified an unholy thing [imperfect without the Virgins Milk and Saints
Intercessions] and has done despite unto the spirit of Grace. -- As the
Apostle argues in the same Case, Hebr. 10. 27.

It is reported by Ireneus cont. Haeres. L 3. Ca. 3. And by Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History L. 3. Ca. 25. That Holy and Beloved Apostle St. John,
when he spied Cerinthus the Heretic in the Bath where he was, made all the
haste he could possible to be gone, apprehending it dangerous to be under the
same Roof with him. Yea the very Heathen (as Tully de natura deorum L 3.
witnesses) being at Sea in a violent storm, were much afraid of being
Ship-wrackt, because they had Diagoras the Atheist abord amongst them. I would
to God some Protestants were but as careful for their Souls, as (I say not the
Apostle, but) the Heathen were for their Bodies, and used the same discreet
caution to provide for their Eternal Salvation, as they had to procure their
Temporal safety. Neither was the Apostle any thing concerned in the Impiety of
Cerinthus, or these Heathens with that of Diagoras, and yet both He and They
doubted some evil might befall them because they were in the Company of such
profane wretches? And can any Protestant Imagine, that he may be free from
danger, though he join in Faith with the Pope that great Antichrist, though he
harbor those Locusts, Priests and Jesuits, and converse daily with them, and
hearken to their Siren Music, and Imbibe their gilded poison, out of that Cup
of Fornication wherewith they have Intoxicated the Kings of the Earth? No, No,
touching of Pitch always defiles. It cost Jehosaphat dear, though he were
otherwise a good King for going to War with Idolatrous Ahab against a common
enemy. For what said Hanani the Seer, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Would thou help the
wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore for this thing, the wrath
of the Lord is upon thee.

What then may they look for, who like the Laodiceans are lukewarm, neither hot
nor cold, altogether indifferent whether they be Papists or Protestants,
prepared to shift their Religion, as the humor of the Successor shall happen,
such as are not ashamed to declare beforehand, that they had rather be Papists,
than join with any of the Reformed Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, that
scoff at the very name Protestant, and make it the best part of their Religion
to swear and damn and rail against, and persecute all those pious peaceable
Protestants that cannot (suppose it be through the error or weakness of their
Conscience) come up to the usage of some insignificant Ceremonies acknowledged
to be indifferent, though otherwise sound in their Faith, Loyal to their King,
readily paying all Taxes, useful to the public, and peaceable to their
Neighbors, whilst at the same time these high soaring Nominal Sons of the
Church of England (as they love to style themselves, though there is scarce one
in forty of them, but either is ignorant of, or does not believe her Articles)
shall speak well of, applaud and caress Papists, and argue for their
Principles, and extenuate for their Treasons, etc. what shall we say of such
people? -- The Lord Rebuke them.

But least we should seem Fanatical in this assertion, that the Faith of Rome
is to be refused on pain of Damnation, we shall here add some Testimonies of
the Reverend Fathers and Divines of the Church of England. 1. The famous Jewel
in the defense of his Apology, part. 6. Ca. 22. Div. 2. We have departed (says
he, speaking of the Church of Rome) from them who have utterly forsaken the
Catholic Faith. 2. Dr. Reynolds Conclus. 5. -- The Church of Rome is not
distempered with a little-Ague, such as hinders not greatly the functions of
life, but is sick of a Canker, or rather of a Leprosy, or rather of a
Pestilence, insomuch that she is past hope of Recovery. 3. Dr. Whitaker de
Eccles. Cont. 2. Quaest. 6. C. 1. handling this Question exactly, An Ecclesia
Romana sit vera Ecclesia Christi visibilis; whether the Church of Rome, be a
true visible Church of Christ, resolves it in the Negative and goes on; eam nos
non modo non solam Catholicam etc. we say not only that it is not the only
Catholic, but not at all Catholic, Not Only Not Catholic, that is,
Universal, but we affirm it is not a true particular Church of Christ. Quare
deserendam esse ab omnibus etc. And therefore we say, she [the Church of Rome]
ought to be forsaken of all, who would be saved; as the Synagogue of Antichrist
and Satan, it is not any Church at all, nullam in ea salutem in ea sperandam
esse, there is no salvation to be hoped for in it. With which home Testimony of
so great Luminary of the Church of England, we shall conclude.

The COURANT.
Truem. What have got there so busily poring upon?


Tory. By the Mass, a most Divine Scrol! and as I am credibly assured, found in
the Friary at the late Fire at St. James's. I'e warrant ye, if I knew the Holy
Father that lost it, and did but Restore it, he would straight forgive me all
my Drinking and Whoring.


Truem. Ah! but how would you come off for your Lying and Slandering the Whiggs
with notorious scandals, which is your daily practice?


Tory. Pshaw! all that is so far from Criminal, that it is meritorious; but
there is another thing troubles me, the Plague on it is, though the Priest
compound one's sins with Heaven; he cannot get Releases from stubborn Earth; if
he would but as easily wipe out my Landladies Chalk, and cross my Surgeons
Bills, as he can mutter out an absolvo te, he were a rare fellow indeed!
However I Will away to Thompson or L'Estrange (they are the two great Internuntii
of Intelligence between the Cloistered Monks, and the Lewd world) and have an
Advertisement, and make the most on it.


Truem. Prithee let us hear it first.


Tory. I Will warrant, you had rather hear one of Baxter's tedious Sermons; but
to vex thee, and show thee what a dainty curious Religion we may with good
Industry one day arrive at, I Will read it from the original Copy (if that be not
one of Heraclitus's Bulls) as follows.

A Revelation from God Almighty done unto St Bridget, First Printed at Rome in
the Italian Language, afterward in Dutch, in French, and now in English.

Know my loving Friends, that when I was Apprehended of the Barbarous Jews, I
received a hundred Buffets upon my Cheeks, and upon my Lips, thirty blows with
Fists; when I was taken in the Garden of Olivet, I fell seven times, going from
one side to the other, I fell often; and to make me rise up again, I received
of the Jews two hundred and five Kicks; I also received seventy two upon my
Arms; and eighty two Blows upon my Shoulders; I also received twenty two Blows
round about my Loins, they drew me up by the Hair eight and thirty times; I was
shouted at a hundred and five times; I have been drawn up by the Hair of my
Head from the Earth eight and thirty times; upon the Pillar I received one
deadly wound, and on the same Pillar received six thousand six hundred fity
six. Blows, I was whipped to the Bones too, and twenty times they gave me a
hundred deadly wounds, with pressing on the Crown of Thorns: I had three
deadly wounds upon the Cross, they spit upon my Face two and twenty times, the
Soldiers that apprehended me w^^^ five hundred and eight in number, and they
that followed me were three hundred and three, of them that led me bound there
were three hundred and three, I spilt out of my^ Body three millions eight
thousand four hundred and thirty six drops of Blood. -- They that pray daily
seven Pater Noster's, and seven Maria's, until the number is filled of my Drops
of Blood, I will give them five Graces: The First, he shall not come in
Purgatory. Secondly, the same Graces, as if he had shed his Blood for the
Catholic Faith. Thirdly, the Soul of his Friend shall have hope not to come to
Purgatory. Fourthly, if he die before the number is finished, it shall be
holden as if it were accomplished. Fifthly, they that carry this about them in
Devotion, shall not die without being visited of the most Blessed Mother Mary.

Set thy Intention to give God daily thanks, that God for thy Salvation has
spilt so many Drops of Blood, that thereby thou may gain God's Grace, Amen.


Truem. This is goodly Gear in Earnest! I wish you a good Market for it, but in
the mean time prithee what is the meaning of your friend Hodg with his
Sham-Letter from Scotland?


Tory. Troth! I think the old fellow's mad, or has an ambition not to be out
rivaled by Thompson in Roguery of that kind; what the Devil need he take such
pains publicly to be the Papists Advocate, they can shift well enough for
themselves, his Post is to pelt the Non-Con folks; really the man is grown too
open of late, and our friends of the Crape-gown are forced to be ashamed of
him. If he continue to scribble so many Observators a week till the Dog-da^s,
there is no remedy, we must prvide a Lodging for him at Hogsdon, or an Apartment
opposite to his quondam fellow Servant Oliver's Porter.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 2. 1682.
Quid primum discendum est in Schola Christi nisi ut Renunciemus nobis?
Whether any Protestant may in compliance, or for fear, etc. be present at Mass
without grievous sin?
IN discharge of our promise, N. 18. we now come to consider this Question.
Whether any Person that has been Educated in the Protestant Religion, and
rightly instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel; may if he happen to live
amongst Papists, or Popery should prevail, be present at their Mass, and
Communicate with them in the rest of the Ceremonies by them used, without
offending of God and hazarding his Soul.

By our stating this Quaere, the Reader may perceive we speak not here of those
who out of curiosity happen to go into a Popish Chapel or the like, merely to
see the manner of their Foppish Ceremonies, though yet I must say even this is
not unattended with danger, for as those that out of wantonness imitate
Stammerers, many times come to stammer themselves against their wills; so if
People will thrust themselves into Temptation, who knows but God may give them
up to believe Lies? -- But that which we intend in this Discourse, relates to
such as know already what the Mass is, but for some carnal reasons, out of
fear, or in compliance with the times, etc. do resort thereunto, and this we
averr they cannot do, without great and dangerous sin. For,

1. Though God, by the wise Preacher says to every man, My Son, give me thy
heart, and that without the inward affection, all external Postures of Devotion
are vain, yet it is also true, that God requires the whole Man, and we must
serve him with our Bodies, as well as with our Spirits; for which he himself in
his Holy Word Assigns the Reason, viz. Because the one as well as the other is
his, since our Bodies are Redeemed with the Blood of a Crucified Jesus of
infinite value, shall we dare to prostitute the same before an Idol? since they
ought to be Temples of the Holy Ghost, will you pollute them with abominable
Sacrilege? since they are designed for a blessed Immortality, and to be
partakers of Divine Glory: How vile a thing is it to sully them with assisting
at loathsome Superstitions. St. Paul envying against Uncleanness, uses this
very Argument. -- Your Bodies are Members of Christ; how monstrously wicked
then is it to make them Members of an Harlot? when the Lord speaks of his
faithful Servants, he Characterizeth them by this special note. They have not
bowed the Knee to Baal, nor have kissed his Hand. He might have said, they are
not corrupted with Superstition, or they do not own Baal for God, but to
express that the same was not enough, the Holy Spirit by name declares, that
they have not so much as by outward gesture exhibited any worship to the Idol,
and does he not by this Description admonish us also to abstain from all such
Pollution, if we would be accounted of the number of his people?

But you will say, you keep your hearts right to God, and whatever others do,
you fix your Devotion on him, and know that it is abomination to direct your
prayers unto, or to expect help from an Idol, and therefore you address your
prayers only to God, though with your Face directed toward an Image. With this
very pretense, the Corinthians of old endeavored to excuse themselves, when
Paul reprehended this Crime in them, 1 Cor. 8. They went to the Feasts which
were kept in honor of Idols, and with others were partakers of those solemn
Banquets. But did they do this superstitiously? No, for Paul, as in their
person, brings in this excuse, -- We know that an Idol is nothing, whatever men
esteem it, and that there is but one God. But the Apostle does not take this
for a sufficient Plea, but tells them, that for all that, a weak Brother that
sees them, may conclude that they do it in honor to the Idol, and so by your
example may be tempted to Idolatry. When the wicked Sacrifice to the Devil,
whoever in such an action mixes himself with them, adjoyns himself to the
Devil, you cannot at once be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of
Devils, whoever chooses the one, must of necessity renounce the other.

Were such evasions of a good Intention to be allowed, how rashly and foolishly
did Daniel's Companions expose themselves? Could not they thus have concluded
amongst themselves, others indeed will Worship the Image which the King has
set up, but we though we bow before it, will still Worship the living God. In
the mean time to avoid danger, we will go with the Crowd, and pretend to do, as
they do, would such a Cavil have excused them before God? sure none will dare
to say it. What then, shall we ^ame them for an inconsiderate Zeal, that they
would rather be cast into a fiery Furnace, than by dissembling, derogate from
the Honor of God? This we cannot do, because the Holy Ghost expressly commends
them for this noble Resolution and Constancy, and Heaven gave Testimony to it
by a Miracle; and what is written is for Example and Instruction.

But how witty is man to find out Glosses and Colors to palliate his Crimes;
some fancy to eyade all this by saying: These things are true of Heathen
superstitions, who sinned not only in using ill Ceremonies, but also by
Worshipping false Gods, and therefore it is no wonder, if the Lord did so
abominate their Rites, but this is nothing to the Papists, for though the
Worship of God be corrupted amongst them, yet they have no other intention but
to Worship the true God.

But to this, I answer, whenever the World goes about to Worship God in a
perverse and unlawful manner, at the same Instant it Adores an Idol with
whatsoever varnish it may color its impiety. In vain do those that set up
Superstitions Condemned by God, allege that they mean thereby to Worship God;
for since that the Lord neither has instituted, nor will accept thereof, such
Worship is exhibited to the Devil, rather than to him; For which cause the
Apostle Paul speaking of those who turn' (...) Corruptible Image, says, they
served the (...) Brazen Serpent was not made by the Capricio of men, but by the
Command of God; nor was it only a Symbol of a Divine Benefit, but also a Type
of Christ. In aftertimes this was abused to Idolatry, nor did that abuse want
a specious pretext of the name of God: Now suppose any one had feigned to
Worship that Serpent to accommodate himself to the Superstition of the Rabble,
would any say he were guiltless? The Golden Calf was made by Aaron to represent
the true God; but being against God's Command, and contrary to Truth, the Lord
pronounced it Idolatry. The like may be said of Jeroboam's Calves, for he did
not pretend to Introduce any new God, only set up those Figures to prevent his
people's going up to Jerusalem to pay their Devotion, whereby he thought the
State of his Kingdom would be endangered, yet still it was gross Idolatry,
because he instituted a Rite without warrant from the Word of God, and contrary
to the Divine Command. Now if any one had offered Sacrifice there, not
cordially, but only in Complement to the King, would he have been innocent? or
do we read of any of the Servants of God, paying their Devotions there? or
rather on the contrary, do not we find that God by his Prophets continually did
forbid and condemn the same? Was the Temple at Samaria Dedicated to Jove or
Mars, to Baal or Ashdod? No, no, 'twas Consecrated to the God of Israel; but
was it ever the more lawful to Worship there? Secret Idolatry though varnish't
with the name of God, is prohibited, as well as that which is open, as was that
of the Gentiles.

But the better to understand wherein, and how far it may be lawful for a
Christian to whom God has made known the Abominations which abound in the
Popish Church to Communicate with them, we must note, that of those things
wherein they place the Worship of God, some are inventions directly contrary to
God's Word, some other are depraved and corrupted by latter use, though
originally not evil.

2. Some of their Ceremonies are in no sort to be excused, since they contain
apparent Idolatry, others are vain and foolish, which yet do not defile a man,
unless he have entertained a Superstitious Opinion in observing them.

3. Some things are there wickedly Imposed and Commanded, which yet a man may
observe without offense; others which neither can, nor ought in any manner to
be observed. I shall not enlarge on each of these, it is enough in general to
have hinted them, and to show that I intend not to forbid a Christian Man
wholly and without exception from Communicating with the Papists in any Rite,
Ceremony or Observation whatsoever: I only show the danger of being partakers
with them in what is plainly evil.

As for Example, Mass is every day said, those that would appear Religious go
thither, can this be excused? A Person but meanly instructed in the Gospel,
cannot but know that that action is abominable Sacrilege. For how can any man
bow down before an Idol (their Breaden God is no more) with a design that all
present shall think that he does it unfeignedly, and not sin grievously in so
doing. If this be not Criminal, what means that of the Holy Ghost, whereby we
are forbidden to have any Communion with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather to reprove them. I see a wicked work adoing, and odious to God, I thrust
my self in, and make as if I approved it, with what Face, with what Forehead
can I afterward deny, that in so doing I have sinned? For what is this, but to
boast with those ungodly ones of whom David speaks, Let us do whatever we list,
God sees not?

But you will say, though you freely confess, that in the Mass there be many
corruptions, yet in your Opinion it is a Remembrance of the Lords Supper, and
in that respect you come there to be put in mind of our Lords Death. But tell
us, I pray, what Similitude has the Sacrament instituted by our Lord, with
this Mock-Shew. For First, The Papists Imagine their Mass to be a Sacrifice,
which reconciles to God not only the Living, but also the Dead, and is this
think you nothing? Secondly, The Canon, a principal part of the Mass, is stufft
full of Execrable Blasphemies. Thirdly, Herein are Prayers offered up for the
Dead tormented in Purgatory, which we know to be altogether Superstitious.
Fourthly, Were there nothing else amiss but that Diabolical Fiction, whereby
they think that Christ is there offered up to God; That by that Act, the Sins
both of the Living and the Dead may be Expiated; is not this to deny the Death
of Christ? which is made of no value, unless it be acknowledged to be the one
only and perpetual Sacrifice. And is not the Lords Supper hereby Profaned?
These Pollutions can no more be separated from the Mass, than heat from Fire:
And whoever comes to participate thereof, can he be pure and clean, doing such
a filthy work; Is this the Honor we give to God our Father? This the gratitude
we pay to Christ our Redeemer? That when we see them both thus reproached and
dishonored, we not only do oppose, but join our selves Companions in the
Wickedness, and invite others by our Example to do the like.

The COURANT.
Truem. [ Eading] THe Jesuits are hated by all the World, and yet they always
Reign. They are like the Astrologers in Tacitus, Divinatuli genus hominum
potentibus infidum, quod in Urbe and vetabitur semper and retinebitur, A sort
of people treacherous to Princes, (deceiving them with fair promises and vain
hopes) who were always regarded with horror in the City, and yet were always
harbored there; they have been driven out of several states, but they ever
found means to Re-establish themselves. They are the greatest enemies, and the
greatest friends to Monarchies, enemies to those where they cannot govern all
things at their pleasure, and friends to those that entirely submit to their
Conduct. The more Absolute the Monarchy is, the more they love it; for they
themselves are also most Absolute, and govern their Society altogether
Despotically; therefore they hate perfectly Aristocratical and Democratical
Governments, because there they cannot make so grand a fortune, for to do it
it is necessary they should be Confessors to all the Magistrates, and all that
have any share in the Government, who yet still would not be so easily wrought
upon, for it is not to be hoped, that they should all at once be brought to a
Death bed, but there will still some survive that will not accord the Fathers
those advantages they aim at; nor will the Popes Excommunications so soon make
Impressions of fear.


Tory. What the Devil art thou Mumbling there?


Truem. It Is a late French Book that calls it self sure and honest means for
the Conversion of all Heretics: I was Translating a Paragraph of it, part. 2.
p. 56. merely for Exercise, it is good to be a little acquainted with the French
Tongue, for who knows how soon a man may have occasion ^or't, and besides
methought 'twas a pretty notable Description of the Jesuits.


Tory. Prithee let the French and the Jesuits alone, they are honest Fellows,
and mean England no harm; all our danger is from the Whiggs and the Fanatichs,
this Preaching and Praying will undo us. I was glad to see the Blessed Work
began here in the Town the other day, Bristol is a brave Example to follow; what
though the Trade be lost, what is Trade to be valued, when Whiggery is in the
Case? I hope to see all the Dogs Muzzled, and that e're long we shall have no
History but Thompson, nor any Divinity or Politics but the Observator. And
then people will be quiet and not disturb the Government.


Truem. The Government we live under, ought certainly to be regarded with all
respect and veneration, and he that goes about to disturb and vilify it,
deserves exemplary punishment. But there are a parcel of Vermin that horribly
profane the word, for though they are not fit for the Office of a Scavenger,
they call themselves The Government. There was Tory Tom, a Worshipful
Journey-man Barber, who with half a dozen Ruffians like himself, the other
Night waylaid and fell upon an honest Gentleman in Cheapside, that neither saw
any of them before, or gave them the least provocation, and had it is probable
murdered him, if by accident one or two had not come in to his Assistance.
Being taken up for this Exploit, O, cries Tory Tom, -- The Government is on our
side, will you send me to Prison for my Loyalty? as if the Government would
favor Breach of the Peace and Assassinations, or Loyalty consisted in
violation of Laws. Ask Thompson why he Prints horrid Popsh Lies three times a
week, he will tell you ' it is to serve the Government: Why did he endeavor to
Sham Godfrey's Murder? No doubt out of pure Loyalty. Why did Roger forge that
damnable double Printed Story from Scotland on purpose to raise false Scandals?
and get an opportunity to vindicate the Papists. Why still, if you will believe
him, all is for the interest of the Government, when in truth such Villains
pretenses are the greatest Affronts in the World to the Government, and will no
doubt in due time be deservedly punished as such -- Quod defertur non aufertur.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 9. 1682.
An non nimiae Impudentiae est Excusare opus, quo Deus contutumelia afficitur,
and proximi impelluntur ad exitium.
A further detection of the sin of going to Mass, and complying with Papists in
their wicked and Foppish Ceremonies: The Case of Naaman the Syrian explained.
TO deterr any Sober Christian from daring to be present at the Popish Mass; he
needs only consider the horrible Idolatry that is there committed, where a bit
of Bread is adored for God, and no longer esteemed Bread, but God himself. It Is
most true, were the Lords Supper there rightly Administered, there would then be
there a true Exhibition of the Lords Body and Blood, but it would not therefore
follow, either that the substance of the Bread is changed into the Body, or
that the Body lies included under the Bread: For the end of Instituting that
Sacred Supper, is to elevate our Minds to Heaven, not to detain them in the
visible Elements; but indeed by what right does that promise. -- This is my
Body which shall be delivered for you, -- at all belong to the Mass? Before our
Lord promises any thing there of that kind, he commands the Sacrament to be
distributed amongst the Faithful. Is this done in the Mass? No, but on the
clean contrary, the Priest dispatches it all alone as a private affair, and on
such a manner, as if he purposely meant to Excommunicate himself from the whole
Congregation. Christ adds another Command, that we should do This in
remembrance of him, showing forth the inestimable benefit of his Death with
Thanksgiving. But how can this be done in the Mass, where not one word is
understood? but all things are whispered by the Priest with an obscure murmur
and unknown. Furthermore, the Lord directs his word to his Disciples, when
reaching forth the visible sign, Bread, he promises them the Communion of his
Body, but in the Mass there is no such thing, but the Priest after the manner
of Conjurers or Jugglers, blows upon the Bread [ sufflation they call it] that
with a secret Exorcism he may Inchant it. And what is there in all this of
God's Institution? can day and night be more different than our Lord's Supper,
and this Romish Pageantry? What then shall we account the Adoration paid there
to the Bread? Must we not confess it execrable Idolatry, more gross than ever
was practiced amongst the Heathen? and if so, tell us with what forehead, with
what Conscience can any Christian man dare resort thereunto, that he may seem
to Conform, and do as others do? Here Is an Idol erected to that very purpose,
that it may be Worshipped and Invoked in God's stead, I come, and down on my
knees, and publicly profess to adore it, what Fig Leaves, what excuses, what
evasions can palliate so shameless a wickedness?

But let us in some other particulars consider what these complying men must
do, if for sinister ends, and temporal respects, they will, against the
convictions of their Consciences, join in outward Communion with the Papists.
-- They must not only on Sundays come to the Holy water Bottle and Mass, but
also on Holy Days, a great part of which are instituted by Superstition; then
there is a Mass sung in honor of such or such an He or She Saint: Now to omit
that many of their Saints were little better than Devils, and that several of
them as St. Christopher, etc. were mere Phantasms, Romantic Hero's, that never
had Being but in the Lying Legend, etc. passing by all this, I say, and
supposing they were all Saints in good earnest, yet still here is a Mass sung
in honor to a person dead: Now what can be more vile than that the Supper of
our Lord should be transported to such an abuse? Besides what Prayers are there
used, are they not for the most part impious an filled with Blasphemies? and
yet will you voluntarily interest your self in these Profanations, and
countenance them with your presence and complying approbation, and yet hope to
escape guiltless in the terrible judgment of a jealous God, who is of purer
Eyes than to behold vanity, or connive at sin? There is none of us (I speak of
those to whom God has vouchsafed the Light of his Gospel) but is well
satisfied, that the Obsequies of the dead, as they are practiced amongst the
Papists, with the Masses attending them and other appurtenances, are mere
abominations, as well, because they are falsely feigned against the manifest
word of God, as more especially because they extenuate and depreciate the
effect and virtue of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Savior. But now if
it happen any of your Relations, Friends or Neighbors dye, you that call your
self a Christian come with others to attend the Funeral, you are prefent at the
Masses, and pretend with the rest to pray for the Soul of the deceased; dare
you offer to justify all this? if it be your Father or Mother that is departed,
you will presently be smelt out for an Heretic, if you do not only approve of
this Sacrilege, but purchase it with your money, and give so many shillings to
some Priests to say so many Masses to redeem their Souls out of Purgatory. I
will not mention the damnable Superstitions you must run through at Easter,
when you must prostrate your self before the Vicar of Antichrist, some wicked
Popish Priest, who by the authority of the Pope, gives you Absolution, and
injoyns you penance, which perhaps may it self be as great a sin as any you
have committed; as to murmur over so many Ave Maria's, to say so many Prayers
before a Crucifix, to buy so many Masses, etc. and to what end all this, why,
forsooth, that thereby as so many Compensations you may satisfy God for your
sins; if this can be approved and justified, I know not what ought to be
Condemned.

But furthermore when a man has thus spun out his days in Hypocrisy, and lived
in this filth, the last Scene is still the worst in the Tragedy, and that is
when he comes to dye; then come the Priests and the Monks, the Devils Fans to
Winnow him like Wheat, and though he knows they are the very Locusts that
proceed out of the bottomless pit, yet out of complaisance he must seem to
hearken unto them, to be satisfied with their gibberish prayers, to be content
with their lewd Absolution and ridiculous extreme unction, and under what
throws and pangs and tortures of Conscience must such a poor soul lie, when he
perceives he must immediately appear before the Tribunal of that Judge, whose
Truth he dares not to acknowledge, especially when this Sentence shall Echo in
his Ears, that Christ shall disown all those as unworthy of his Kingdom, who
have here been ashamed to confess him before men.

But how fond are we to indulge our sins, and what sorry Shields will men make
use of rather than not have some color of patronage for their crimes? These
Nicodemites, these colloguing Hypocrites, who think they can make a match
between Light and Darkness, and at once pass Homage both to Christ and Belial,
that they may seem cum ratione Insanire to offend God with warrant from his own
word, plead Scripture (the Devil did so of old) for their practice, and
allege the example of Naaman the Syrian 2. Kings 5. who being Miraculously
Cured of his Leprosy, came to acknowledge the true God of Israel, and resolved
not to Worship any other Deity, for so says he to the Prophet Elisha v. 17.
Thy Servant will henceforth Offer neither Burnt Offering nor Sacrifice unto
other Gods, but unto the the Lord. But then in the next verse he comes with
this Reserve -- In this thing the Lord Pardon thy Servant, that when my Master
goes into the house of Rimmon to Worship there, and he leans on my hand, and
I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy Servant in this
thing. -- And the Prophet said unto him -- depart in Peace. -- Which say these
men, implies an approbation or leave for him so to do; if therefore it were
permitted for him rather than lose the favor of the King his Master, to wait
on him into an Idols Temple, and bow down and pay the external signs of Worship
there, still keeping his heart upright to the Lord; why may not we for like
reasons assist at Mass, since in our hearts we contemn and abhor it.

This is the full force of the Objection. To which I answer,

1. My friend, thou that make use of this Plea, I cannot but admire since in
the word of God thou have a general road, the Kings High way plainly set forth
by commands, and hedged in with Prohibitions not to depart from it, and trackt
by all the Troops of Pilgrims to the new Jerusalem, wherein thou can not err;
why do thou rather chuke to decline and start aside after this particular
Example, as into a By-path rarely trodden, where easily thou may go astray?
How come thou so Eagle eyed to discover the^e private passages, and small
Chinks and Crevises, and yet art so blind thou can not see the Door? Can
thou be ignorant that it is a very dangerous thing to follow particular Examples
without some other Warrant? For sometimes to some persons God as by a singular
privilege has permitted that, which to all in general he has forbidden. And
many things he suffers, which he does not approve: We do not read, nor is it
credible that this Syrian General was ever Circumcised, will you hence raise an
excuse to avoid your own being Baptized? what if we should say, thou art more
bound to confess publicly thy Faith, and abstain from all appearance of
Idolatry than Naaman was, because God has vouchsafed unto thee a greater
measure of understanding; because somewhat was indulged to his ignorance, will
you, who are many degrees beyond him in knowledge claim the save privilege?
How absurd, how rash is this? be not deceived, God is neither a Sophister, nor
will suffer his glory to be fullfilled, or his Justice eluded by any
Sophistical tricks or evasions? But,

2. This Scripture is by them abused, and being rightly interpreted, gives not
the least countenance to their practice who allege it; For first you must
note, that this noble Syrian, as long as he lived in Idolatry and Superstition,
with great cost and pomp was wont to Sacrifice to his Idols, for the meanest
men would strain themselves upon such occasions. But now what does he resolve;
that henceforword he would only Sacrifice to the God of Israel. Now what was
that less than to make a public and notorious Profession of his having
abandoned the false Gods and only to cleave to the Lord? whence the world might
as easily perceive, that he was no longer an Idolater, as if he had proclaimed
it with the sound of a Trumpet; For how could they doubt but he had cast off
those Gods to whom he paid no more Offerings as he was wont to do? be, hesides
loads away two Mules with the Earth of Canaan, whereon he might adore the
living God, least otherwise by the contagion of profane Earth his Sacrifice
should be polluted, which was another solemn testimony of his Profession. But
afterward he beggs pardon if he go into the Temple of Rimmon; if he did this,
that he might counterfeit a worshipping of that Idol, it would be some pretense
indeed for them. But the matter is quite otherwise, for the words import only
thus much, -- If the King my Master shall happen to go into the Temple of
Rimmon, and leaning upon my ^oulder, shall worship there, though I bow down in
civil respect to my Prince and Master, let not the Lord impute it to me as
though I worshipped the Idol. The bowing of his body here intended was no
simulation of Idolatry, but a civil duty which he was wont to pay the King.
Those therefore that will defend themselves by this Example, must first purge
themselves from all suspicion of Idolatry, and openly show that they renounce
superstition, and then we shall have no controversy with them, but till then
it is vain and ridiculous for them to think to shelter their impiety under this
president.

Another excuse they would raise out of that pretended Epistle of Jeremy* in
the Book of Baruch chap. 6. where in v. 4. are these words, Now shall ye see in
Babylon Gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood borne upon shoulders, -- be
not afraid of them, (...) but say you in your hearts? O Lord we must worship
hee^ -- I answer, 1. This Epistle is Apocryphal, and so not of sufficient
authority, and 2. the words are nothing to the purpose; the Text only
admonishe^ them when they see them, they should not be afraid of them, but
instead of joining with them in their Idolatry, should pay their Devotions to
God. That of Paul Acts 21. is somewhat more colorably, yet well considered
makes as little for their turn. Paul, say they, though he knew the Ceremonies
of the Law to be abolished, yet to gratify those of his own Nation, shaved his
head (according to Law, Numb. 6. 18.) and vowed and performed a purification
after the manner of the ^aw, ^f this were lawful for Paul to do, we conceive we
ought no more to be forbid the frequenting of Masses and other Popish mysteries,

1. I answer, 1. They are grievously reproachful, first to God in comparing a
Ceremony instituted by himself, with abominable Idolatry, and in the next place
to Paul, unjustly loading him with this infamy, for was it a Ceremony condemned
by God which Paul used? or rather was it not yet an indifferent thing, 'till
the Light of the Gospel should shine more clearly? 'twas certainly a thing for
that time placed in the liberty of Believers, either to practice it or forbear.
The shaving and purgation it is true, were part of the legal shadows, but yet a
Christian might use them to Edification, it being simply no more than a
Sacrifice of praise; and this is that which St. Paul elsewhere witnesses of
himself, That to the Jews he became as a Jew, and to the Gentiles as a Gentile,
that he might bring them all to Christ. How preposterous is it then to bring
this indifferent action to excuse those things which they know are plainly
wicked, as if there were no difference between a man's shaving his head, and his
bowing down before an Idol

2. Observe the Apostles scope, intent or end herein, had he done it to retain
the good opinion of men, or for avoiding danger to his person, it would have
been something to your purpose, but it is evident he yielded to this compliance,
only to avoid giving offense to weak Brethren, and that he might indulge
something to those who were but yet rude in the Faith.

The COURANT.
Truem. WIll not the blind self-seeking party leave
Snares for themselves with their own hands to weave?
Will not the Serpent cease to bruise their Heels,
Whom he pursues, though broken heads he feels?
Will harmless Doves never become so wise
To know the Birds of prey through their disguise?
'Till they are all beguiled with painted shows,
And quite devoured by Buzzard, Kites and Crows?

Tory. What art thou mumbling over a Whig-charm, or some of Withers's Rhymes?
prithee speak to the purpose, and tell us what news? how joggs the slippery
world?


Truem. I seldom read Gazets, nor much trouble my head with the motions of the
superior Orbs. Commend me to the poor honest Muscovite, who resolves all
Inquiries with this profound Reply, -- God and our Great DUKE knows all.


Tory. What, do take me for an Informer, or an Irish Evidence? I do not mean
matters of State man! But how fare our Observators, our Thompsons's, our
Heraclitus's, and all our good friends?


Truem. Brisk, bonny and rampant! O the effects of a promising Midsummer-moon!
Heraelitus takes upon him to Libel Dukes and Earls Cum Privilegio, and bids
defiance to Scandalum Magnatum, and all Law, but that of a Fullers-Rents
(^dgel. Thompson Reprieved from the Pillory till next Term, hopes to hand it
over to Michaelmas ('it is an easy matter to swear that Teague is sick, and
Dermond and Shaire out of Town) in the mean time he vapors and swaggers, and
tells the World N. 16. That he doubts not but to prove his damnable lies by
sixty witnesses, if a Christian Jury can but be returned. The meaning of which
is, a Jury of Papists, for Nat's prompters acknowledge none but Roman
Catholics for Christians. -- O Tempora! O Mores! What an age are we fallen into,
when such a wretched Miscreant, the Off scouring of Jayls, and common Spout of
Popish slanders, dares Arraign the Justice of the Nation, and scandalize the
most Honorable City in the World, as if it contained generally a pack of
Heathers and Villains, without honor, honesty or Conscience, so abandoned to
partiality and perjuries, that scarce twelve honest men could be hoped to be
found amongst them, and all this with Impunity!


Tory. Well! well! honest Not for all this passes for a Loyal useful fellow,
and went very diligently last Sunday to see the Laws put in Execution against
the Conventicle in Jewen street, for the hononr of the Protestant Religion. --
But have you forgot Hodge?


Truem. No Sir! but since he has got that infallible trick of a Scold, resolved
to have the last word, 'twere no great matter (if for a penance) we let him
chatter alone, and observe upon himself for a Month or two. However, out of a
pity to the old Drudge, that he may not want Subject, and so be forced to
trump up more Scotch Letters, we shall bestow upon him a Remark touching that
passage Observe. 143. That the Inscription on the Monument is a rank reflection
on the Papists: You must note this Inscription has long lain heavy on this
Gentleman's stomach, and made it Rejounce several times before. Diverse
Parliaments have been satisfied that London was burnt by the Treachery of
Papists; one of that Crew was legally Condemned and Executed for it; the whole
Body of the City convinced thereof, ordered that Inscription, and that great
and upright Statesman, the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, in that
excellent Speech at the Sentence of that Popish Traitor Stafford, (for which
as I understand he received the thanks of the whole House of Lords) mentions it
as a thing out of dispute, -- Does any man (says his Lordship) now begin to
doubt how London came to be burnt? Yet after all this, comes Squire
Fiddle-faddle the Observator, Rowland Peppins Herald, Roger L'Estrange the
Pamphlet-monger, and he, forsooth, will have it otherwise, and acquit his
Clients the Papists of that Villainy, and by his good will, would tear down both
the Inscription and Monument.

Which yet we hope shall teach Ages to come,
To hate the Treacheries of Barbarous Rome.

Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 16. 1682.
Hoc quidem vulgar est in mundo, ut quisque aliorum peccata Clypei loco ad sua
tegenda opponat.
Some other excuses for going to Mass where it is by Law established, weighed
and found too light. The Plea of those that say they go out of Curiosity
considered. A Pathetical Caution against all such sinful Compliances.
WE have not yet run over all the little Excuses which our Semi-Romanists have
got, for when once carnal wisdom and corrupt nature have engaged a man in an
ill act, they will muster up and furnish him with whole Regiments of Apologies,
Evasions and Sophisms, wherewith to defend, or at least extenuate his practice,
rather than he shall forsake his Dalilah, or abandon the silver shrines, and
that craft whereby he gets his living, though never so unjust, wicked and
unlawful.

One of their Pleas is like that of Lot, begging leave to retreat to Zoar, Genesis
19. 20. Is it not a little one? (only here is the difference he was flying
from, they are posting to [spiritual] Sodom.) They allege this is sure but a
small offense to be present at Mass, and we hope the Almighty, who is a God of
Infinite Mercy will easily pass it by, etc.

To this I answer, though true it is, that there may be comparison between the
commands of God, whereby some are greater and some lesser, as our Savior
pronounces Faith, Righteousness and Charity to be the chief points of the Law,
yet if we consider each command by it self, every one of them is of great
weight, and by a willful breach thereof, we commit no less than High Treason
against that Infinite Majesty, who is the Author and Establisher of such
commands; nor ought we to esteem any thing small or light, that is repugnant to
the Divine Will, especially in a matter of this moment, as we have proved it to
be, tending to advance Idolatry, rob God of his honor, harden Papists in their
impiety, and laying a stumbling block before weak Christians: Remember that
famous History Recorded by Josephus, and in the Book of the Maccabees, touching
Eleazar and the Jewish woman with her seven Sons. All that Antiochus and the
persecutors urged them to do, was only to taste a little Swines-flesh, a small
business you will say, what not eat a bit of Pork? and yet being expressly against
the Law of their God, they all choose rather to dye with exquisite Tortures, and
the reason is notably given by the good old man, 2 Maccab. 6. 24. in these
words, -- It becomes not our age in any wise to dissemble, whereby many young
persons might think that Eleazar being fourscore years old and ten, were now
gone to a strange Religion. And so they through mine Hypocrisy, and desire to
live a little time, should be deceived by me, and I get a stain to my old age,
and make it abominable. For though for the present I should be delivered from
the rage of men, yet I should not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither
alive nor dead.

It Is true, this History is no part of Canonical Scripture, but yet it was
never esteemed Fabulous, but the Church has always reckoned them for Holy
Martyrs, and applauded their Faith and Constancy, and consequently must condemn
those that practice the contrary. In a word, those that repute this feigned
compliance with Idolatry for a little matter, and dare join with Papists in
their damnable Superstitions, know not how highly Gods Honor ought to be
prized by all his Creatures, which have their Being to no other end but to
glorify him, nor have sufficiently weighed that Tremendous Declaration of the
great Jehovah, Isaiah 42. 8, I am the Lord, my Glory will I not give to
another, nor my Praise to Graven Images.

Obj. You will say here is a stir indeed about going to Mass! will you compare
that with the Idolatries of the Heathen? are not the Papists Christians?

I answer, That the Church of Rome is no Church of Christ, we have lately
proved at large; that she is guilty of Idolatry is apparent, and in this
respect, worse Idolatry than the Heathens, because she is fallen into the same by
Apostasy: It Is an aggravation of her Crime that she was once a Spouse of
Christ, a man resents more sensibly the Disloyalty and Adulteries of his Wife,
than those of a common acpuaintance or ordinary friend. Nor is this any other
than the Doctrine of the Church publicly professed and taught in her Book of
Homilies, part the 2. p. 213. -- The Church of Rome as it is at present, and
has been for the space of 900 years and odd, is so far wide from the nature of
the True Church, that nothing can be more. And again, in her Homily against the
peril of Idolatry, she thus plainly expresses her self, That [the Church of
Rome] is an Idolatrous Church, not only an Harlot (as the Scripture calls her
but also a foul filthy old withered Harlot, and the Mother of Whoredme, guilty
of the same Idolatry, and Worse than was amongst Ethnicks and Gentiles.

Thus thought, thus spoke the Church of England heretofore, and whatever some
young flashy heads (who fancy a Reconciliation with Rome, possible) may
pretend, our Church ^^till of the same Ju^gment, witness Dean Stillingfleet's
learned Discourse Of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome; witness to that
excellent and most true Assertion, publicly delivered by the Right Honorable
the present Lord Chief Justice Pemberton at Plunket's Trial, p. 100. That
Popery is a Religion ten times worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions; so
that we have the present Papists not only accused by our Church to maintain and
practice Doctrines and Fopperies worse than Heathennism, and the Charge made
good by our most able Divines, but also judiciously condemned from the Bench
for the same.

However it may be still Objected, what if Popery (which God forbid) should
once again in after Ages gain the Ascendent of England, and the Mass happen to
be Established by Law; may not I, if I am a Minister brought up in the
Protestant Religion comply so far as to say Mass, if it be done purely out of a
good intention, thereby to gain an opportunity of Preaching the saving Doctrine
of Christ to the people for their Edification, who otherwise will be bereaved
thereof.

I answer, as Jehu replied to Joram, talking of peace, 2 Kings 9. 22. What
peace! so long as the Wh^redoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her Witchcr^fts are
so many? So what talk you of Preaching to Edification, when you practice shall
lead to Destruction: This is an excuse that proceeds from the Belly, not from
the Heart, he that makes it, whoever he shall be, has more respect to the
keeping a Fat Benefice than the Salvation of the people, or if indeed his aim
should be right, it will not follow that what he does is not sinful; for good
intentions can never justify bad actions, God indeed sometimes by his
omnipotent providence can promote his word even by means unlawful, being an
All-wise Artist that can bring good out of evil, but shall it therefore be
said, that he approves of the irregularity, or that he is excusable that
commits it? when he that mounts the Pulpit to take upon him the Person of
Christ by instructing the people in the Gospel, under his name and authority,
and performing the office of an Ambassador from Heaven, shall fain a consent
to abominable Idolatry, which is openly repugnant with the chief Scope of the
Evangelical Doctrine, what hopes are there of Edification from such an
Hypocrite? Let such boast their pious designs as much as they please, those
Cobweb pretensions are all instantly swept away and overthrow^^ by this one
word of Eternal Truth, That no Evil is to be done, that good may follow.

Others there are, that allege they haunt Popish Chapels only out of
curiosity, spectatum veniunt, they come merely to see, but let them remember
too -- spectantur and ipsi, they are seen by men; which if Papists, may by
their presence be Confirmed in their Idolatries, and if Protestants, may be
scandalized and perverted by their Example, for who can tell what their
Intentions are, when they do as the rankest Papists do; and (what is yet more)
they are also seen by God, who will revenge and punish such their mispending
their precious time, and abetting of damnable Superstitions. It is not safe to
touch upon the borders of evil; Dinah in curiosity went out to see the Maids of
that Country, otiose spectat, sed non otiose spectatur, her gazing was her
vanity, but her being gazed upon produced worse than vanity; far was it from
her thoughts, that such a petulant curiosity should forfeit her Chastity, yet
we see what a fearful Tragedy ensued. Our great Grandmother Eve expressed more
than an inclination to Fall, in that she presumed to hold Chat with the
Serpent; Peter the Champion of our Lord (the only man whose Sword was drawn in
his Quarrel) is so far infected with the Air of the High Priests Hall, that as
he warmed himself at the Fire, so he cooled in Devotion to his Master, till at
last he utterly denies him, and swears and curses to it like any Tory.

Most dangerous it is to come within the smell of false Religion; Tertullian in
his Book De Co^ona militis, cuts off all appearance of Idolatry, not permitting
Christian Soldiers to wear a Laurel, because Heathen Victinus were encircled
with such Garlands, etiam Draco Terrenus de longinquo non minus spiritu
absorbet Alites, faith the same Father. The Babylonish Dragon will infect with
his Breath even a far off, and will you be so fool hardy as to venture into his
Don? Will any except a mad man run into an house infected, to riffle for a rich
Suit? or dip his hand into a fiery Crucible to pull out Gold? or hazard his
Soul for acquaintance with all Religions? and damn himself in a vain curiosity?
Fly from Idols is the charge of the Beloved Apostle, 1 John 5. 21. I will
destroy those (says the Lord by his Prophet Zephaniah 1. 4.) that swear by the
Lord and Melcham. Justly therefore does the Apostle Paul cut off all
Association with Idolaters (an Association worthy to be abhorred by all true
Protestants.) I would not that you should have fellowship with Devils; no
Society with Devils spiritually by having fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. nor Sacramentally by combining in the practice of a
false Religion. It carries a special Emphasis, Numb. 25. 4. That Israel joined
(or as some. Translations render it, coupled) himself with Baal-peor and what
followed? The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel. He that will be
safe from the act of evil, must wisely prevent the occasions; some indeed by a
kind of spiritual Antiperistasis have thrived in Religion, by being environed
with Heresy and Infidelity, but these men are presidents for wonder more than
Imitation, their paths are not for ordinary steps. Who dares venture on the
mercy of Lions, because Daniel in the Den found a guard? or commit himself to a
flaming Furnace, because the Three Children escaped scorching, It Is merey above
expectation to deliver that man, who willingly casts himself into the mouth of
a Temptation.

To close this Subject, let us therefore beware of Blending Religions, of
thinking at once to serve God and Mammon, of being both Papists and Protestants
as convenience serves. Those that are neither hot nor cold, God will spue them
out. The Jews might not Plow with an Ox and an Ass in the same Yoke. The Church
of Galatia might not endure the Co-partnership of the Jewish Ceremonies. If
Moses and Christ might not stand together, much less Christ and Belial, the
Lords Table and the Altar of Devils. Let us be united within our selves, and
bequeath oppositions to the Monks, and persecution to the Inquisition; learn
manfully and resolutely to defy Rome and Hell, come not within the pale or
scent of her Idolatry, and be ever steadfastly zealous for the Protestant
Religion, whereof Truth is the circumference, and Jesus Christ the Center. This
resolution (to conclude in the words of Mr. Wotton an eminent Divine in the
Church of England) will bring safety in peace, and in war victory, that no ill
tidings shall affright you, (no Plots harm you) no losses discourage you, no
menaces turn you out of the right way; the Lord Jesus himself, like the Angel
in Joshua, will march at the Head of your Troops, and be as a Cloud to refresh
you in the heat of Summer, and as a Fire to warm you in the cold of Winter,
your Swords shall eat the Flesh of your enemies, your Pikes and Bullets shall
be be drunk with their Blood, and Babylon shall be cast like a Millstone into
the Sea, to the Glory of God that has appointed her this punishment, the
increase of Religion, the safety of the State, and the honor in this Life, and
everlasting Salvation in the Life to come. -- Necessity of Separation from the
Church of Rome, p. 295.

The COURANT.
Truem. PUt case I say, that a Gentleman that scarce ever came to Church in
almost twenty years together since His Majesty's Restoration, thinks
convenient (for Reasons best known to himself) to make a Solemn Declaration,
that he is no Papist, etc. and that he intends to take the Sacrament upon it,
and comes on the Wednesday to the Curate and Churchwardens, desiring them to
be witnesses, and they or one of them (knowing him infected with the Itch of
Scribbling) tell him they will sign it, but would by no means have their names
exposed in Print; whereupon he solemnly promises their names shall not be
Printed, yet on the Saturday following Prints them at large, and has them
bawled about all the Streets, [see Observe. Numb. 126.] and yet for all this
premeditated Breach of Faith, (at which an Heathen would blush) roundly goes
next day to the Sacrament. -- What would you think of this man, and the credit
of his Protestation?


Tory. I must needs think him a great Knave, and his Declaration no more to be
credited than a Jesuits under the Gollows.


Truem. Hold, hold, or you will be Excommunicated at Sam's, why our Old Friend in
High Holbourn is the very man.


Tory. How? Nay then the Case is altered: I Will lay a wager he will deny it.


Truem. So the Papists do their Plot, and so it is probable he would the Creed,
when it is for his advantage; but his denial makes it nevertheless a Truth. The
Gentleman's Trade is Leasing-making, and if that were half so Criminal in
England, as it is said to be in Scotland, he had trudged further North-west long
ago.


Tory. Come, come, we shall have you in the Observator.


Truem. I value the driv'lings of an Observator, no more than Harry Care does
the silly Tories impotent malice in burning him in Effigy at Norwich. O
Heavens! how some peoples Fingers itch to be at Fire and Faggot, and will play
at small games rather than stand out. Had not the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo
been unluckily abolisht, they would no doubt have been glad to have Roasted the
poor Fool in bad Earnest; yet know no more harm by him than the Man in the
Moon, only that he has the courage to write against Popery once a week, when
swarms of Libels and Pamphlets are scattered every day to promote it; I had
almost said with Impunity.


Tory. There Is no fear of Popery man; have thou not seen a choice Book
Intitutled -- Plain dealing is a Jewel, etc.


Truem. Yes, though like the Pestilence it yet walks in darkness, I got a sight
of it, by the same token, the Author p. 15. makes a Solemn Declaration (just
like Brother Roger) That he is a Protestant and never was at Mass (in England
you must understand him) in his Life. -- But the Devil cannot hide his Cloven
Foot, for p. 12. he puts us upon Petitioning His Majesty for Mercy to the Few
Papists in England, and to stop their Convictions upon their present
prosecutions [poor Lambs they are shrewdly hurt. Yet some think more has been
actually levied on the Protestants at Bristol within a twelvemonth, than on all
the Papists in England these seven years] and this he recommends as the only
expedient to ease the poor French Protestants from the Persecution. Now I
should have thought, that the Petition for a Cessation of Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters, would be a more likely medium for that purpose; for if
we teaze our Protestant Brethren, merely on the Account of Nonconformity to
our Ceremonies; do we not justify the French King in Harassing those that
differ from his Established Church, not only in Ceremonies, but most material
points of Doctrine too?


Tory. Well, but he tells you that if we should be Blessed with a Popish
Successor, yet it is impossible he should establish Popery.


Truem. That Is the most errant sham in nature, and some day or other when we
meet, I doubt not but to Demonstrate, that in such a case (which Heaven
prevent) the persecution on all forts of Protestants would be much more bloody
and cruel than that in Queen Mary's days; and he that does not already
apprehend why, is only fit for La^ine Prayers, and drinking of Healths with an
Huzza?


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 23. 1682.
Tu Portentorum locus es, conformis eorum, Cum Nilo portenta paris, nutris
Crocodilos. Theodor. a Nyem. L. 3. Ca. 41. ad Romam.
The Papal History after the Council of Constance, prosecuted. The loud
complaints of Clemangis and other learned Godly men of the miserable
corruptions of the Church in those Times. The Life of Martin the V. His tricks
to avoid a Reformation, he dispenses with a man to Marry his own Sister.
THough we have made a long, yet perhaps neither altogether useless nor
unseasonable digression, to give our Countrymen a true Idea of the Church of
Rome, and what a necessity there is incumbent on all true Christians to abandon
her Communion, and not pollute their Souls by mixing with her damnable
Idolatries and Superstitions: We must remember to return and reassume the
intermitted not neglected Thread of Papal History. Which the Reader may remember
we diverted from Numb. the 8. concluding with the flagitious and detestable
Life and justly deserved deposal of that most Holy Monster John the 23 d. ^lias
the 24 th. and that most scandalous tu^g for the u^erring Chair, which for
several years depended between him, and Gregory and Benedict his two
Competitors, who being at last all three cashiered by the Council of Constance:
In their stead was set up Otho Colonna, by the name of Martin the 5 th. The
beginning of whose Popedom their best Chronologies assign to the Year of our
Lord 1417.

But before we proceed to the particular story of his Life, it will be
necessary for clearing some passages that we may meet with therein, to take a
brief review of the lamentable state and condition of the Church in general, in
and about those times, which we find so sensibly described and bewailed by
several pious learned men of that Age, that their complaints seem rather writ
with Tears of Blood than Ink.

Amongst these, Clemangis Archdeacon of Bayeux in France, for his courage and
zeal to truth, deserves to lead the Van; His Book De Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu,
of the corrupt Estate of the Church, as it was produced at the Council of
Constance, so it well deserves every studious Gentleman's Reading, that would
fully satisfy himself touching the horrid abominations of Rome. I shall only
select a few passages, -- Having set forth by what steps and degrees the Church
at one and the same time rose to her temporal height and spiritual declination,
and by what subtleties the Popes engrossed all Dominion, and how greedily they
and their Creatures the Cardinals hunted after gain, he proceeds to their
further Character thus. -- They bear more patiently the loss of Ten thousand
Souls, than of Ten Groats; nay, they regard the ruin of Souls with no
consideration or emotion of mind at all, but for the least diminution of their
own private pecuniary advantages they presently grow mad and furious. -- The
Study of Divinity, and such as make Profession thereof, are made a mere
May Game and Laughing Stock, even (which is most monstrous) to the Popes
themselves, who prefer their own Tradition far before the Commandments of God.
And now that worthy and excellent function of Preaching, sometimes attributed
to Pastors only, is of that base account with them, that they think it too mean
a work for them to meddle with, and that nothing is more unbecoming their
dignity.

The same Author in his Epistle concerning the Study of Divinity, tells us,
That in those days the Monasteries both of Monks and Nuns, [each Sex it seems
was as bad as the other] are become so many Brothel-Houses; their Divinity
merely Scholastic and Chimerical, the very same which St. Paul intended to
describe by those words, -- They dote about Questions and strife of words.
Their fruits are like those of the Lake of Sodom, outwardly fair, but inwardly
smoke and filthy ashes; Ecclesiastical Persons are generally the Successors
rather of Simon Magus than Simon Peter: No man has Orders given him without
silver or gold, nor is any refused or debarred from the sacred function that
brings money, be he never so wicked. To such a prodigy of wantonness and
debauchery are they grown, that their people the better to defend their Wives
chastity from the attempts of these Clergy-stallions, will have no Priests
except such as are known to keep Concubines. The Legends of Saints are read
instead of the holy Scriptures, and the Saints brought into the place of God.
And in a Letter to a Student at Paris, discoursing of the Council of Constance,
he assigns several reasons why no Reformation of the reigning abuses of the
Church was to be expected thence: For, says he, these Carnal Sons of the
Church do not only not regard spiritual things, nor have any feeling of them
themselves, but they persecute those that are according to the Spirit, as ever
since the time of just Abel, whom Carnal Cain murdered, it has been, and will
be to the worlds end. These are they that for Temporal Commodities fly to the
Church, and yet living even worse than secular men, they covet, scrape and rob
all they can, desiring to bear Rule, but not to serve, glorying in their
superiority, oppressing their inferiors, and rejoicing in their own pride and
luxury. They account gain godliness, and are always ready to act or suffer any
thing whatsoever for their temporalities, how lewdly soever they are gotten,
scorning and laughing at all those that are desirous to live justly, holily,
chastely, innocently and spiritually; with such the Church at this day is so
full, that almost in every Chapter and College scarce any other can be found.
And can we imagine that such will endeavor the Reformation of the Church in
manners and discipline, and honesty of Life, who count that Reformation their
greatest Calamity, and desire nothing so much as that it may be lawful for them
to do whatsoever pleases them freely, without control or punishment? -- Thus
far Clemangis of the manners of the Dignified Clergy, almost 300 years ago, and
I wish the Picture may not serve too well for some Ages since.

Nor was he the only complainant, Cardinal Zabarella a famous Lawyer in his
Treatise De Schismate, written about the year 1406, talks much at the same
rate, and affirms, That with the flattering Canonists there was nothing so
unlawful, which they thought not lawful for them to do, insomuch that they
extolled the Pope above God himself, making him more than God, so that (says
he) if God afford not his helping hand to the present state of the Church, it
is in danger of an utter overthrow.

Nor was John Gerson the Learned Chancellor of the Parisian University (who
was also one of the Assistants at the Council of Constance) silent. In his Book
De Examine Doctrinarum, It is not ( says he) in the power of the Pope or any
Council to change what is prescribed by the Evangelists and St. Paul, as some
do Dote: Yea, we are to give more credit in a matter of Doctrine to the
assertion of a simple unlearned man speaking according to the Scriptures, than
to the Declaration of the Pope or Council, being contrary thereunto.

We have seen in what a maimed condition the Church was, and that there were
some able Physicians that both saw, and might they have been suffered, were
able it is probable to have cured her wounds: Nay, all the Empericks at
Constance pretended at least the same design. But they made use of but an ill
expedient, when they elected the beforementioned Martin the Fifth. For though
in the Council he had carried himself very subtly, and under color of
moderation had not only avoided opposing either party, but given each side
grounds to hope him most inclinable to their particular Faction, which much
facilitated his choice, the rather for that the Emperor was much taken with
that stayedness of his temper, and expected no small fruits of Reformation from
so unbiased a Conduct, yet no sooner were his Temples Impaled with the
Triple-Crown, but he appeared divested of that moderation which before he made
show of, and wholly addicted to advance the secular interest, Dominion and
Treasure of his Chair. Therefore when soon after his Election, the Emperor
Sigismund, who had had so great an influence in his promotion, pressed him
earnestly to proceed on vigorously with the promised Reformation, the crafty
old Father wheadled it off, That the Bishops etc. continuing so long together
at Constance, was a great inconvenience to their respective Churches and
charges; that therefore it was now very necessary to give them a short recess?
that Reformation was a thing highly needful, but withal being a matter of great
importance, it required mature deliberation. Therefore he thought fit to
dissolve the Council at present, on condition that another should be called
within 5 years, and in the mean time he would endeavor to prepare matters; and
that afterward in 7 years they should have another Council, and thence
forwards for ever a Decennial one, that is to say, a general Council every 10
years should be convened and sit to Redress the grievances of the Church. --
Having Cajoled them with these fair stories, to make them the rather believe
that he was in honest earnest, he presently ordains and appoints a place for
the next general Synod, viz. That it should be held within 5 years at Pavia in
Italy. And then in the 45 th. Session (they having done very little, or indeed
nothing toward Reforming the Root of all the Churches corruptions, but only
fiddle-fadled about number of Canons for ordering of Annates, Collations,
Reserved Causes, Appeals, Commendums and the like Ecclesiastical Trumpery,
comes Cardinal Winbald, (like the Popes Chancellor) and dissolves them, by
pronouncing these words -- Domini ite in pace -- My Lords, you may be packing,
or get ye gone in peace. Which was done, says Platina, sublato omnium consensu
maxim vero Imperatoris, without any of their consents, but especially against
that of the Emperor.

Nor could the Emperor prevail with Martin to continue a while in Germany, but
he would away for Rome, alleging that in the absence of the Popes, the Saints
Chapels were gone to decay, and (which was a more cogent reason by half)
Tyrants had seized a great part of St. Peter's Patrimony. He was no sooner got
into Italy, but he engaged in several wars, and reduced the Duchy, Spoletto,
Perusia, Bononia and other places which had set up for themselves: He likewise
made Lewis of Anjou King of Naples, though Joan the Queen thereof had before
declared Alphonsus King of Aragon her H^ir.

The time being come for holding the Council at Pavia, the Pope for fashion
sake sends thither one Archbishop, a Bishop, an Abbot and a Friar, who met
there only two Abbots of Burgundy, and these six began forsooth a Council; a
Worshipful Representation of the whole Catholic Church on Earth! But the
Plague breaking out, they adjourned from thence to Sena, where things not
fadging just as Pope Martin would have them, he quickly gave that Assembly too
a Writ of Ease, without their effecting any thing. But for a color still
promises to call frequent Councils, and that next seventh year they should have
one at Basil.

Having thus shamed off the means of Redressing the Churches grievances, and
correcting abuses, he settles at Rome, and begins to re^edify several decayed
buildings, which the Romish Historians gloriously Entitle Restoring the Church.
But his main business was to scrape money together. For says Antoninus, He was
generally blamed as one that too greedily labored to heap up riches, being in
no wise able to say with the Apostle (whose Successor he pretended to be)
silver and gold have I none. But all his vast Treasure was lewdly consumed by
his Kinsmen, and especially by his Nephew the Prince of Salerno, to whom it
fell by his death, he bestowing most of it on hired Soldiers and Enemies
against the Church.

And now he had spun out the time, till the Council at Basil was to Assemble,
how he would have shuffled it off, or rendered it insignificant, we know not,
since then God was pleased to cut him off, dying of an Apoplexy the 20 of
February 1431. in the 53 year of his Age, and when he had held the Chair 13
years 3 months and 12 days.

This is that Pope whom many flattering Popish Authors extol for his virtues to
the Skies, when yet besides his sordid covetousness and other pranks
beforementioned, Angelus de Clavasio, a Friar Minorite, in his Book called
Summa Angelica, in the word Pope affirms, that this very Martin after long
consultation, gave a man leave to marry with his own Sister, dispensing with
the Positive Law of God and Nature.

This Pope likewise was a very busy stirrer up of persecutions and bloody wars
against the poor Bohemians as Heretics, they having sometime before embraced
Wickliffs Doctrine. But of this, and the other troubles of those people for the
sake of the Gospel, we shall take another opportunity to discourse.

The COURANT.
Truem. MEthinks you look Cloudily to day, Monsieur Tory? does Tuesdays Verdict
stick in your Gizzard? would not the Sham take? Could not poor Not get a
Christian Jury (as he called it) that might believe the Sun was a Bottle of
Ink, and that Sir Edmondbu^y Godfrey Killed himself 4 days after he was
Murdered?


Tory. Prithee why d^ee talk so? you know I never justified that story, I think
'twas very ill done, and the Contrivers of it deserve to be punished.


Truem. Why, this it is, for a man to be unfortunate, and down the wind; his
friends straight abandon him, as vermin run from falling Houses. All the while
bonny Not was towering upon the wing, alarming the world with his Regiments of
Five-Hundreds, and his Troops of Sixty's, that should Swear Canon-pooof, and
drive the Nail home and Clench it, then you and all your party appeared openly
in favor of the welcome News -- I know not what to think on it, says one, I was
never satisfied in that business of Godfrey's Murder. Nay, quoth a second,
there are shrewd Circumstances in these two Letters to Prance, they are
ingeniously Penned, and a great deal of weight in them. Alas, Sir! adds a third;
it is not to be doubted but he can make it all out (and by such a number of
Protestant Witnesses too, not so much, you see, as a suspected Papist is
concerned) else you must think he would never write so confidently, I fancy
here will be a notable discovery, and then what will become of Madam Plot, when
she has lost one of her main Crutches. Damme, concludes the fourth man, that
story of Godfrey's being Killed at Sommerset-house was all Bubble; why the
Devil should the Papists meddle with him? the three poor fellows were merely
sworn out of their Lives, and so were all the rest; that noise of a Popish Plot
was nothing in the world but an intrigue of the Whigs to destroy the Kings best
Friends, and the Devil fetch me to Hell in a Hand basket, if I might have my
will, there should not be one Fanatical Dog left alive in the three Kingdoms.
-- This Gentlemen was wont e're while to be the style of Discourse at Sam's and
Margarets, and now when the Oracle Nathaniel's 600 and 60 witnesses are
dwindled to half a dozen, and they only served to prove him and his associates
impudent lying villains, and that he is like to scour a Pillory; do you desert
the Cause, and come sneaking like a Quaker, and Cry -- Friends never owned it?


Tory. A Pillory! never fear it. Not I Will promise you has friends in a Corner;
what he did was only to Print the Papers for money in the way of his Trade, and
he has discovered his Authors, what would you have more of the honest man?


Truem. I will not presume to prejudge his doom; I doubt not but the Reverend
Judges will do him and the Nation Right, but for what you allege, that he did
it for others, in way of his Trade, will for him be but a vain excuse; for he
has made it his own Act, he did not do it Ignorantly, or by surprise, not
imposed upon by false Information, or mistake, but wilfully, and with a
malicious design, as appears,

1. For that it was contrary to his own personal knowledge, he himself viewed
the Bo^y at the White-house (as is proved by Affidavit) and from the Testimony
of his own Eyes, he himself then Printed that there was no Blood, that it was
evident he was strangled, etc. 2 When he first published his pretended
Sarum-Letter (which was only to sound the waters) there was presently a
satisfactory answer returned, yet soon after he Printed his first Letter to
Prance, and that too being solidly refuted, he flung out a second, and has
himself all along in his Intelligence, and by word of mouth espoused the thing
and boasted he would prove it sometimes by 500, sometimes by 60 witnesses. Nay
since the very last Term, has vapored in Print at the same rate, and
endeavored before hand to cast a scandal on any Jury that should try him. Now
if such a man, in such a cause, wherein the honor of the King, and of the
Justice of the Nation, and the whole Protestant Interest is so highly
concerned, and so impudently arraigned and aspersed, shall escape without some
exemplary mark from that Justice, which he has so daringly affronted, it might
prove an unaccountable precedent.


Tory. But what should be his design in all this?


Truem. We need not go to Ga^bury to discover that; it is plain it was to sham
off the belief of the Popish Plot, that it may still proceed; to excuse the
Papists from that barbarous murder, and fix the Odium of being guilty of
innocent blood on the King and his Judges, and all the Protestants in the
Nation* for putting Green, Berry and Hill to death wrongfully, And this alone,
methinks should open your eyes to see through the boasted Loyalty of Thompson
and all such fellows, and their kindless forsooth to the Church of England, and
what interest it is, that under that disguise they serve. And to show all the
world that the Popish Plot is still working on, for it can never be imagined
that three such little inconsiderable fellows would ever have troubled their
heads with such a business, or dared to have broached it in that audacious
manner, had not men of wi^er heads and greater figure abetted them. Though P^in
and Farewell owned themselves Authors of the Letters, yet if ever the matter can
be thoroughly sifted, The wager that a Jesuit^ or Priest was the Composer of
them.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 30. 1682.
Infanda Tellus, quaque vix pejor stygem
Vehit profundis apta suppliciis humus,
Quousque sae vos, misera lassabis Deos
Experta Fulmen? --

An excellent discourse of Clemangis, that we ought to depart out of Babylon.
The story of Pope Eugenius IV. who is deposed in the Council of Bazil.
IN our last we mentioned the Complaints of Clemangis, the Reverend Archdeacon
of Baior, touching the lamentable corrupt state of the Church, and shall now
add another notable discourse of his, in an Epistle to Gerrard Market a Doctor
of Paris, which though somewhat long, we choose to recite, not only for the
Excellency of the matter, and to show what sentiments that good man had of the
Church of Rome, in those days, that it was even become Babylon; but also
because the Papists by their Expurgatory Indices have utterly endeavored to
suppress it, leaving out the said whole passage in such Editions of that
Author's works, as are Printed amongst them, being as follows,

That we are to fly out of Babylon, according to the admonitions given in both
Testaments, thou confessest; but do suppose that flight is not to be
understood Corporally, changing the place, but spiritually, not imitating the
Corrupt manners of the wicked. Truly what thou say is not amiss, yet
suffices still not for a full resolution. Was not the Patriarch Abraham
commanded to depart out of his own Country, and from his kindred and fathers
house, non solum Affectu sed etiam Effectu, not only in Affection but actually,
nay his bodily departure is first commanded, and then he is enjoined to
withdraw his very mind and thoughts from it too; and the reason is, because the
Inhabitants were Idolators. Turn over the whole Canonical History, and thou
shall not find that God has ever poured down his Vengeance upon any
Babylonical Congregation of men, but that first consulting the safety of the
Righteous, if any were amongst them, he called them forth, left being covered
with the wicked, as it were under the same Roof, they should perish in they
same destruction. -- Thou will say perhaps whether shall we fly? there is no
place where Babylon is not, no City that is not Drunk with the Cup of her
Fornication: But tell me I pray, have you seen all the Cities, that you can
give so absolute a sentence of every corner? Our Savior teaches his Disciples,
if they were Persecuted in one City to fly unto another; and lest they should
make this very objection, that there were no Cities to which they could retire
themselves, he takes away the excuse by adding -- Verily I say unto you, that
you shall not go to all the Cities of Israel until the Son of man come; plainly
intimating thereby, that there should be always Cities, dedicated to the honor
of his name, unto which in times of Persecution they might fly, now what
Persecution is more to be avoided than that which constrains men to do that
which is wicked, execrable and contrary to the Law of God, where not only sound
Doctrine is not received, but such are cruelly tormented that contradict their
wills? what will thou do there, where if thou propose any thing that is good,
no man will hearken to thee? and if any man commit wickedness thou shall be
constrained to imitate it; where if thou give sound Judgment of any thing, they
will say thou art beside thy self, [a Fanatick] but if thou art furious and
mad, thou shall be counted wise; and if thou withstand the violence of their
perverseness, thou shall reap to thy self another fruit, but an i^placable
hatred with the danger of thy Life, what is it to be made drunk with the Cup of
Babylon, but by a long conversation there to be so infected with Contagion as
following the wandering multitude to embrace falsehood for truth? for whereas
thou say that that man flies from Babylon according to the Exhortation of
the Prophet, who though he may live in the midst of a wicked and perverse
Nation, differs from them, nevertheless in his life and Conversation; know that
this indeed suffices as long as the violence of the fury compels not a man
to wickedness, and so long as Gods mercy tollerateth the sins of the place, not
yet grown to full height. But where their state is desperate and past hope of
amendment, and from all parts send up a continual cry to Heaven for vengeance,
whoever wilfully abides there, and dreadeth not the Thunderbolts of divine
wrath, how different so ever he may be in his private sentiments and manners,
is guilty of a sinful stupidity. It Is true, if thou seek here an assured
settled Rest in all respects, thou seek Impossibilities, and wilt never find
it, neither within or without thee. All things are full of War, confusion,
danger, every thing encompassed with snares and subtleties, neither can thou
retire the within thy self; but they follow thee. But yet notwithstanding
though there be something of Babylon every wheere yet that Babylon is not every
where, that is the mother of Fornications and Abominations of the Earth, whose
Judgment, as John says, is Ascended up to the Heavens, which has made drunken
all the Nations with the Wine of her Whoredom, and constrains all her
Inhabitants to Commit Fornication, to Blaspheme, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to Worship the Dragon, with which impieties whosoever is polluted,
how can he find peace within himself, except he hate the Fornications of that
Whore; forsake, Condemn and detest them? To which whosoever shall adhere, is
made one body with her, because so long as he converseth with her, he cannot be
freed from her manners, being by force and fury drawn unto them, etc. Thus far
Clemangis on that subject, and that the Church of Rome at that time was grown
the very Babylon, which he describes, wherein was Confusion and every evil
work, is apparent from the Histories of that Age.

Pope Martin dying Anno 1431. one Gabriel Condelmere, a Venetian, descended of
a mean family, was Elected and assumed the name of Eugenius the 4 th, and
holding a Consistory immediately after his Coronation, such a multitude flockt
together, that the whole Palace totterd, and the people run out in such
confusion fearing it would fall upon their heads, that one Bishop was Killed.
Some Informers giving this new Pope notice that Martin his Predecessor had left
vast Treasures to his friends and Nephews, he would needs force them to
surrender it to him, and in order thereunto Imprisoned the said Martins
Vice-Chamberlain, and great heart-burnings arose in the family of the Colunni
against him. Pope Martin before his death had assigned a Council, and sent
thither as his Legate, Julian Cardinal of St. Angelo, who had began the
meeting, but Eugenius had little stomach to Confirm it, because they had been
so saucy as in the very second session to declare -- That the Pope himself in
those things that appertain to faith is bound to obey a General Council, which
if he refused to do, unless he repent, Let him be duly punished. And indeed he
endeavored to play a Shamm, by offering to refer it to Bononia, under pretense
that the Greeks (who were now upon some overtures for a Reconciliation with the
Latin Church,) could more easily repair thither. But the Emperor Sigismond
fearing delays, wrote to him very earnestly of the mischiefs that would happen
by such Translation of the Council; and how much all Christian Princes would be
dissatisfied therewith. And withal prepares to come himself into Italy,
whereupon the Pope more out of fear than good will, approves of the Council of
Basil, and confirms the Legantine power of Cardinal Julian.

The Emperor Sigismond comes to Rome; but the Pope refused to Crown him,
unless he would first promise to Ratify the pretended donation of Constantine,
and also grant all those things de novo, and swear forthwith to depart Italy:
All which Valla cannot mention without Indignation, -- what (says he) would be
more absurd than to be crowned Emperor, and at the same time renounce Rome to
be Crowned of him, who he confesses and (as much as in him lies) makes Lord
of the Roman Empire? And to Ratify a donation, which if it be true, leaves to
the Emperor nothing of the Empire? which I think Children would not have done.

I shall not mention all the quarrels of this Pope, the greatest part of whose
times was spent in Wars and Bloodshed; insomuch that the Romans not able to
endure his Cruelties, once drove him out of the City, making him run away in
the habit of a Monk, and pelting him with dirt and stones, whence he retired to
Florence, and remained there some time; but having by his friends again reduced
Rome to his obedience, he used greater severities, than ever, and
notwithstanding he had so approved of the Council of Basil, yet now will needs
dissolve it, and accordingly recalls Cardinal Julian, his Legate, from thence;
on the other side the Fathers of the Council, by their Letters first entreat,
and afterward admonish him to come thither himself, or at least not to disturb
the peace of the Church, by offering to obstruct their proceedings, but he
persisting, and appointing another Anti-Council at Ferrara, they formally Cite,
Accuse, Adjure, suspend, and at last depose him from the Popedom, and in his
room Elect Amades Duke of Savoy, by the name of Felix the Fourth; who before
led an Hermits Life on the Banks of the Lake of Lausanna.

However Eugenius still swagger'd as Pope in Italy, and having got together a
Conventicle of Cardinals, (most of their own making) and others in Ferraria, in
the year 1438. (and next year by reason of the Pestilence removed to Florence,)
John Palaeologus the Emperor of the East, and several Bishops of the Greek
Church, upon a treaty that had been advanced for a Reconciliation between the
two Churches, resolved to have a personal Conference, and being at Sea, upon
his Voyage for Italy, Charles the 7 th King of France, who sided with the
Council of Basil, sent forth a Fleet of Galleys into the Ionick Sea, to meet
him; and acquaint him that the lawful Council was held at Basil, not at
Florence, and therefore to persuade him to Land in France, whence he should be
honorably Conducted to Basil. But the Pope understanding this design, by large
Bribes Corrupts the Admiral of the French Galleys, who wilfully steering a
wrong course, misses the Emperor, and so he Lands in Italy.

The presence of this Emperor and the noise of an Union like to be patcht up
between the Two Churches, added not a little luster to the Popes Council; yet
the proceedings of the Council of Basil extremely troubled him, and against
them he and his Council published several Bulls and writings, wherein they
blush not to affirm, That it was so far from truth, That he ought to obey
general Councils, that he then most merited when he contemned the Decrees of
the Council, and that this proposition -- The Council is above the Pope, is
Heretical; although both then and ever since it was and has been held and
affirmed by all the Universities of Christendom; whence it will follow, that
whilst the Roman Church boasts her self superior to all other Churches, and
the Roman Bishop above all other Bishops; by this Decree of Eugenius, the
Bishop of Rome is made superior to, and of higher Authority than the universal
Church, and consequently the pretended Infallibility of the Church, should be
derived not now to the Romish Church, but to one only man; which shows him
evidently to be the Antichrist, according to that Interpretation of St.
Augustine, de Civitate Dei, Lib. 18. Cap. 2. That Antichrist should not not
only sit in Templo Dei, in the Temple of God, but (...) In Templum, into the
Temple. As if he himself were the Temple it self, and he alone the Church.
Besides by these Translations let the Christian Reader judge of that
Infallibility, of the Church represented in a Council, since here he sees these
Two Councils, at one and the same time, in one and the same question, do decree
things directly contrary.

But 'twas not with Paper pellets and spiritual Thunders that this stouthearted
Pope Attaqu'd the Council of Basil, for a truce being concluded between the
Kings of England and France, whereby the Soldiers on each part were dismissed,
Eugenius subtlely Inveigles the Dauphin of France (afterward Lewis the 11 th.)
who gathers up near 30000 of those disbanded Troops, and marches toward Basil,
Coloring the Expedition with many remote pretenses, but indeed with a design
to unroost the Fathers there, and force them to break up. But they were no
sooner entered the Territories of Basil, but the Cantons of Switzerland hastened
to its succor and relief. And 4000 Switzers with incredible Valor stood the
Shock of all the great Army, and continued the Battle all night, scarce 150 of
them escaping, but thereby they put a stop to the enemies advance, and
preserved the City and Council.

The COURANT.
Inter Serpents et scorpiones Nemo securus Ingreditur. St. Hierom. Tory. FOr
all your Tatling Catholic Not, tho unhapily Cag'd since I saw you last, yet
defies the Wooden Ruff and the Whipping-post. The good man avows to all the
World -- He has done nothing to be ashamed of.


Truem. I told you then I should not meddle with the success of his present
Adventures. Nor will I dispute whether hebemore meritorious, better be
friended, less Guilty, or born under more indulgent Stars than his Sister
Cellier. It Is certain their ends were the same, though they pursued several
means, her story of Prances being Racks, and his of Sir Edmondbery Godfrey's
Killing himself, being a like design* to Sham that Murder from the Papists, and
load the Justice of the Nation with scandal. But all I shall say is, that he
had long since a prior right and Title to the Pillory, for (if he be not
belied) this very Loyal Protestant was the Gentleman (that besides some
Cart-loads of bare faced Popery) first Printed and Published a certain Libell,
the Reprinting of which from his Public Copy, after it had many days haunted
the Town, brought another to that Ignominious stand.


Tory. Prithee let Not alone, he is safe enough, and I think at this juncture
your Faction have little cause to boast.


Truem. I know not what you mean by Faction; for some Folks of late have got
new Dictionaries, and they call Religion Sedition; the Nine and Thirty
Articles, Fanaticism; drunken madness Loyalty; horrid damming and swearing,
zeal for the Church; Traitorous Papists, good confiding subjects; moderate
Churchmen, the worst sort of Whigs; asserting liberty and property, (though in
never so dutiful and legal away) Rebellion; promoting a general good of the
King and Kingdom, Faction; and endeavoring the safety of the Nation against
Popish Conspiracies, a Presbyterian Plot. -- But if by Faction may be
understood, a few boysterus Troublesome people, with as little sense as
honesty, that contrary to the rightful customs of the place they live in,
bandy against and disturb the Majority (as suppose, out-number'd above one
Thousan^d in three, and by persons of as good or better Quality every way than
themselves) and struggle to overthrow the Right, Laws and Privileges of the
whole Community, and when with Innovations, Noise, Shamms and shameful foul
practices, they themselves have first industriously raised Feuds and
Cumbustions, do then think to file them to the account of such, as justly and
innocently oppose their lewd designs; if this I say may pass for a true
description of Faction, then on my Conscience Popery and Torism are as errant
Factions as ever pestered a State.


Tory. Thou art always harping upon Popery; I tell thee once again, that party
is not worth minding; where shall you meet a man that now adays will own
himself, a Roman Catholic; now quoth Roger, we have taken the Oaths, etc.
There Is Sing and Nevil shall talk as zealously for the Church by Law, as any
Country Curate, and is not this a happy Reformation?


Truem. A Wolf is never the less a Wolf, but the more dangerous, for wearing
the Lambs-skin that he lately worried; I tell you there are still Papists in
England, and Bloody Traitorous Papists and a damnable Company of them too; when
was St. Omers and Doway more empty, and yet I Will warrant you all the Jesuits
are not gone to Convert the Great Mogul. Do not their raskally hedge-Priests
flutter up and down as thick as Filfares? who may not any day meet at 'tother,
end of the Town with Father Mathew's (my Lord Peters's Ghostly Tool) Father
Fincham, (Brother to the Right Worshipful, in Cromwel-shire) Father
Witherington, -- (Who once in doleful dumps,
Being drunk, said Mass upon his Stumps:)
Cum multis aliis quos cum proscribere Nolo; strutting up and down streets, as
briskly as if they hoped to sing te Deum in Paul's, and what business, think
you, have these reverend Blades here?


Tory. Nay, how do I know? perhaps they only come over to turn Informers
against Protestant Conventicles. -- Do any of them Lodge in the Savoy?


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 7. 1682.
Crudeles Impiorum Misericordiae.
The Debates of the Bohemians at the Council of Basil. The Story of Zisca, his
wonderful success and Epitaph. The use of the Cup permitted to the Bohemians,
etc.
AMongst other Occurrences that happened at the Council of Basil (which began
to be Assembled Anno 1431. and continued sitting almost 12 years) very
remarkable were their proceedings with the Bohemians. How God had been pleased
to enlighten that Nation with the knowledge of his Truth, and to discover to
them the errors and wickedness of the Church of Rome, by the spreading of
Wickliffs Books amongst them, we have heretofore acquainted you. As also how
those good seeds were cultivated by the pains of those laborious Husbandmen in
the Lords Vineyard, John Huss and Jerome of Prague, who were both cruelly
martyred, (contrary to the safe conduct granted them) by the Council of
Constance, about the year 1415. Whereby the Gospel had taken such Root amongst
the Bohemians, that all the powers of darkness could not pluck it up; yet of
those of them that refused the Church of Rome, there were two sorts, some that
only contended to have the use of the Cup in the Sacrament restored to the
Laity, but in other Doctrines agreed with the Romanists; and these for that
reason were commonly called Calixstines (from Calix a Cup;) the other not only
complained of the Sacrilege of the Papists in that respect, but also pressed
for the purity and simplicity of Religion in all Articles and Ceremonies, and
these were sometimes called Piccardines, and sometimes Tab^rit^s, for the cause
herein after mentioned.

You must note, after the burning of Huss and Jerome, the Nobles of Hungary, to
the number of 50 and upwards, in the name of themselves and the whole
Commonalty, sent Letters under their Seals, Dated 2 Sept. 1416, to Constance
complaining thereof; as likewise did the Nobles of Moravia: But that Bloody
Conventicle vouchfased them no answer, but on the contrary stirred up great
persecution against them, so that the Hussites were not only Excommunicated,
but their Churches broke open, and their persons and goods every where exposed
to violence, which occasioned such a tumult on the 13 th. of July 1419 at
Prague, that the common people being enraged, threw 12 Senators of Old Prague,
with the chief City Majestrate out of the Windows of the Senate House, who fell
upon the points of Spears.

Pope Martin the 5th. Anno 1420, publicly excommunicates the Bohemians,
Exciting the Emperor and all Kings, Prince, Dukes, etc. to take up Arms against
them, Entreating them by the Wounds of Christ, and their own Salvation,
unanimously to fall upon them, and quite Extirpate that Sacrilegious and cursed
Nation, and withal promises [ so zealous and bountiful was his Holiness!] an
universal remission of sins to the most wicked person that should kill one
Bohemian Heretic -- History of the Bohemian Persecution, p. 27.

But some small time before this, some thousands of those that professed the
true Religion, finding they could not live peaceably in Prague, retired from
thence to a stony Mountain about 10 Miles distant, which they named Tabor, and
encompassed it round with a Wall and other fortifications, constituting there a
kind of Commonwealth, and resolved to defend themselves by Arms, and hence
they were called Taborites. The Emperor Sigismund spurred on by these
Incentives and large promises from the Pope of gairing Heaven, gathers a most
puissant Army from all parts of the Empire, and resolves utterly to extirpate
these poor Bohemian Hussites. Who being in this sore distress, one John de
Trosnovie, called Ziska, because he had but one Eye, of a Noble house, but mean
fortune, yet great valor and conduct, undertakes to gather together the
scattered people, and to head them against their Enemies, which he performed
with such success, that Aeneas Sylvius (afterward Pope, and no friend to be
sure to the Bohemians) who wrote the Story of those Wars, affirms his
Achievements will rather be admired than believed by posterity; for with
handfuls of those poor unfurnisht people, he fought eleven several Battles with
Sigismund's numerous, well provided and fresh recruited Armies, and in all of
them came off victorious, nay though in one of them he lost his other Eye and
so was blind; yet afterward he continued no less fortunate a Leader, so that
at last Sigismund despairing to vanquish him, but by a Treaty, consents to
declare him his Lieutenant, and allow him a Pension, on condition he and his
followers would acknowledge him the said Sigismund as King. -- But before this
Treaty was fully perfected Ziska dies.

Some say that he should bequeath his Skin to make a Drum of, or that his
followers should carry it about with them, thinking thereby to fright their
Enemies, but this I conceive but a Fable, and yet it is little more than what
our valiant King Edw. the 1 st. did; who on his Deathbed, commanded that his
Bones well boiled from the flesh should in a fit Vessel, be carried about by
his Son, 'till he had Conquered the Scots, telling his Son, that as long as he
had his Fathers Bones with him, none should overcome him. This is certain, that
after his Death the Bohemians called themselves Orphans, as having lost the
common Father of their Country man; nor will it be amiss to insert here his
Epitaph written on his Tomb in the City of Tabor, as we find it before the
History of the Abbot of Vrsperge. -- I John Ziska rest here, in the skill of
Military Affairs, not inferior to any of the Emperors or famous Captains of
old. A severe scourge of the pride and covetousness of Clergymen, and a most
valiant Defender of my Country. That which Appius Claudius being blind did for
the Romans in well counselling, and furious Camillus in valiantly exploiting;
the same have I done for my Bohemians. I was never wanting to the good fortune
of the war, nor it to me. I have foreseen though blind, all advantages and
opportunities of well doing, and with Ensigns displayed have fought eleven
times in the open Field, ever victorious. It seemed to me most fit and
honorable to take in hand the most just cause of the miserable and hungry,
against the delicate fat and full-cram'd Priests, and in this doing, I have
found the assistance of God giving a Blessing to my arms; if their envy had not
hindered it, no doubt I should have merited to be numbered amongst the
illustrious men; nevertheless my Bones lie here in this sacred place, without
asking the Pope any leave, and in spite of his Teeth. -- John Ziska the
Bohemian, an Enemy of Priests that are covetous of dishonest gain, but in a
godly zeal.

After his death, the Pope and Emperor thinking the Hussites much discouraged
thereby, as in truth they were, sent several great Armies against them, but
still they were strangely discomfited, for the Bohemians (says Monstrelet)
feared neither death nor torments, their very Women took arms and fought, and
the dead Bodies of many of that Sex were found amongst the slain in several
Battles. Wherefore being not able to extirpate them by War, they are invited to
come (in order to hearing their demands and giving them satisfaction) to the
Council of Basil. Indeed most of the Bohemian Churches being sensible of the
perfidious treachery used to Huss and Jerome at Constance were loath to send any
Deputies thither, but the Nobility overruled the matter, that some should be
dispatched to render a Reason for the Innovations in Religion laid to their
charge.

Commissioners were therefore chosen and sent, amongst whom the most eminent
were John Rokizane of Prague, and Nicholas Episcopius of the Taborens, both
famous Divines, and of the Nobility, Procopius the General of the Taborens, and
William Rastka Baron of Postupiez, and others, who being honorably conducted
in their passage, and courteously received at Basil: They declared that at
Constance they had been condemned unheard; though they held nothing but
according to the Scriptures, and then exhibited the four Requests and Articles
following, desiring that the Council would grant them, or allow them to defend
them by Argument.

1. That the use of the Cup may be restored to the people, and that the Service
of the Church might be in their own Tongue. 2. That Clerks or Ministers might
usurp no Authority in Seculars. 3. That the word of God might be freely
Preached without disturbance. 4. That there may be public punishment of
public offenses.
These Articles being read, the Popes Legate demanded if they had nothing else
to propound, because he had heard it reported, that they affirmed that the
Orders of Monks were from the Devil, Procopius made answer, from whence else, I
pray, can they derive their original, which was instituted neither by the
Patriarchs nor Prophets, neither by Christ nor his Apostles? However a
Conference was appointed, and 40 days (some say 50) the Disputation lasted; and
when the Bohemians could not be confuted by Arguments, they were at last
wheadled into a composition; John Rokisane being himself corrupted with the
hopes of an Archbishopric, seduced others of the Commissioners, and so
matters were subtly carried, that leave being given by the Council, that they
should enjoy the use of the Cup, in other matters they were brought to consent.
These four Articles with some Explanations were afterward named the Concord,
and Commissioners were sent into Bohemia from the Council and Emperor, to
declare that Realm was received again into the Bosom of the Church, and a Diet
being there Assembled on that occasion, Rokisane very rhetorically explained
and magnified the benefits of this agreement, whereby so much War, Bloodshed
and Devastation, as otherwise might have happened to the Kingdom, was
prevented, and now he was pleased to mention the Pope and Caesar in other
Language than heretofore, when he was wont to style the one the Whore, and the
other the Beast. This Rokisane continued a pitiful Hypocrite long after, and at
last died uncomfortably, Anno 1471.

The craft of the Council in granting the Cup to the Bohemians provided in all
other things they would submit was considerable, for hereby they set at
variance the Calixstines and the Taborites, and consequently prevented all
their further endeavors of Reformation, and the pure professors of the Gospel,
henceforwards were as much hated and persecuted by those that enjoyed the use
of the Cup, as by those that disowned it.

It was no little grief to many, especially of the zealous Ta^orites to depart
in this manner from the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ delivered to them by
Huss, and return again to the profession of the Church of Rome, nor could they
ever be wholly brought over to embrace it, but the truth has remained still
amongst them, and great Persecutions have they suffered even to our times; as
by the History thereof brought down to the year 1632. and Printed at London,
Anno 1650. appears.

To return to the Council of Basil, the other most material Decrees they made,
were, 1. That no Actions, Suits or Controversies should by Appeals be carried
up to be decided in the Courts at Rome, which were above four days distant from
thence. 2. A Regulation of the Cardinals, that they should not be above 24 in
number, and to exclude the Popes Nephews and Kindred from that office. 3.
Against the payment of Annals or first fruits to the Pope. 4. Against Priests
keeping Concubines. 5. They brought two new Holy Days into the Church, viz. The
Conception and the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

As long as Sigismund the Emperor, and Charles the 7 th. the French King
lived, who both favored this Council, the same continued Assembled, but
afterward wanting such friends to back them, it mouldered away insensibly, so
that at last most of the Fathers and Ambassadors of the several Princes
abandoning it, it was broke up and dissolved.

And also Felix that by the said Council had been elected Pope, was prevailed
with to renounce that dignity, and resign his pretensions of Papacy to Nicholas
the 5 th, the Successor of Pope Eugenius, about the year 1450.

But remarkable it is with what kind of arguments this very Council (perhaps
none of the worst in the whole Pack) endeavored to silence the Bohemians,
which appear out of the Letters of Cardinal Cusanus (one employed by the
Council to manage the controversy) in his 2 and 3 Epistle to the Bohemians,
where he maintains these assertions: 1. That the Scriptures can by no means be
of the Essence of the Church, either begun or continued, but only of the seemly
Order thereof. 2. That the Church is not known by the Gospel, but the Gospel by
the Church.

The COURANT.
Tory. AH Trueman? now do I expect to be pelted with Droll and Railery upon
poor Loyal Nat's persecution last Wednesday.


Truem. Never feared Tory! I perceive thou art already in a state of
Mortification, your whole Brotherhood have of late put on their A^h Wednesday
Faces; I scorn to throw water on a drowned Rat, it is your Tory generosity to
triumph over the miserable. I am satisfied that the injured Justice and Honor
of the Nation is vindicated in exposing two of the Conspirators, yet I would
almost as soon have lost an hand, as flung a rotten Egg at either of them It Is
to me rather matter of gri^f than merriment to find such ill Instruments
employed to abuse the Church of England, and that Venerable name of Loyalty, by
pretending to be Sons of the one, and Friends of the other, when Popery and
Divelism are the only things they toil to advance. But especially would it not
make a man turn Heraclitus (I do not mean such a Motley Scoundrel as lately
Usurps that name, but the good old weeping Philosopher himself) to see so many
things that wear the shapes of Rational Creatures; and call themselves
Englishmen and Citizens, and Protestants too, yet favor and encourage such
lewd Varlets. Not indeed has had the luck first to handsel the Engine, but is
it not notorious that the Observator, Heraclitus, etc. with their Abetters,
push on the very same designs? and why then should not they have neighbors
fare? -- But prithee, how go other affairs of greater consequence?


Tory. Our friends have wrote to Ireland to put a stop to the Embarquing of any
more Swearing-Teagues, being like to be sufficiently furnished and better cheap
at home, B -- and H -- themselves were not so perfectly Sataniz'd but some
modesty was left, They pretended at most but to transactions in Cooks-shops and
private Chambers; but when men shall give the Sun the Lie, and with Oaths
rampant run down the certain knowledge of 2 or 3 thousand people at once, these
are Blades that deserve encouragement.


Truem. Much good do you with your stock, -- but all this is nothing to the
Point, what say you to the Election of Sheriffs?


Tory. I only say, as once upon a like occasion, an Eminent Mouth said, after
he had offered to lay 10 Guinneys to one on the wrong side, -- Alas! who should
have thought it!


True. I confess two thousand seven hundred to 1500, viz. twelve hundred odds,
is some small disproportion, but by this, all the world may perceive what an
inconsiderable interest these Sir Troublesomes that make so much noise have,
when brought to the Test, and how egregiously they mis-represent things; a
Tory's tongue always runs high Fullum's; bounce and vapor is his Dialect, he
evermore turns to the magnifying end of the Prospective, and is pugnacissimum
Animal (as one of the ancients calls a Gander) a creature that can rant and
swagger, but let him come to service, and he shrinks and dwindles, and proves a
mere Egyptian Reed, that not only deceives, but wounds the hand that leans on
him. Indeed how should it be otherwise, since his vanity, roaring, huzzaing,
swearing, etc. never afford him time to think, for it is observable, your
actions were not more extravagant than your Pleas and pretensions for them were
absurd and silly, and you were abundantly more outdone in Reason and Argument
than in Number.


Tory. Hang me, if Gadbury and L'Estrange did not 3 months ago promise us
success; for that trick I Will never trust Stars and Observators again. We
thought our selves profound Politicians, and that we had laid a train of small
Shams and little tricks that would infallibly have done the work, and hanged up
all the Whigs, that is, all that are soberly loyal and oppose Popery, before
Christ-mass-day.


True. Yes, you had twenty pleasant Crotchets in your Noddles, but above all,
that was a dainty one of the 4000 Guinneys offered. Really the Gentleman
deserves rather to be Sainted than Sheriff'd, that withstood such a charming
temptation. Tell me in earnest, are not you yet ashamed of that whisking Lie?
what a black design must that needs be at bottom, that must have such
ridiculous fictions, horrid practices, and lewd shameful arts to promote it?


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July* 14. 1682.
Singuli decipere et decipi possunt: Nemo Omnes, Neminem Omnes fefellerunt. --
Plin paneg.
The manner of the Interview between the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Pope
Eugenius the IV. The matters in debate between them An Accommodation pretended
to be made. But the Greeks refuse to stand to it. Constantinople taken by the
Turk.
HAving in our last, related the Transactions between the Council of Basil and
the Bohemians; it will be now no less Convenient to set forth what passed
between the Greeks, and Pope Eugenius, at his pretended Council at Ferrara, as
well for that it happened about the same time, as for the near Resemblance both
in the occasion, management, and Issue of both Treaties; for each of them was
in order to an Accommodation, to which they were Inv^igled by Bribes and ill
practices rather than strength of Argument, and though a kind of submission to
Rome in both cases was pa^^ht up by the Deputies or Commissioners, yet the same
was presently disowned by their Principals and came to no effect.

We have told you how Eugenius the 4 th (though deposed by the Council of
Basil) yet took upon him still as Pope, and Conventicled an Anti-Council at
Ferrara, (though, because removed from thence to Florence, it is commonly called
the Council of Florence,) to which, we briefly acquainted you that the Emperor
of Constantinople with his Patriarch, and several Bishops, Repaired. The
occasion whereof was this, --

Almost Fourscore years before, John Palaeologus Emperor of the East, being
infested with a people called the Triballi, unhappyly makes a League with
Amurath the Third, Emperor of the Turks, and consents to admit Threescore
Thousand of Amurath's Forces into Europe, which were wafted over by the Genoese
Galleys, and established their Metropolitan seat at Adrianople in Thrace. They
had not long been entertained, but according to the usual course of Foreign
Auxiliaries, instead of assisting they were for driving out or subdueing those
that Invited them thither, and being now by continual new Accessions of Numbers
and fortunate successes grown formidable to Constantinople it self, which they
already threatened, and in very few years after actually made themselves Masters
of, the poor Grecians being in this distress, their Emperor made Application
to other Christian Princes for succor, and especially to the Pope, as a M^ster
wheel in that affair. But his crafty Holiness, who never does a Courtesy
Gr^tis, hoping to make an advantage of their necessity, tells them he is
willing to procure them Assistance, but they hold several Heterodox tenets, as
denying Purgatory, maintaining there must be Leaven for the Bread for the
Sacrament, and especially denying Peter's Primacy, and not submitting to him as
supreme Universal Bishop, and if they would reform themselves in these matters,
they need not doubt of aid, and for their satisfaction he would call a General
Council, where the several points should be fairly debated, etc. The Emperor
being thus straightened, consents thereunto, and brings with him J^s^ph the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great train of his Bishops; transported by
the Gallie^ of the Venetians, the Countrymen of Eugenius,

The Formalities of Greeting between this Western Pope, and Eastern Patriarch,
are very remarkable; which I shall give you from the Original Acts of the
Council of Florence, written in Greek by some of the Attendants of the
Constantinopolitan Bishop -- (...) etc. In the Morning before the first hour of
the day, we saw Caristinus come running to us, sent from the Emperor, who
acquainted the Patriarch, that the Pope expected that his Great Holiness
[(...), for you must note, the Patriarch assumed the title of his Holiness as
well as the Pope,] should go to him and adore him and kiss his feet, and the
Emperor had already insisted and contended three days, that the same might be
waved, but-could not obtain it, of which in the mean time he thought fit to
Advertise your Great Holiness, that you may know in what manner you must
approach him. This was irksome news to the Patriarch, who expected to be
received in a far different, way and with greater marks of Affection and
esteem. For whilst he was at Venice he had thus declared himself to one of his
Domestic Favorites, discoursing about the Pope -- I have determined with my
self, that if the Pope be a person of more years than I, then I will esteem him
as a Father, if of equal years I will carry my self toward him as a Brother,
but if he be younger than I, then I will regard him but as my Son: And my mind
is, that if there be any meet Palace near to his, that has a private passage
from one into the other, I will take it up for my Quarters, that I may
privately go to him, and he likewise to me again, etc. [thereby to void
priority of visits and Ceremony] wherefore when now he heard talk of Kissing
his Feet, he was astonished; however he proceeded, and we came (when the Courts
were all ready full) to Ferraria, and staid right against the Castle, near the
Bridge, and before noon there came six Bishops in the Popes behalf to
Congratulate the Patriarch, who told them, That he owed not the Pope any such
Salutation as Kissing his Feet, but for as much ( said he) we be Brethren let
us Embrace and Kiss each other in Brotherly manner, else I will do nothing. The
Patriarch also had other Speeches concerning that matter, unto which they made
answer, and the Patriarch advised with all the Bishops that came with him about
this weighty affair, who all ( Nemine Contradicente) Voted (...). That the same
[ The Toe Kissing] was neither Just nor seemly, nor profitable to be done. But
the Popes Bishops return again in the morning, and with repeated instances
press the Kissing of the feet, to which the Patriarch answers, from whence has
the Pope that Right? show us what Synod has bestowed it upon him? or where is
it written? especially since the Pope calls himself the Successor of St.
Peter? Then the Bishops told him that it was an ancient Custom of the Pope,
that all persons salute him in that manner, Bishops, Kings, the Emperor of
Germany himself, and the Cardinals who are greater than the Emperor, ( here is
Divinity for you!) in as much, as they are persons Consecrated. Whereunto the
Patriarch replied, That this was a new Invention, I will not ( quoth he) assent
unto it, I will never do it, but if the Pope be pleased that I salute him
Brotherly, according to our ancient manner, in that sort I will go unto him,
but if he refuse that, I will have nothing to do with him, but will return back
again. -- Thus far the said Greek Synod.

You see he was very resolute, and here was a long Voyage like to be spoiled
and come to nothing; but at last an Expedient was found out, viz. That whereas
the Pope thought to have made the Patriarch kiss his Feet in a full Assembly
publicly, he was forced to receive him and take that Homage in his Privy
Chamber, the Cardinals only being present.

But then a new difficulty arose, about the order of sitting in Council, who
should have the uppermost place, the Pope contended, that the Grecian Emperor
and Patriarch with the Orientals should sit on the left side the Church, and
the Western Bishops on the right hand, and himself at the higher end of all, in
the middle, as head of them all, in a more eminent Seat. The Emperor on the
contrary, pretended the place belonged to him, At last it was ngreed the
Western people should sit on the right hand, the Eastern ones on the left; Pope
Eugenius's Throne placed by the High Altar; the Roman Emperors (though absent)
in the next place but some degrees lower; and equal with him the Cardinals. The
Emperor of Greece had his Throne set right against the Popes, and on his left
hand, but a little lower sat the P^t^. of Constantinople, and equal with him,
were the seats of the Legates of the Three other Eastern Patriarchs, and of the
Archbishops and Prelates, Ordine quisque suo.

Being thus at last seated, the 4 principal Controversies debated between them,
were. 1. Touching the procession of the Holy Ghost, the Greeks not
acknowledging that he proceeded from the Son, but only from the Father, and
therefore charged the La^ines that they had added the word, Filioque, and from
the Son, to the Creed. 2. About the Bread used for the Sacrament. The Greeks
contending, that it ought to be Leavened, the Romanists, that it must be
unleavened. 3. About Purgatory which the Greeks denied; and the last (tho
principally intended) about the Popes Primacy and being supreme head of the
universal Church, which they would not acknowledge.

These points were argued strongly on both sides in the said Council: ((...) so
they have been also in Books, I my self have now by me a Catalogne of 19
Learned Greek Authors who have wrote against the Latin Church.) But the most
prevalent reasons it is supposed that swayed with the Greeks were, the necessity
of the Empire, and the hopes of the Forces to assist them, together with the
Popes Artifice in making Two of the most Learned of the Greek Bishops
Cardinals, viz Isidore Bishop of Russia, and Bessarion Bishop of Nicea; winning
them to favor his* pretensions; in fine an Instrument of union is mutually
concluded upon, in the year 1439. beginning Laetentur Coeli, Let the Heavens
Rejoice, etc. Whereby the procession from both Father and Son was acknowledged,
and that the Sacrament may be indifferently Celebrated with Bread Leavened or
Unleavened, That the Souls of the Faithful that have not fully satisfied for
their Sins, do go to Purgatory, and that the Pope is head and Sovereign over
the whole Church. But Michael Bishop of Ephesus with others stoutly withstood
the same, especially the two last Articles. And Joseph Patriarch of
Constan^^nople immediately after his Subscription died suddenly, falling down
with the Charter of Union in his hand. Pope Eugenius would have had the Greeks
proceed to choose another Patriarch, promissing to ordain him without Money, [no
small kindness I Will promise you, from a Pope!] But they perceiving what the Old
Fox would be at, viz. That as he had got his Supremacy acknowledged under their
hands, so he might enter into actual possession thereof, and begin to Exercise
it over their new Patriarch, refused the same, alleging by their Laws and
Customs, that their Patriarch could not be chosen any where else, but at
Constartinople, for he must be Consecrated in his own Church* etc. Whereupon
the Pope much against his Inclinations, takes his leave of them, and suffers
them to depart.

But no sooner were these Prelates returned home, and given an account of their
proceedings, but they were Rejected by their Churches and Brethren, as having
Betrayed them into unjust slavery to the Bishops of Rome, which they would by
no means submit to, ^ay so offended they were, that they Excommunicated all
those that consented to the aforesaid Union, and when they died cast them like
dogs into ditches, denying them the Honor of Christian Burial. And so they and
their posterity stand out in opposition to the Church of Rome to this day, but
by reason of the oppression they live under, are very Ignorant and (as the
natural Consequent thereof) superstitious admirers of their own Rites and
Ceremonies. I my self have conversed with some of their Priests whose Beards
and long hair (for they are as stiff for that, as Popish Priest^ are for Shaven
Crowns) were the main Testimonies of Learning or Theology they could produce.
Latin few of them understand, for they have not Schools for it, nor are they
Critics in the true ancient Greek, (for the Language is now no less
degenerared than the people;) yet there are here and there some, few
Indifferently well Learned amongst them. The Fathers they most adhere to and
Reverence are Chrysostom, Basil, and the Two Gregory's, the one surnamed
Nissene, and the other Nazianzen. Their Liturgy is ordinarily that of St.
Chrysostom, but on Festival days they use that of St. Basil, which being both
written in the ancient or Learned Greek, cannot much more edify their vulgar,
than Latin Service does our illiterate Papists.

Not long after this Congress at Ferrara, viz. in the Reign of Constantine Son
of the said Emperor John Paloeologus, the City of Constantinople was subdued
by the Turks, Mahomet the Great, Investing it by Sea and Land with an Army of
Five Hundred Thousand, and after 54 days Seige stormed and masterd it, on the
29 th of May, 1453. Murdering young and old, and Comm^^ting all kind of Cruelty
and Barbarity, and in the Turks hands it has ever since remained being now the
Metropolis of the Ottoman Empire.

Some that are much at leisure, have observed it as I know not what fatality,
that as this City was first made famous by a Constantine, the Son of an Helena,
a Gregory being also Patriarch, so it was lost by a Constantine, as Augustus
was the first that the Son of Helona Gregory being also Patriarch, established
the Roman Empire and Augustus the last.

But I think the base humor of the Citizens is much more to be taken notice
of, who when their Religion, Lives, Liberties, Estates, posterity and all were
thus at stake, and though they were exceeding Rich, were yet such sordid Misers
that they would not part with any money to pay the Soldiers that were to defend
them, but choose rather to hide it in the Earth, and so hastened their own Ruin
by discouraging the Soldiers, and deservedl^ lost both their adored muck and
their more useless Lives, and their posterity remain the most miserable slaves
in the Word to this day.

The COURANT.
Tory. What does this Pacquetting fool mean by this old known story of the
City of Constantinoples sordid niggardly, Couardise? If they had a fancy to
bury their Gold and their Consciences, and save their pence in Coffers and
dunghills for the enemy, rather than expend them for their public safety, and
so become both slaves and Beggars -- what is that to us.


Truem. Nothing that I know of, but -- Aliena pericula Cautos, for there may
have been folks in the World since 1453, or at least may be hereafter, who when
their Religion Lives, just ancient privileges, etc. may be as much at hazard,
as those of the Constantinopolitans were, and from a people altogether as Ill
principled, and no less savage than the Mahumetans, may yet be so far from
breaking a Bagg to prevent the impending ruin, that they shall scarce stir a
foot, nor bestow a little Breath and Sweat, not so much as hold up an hand, nor
speak a seasonable word in defense of undermined Religion and Invaded Liberty.


Tory. Well! I Will say that for our folks, we spare for no pains nor Cost -- To
undo our selves and our Neighbors. How many Cabals, Tavern Conventicles,
private Treats, etc. have we had of late! There Is Loyal Not scribles on at the
old impudent rate, as if he defied all Justice, and Courted Preferment from the
Pillory to the Gallows, and then the Indefatigable Observator fills the
Bog-houses in Town with Antipendiums, flams, shams and Forty ones, that old
wretch (were he not well paid for it) would live a Dogs life amongst them, for
the Whigs have had a Company of plaguey Books out of late, there is the
unanswerable Julian, The Roguish History of Whiggism, the Samaritan, and I know
not what all.


Truem. Yes, and the third part of the Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists,
such a modest rational and truly Christian discourse, as one would think should
Convince any soul that reads it.


Tory. Convince me no Convinces; I thank God never read any Books but
L'Estranges and those that are Printed for Ben. Took, and they satisfy me
abundantly. But they say there is another B^oody thing abroad, called Elymas the
Sorcerer.


Truem. Yes, a shrewd unpleasing discovery; it seems all the Popish Tools do
not herd amongst the Fanatics.


Tory Hang Father Mambourgh, what will you believe a Jesuit?


Truem. No, Hang him, and all the society too, say I, and all that adhere to
'um, but yet when some Jesuits were hanged in earnest, I remember there were
plenty of Tory-fools ready to believe 'um, who knows but some people may be
still as simple?


Tory. Prithee, leave tattling of these Phamplets, and let us talk of that which
all the World talks of, who do you think will bechosen Sheriffs?


Truem. What a foolish question do you ask, just as if you had been Huzzaing at
the Towzer? is not the business already fairly decided, agreeable to
prescription, Charter, common reason, and the very Concessions of the party
first opposing? have not the ablest Lawyers in the Kingdom given their
opinion? Can any thing be more home than Turners Adjudged Case? are not Ten
parts in Twelve of the whole City (even hundreds of those who Polled contrary)
now satisfied? Is there the least color or shadow of Argument to the contrary?
To break through all this, will it not be to overturn the very basis of the
City Government? A new way of destroying the Charter without a quo Warranto?
And yet at last impracticable, for, alas! Right is Right, and it is not Tricks
and Huzza's can alter it: The law is true steel Twill not long stand bent, but
in time always Cuts their fingers that misimploy it, nor can any man be
Counter-secur'd against it. Because the Dog Days are coming on, do you think
any body so mad as to hazard the exposing themselves to Ten Thousand just
Actions, Indictments, Impeachments, and God knows what else, merely to comply
with an odd Capricious humor?


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR* The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July 21. 1682.
Probitas Laudatur, at alget.
The Turk Appeals to Heaven against the perfidiousness of the Christians,
occasioned by the Pope. Memoirs of Pope Nicholas the V. His dispensation in a
Case of Witchcraft. Pope Calixtus the III. his Indulgences, Saint-making, etc.
WE have not done with Pope Eugenius the 4 th, till we have acquainted the
Reader with that remarkable occurrence, which formerly we occasionally
mentioned, (yet not here to be omitted in its proper place) viz. How that
Vladislaus King of Hungary having concluded a Peace with the Turk, Pope
Eugenius who was of a robust Hectorly temper and himself continually entangled
with Wars, dispatches Cardinal Julian to that King, promising him some aid by
Land, and also the assistance of a Navy by Sea to Embarrass the Enemy, if he
would fall upon them suddenly notwithstanding that League. The King urged the
obligations of Amity he was under by the Treaty, but the Pope who is always an
Alexander and prepared with Tools to Cut asunder those knots he cannot fairly
untie, tells him that is but a foolish scruple, for no Treaty was good, nor
League valid that was made with the Enemies of Christ without his, the said
Popes License, Command and Ratification, being Christ's plenipotentiary in that
behalf; by these Instigations, from one of such boasted Sanctity, the King was
Inveigled to bre^k his Faith with the more faithful I^fidel, and to fall upon
the Turk unawares not dreaming of any Hostility. But observe how justly
providence Revenged this horrid perfidiousness, when Amurath the Turkish
Emperor (says Bo^sinius in his Hungarian History, decad 1. lib. 6.) saw
himself distressed and his Army put to flight by the ungarians, he pulled forth
of his Bosom the Articles of Peace (...) sworn unto between Vladislaus and
himself, and spr^^ding it abroad with eye steadfastly lift up toward Heaven,
Behold! Behold! (says he) O Jesus Christ; these are the Covenats of Peace
which thy Christians have m^de with me: They have hol^ly sworn by thy Divine
Majesty, but Tre^t^h rous^y have violated the Faith given in thy Divine name,
and perfid^ usly denied their God; now O Christ, if thou be God, I b^s^ech thee
Revenge here these thine Injuries, as well as mine, and to them that as yet
acknowledge not thy Name, show the punishment of violated Faith, and revenge so
notorious a Perjury.

Scarce had he uttered these words, when his Forces began to Rally, and the
success of the Battle which before seemed desperate Inclined to his side, which
ended in an Entire Victory, King (...) a Prince of exempl^ry Valor and
Generosity, being himself s^^an in the field, and Cardinal Julian the Popes
Legate wounde^, and in his Retreat killed by the Christians themselves, as
being the Author of this miserable defeat, by that disloyalty of which he was
but the Instrument from the Pope: This happened Anno Christi 1444. and by this
Victory the Turk gained an In^oad into Hungaria, and from thenceforwards daily
prevailed against Christendom. And here ^e may take notice of the prevarication
and fl^ttery of Platina in his Lives of the Popes, (especially in the latter
pa^^near his own times, for that Historian himself died about 40 years after,
viz. 1481) if it be not rather the Legerdemain of Omiphrius and others, who in
many places have Castrated, altered, and added unto the true ancient Platina,
as by some of the first Editions plainly appears. But in the Platina we now
commonly have this Treacherous prank of this Pope Eugenius, is thus cunningly
slubber'd over.

Vladislaum Polonem Regem cum Juliano Caesarino diacono Cardinali in Turcos
miserit: Quorum de numeris ad Triagenta Millia uno praelio caesa, inter
Hadrianop^l^n Danubium sunt, licet in tarta Victoria ipse cum Cardinali ab
Hostibus Interfe^tus sit. Constans praeterio in pactis servandis est Habitus,
nisi quid pollicitus fuisset, quod revocare quam perficere satius esset. He
sent Uladislau^s King of Poland with Cardinal Julian against the Turks [ not a
word of the Peace in being, nor other Circumstances will this Pontificion
Biographer tells us] of whom Thirty Thousand were slain in one Battle, though
yet at the same time both the King and Cardinals were slain. This Pope was
accounted constant in keeping his word, unless he had promised something which
'twas better to Revoke than perform -- By these last words, they would
pallitate their Popes Roguery in this affair, but the German Historians were
more honest than to Conceal it, Nay Aeneas Sylvius ( afterward himself a Pope)
L. 1. Epist. 81. takes notice of it, and acknowledges That God by this signal
Overthrow taught us, as it were from Heaven, that Oaths ought not to be kept,
not only with the Domestic friends of the Faith, but also with the Enemies
thereof.

Pope Eugenius went the way of all flesh Anno 1446. To whom succeeded one Thomas
de Sarzana by the name of Nicholas the fifth, who had been Employed by Eugenius
in Germany to compose the differences, and take the Emperor from siding with
Felix (formerly Duke of Savoy who was Created Pope (as we told you lately) by
the Council of Basil, and was still living) during this negotiation, he
Contracted a friendship with the before mentioned Aeneas Sylvius, and such
^avo^r^n the Imperal Court, that soon after he came to the Chair, Foelix the
Antipope finding himself abandoned voluntarily resign^d his Pope-ship Anno
1449. and accepted of a Legates place under Nicholas; and so the Schism (as
they call it, that is having two or more Popes at once, and this was just the
Thirtieth of that kind) which had lasted almost Ten years, was soder'd up and
Cured.

The year 1450. was the great Jubilee held at Rome, an excellent Fair for the
Popes Merchandise, and which brought him in abundance of Money -- Tanta
multitudo Roman venit, quanta nunquam antea, There came ^saith Platina) such a
power of People (the world was always full of fools) to Rome as never the like
was seen, and one day there were 200 men and 3 horses and a Mule Killed upon
Hadrians- Bridge by reason of the Crowd.

The next year the Emperor Frederick takes a Journey into Italy, as well to be
Crowned as to Marry Lon^ra the King of Portugals Daughter, Pope Nick being
naturally a Coward, was very apprehensive, lest Frederick calling to mind the
ancient Right and Authority of his predecessors should take upon him the Rule
and Government of the City, and thereof Fortified the Capital and Castle of St.
Angels and all the Gates, etc. But he was more afraid than hurt, for Frederick
had no such design against him; but being Crowned and Married and magnificently
treated for sometime at Rome, peaceably returned into Germany.

When Constantinople was beseiged by the Turks, the Greeks (says Antonius
part. 3. Tit. 22. C. 13) sent Ambassadors to Pope Nicholas Imploring his
assistance of men and money; but Nicholas would not hear them; yet Platina
would make us believe he was so much afflicted for the loss of the City, that
it was one of the causes of his Death, which happened Anno 1455.

It Is a remarkable odd story which Bodin in his Daemonomania, and Jacob
Sprenger the Inquisitor of Witches, in his Book Entitled Malleus Maleficarum
tells of this Pope, viz. That a certain German Bishop being sick, for whom
Nicholas had a great kindness, he understood by a Witch [the Devil it seems was
these Holy Fathers Oracle] that his indisposition proceeded from Witchcraft,
and that there was no way in the World to Recover him but by a contrary Charm:
by which the Witch her self that had bejuggled him must die: He therefore sends
Post to Rome, and begs Pope Nicholas leave, to be Cured by this White Witch,
and accordingly his Holiness grants him a Dispensation both as to Employing the
Witch and the Murder that was to follow, the Bull alleging that he allowed
that same, because of two evils we are to avoid the Greater, [the Popes worship
had forgot that we are not to do evil that good may come on it, indeed that
maxim has no place in the Roman divinity, for by Blood and Murder, force and
fraud, perjury and all kind of villainy they pretend to advance the Glory of
God, true Religion and Holy Church,] well! this License being arrived, the
Witch under the Popes Blessing and Authority, at the Bishops Entreaty
undertakes the Job, and plied her business so much (I cannot say so well that
about Midnight the Bishop was perfectly restored to health, and at the very
same Instant the disease passed into her that had bewitched him, whereof she
dyed.

We come now to Calixtus the third, named before Alphonsus Borgia, who was no
sooner Elected but he denounced War against the Turks, saying that he had long
since vowed the same; and in testimony thereof showed a note formerly
subscribed with his own hand, in a certain book containing the words following
-- Ego Calixtus Pontifex Deus omnipotenti voveo, and Sarct^^ Individu^
Trinitate me Bello, maledictis* Interdictis, execra^ionibus and d^mum
quibuscunque rebus potero Turcos Christiani nominis hostis saevissimos
persecuturum. I Pope Calixtus do vow to Almighty God and to the holy
undivisible Trinity, that I will persecute the Turks, Enemies of the Christian
name, by Wars, Curses, Interdictions, Execrations, and by all other means that
I can. 'Twas a riddle to all present, how he should qualify himself with the
Title of Pope so long before he was Elected, but it seems the man's head ran
much upon it, nor were the Threatenings of such an old decripi^e fellow (for he
was about Fourscore) very terrible.

However, in pretense at least of Carrying on this sacred War he laid a Tenth
on all the Clergy of Christendom, and published a Croysado, according to
Custom, granting thereby full Remission of sins to all that should Contribute
to that expedition, provided that once in their lives, and once at their death,
they were Confessed; and also gave Authority to whomsoever would give Five
Ducats, to Absolve and dispense in many cases; Alponsus King of Naples, and
Philip Duke of Burg^udy, were admonished to Cross themselves, (that is to serve
in person, for in such cases, all both Soldiers and Commanders wore Crosses on
their outward Garments) but as the business was suddenly started, and for a
spurt carried on with wonderful vigor, so in little time the zeal abated, and
the preparations declined. Some few Galleys the Pope did equipp and put out to
Sea, that did the Turks some damage, and sent a Friar with great presents to
the King of Persia and the Cham of Tartary, persuading them likewise to fall
upon the Turk.

For a blessing on these Enterprises, he ordained that a Bell should every day
between Noon and Evening be T^ll'd, at the sound whereof, whoever did on their
knees mutter over 3 Ave Maria's and Pater Nosters should have three years and
three fortieth parts of Indulgences [that is to say, for three years a man
might live as he list, and defy both God and the Devil, and for the rest of
all his sins being divided into Forty equal parts, every time he mubled over
three Ave's and Pater's at the tinkling of that Bell, three of those parts
should be wiped off the score, so that Foureteen bouts would Balance the whole
Account.] He likewise appointed a General pr^c^ssion or Letany the first Sunday
of every Month, in which whosoever assisted should obtain seven years and a
seven fortieth part of Indulgences, besides a Prayer in the Mass for Victory
over the ^^^^dels, and he that said That had three years Indulgen^e.

If all these Baits of d^votion would make men Saints, he yet had another trick
would do the fe^^ and that was Canonization, which he bestowed one Edmund of
^^^terbury, one Vincent in Spain, and several others, that as little d^^^rv'd
that Title as he had just power to bestow it; which Bess^^^^ seeing, and
especially how rashly and indirectly the same (...) managed, was not a little
scandalized thereat T^ese New Saints (quoth he) make me doubt of the old --
Lange^ in praefat.

But he that was for ^btr^ding Saints upon Heaven, was no less busy in robbing
Princ^ of their Rights upon Earth, for Alphonsus King of Naples dying* this
Calixtus published his Bulls, declaring that the Realm of Naples being vacant,
appertained only to him as a Fiefe of the Church, and commands Ferdinand the
Son of Alphonsus, that neither he nor any other should call himself King
thereof, on pain of Excommunication; whereupon Wars were like to ensue, but the
same was happily prevented by the Popes death, who was called out of this World
in the year of our Lord 1458, leaving behind him in his Coffers One Hundred and
Fifteen thousand pieces of Gold, as Platina affirms, a Treasure very different
from His, that said -- Silver and Gold have I none, and yet these Money monging
Popes are not ashamed to boast themselves his Successors.

The COURANT.
Unum aliquem voluptate ac deliciis fluere, gementibus, undique ac lamentibus
aliis, hoc non est Regni sed Carceris esse Custodem, Tho. Mor. Utop.
Truem. Whether so fast man?


Tory. To the new Academy.


Truem. What? to learn to ride an Hobbyhorse, and practice the noble science
of defense with Bean stalks and Bull rushes?


Tory. No, no, our's is not Monsieur's vaulting-room, but a Schola Illustris,
that undertakes to new model all Arts and sciences.


Truem. A gallant enterprise! as how I prithee?


Tory. Why first we begin with Grammar, and Correct the old fashioned use of
words and Phrases; as for Example, to Elect two persons shall henceforwards
mean, to choose but one; the lesser party is to be called -- A Majority.
Confirmation shall signify He-go-mad, or a fatal necessity of approbation
without a dram of free will in the Case; and to desire people to do a thing
must be interpreted, that you do thereby actually do it your self in spite of
their teeth; in Geometry and Arithmetic our Doctors of the Chair teach, that a
part is greater than the whole, and Twelve hundred more by a bundance than Four
and twenty hundred. Logic they affirm ought not to be the Art of Reasoning but
of Scolding.


Truem. Nay then by my Vote, Roger L'Estrange shall be constituted
Logick-Reader to both Universities.


Tory. I must tell you there are some there think themselves not a little
obliged to that Reverend Guide, else they would never have made him such a
present.


Truem. Yet I have heard of a certain Squire Tyburn-wards, that owes a
Gentleman near Cambridge the Sum of Twelve Pound upon Note or Bond, and having
been several times dunn'd for it, has promised payment, and bound those
promises with Oaths and Execrations, as solumn and dreadful as those wherewith
with Roger uses to disprove himself a Papist, yet has not paid the money, at
least it was not paid just before the time he received the Guinnies, nor is it
as we believe, satisfied to this day; Mr. L'Estrange would do well to give an
account of that affair in his next Observator. 'Twould be altogether as
edifying to the public as Brass-screws, or his being sent for to the old Dog!
Talk no more of debts and duns -- how goes the business in the City!


Truem. Alas, it does not go sir! but it is driven.


Tory. What may be the grounds and design of all this bustle?


Truem. As far as I can learn, on the one side, the Generality of the Citizens
have a mind to preserve their Right of Choosing of Sheriffs, and acting in
Common Hall as time out of mind has been accustomed; on the other side, there
are some that scarce know what they would have themselves, but however they
make a horrid noise and clamor, and every body that will not be as mad and
silly as themselves, they count a Traitor and a Fanatic, many of these are
influenced by Strangers, that endeavor by rudeness and ill Language and all
kind of Affronts to provoke and raise some tumult or disturbance, and rather
than fail will swear it, on the most peaceable. Or if we may believe what a
printed paper relates, and names the person, one of these sticklers confessed
lately, that the business so strugled for, was, to get Sheriffs to hang up half
a score that were uneasy, etc. But as one Innocent man's blood is enough to draw
down divine vengeance on the whole Nation, so who knows where Blood hounds if
once flesht, would stop? as to the present Controversy is it not fit to be
considered,

1. If my Lord Mayor be allowed a Right to choose one of the Sheriffs against
the mind of the Common Hall, then whether the Cities late plea to the quo
Warranto, in defense of the Charter, be not thereby confessed to be false and
invali'd?

2. If the Sheriffs for the time being, have not a right to declare the free
choice of Sheriffs for the year ensuing, and to manage the Poll, (if any be
demanded then whether we have had any Sheriffs duly chosen this hundred years?
for it is certain the Sheriffs not the Mayors have done it; nor did ever any
Mayor Adjourn the Common Hall, before the business dispatched, but Sir Samuel
Starling, and he paid for it, being cast at Law upon serious consideration of
all the Judges.


Tory. But what have you to do with these matters?


Truem. Just as much as the Observator; therefore I humbly conceive may do it
altogether as lawfully.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July 28. 1682.
Dividimus muros et moenia pandimus Vrbis.
The History of Aeneus Sylvius, or Pope Pius the II; the Arts used by him to
get the Chair; how strangly he was thereby altered. Certain notable sentences
of his.
WE hasten -- Because sooner than intended, we must, it seems, close these
unwelcome and ungratefully received sheets. Who would suspect that in a
Protestant Kingdom, and in an age too wherein one of the most damnable Popish
Plots that ever shockt a State, was so providentially discovered* (and is it
not still apparently working?) An History of Popery managed with an exact
fidelity, and some small neither unusefull nor unpleasant digressions for the
Readers Entertainment, should (even amongst Protestants) meet with
misconstruction and Contempt -- But let them slight on.

Those that love Lees, and loath the generous Wine,
We envy not, their Pallate's with the Swine.
Pope Calixtus being dead, there were but Two Competitor^ for the Papacy, viz.
Cardinal Rotomagensis, and Aeneas Sylvius, so that during the four days space
wherein the matter was debated in the Conclave, the only difficulty was which
of these they should choose, nor was either of them wanting to push on his own
promotion, and asperse his Rival.

On the one side, Rotomagensis runs up and down from one Cardinal to another
whispering -- What have you to do with Aeneas? how can you think him worthy of
the Papacy, will you confer so important a charge upon that gouty Beggar? where
is his knowledge, where his Learning, will ye make him a Pope because he is a
Poet? It is not long since he came out of Germany, and who knows but he may
transfer the Sea thither? I should never have Ambition'd the Chair, had I not
seen a person stand for it of so much weaker parts than my self; besides I am
the antienter Cardinal of the two, and I believe you think I have parts and
Learning sufficient to govern the Church of Christ, moreover I am of Royal
Extraction, and have wealth, friends and faculties, wherewith to accomodate and
relieve the Necessities of the Church, and upon my Election, the many Benefices
which I now hold will be divided amongst you.

These reasons, and especially the last, were very prevalent with many,
particularly the Cardinal of Avignon espoused his Interest, not so much because
he was a French man, as in hopes that upon his promotion, his Church, Palace,
and office in the Chancery would fall to his share; therefore cunningly in the
night he gets together certain of the Cardinals in an house of Office [ A sweet
place to confir^ notes about choosing an Head for the Church!] and there
contrived a method how Rotomagensis should carry the day.

But there was fraud in fellowship; for the Cardinal of Bologna, one of this
House-of-Office-Cabal, discovers the Intrigue to Aeneas a little after
midnight; presently up gets he, and away to Cardinal Roderigo a Spaniard of
Rotomagensis's faction, as having from him and the Cardinal Avignon received a
promise in writing that the Chancellorship should be conferred upon him. Aeneas
expostulates with him for siding with his enemy, who excuses himself so well as
he can, telling him he did it not out of any personal Aversion, but because he
thought verily the other would be chosen, and he was loath to hang an arse, and
so perhaps lose his Chancellors place: Will you then (quoth Aeneas) sell your
Vote? and by Simony incur the displeasure of God Almighty? will you obtrude an
hairbrain'd Youth upon the Vatican, and one that is an enemy to the Nation?
know you not the Chancellorship which is promised you, is already bestowed and
Confirmed to the Cardinal of Avignon, and so you are merely Choused, for can
you think that a French Pope will do more for a Spaniard than for one of his
own Countrymen!

Having thus rattled up Don Roderigo, in the next place he finds out the
Cardinal of Pavia, whom he accosts in this manner, -- I hear you resolve to
choose Rotomagensis Pope, are you not ashamed to degenerate so much from
Cardinal Brando your Uncle, who with so much labor and sweat assisted to
transfer the pontificial Court from Germany to Rome, [He means in the Schism,
when the Duke of Savoy took upon him to be Pope] and you that are his Nephew
would Transport it from Italy into France; surely Rotomagensis will never give
the Italians precedence before the French, and yet you an Italian will
Confederate sooner with France, than with your own Country. Can you have the
heart to see your self a slave to the French, when it is in your power to make
the French truckle to your Nation?

The Cardinal Pavia replied -- That he did not believe that the French had any
designs against the Interests of the Church, they having given with so much
Generosity most of the provinces it possesses, and surely they would not take
away what they so lately had given. -- Suppose says Aeneas, that should be,
ought it not however to stir up your heart against this Cardinal of Roan to
consider the Infamy of his manners, who is addicted to all kind of
Lasciviousness and debauchery. You have often told me you would sooner die than
give your Voice for him, what reason have you for so great a Change? is he in
the twinkling of an eye become an Angel of a Devil? or are you become a Devil
of an Angel? Pavia (who was but a silly fellow, and easily made to comply with
either side) began to weep, -- What you say Aeneas is true, but what shall I
do? I have now passed my word to make Rotomagensis Pope, and if I do not, I
shall be held Infamous and a Traitor: To which Aeneas briskly replied Things
stand so now, that which way soever you turn you, you cannot avoid the blame of
a Fool and Traitor, yet it is in your power to choose whether you will betray
Italy your own Country, or betray him and be faithful to your Country and your
best friends. -- These words overcome old Pavia, who presently joins with
Cardinal Peter de Sancta Maria Nova, and other Italians, in the Cardinal of
Genoa's Chamber, where they all resolve to prefer Aeneas. Rotomagensis fearing
things would not fadge according to his expectations, seeing Aeneas going to
take up the Billet to give his Vote, whispers him very submissively -- AEneas I
recommend my self to thee, remember me, I beseech thee, and have compassion on
me. But Aeneas takes him up short thus -- poor Worm! thou mistakest in
Recommending thy self to me. The scrutiny being published, it appeared that
Aeneas had three Voices more than Rotomagensis, but they could not yet obtain
their two thirds.

Then the Cardinals Roderigo and Santa Anastasia declared for Aeneas with a
loud Voice, which Cardinal Prosper Colonna observing, being ambitious to have
the Honor of making the Pope (since now there wanted but one Voice) arose and
went toward Aeneas, and being stopped and held by Cardinal Niceno and
Rotomagensis, he cried out -- I join my self to Cardinal Aeneas and do make him
Pope; which being heard by the rest of the Cardinals, they all threw themselves
down at Aeneas's feet, saluted him Pope, Corfirmed the Election afterward with
the usual suffrages. Then Cardinal Bessarion Apooglized to the New Pope for
himself and all the rest of the Cardinals that favored Rotomagensis -- To whom
the crafty old Fox (being now sure of the Chair) very gravely replied -- I
assure you, you shall be all equally dear to me, for I acknowledge my Election
not from this person, or that, but from God, and the whole body of the sacred
College, inspired by the Holy Ghost from whence all pe^fection comes; so bold
and profane was this wicked Pope, to attribute that to divine designation,
which he had obtained by fraud and notorious Canvasing of Parties.

This Aeneas whose other name was Piccol homini, but after he came to the
Popedom called Pius the second, was a native of Siena, his patrimony so mean,
that Platina tells us, when he was a Boy and learnt Grammar, he was forced for
mere Poverty to do Husbandry work for his livelihood, but being of a notable
wit, he quickly became a good Poet, then studied the Civil Law, and afterward
Divinity, he was scribe in the Council of Basil, and Master of the Ceremonies,
and by them employed in several E^bassies, and wrote the Transactions of that
Council; mainly opposing Eugenius, and asserted, that a Pope ought to be
subject to a general Council. Most remarkable is the Epistle he wrote to Gasper
Sch^^ck the Emperors Chancellor ( Epist. Aen. Sylvii 54) -- All men abhor and
detest Schism, the Remedy is brief and safe, viz. That Princes or their
Ambassadors Convene in some common place, and conclude matters among
themselves; for he shall be undoubted Pope, whom all Princes would obey; nor do
I see any of the Clergy so constant to Death as to suffer Martyrdom either for
the one part or for the other; we all commonly hold that Faith which our
Princes embrace, and if they should Worship Idols, we would also do the same,
and not only deny the Pope but God also, if the secular power press us
thereunto, for Charity is grown cold, and all Faith is gone, etc.

But Honors change manners; no sooner was he Pope, but he begins to sing
another Tune, and sets forth a Bull entitled Retraction revoking his former
Acts and opinions, and the things which he before had seemed to detest in other
Popes, he himself now both applauded and advanced. So likewise by another Bull
beginning Execrabilis, dated in the second year of his Popedom, he strictly
forbids any to presume to Appeal from the sentence of the Bishop of Rome to any
future Council; and pronounces all such Appeals, whether of Emperors, Kings,
Bishops, etc. to be void, vain, execrable and pestiferous. In another Bull
which begins -- In minoribus agentes, directed to the University of Cologn,
Anno 1463, he professes that it repents him that he wrote the Dialogue and
other Books touching the Authority of the Council, and is not ashamed to add,
That then like St. Paul he ignorantly persecuted the Church of God, affirming
now on the contrary, that the Authority of the Pope is above that of the Church
Representative, and endeavoring to prove the same by the very same Text, which
before he had expounded in a quite different sense.

Nor was he less pragmatical in his Actions than his predecessors, For the
Augmentation of the Papal Majesty he feared ( says Stella in his Life) neither
Kings nor Dukes, people nor Tyrants, but if they would not obey, he Persecuted
them so long both by Wars and Censures till he perceived them to be recovered.
Thus he became an enemy to Lewis King of France, who went about to restrain the
Insolences of the Clergy in his Dominions, he Thundered forth terrible
Execrations against Sigismond Duke of Austrea, for that he had Chastised the
Cardinal of St. Peter ad Vincula, he deposed the Archbishop of Ments for having
an ill opinion of the Church of Rome, and brought many Towns of Campania to the
submission of the Holy Se^. But his Ambition cannot better be descried than
from his 3^6 Epistle, where he offers and promises the Empire of the Greeks
to M^homet the Grand Seignor, if he would become a Christian and succor the
Church, that is to say, his Faction, that he might more easily rend and at his
pleasure trample upon Christendom, which he continually harrass'd with Wars.

Yet it must be acknowledged, that he was more Learned, and a man of better
sense than most of those that have possess't the Chair, and till he was blinded
with self-Interest had a very piercing Judgment of things, as appears by these
his following sayings or Apothegms recorded by Platina and others.

Proverbial Maxims of Aeneus Sylvius or Pope Pius the II.
1. Every sect grounded on Authority, wants humane reason. 2. The Christian
Faith, if it were not approved by Miracles, yet ought to be received for its
innate Honesty and Excellency. 3. Marriage with great reason was forbiden to
Priests, and yet for the greater reasons ought to be restored to them [Note
that in some late Editions of Platina this sentence is struck out, but it is in
mine Printed at Cologn, 1611] 4. To search into and study the Course of the
Stars is a thing of more delight and ostentation than profit. 5. A Covetous man
is never satisfied with Money, nor a Scholar with knowledge. 6. Those who have
the happiness to know most, have the perplexity to meet with most doubts. 7.
Learning to the vulgar ought to serve instead of Silver, to the Nobles as Gold,
but by Princes to be valued as precious stones. 8. Laws on poor people have
force, but toward the great ones they are Dumb.
The COURANT.
-- Quae tanta Insania Cives!
Creditos avectos Hosts?
Truem. ANd have you disposed of the House in Aldersgate Street?


Tory. Yes, yes, that little man is to be Abbreviated in Michaelmas Term, and
Sir Richard to enter upon the premises at Christmas; so 'twas resolved at our
Club last night at the Queens Head l'le assure you.


Truem. Very fine! and who are the rest that you design the Two Gentlemen shall
have the honor of being Executioners to?


Tory. Why, not above half ascore Lords, Four Aldermen, and about Three hundred
and fifty Commoners.


Truem. That Is a small business, prithee let it be two or three thousand when
your hands in, -- But how will you do for Evidence.


Tory. Pshaw! let us have confiding Juries, and we will pres^ntly find Witnesses
enough in the divels-name; there is a spot of ground near Paul's where they grow
as fast as solun-Geese do in Scotland; Godwin the Tailor who swore his wife (
Colleges sister) into Newgate the other day, will do well for a young beginner,
besides we still maintain the old Reserve at 'tother end oth' Town on purpose
for opportunity. I saw some of them on Wednesday last in Fleet Street as fine
as if the Devil were their Tailor; they looked l'le promise you more like Lords
than Common Knights, look, look quoth a roguish Porter seeing them go by,
observe the difference; all the while these fellows swore against Papists they
were forced to sneak up and down and beg Coffee at the Amsterdam, and d^ne five
of them on a Loyn of Mutton, but no sooner did they Tack and puff Shaf^sbury
into the Tower, but Hey b^ys up go we! The plate Fleet arrived, it rained Laced
Crava^s, and Beavers, and the Fairies brought them New Suits and Guinnies in
the pockets, and ever since the miracle continues, and they live like Princes.


Truem. But how if one of your Gazet-Sheriffs should not be willing to hold
after this.


Tory. Nay then I faith Roger L'Estrange has spent his time and pains to a fine
purpose. Pray do you know what Company that Gentleman is of, he has stickled
more in this No-Choice, than any Livery man of them all.


Truem. Who Roger, he is a Haberdasher of small Wares.


Tory. Well, you see he claws off Prance still.


Truem. Yes, he went by there the other morning, and put forth his Snout out of
the Coach against Prances door, and loll'd out his Tongue and Bleated just like
a Calf, was not that now ingeniously done, and much like a Gentleman.


Tory. You mistake he only paid his Adorations to the Golden Cross, and said an
Ave Maria, and so Jogged on; but prithee what is that dog story he keeps such a
clutter with.


Truem. The matter of Fact was truly and nakedly as follows, Miles Prance and
another man and a third person that was a Constable went one evening into Sam's
Coffee-house, and sat down quietly without speaking to any body, but before
Prance had drunk his dish, a Journy-man Draper whispered the Company and told
them who he was, presently twenty or thirty of them flock about him, called him
scurrilous names and gave him all kind of Affronts, which he took patiently,
only laughed at their folly, and paying for his Coffee, he and one of the
persons that came in with him, went to the Old Dog Tavern and sat down in the
Kitching, where the other man in a Frolique would needs send to Sa'ms for
L'Estrange, who refusing to come, unless a Name were sent, the same person
returned the Boy again to tell him, that one Squire Ketch would speak with him;
whereupon a Committee of four or five were sent from Sams, who began a quarrel
with Prance for sending for L'Estrange, and he denied (as most truly he might)
that he sent for him; but there were no such Oaths or Execrations uttered, nor
did ever Mr. Allens boys make such Affidavits as were Printed, but all those
lies were calculated on purpose to fully Mr. Prances Evidence against Thompson,
the day before whose Trial this story was first blazed abroad by the Observator.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 4. 1682.
Monstra, non Homines pagina nostra refert.
The wicked Lives of Pope Paul the II. a professed enemy of Learning, and Sixtus
the IV. who granted a License for Sodomy; the story of Pope Innocent the VIII.
and his Sixteen Bastards.
OUR last acquainted you with a pretty tolerable Pope, a man of sense and
Letters, and only tainted with Pride and Covetousness and a few such ordinary
Vices, but we now come to Brutes and Monsters, hardly to be matched by the
Nero's and Caligula's or any the like prodigies of the Heathen World.

Pope Pius the 2 d. intent upon an expedition against the Turks, dyed at Ancona
in the year 1464. And is honored with this Epitaph.

Frigida membra Pii retinet lapis iste loquacis,
Qui pacem moriens attulit Italiae;
Vendiderat pretio Gentes, and Crimina multa,
Virtutis specie gesserat ille Pius.
Here the cold Bones of tattling Pius ly,
Who by his Death brought Peace to Italy;
Nations he sold, and many Crimes did act,
But masked with seeming virtue each lewd Fact.
Peter Barbs a Venetian succeeds, by the name of Paul the second, one of the
most pevish fancifull fools, that we shall meet with in any History. One of his
first exploits was to abolish all the Abbreviators, to whom Pope Pius his
predecessor had sold those places, without returning any of their Money. What
these Gentlemen's Office was, I am not wise enough to acquaint you, but it
appears to be both of Honor and profit, else they would never have stickled so
much about it. His pretended reason for putting them down was Ignorance, when
in truth they were the Learnedest men Pius could get together from most parts
of the World, and Platina who writes the Lives of the Popes hitherto, was one
of them, a person no way contemptible for parts, as the size of Learning went
in those times. When some of these discarded Officers, petitioned him to refer
their Cause to the hearing of the Auditors of the Rota, (a certain Court of
Judicature in Rome) and Platina spoke for all the rest; this haughty Pope
returned this swaggering Answer -- What do talk to us of Judges? do thou
not know that all Laws are lodged within the Closet of our Breast (Ita nos,
inquit, ad Judices revocas, ac si nescireo omnia Jura in scrinio pectoris
nostri collocata esse?) This is our sentence, let them all be packing, I regard
them not, I am Pope and it is lawful for me to disannull or approve the Acts
of others at my own pleasure. And because Platina, not satisfied with this
Answer, wrote him a Letter about the same affair, he accused him of Libelling
and Treason, which Treason was that he had ^alkt of Appealing from his Holiness
to a General Council; upon this poor Platina was Jail'd for four Months, and
not long after taken up again upon a Sham plot, and put upon the Rack with
several others, of whom diverse, being persons of good quality, whom he names
in his History, dyed of their Tortures; and when it appeared there was no such
Conspiracy, as the Pope had fancied, yet they were long kept in durance, least,
forsooth, he should seem to have Committed them at first without cause; and
when other accusations failed, he accused them of Heresy for disputing of the
Immortality of the Soul out of Plato, whom, yet, (as Platina truly observes,)
St. Austin affirms to come nearest therein to the opinion of a Christian; and
to complete his ridiculous folly, he very gravely pronounced, all those to be
Heretics that should either in jest or earnest make mention of the name of an
Academy. This will not appear strange, when you consider what the same Author
relates, that this Pope hated Learning, and had such a spite against the
Studies of Humanity, that he called all that followed them, Heretics; and for
that reason, exhorted the Citizens of Rome not to suffer their Sons to be any
longer at the Studies of Learning, for that it was sufficient if they had
learned to write and read, and therefore Genebrard fitly calls him, Hostis
Virtutis and doctrinae, the enemy of virtue and Learning. The most memorable
things that he did for the good of the Church, was that he bought up at any
rate all the extraordinary precious stones he could hear of, to make the Papal
Mitre more gay and glorious, for he took much delight to be gazed at and
admired in that Bravery; likewise he decreed that none should wear Scarlet Caps
but Cardinals, and in the first year of his Popedom he gave them Cloth of the
same Color wherewith to cover their Horses and Mules when they rode; that the
Apostatized Church might even literally resemble that Whore described to us in
the Revelations. In the year 1465* the Cardinal of Laurence dying, who was
exceeding rich, by the Popes consent bequeathed his Estate to his two Brothers,
called Scaranupi, but no sooner was he dead, but the Pope seized on the
Legatees and kept them in Prison till they surrendered the Estate to his
disposal, and so got those riches which (says Platina) the late owner would
rather had fallen to the Turks than him, as being one that he hated and always
had quarrels with. Another of his excellencies, was that he had appointed
public Races all the Lent, and proposed Prises to those that won, every day,
so that there ran old men, young men, and Children, Christians and Jews, nay
they ran with Horses and Mares and Asses and some upon Cows, with such
diversion to the Company that they could scarce stand for Laughing, Vnde
pontifex ipse solidam voluptatem percipiebat, from which his Holiness himself
did take solid displeasure. Excellent sport for Christ's Vicar! He was a great
Epicure, and if store of Belly-Timber were not brought him, would roar and cry
out like mad; he would drink too like a Fish, and when he went abroad it is
reported he used to paint his face, as Wenches do. He Excomunicated George King
of Bohemia for being infected with the Heresy of John Hus, and deprived him of
his Kingdom, which he liberally bestowed upon Matthew King of Hungaria. In the
7 th year of his Popedom he dyed suddenly some say of an Apoplexy, but G^sper
Pencerus affirms that he was strangled by the Devil in the very act of
uncleaness; this is certain he was a great Whoremaster, and was publicly known
to have one Bastard, whence John Pannonius a Bishop of those times made this
Epigram on him.

Pontificis Pauli testes ne Roma requir as
Filia quam genuit, sat docet esse Marem.
Pope Paulus a male, Rome need no further trial,
His Bastard Daughter makes it no denial.
To fill his Coffers he decreed that the Jubilee should be brought down from 50
years and Celebrated every 25 years (and so it is observed to this day) by
which means it would come in the year 1475. whence he promised himself
abundance of money, but like the rich fool in the Gospel he was cut off before
that time, dying as you have heard Anno 1471. and here Platina's History de
Vitis Pontificum concludes.

The next Pope was F^ancis de Rovere a Savoyard, General of the Franciscans,
who would be called Sixtus the 4 th, he created two Cardinal^, Peter Riere whom
he had brought up from a Child with his Brother Jeronimo, and Julian his
Brothers Son (who was afterward Pope Julius the second) this Peter (who was
supposed to be his own Bastard) he so prodigally enricht, that he seemed born
for nothing but to spend money, for in those two years that he lived a Cardinal
he consumed Two Hundred Thousand Crowns in his ordinary Household Expense, and
Dyed Forty Thousand Crowns in debt, being himself wasted and consumed with
debauchery; touching this Pope himself, hear what a Character Agrippa a Roman
Catholic gives of him and his d^ings in his Vanity of Sciences, cap. 64.
Amongst all the Pimps or Bauds of thse latter tim^s there was none more famous
than Pope Sixtus the IV. who built at Rome a goodly Brothel-house or public
Stews, wherein according to the example of Heliogabalus he kept multitudes of
Buxome Strumpets wherewith he furnished his friends and followers, gathering by
this Whorish merchandise no small advantage to his Treasury, for these
priviledg'd Court^sans at Rome did weekly pay every one a Julio to the Pope,
which yearly Revenue amounts many times to the sum of Twenty Thousand Ducates,
and in such request is that Office with the prime Grandees of the Church, that
the Rents of the Bawds are cast up together with the Patrimony of the Church,
for thus have I myself heard them casting up their accounts (what Revenue or
preferment such a man had) he has two Benefices, one Cure of Twenty Ducates, a
Priory of Forty Ducates and three Whores in the Bawdy House [that is, he is to
receive their Rent.] Thus far Agrippa. Think you not now that the Church of
Rome may most properly in all senses be called a Whore and mother of
Fornications? But though this were a prodigious piece of Impudence, yet this
Incarnate Devil of a Pope proceeded to greater Abominations, for Wesellus of
Groningen, who lived in the time of this Sixtus, and being a man famous in
those days for his knowledge in the three Larned Languages, was thence commonly
called Lux Mundi the Light of the World, in his book of Papal Indulgenses,
ass^res us, that this Pope Sixtus at the request of the before mentioned Peter
Riere (whom he had made Cardinal of St. Sixtus and Patriarch of Constantinople)
and of Jeronimo his own Brother, and of the Cardinal of St. Luce (who had the
chief place belonging to Hunting under Paul the second) permitted unto them and
ever of them Sodomy during the three hottest months of the year viz. June, July
and August, with this Clause Fiat ut petitur, let it be done as it is desired.
yet this good Father wrote Book^ of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, and
Authorized that execrable blasphemous book of Alamus de Rupe a German and
Domini^an Friar entitled Compendium Psalterii Mariani, wherein all that the
Prophet David says of and to the Lord is attributed unto the Virgin Mary; he
also instituted a new Society of the Rosary, for the Credit whereof James
Sp^engerus Provincial of Germany, devised a book of certain Miracles (which
Sixtus approved and defended with his Bulls and Indullgences) wherein we read
-- That the Virgin Mary entering into the Cell or Chamber of this Alani, the
doors being l^k^, and having woven some of her hair into a Ring, married her
self therewith unto him, offering her self unto him to be kissed and her
Breasts to be handled and sucked in as familiar manner as a Wife to her
Husband, with many other accursed Bl^sphemous lies, by which we may with
amazement consider into what a bottomless pit of Impiety the superstitious
minds of the common people wereby these lewd Atheists overwhelmed! the only
commendable thing this Pope did that we can here of, was that he erected the
Palatine Library in the Vatican, and assigned a Revenue thereunto to maintain
the Officers belonging to it; he was Pope 13 years and dyed in the year 1484.
To him is attributed the Invention of Beads, for the counting of Prayers,
because he ordered those of the Society of the Rosary so to do, that they might
know when they had done their Task; of which Mantuan takes notice.

Hi filo insertis numerant sua Murmura Baccis.
Their murmering Prayers they count with Beads on strings
Touching the Religion of this Pope, it is thus expressed in an Epitaph made for
him by Johnanes Sapidus.

Riserat ut vivens Caelestia Numina Sixtus,
Sic moriens nullus Credidit esse Deas.
As Sixtus when he lived mocked God, so he
Even at his death believed no God to be.
Then came Innocent the 8 th of the Family of Cibo, originally a poor boy
brought up with the Servants of the King of Sicily, but being for his
extraordinary Beauty preferred to the Cardinal of Bononia (you that are
acquainted with Italy and the manners of the Scarlet Princes may guess for what
purpose) he soon got advancement. He was the first of all the Popes that
publicly made his boasts of his Bastards, and indeed he had some reason being
very plentifully stock't that way, for before he came to the Chair he had no
less than 16 Bastards, eight boys, and as many Daughters, how many more he had
afterward we find not. But there was but two of them alive when he was made
Pope; of whom Onuphrius gives this Account, that his Son Francis and his
Daughter Theodirina, his Bastards, were by him Enriched beyond measure, he
distributing and squandring away vast sums of money got by Indulgences in
pretense of an Expedition against the Turks amongst those Brats and other of
his Relations.

The COURANT.
Parque refer pari licuit, semperque licebit.
Truem. HAve you been to Congratulate the Captain?


Tory. Who? Captain Confirmation? no, I have had no leisure to be drunk to day;
but I Am the Son of a Whigg, if he be not a rare man; Montecuculi and Turenne
were but Ratcatchers to him for Leading up with a Huzza! and cutoff the Rear
with Bar-shot!


Truem. I pray do any of the Ancients that wrote the Tacktiks, or the Art
Military, make the discipline of the Tap a qualification absolutely necessary
in a Commander?


Tory. No, hang 'um, dull fools! they did not understand it, but where drink's
the only valor, why should not a Hogshead have the Conduct? and then how
gallantly and magnificently it sounds, Brave Captain -- Fill us two Pipes?
Noble Captain -- fetch me up a Piss-pot. Nor is Five pound a night for keeping
in awe Legal Riots and quelling peaceable seditions, and many a Bottle called
for by the by to atone the sin of defaulting, a thing to be slighted, and
therefore no wonder if there have, since the memory of man, been mighty
strivings amongst the formidable Giants of Blew Apronland for martial
preferment.


Truem. Which puts me in mind of an old story in our Country (though nothing to
this purpose) of a Woman that had four or five Children, and a Bitch that
happened to increase the World with as many Whelps, strait the little Brats
(being you must know in Hobb's state of nature) began to catch for propriety,
Dick said -- This shall be mine; and Tom said -- This shall be mine, and each
made sure of one; then says Tom, my Puppies name shall be Captain, no, quoth
Dick, mine shall be Captain, and so said they all; and in short fell to
Loggerheads about the point, the Mother hearing them screaming and crying, one
with a Bloody Nose and 'tother with a torn Muckender, came in to part the fray;
to whom with many a bitter sob, they relate the occasion of their quarrel;
whereupon like a discreet Matron, be quiet, be quiet, quoth she, you bawling
Bastards, all the Puppies shall be Captains; and so the Controversy ended.


Tory. Well! but what is the New's abroad?


Truem. They talk of more and more Plots still.


Tory. As how prithee?


Truem. Why, they say, there is so many Popish Priests and Jesuits come over
(but for no harm I^le warrant you) that they cannot all get work, therefore what
do half a dozen of the cunning'st Rogues in the bunch but to get elbow room
subtly give out with great Confidence, that there are Warrants out against
Father such an one and Father such an one, and by these Arts have frighted away
many of their Brethren into the Country, and now monoplize the whole Employment
of Mass-mumbling and Whore-shrifting to themselves.


Tory. A pretty stratagem! but we have a Plot going on too.


Truem. Prithee what is that?


Tory. To Indict all the Whiggs in England for a Riot at Guild Hall on
Midsummer-day.


Truem. That Is fine! but how can it be done with any handsome Color?


Tory Let us alone for Cloth and Color too, the way is found out and
discovered by a notable paty Old Tory that lives to the South of St Paul's, who
being on Tuesday last in Aldersgate Street and talking of those businesses,
some of the Company alleged, that one that he knew of those now prosecuted in
the Crown-Office, was diverse miles of in the Country that day; no matter for
that, no matter for that, quoth this Sir politic Nestor, the proceeding is
just, all over according to Law for all that, for his heart was with them, and
that makes him as guilty of the Riot as the Sheriffs themselves.


Truem. 'Twas an Ingenious explanation, but I must take leave for I am for
Tunbridge to night.


Tory. Then pray present my service to our friend, Mr. Common Simpleton! and
desire him to drink less Water and more Wine next week, upon my life his
Heraclitus will be fit for nothing in the world but to send down thither for
service in the Backwalks.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 11. 1682.
Donec erit Papa, donec erunt pia scripta virorum
Pellis ovilla trucem non Teget ulla Lupum.

The Turk and Pope intimate Friends, Relics pretended to be found. An Epitaph
upon Pope Innocent VIII. The detestable Lives of those Two Monsters, Pope
Alexander the VI. and his Bastard Caesar Borgia.
WE are yet in the story of Pope Innocent the 8 th. In whose time it happened,
that Bajazet the Grand Seignior of the Turks going about, according to the
unnatural policy of that barbarous Empire, to make away his Brethren, one of
them named Gemes (Zizimus, Onuphrius calls him) a person famous for his Wisdom
and Valor, escaping, endeavored to defend himself by Arms; but being
unhappily routed by his Brother on the plains of Bythinia, retired himself to
Rhodes, where being taken by the Grand Master of the Order, for a sum of Money
was delivered unto Innocent, under whom and his Successor he was kept Prisoner
for many years, and at last dyed in Captivity, and though we never hear they
made him a Christian, yet they forgot not to make advantage by him to
themselves, for so much did Bajacet apprehend his Liberty, that he held
Correspondence with the Pope, and allowed him a Pension of Forty Thousand
Crowns ( Phillip de Comines who lived in that Age, says it was Sixty Thousand)
per annum, to oblige him to keep the said Gemes the more strictly and warily;
and no doubt his Holiness esteemed a Mussalmans Money altogether as Catholic as
if it had been the most Christian Kings. Nor was this all the to^ens of their
Amity, but the subtle Turk knowing well enough how to gratify the superstitious
Pope, sent him the top of an old rusty Lance, which he told him was the end of
the very Spear wherewith the Soldier ( Longinus the Papists will have his name
to be from the Greek word (...), which signifies a Spear) pierced the side of
Jesus Christ when he was Crucified; you may perhaps wonder where this Rarity
had lain so many Hundred years, but Onuphrius will tell you very punctually,
that it was found a long time before at St. Andrews Church in Antioch (I pray
by the way how came it thither?) That when the City was taken one Boemundus
caught it up, and though he could not before subdue the Citadel, yet then he
presently took it, and with this piece of a Spear, Hostium multa Millia
prodigiose delevit, prodigiously destroyed many Hundreds of his Enemies; then
it was carried to Constantinople as a present to the Emperor, and being there
found by the Turk, he now very Courteously sends it to the Pope, who most
Religiously (says Onuphrius) laid it up in the Va^ican Church; nor wanted he
the good luck to find another somewhat more precious Relic, for Peter
Gonsalvo de Mendoza repairing the Church of the Holy Cross in Rome, spyed in
the midst of the Wall a fragment of the Title of the Cross of Christ written in
three Languages, which it is said was hid there by the Emperor Placidius
Valentinianus above a Thousand years before. But this Imposture, the Letters
themselves bewrayed; the dull Monk that forged it, was none of the best
Graecians, for instead of (...) it was both Barberously and against all sense
and Grammar, written (...). However both these Inventions, served to supply
Innocents Successor with a plentiful Harvest of Indulgences, and consequently
brought in abundance of money; for as for Innocent himself, he dyed soon after,
in the 8 th year of his Popedom, and was Buried for the greater Sanctity of
the business, just by the place where he had reposited the Holy Spear. You may
remember our last told you his true original Name was Cibo, and that he had a
competent stock of Natural Sons and Daughters; in respect of which, and
Allusion to that (then unquestioned) story of Pope Joan, Marullus bestowed this
Epitaph on him.

Quid quaeris Testes, sit Mas an Faemina Cibo?
Respice Natorum Pignora certa Gregem,
Octonocens Pueros genuit totidemque puellas;
Hunc merito potuit dicere Roma Patrem.
Spurcities, Gula, Avaritia atque Ignavia deses,
Hoc Octave! jacent, quo tegeris, Tumulo.
No need of Groping here, the sex to scan,
His numerous Bastards prove Cibo a man.
Eight Boys he got, and just as many Lasses,
No news then, if he for Rome's Father passes.
Uncleaness, Avarice, Sloth, Gluttony,
Are all Entombed at once, where he does ly.
But let Innocent be never so bad, the Proverb will be vereified -- Seldom
comes a better, his Successor extremely exceeded him in all kind of wickedness.
This was Roderic Borgia, who being chosen Pope, Anno 1492. was called Alexander
the 6th. As for the means his coming to the Chair, Hieronimus Marius in his
Eusebius Captivus, affirms, that it was obtained by a Compact with the Devil
Immediately and expressly, and indeed he that once boasted he had all the
Kingdoms of the World in his gift, might well enough pretend to bestow the
Triple Crown, or who more fit than Satain to bestow the Papacy, a place which
for many Hundreds of years has brought him in so much advantage, as if it were
designed only to serve his Interests? But other Historians mention only a
bargain with Old Nick at second hand, by the meditation of Bribes, Simony, etc.
Thus Onuphrius in the life of this Alexander and Volaterranus in his
Anthropoliga, attest, that he mounted to so high a Dignity by the endeavors of
some Cardinals whom he had Corrupted with Bribes, and especially of Ascanius
Sforta, who sold himself at a high price, Vt hic omnium ejus Ordinis
deterrimus, pro optimo pontifex renuntiaretur, That this fellow the very worst
of all the Cardinals ( and God knows had was the best) might be made Pope. And
that most credible Historian Guiccardine relates it more accurately in these
words -- He was chosen Pope by means of the discord that was betwixt the
Cardinals Ascanius Sforta, and Julian of St. Peter ad vincula, but add withal,
that by a new Example in the sight and knowledge of all men he bought the
Popedom, partly with Money, partly with the promise of his great Offices and
Benefices, by which means he got the Cardinals Voices, who contemning the
Commandment of the Gospel, were not ashamed to sell the power to him, to make
Traffic of the sacred Treasures, by a Coelestical Authority. To this
abominable Negotiation many amongst them were drawn by Cardinal Ascanius, not
only by persuasion but Example, who being Corrupted by an Insinite desire of
Riches, bargained to have the Vice-Chancellorship (which was the principal
Office of the Court of Rome) enriched with most excellent furniture. -- And
then he proceeds to give the Characters of this Pope Alexander in these terms
-- His manners were very dishonest, there was in him no sincerity, no Shame, no
Truth, no faith, no Religion; but rather insatisfiable Covetousness, Ambition
beyond measure more than Burttish Cruel^y, and a most violent desire to raise
his Sons, which were many in number, whether by right or by wrong to the
highest Dignities; thus ^uiccardine a man of the Romish Communion; Noris the
Friar of Padua much less plain, calling him Occultae Iniquitatis summeque
dissimulationis Hominem, A person of secret inquity and the deepest
dissimulation.

At this time Charles the 8 th of France laid Claim to the Kingdom of Naples,
to prevent whose Neighborhood the Pope makes a League with Alphonsus of
Aragon, (who likewise pretended to the Crown) upon these conditions, that
Alexander should invest the said Alphonsus at the same price as he did his
Father, and send his Legate to Crown him. That Alphonsus should pay the Pope
Thirty Thousand Ducates, and give the Popes Eldest Bastard (whom he had made
Duke of Candia) Twelve Thousand Ducates Per Annum, out of the Revenues of that
Kingdom Fora Pension, and the first of the seven principal Offices that should
be void; and bestow certain Benefices of very great value on his Holinesses
younger Bastard, named Caesar Borgia whom he had already created Cardinal, and
the better to do so, because by the Canons, Bastards are disabled from that
dignity, though he had before publicly owned him to be his own Son, and did so
ever afterward, yet now to serve a turn, procured false Witnesses to swear
that he was the lawful Son of another man. So much less did he regard
Subornation and Perjury than the violation of a Canon.

In the mean time the French King advances with great success. Whereupon (says
Paulus Jovius L. 2. see also Guiccardine Cap. 19) the Pope to divert or put a
stop to his Carreer, sends Buiccardo of Genoa as his Legate to the Grand
Seignior Bajazet, suggesting to him that the said King Charles designed as soon
as he had settled his affairs in Naples, to Invade Greece; the Turk thankfully
receives this Admonition, Treats the Legate Honorably, and with them returned
a vast sum of Money and an Ambassador of his own, to whom amongst other matters
given in charge, there was a Letter written in the Greek Tongue, wherein
Bajazet earnestly importunes the Pope to make away his Brother by Poison,
promising upon his faith to give him for the same not only Twenty Thousand
Ducates, but also to bestow upon him the Seamless-Coat of Christ, as some years
before he had sent the point of the Spear before mentioned. But these Ships
were Intercepted, by the Brother Cardinal Julian an Enemy to the Pope, and a
friend to the French, who seized all the Money as due to him from the Pope. At
which his Holiness was much afflicted, and sought new means to reestablish this
Correspondence with Bajazet.

But still Charles passing through Italy without resistance comes to Rome with
his whole Army, and enters the City with displayed Ensigns, and his Lance upon
his Thigh; in the beginning of the year 1494. to the great Terror of the Pope,
who fearing he should call him to account for such undue practices of obtaining
the Papacy, or take from his usurped Dominions and Power, or join with several
of the Cardinals (that were that way already inclined) to require a General
Council; with which one word (says Jovius) the Popes are more terrified than
with any other Accidents whatsoever. Alexander for the present retreats to the
Castle of St. Angelo, and thence with Bribes and flatteries Corrupts diverse of
the Kings Council, to divert him from any Reformation of the Church; and so
upon agreement that the Pope should surrender into his hands the Castle of
Civetta Vecchia, and certain other strong holds, and pronounce him Emperor of
Greece, and some other Articles, matters were composed between them, and for
performance of this Treaty, the Popes Son Caesar Corgia, was to go along with
him, as an Hostage; as also Gemes the Turks Brother, Charles Alledgging he
might do good service in the War he designed against the Mahumetans. But this
Gemes was no sooner come to Naples but he dyed, not without manifest tokens of
a slow Poison given him to drink to shorten his Life. And from whom this
Treacherous more than Barbarous Murder proceeded, may be Guessed by that
Transaction between the Pope and Bajazet, who (says Guiccardine) had long time
made good use of the Avarice of the Vicars of Christ, that he might possess his
Empire in Peace.

Then at the Vatican the Pope received the King, who with bended Knee kissed
his Feet, and another day, the Pope Celebrating Mass, he held the ^ason whilst
he ^asht his hands, which Ceremonies the Pope caused to be Painted in a Gallery
in the Castle of St. Angelo, to transmit the memory thereof to posterity, it
being always the trick of Popes to screw up present Complements into future
duties. Soon after King Charles returned into France, and having first lost his
Son the Dauphin, was himself snatched away by a sudden Death, which Philip de
Comines says, was foretold by Hierom Savanaro^a (a good man esteemed a Prophet
at Florence, and afterward Burnt) who predicted his successes in Italy, but
withal told him, that if he did not procure the Reformation of the church
according to his dnty, there hung a scourge over his head, and God has
pronounced a sentence against him which he would Execute elsewhere.

Pope Alexander now studies nothing but to Advance his Bastards not without
Tragical examples of Whoredom, Incests and Cruelty, odious to the Barbarians
themselves. He had conferred all secular power on the Eldest, which Caesar, the
younger, took so ill, that one Evening he caus^d him to be murdered and flung
into Tyber, being moved thereto likewise by Jealousy, as fearing he had more
share in the love of Madam Lucreta their Sister than himself, for you must note
she was not only Stumpet to them both, but also (O horible Incest!) to her own
Father the Pope himself, who first took her from a mean Spaniard he had Married
her to before his Popedom, as being now below her dignity, and bestowed her on
the Prince of Pizaro; from whom on pretense of his Insufficiency he caused her
by Judges of his own choosing, to be divorced, and once more Married to a
Bastard of Alphonsus King of Arragon; yet still continuing his own detestable
Commerce with her; whence Pontanus gives her this Epitaph.

Hoc jacet in Tumulo Lucreta nomine, sed Re
Thais, Alexandri Filia, sponsa, Nurus.
In this Tomb lies the Pope's and Nature's shame
Thais in Truth, although Lucrete in Name;
See, what Infallibility can do!
She was his Daughter, Miss, and Son's Miss too.
The COURANT.
Tory. THey are divelish mad, I Will tell you that, and threaten you most
Confoundedly.


Truem. Poor blustering vapors! Chits and Asrseworms! scarce fit to be of the
Lifeguard to a Cherry-Tree!


Tory. What news from the Wells?


Truem. Nothing extraordinary, the great stones still stand just where they
did, as fixed and stable as English Liberties or London Charter; the rattling of
Guilt-Coaches has not removed them an Inch. Yet we had abundance of Fools,
Cullies, Sharpers, and Jilts, so that sometimes the Factions on the walks, were
a pretty symbolical Landscape of those in Church and State; the sharking Trepan
was the Jesuit that Embroiled all Company; the Masquerade-Papist played Booty;
the ranting Bully snatched up the stake of Loyalty, and ran away with it, whilst
the poor Old Cavaleir was pointed at for a Whigg. But what is this Glorius
Feast of yours, so much talked of.


Tory. Why, there should have been Fifteen Hundred of us, and 'twas not our
fault there was not so many, for the Tickets were at last given abroad like
Saffolds Pocky Bills.


Truem. I Will assure you, 'twas a brave opportunity for Loyal Journy-man
Taylers, this Cucumber-time.


Tory. Yes, they Indented with their Bellies not to Eat again this Fortnight.
-- And then to see the Condescension and Charity, as well as Policy of the
business; Illustrissimo's and Grandee's, and Porters, and Sons of Whores, and
Prentices, so sweetly mixed, you would wonder at it! O my Conscience (besides the
Lords and people of Quality, who you know have got the Lord knows what) the
very rest of the Company were not much less worth, that Ten Thousand Pounds.


Truem. That Is great I Will promise you; especially their prudence too, being put
in the same Balance with their vast Estates! yet (suppose it true) I have
known one single Ignoramus Grand Jury able to buy the whole Society Twenty
times over. But to talk seriously -- I have a just veneration for any person of
Honor that might divert themselves at this Conventicle, but for the rest, I
must needs say, an Haunch of Venison is not much more valuable than a Mess of
Pottage, and for a few little people (Boys, and Journymen and I know not who)
to single out themselves, and appropriate (forsooth) the Title of the Loyal,
(which every good Subject in England is proud of) is not this in effect to call
all those many Thousands that join not in the ridiculous frolique, Traitors and
(...)? and do not such practices most apparently tend to Faction,
distinguishing and setting up of parties, and Sedition? nor is it difficult to
Imagine what Influence such meetings will have on wild unbridled youth, when in
defiance to their Indentures (for breach of which the Law and prudent necessary
Custom of the City has awarded Little-Ease and Bridewell) they shall dare be
Scaperloytering to a right Honorable Feast. Nor is it any answer to say, they
do it to show their Loyalty, for that is demonstrated in being obedient to the
Law, and their Masters, not in Drinking Healths, Swearing, roaring and
Huzza-ing.


Tory. Well for all your slighting of Health-drinking, I conceive it a most
necessary thing in these times, for you see what Loyal- Nat-Pillory- Thomson,
says last Saturday, how one Saunders a supposed Whigg being Indicted at
Hereford Assizes, the Court gravely put it to him whether he used to Drink the
King and the Dukes Health? who answered, He could Eat the Kings as well as any
man in England, but it seems had a great Fine laid upon him.


Truem I verily believe this another of his impudent Scandals on the
Government, and doubt not but the worthy persons concerned will vindicate
themselves from his Libel, for can it be Imagined that any of the sage Judges,
would so far forget themselves, their Dignity and Gravity, as to ask such a
pitiful ridiculous question? is Health Drinking, an Hellish Custom condemned
by the Law of God, Habakkuk 2. 15. and Morta^ity, and his Majesty's
Proclamation, now become the Shibholeth of Loyal^?


Tory. Well, well, I Am sure they are all Whiggs and Phanaticks and Traitors,
that wont Drink the ^ukes Health (for the Kings of late is somewhat out of
fashion) but prithee tell us what is that place in Habakkuk, for I do not often
trouble my head with the Bible?


Truem. The words are these -- Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink,
that put thy Bottle to him, and make him Drunk also, that thou may
look on their Nakedness, thou art fil^ed with shame for Glory, the Cup of the
Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful Spewing shall be thy
own Glory.


Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.

The Weekly Packet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY.
The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 18. 1682.
Dubium nullum est iis quos spiritus Christi tangit, quin sciant, sese Offerre
summum and gratissimum Laudis sacrificium, quicquid contra hanc Cruentam
Blasphemam and Sacrilegam Meritricem Diaboli legere, dicere, scribere possunt
-- Luther in Epist. ante R. Barius M. De vitis pontificum.
Pope Alexander Poisoned, by a mistake with Wine prepared to Poison a Cardinal.
Thirty Thousand years pardon granted, Julius the second, a Tory-Pope, flings
St. Peter's Keys into Tybur. Pope Leo the X. sends out extravagant Indulgences,
which Luther opposes, and so we are brought to the beginning of the Reformation.
THe Pope was so far from punishing his base begotten Caesar Borgia, for
murdering his Brother mentioned in our last, that he not winked at it, but
resolves still to advance him to Riches and Honor; in order to which the said
Caesar flung off his Cardinals Robes, and openly delar'd he would be no longer
a Priest, but a man of War; then he married Charlotte nearly related to the
French King, who was willing to bestow her on him, because he had a mind to
change his Bedfellow, and concluded by sweetening the Pope by this match, to
obtain a Divorce. Caesar being returned into Italy, designs the ruin of all
the Governors or Lieutenants of the Cities of Romania, and to take the
Government and profits all to himself; for effecting which, there was no kind
of Treachery or Cruelty which he left unpractised, Stabbing some, Poisoning
others, and Strangling diverse; whilst the Father striving as it were to exceed
the Son in wickedness, was playing the same Game with the Cardinals and chief
Barons of the City; insomuch that Volateran and Guiccardine are weary with
relating their Barbarities, and the politic Florentine, Nick Matchiavil, when
he would give the World the Character or true figure of a Tyrant, does it in
the person of this Caesar Borgia, as Zenophon describes an excellent Prince, in
the name of Cyrus.

Amongst other devises both Father and Son were exquisite Practioners in
Poison, and had thereby taken off several of the Richest Cardinals. -- But --
Non Lex est Justior ulla
Quam Necis Artifices Art perire sua.
It Is Just, such witty Engineers of Death,
By their own Arts should lose their hated Breath.


The manner of this Popes death both Onuphrius, Volateran, and Guiccardine
relate as follows, -- He Supping one night in a Vineyard near the Vatican, to
enjoy the coolness of the Air, was suddenly carried desperately sick into the
Palace, and the next morning he died, black, swollen, and beyond all credit
deformed, which happened as it is credibly reported by Poison in this manner:
Caesar Borgia his Son Duke of Valentia, had resolved to Poison Adrian Cardinal
of Corvoto, in whose Vineyard they were to Sup that Night, he sent before
certain Bottles of Wine which he caused to be delivered to a Servant of his
with a strict charge that no body should taste or touch it; it happened before
Supper time the Pope came, and being very hot and thirsty, called for Wine, and
because his Supper was not yet brought from the Palace, the fellow thinking
this to be some more excellent sort of Wine than usual, willing to gratify his
Holinesses Palate, gave him some of it; and just as the Father was drinking,
in came the Son, and not imagining it to be of the Wine he had so prepared,
drank of it too, but he being young and using present Remedies escaped with his
Life, but not without great Languishment which incapacited him for Actions for
the future.

This Pope had Reigned, or rather Raged 11 years, and the people were so
pleased they were rid of him, that Guiccardine tells us, Multitudes ran from
all parts of the City, to glut their eyes, if they could, with the dead Carcass
of this Serpant, who with such unbridled Ambition, perfidious Treachery,
horrible Cruelty, monstrous Luxury, Insatitae, Avarice, and selling without
difference, or respect all things holy and profane, had Infected the whole
World. Nor does Onuphrius the Popes own Historiographer, give him a better
Character; His Treachery ( says he) was more than punical, his Cruelty
Barbarous, his Covetousness and Extortion unmeasurable, his desire to enrich
his Children, whether by Right, or by wrong, unsatiable. He was strangely given
to Women, by whom he had four Sons and two Daughters. His principal Where was
Vanoccia, a Roman, whom for her Beauty, rare mien, pleasant wit, and Eloquence,
in the time of his meaner Fortunes he lived with after the manner of a Wife. --
Now was not this a rare fellow to be Christ's Viccar, Peter's Successor, Head of
the Church, Infallible? etc. Yet this was the precious Pope, who in the year
1494. Published with his own mouth, a pardon for Thirty Thousand years to as
many as would say a certain Prayer before the Image of St. Anne, the Mother of
the blessed Virgin, Beginning -- Benedicta sit Sancta Anna Matter tua, ex qua
sine macula and peccato processisti, etc. Blessed be St. Anne thy mother, of
whom without spot or sin thou did proceed, etc. Where are now the Dominicans
who Preached the contrary Doctrine? the most Holy, most infallible Monster, you
see, has concluded the point against them.

Next came Pius the 3 d, in the year 1503. he was an Old decripite fellow, and
lived not above a month, then upstarts that Hector Julius the second, for
before ever the Cardinals met, he had made his Party by Bribes and fair
promises; and so without ever shutting the doors of the Consistory was declared
Pope; his first business was to Marry a Bastard Girl he had, named Felix, to
one of the Vrsini, and his next was to drive the French out of Italy; he took
Cesena and Forolivio from Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope Alexander the 6 th,
Expelled the Family of Bentivogli with their Wives and Children out of Bononia,
Excommunicated the Venetians, and gave their Lands to the first that could take
them, Interdicted Alphonso Duke of Ferrara, and made open War against him
because he took part with the French, and went in person to the seige of
Mirandula. And passing once over the Bridge of Tyber, with a naked sword in his
hand, he flung the Keys into the River, which gave occasion to that Epigram.

Hic Gladius Pauli nos nunc defendit ab Host
Quandoquidem Clavis nil suvat ista Petri.
Since Peter's Keys with Foes can not prevail,
This sword of Paul to save us shall not fail.
And Monstrelet the Historian thus describes him, -- He left the Chair of St.
Peter, and took upon him the Title of Mars the God of War, displaying in the
field his Triple Crown, and spending his Nights in the Watch. What a goodly
sight was it to see the Mitres, Crosses and Crosier staves Flying up and down
the Field? sure no Devils could be there, where Benedictions were sold so cheap.

Upon this, Lewis of France and Maximilian the Emperor resolve to call a
Council at Pisa, and to summon this Pope thither as being notoriously
scandalous, incorrigible, a Fomenter of Wars, and altogether unfit for the
Popedom; and though the Pope used means to take off the Emperor, yet Lewis
persisted and caused certain Medals to be Coined, upon which was Inscribed
these words -- Perdam Babylonem, I will destroy Babylon, and on some of them,
perdam Babylonis nomen -- I will destroy the Name of Babylon. By which it is
evident he meant Rome, so that the notion of its being Babylon is neither new,
nor set on foot by Protestants, though it is true his Holiness was herewith so
much offended, that by his Bull he took away from the French King the Title of
Most Christian, and offered the same to Henry the 8 th of England (then one of
the Popes white Boy's) on whom afterward was bestowed, that of, defender of the
Faith, but, God be thanked, our Protestant British Monarchs as they yet
usually retain the one, so they may justly, when they shall think fit, assume
the other, without being beholding to a raskally Devils Priest for either of
them.

In opposition to the Council of Pisa, Pope Julius sets up a Conventicle under
that name in the Lateran at Rome, who Excommunicate the other folks, and damn
all their proceedings; but ^n the heat of their Carier Julius dies, on whom
those that knew him bestowed these Epigrams.

Fraud capit totum Mercator Julius Orbem,
Vendit enim Caelos, non habet Ipse tamen.
By fraud that Huckster Julius scrapes up pelf,
For Heaven he sells, yet has it not himself.
And again, Genui tui Patrem, Genitricem Graecia, Partum
Pontus and unda dedit, nunc Bonus esse potest?
Fallaces Ligures, mendax est Grecia, Ponto
Nulla fides; in te haec singula, Jule! tenes.
From Genua and Greece his Parents blood,
At Sea he had his Birth, can he be good?
The Genoe's always false, Greeks Liars be,
Faithless the Sea; all Julius meet in thee.


In a word, the Popedom of Julius was so imperious and barbarous, that the
Cardinals were upon the point of ^^^ding the next that should suc^eed in that
See, to the good behavior, and prescribing certain R^les whereby ^e should
Act, but what a pretty Torisme is it to hedge in a Cuckoo, guide Infallibility,
and bound the perrogative of the Chair, which according to modern Casuists, is
unli^i^table? he dyed in the year 1513 in the 10 th year of his pontificate,
and the greatest Enology that Ouuphrius himself can bestow on him, is, that he
was Bellica Gloria plusquam pontificem deceret Clarus, More famous for war like
Glory than became a Pope.

The next was John de Medicis, a very pretty forward Child, for he got to be an
Archbishop almost before he had left his Go-Cart, and at Thirteen years of age
was made a Cardinal, and at 37 arrived at the Popedom, by the name of Leo the
1^ th. On his Coronation day, he spent an Hundred Thousand D^^^tes, and in one
morning, the College of Cardinals c^nsenting (say; our Author) for fear, not
of free will, he Created one and Thirty Cardinals, amongst whom were two of his
Nephews. He continued the Council of Lateran convened by his Predecessor, and
extinguished that of Pisa, he exacted great sums of money throughout all Europe
by his Legates, under pretense of making War against the Turks, and his
Prodigality causing continual want, he used (says Guiccardine) very
licentiously the Authority of the Holy See, and spread abroad throughout all
the World, without any difference of times and places, most ample Indullgences,
not only to succor the Living, but also to deliver the Souls of the departed
out of the pains of Purgatory. And it being notorious that such Indulgences
were granted only to rook people of their money, there arose thereby many
scandals, especially in Germany, where his Ministers for a very small price
sold these braided Wares, and in Taverns played away at Dice the power of
delivering Souls out of Purgatory, and the money thus raised he gave to his
Sister Magdalene, who appointed the Bishop of Arembauld her Commissary for that
business, which place he executed with exceeding great Covetousness, and
Extortion, so that Preachers were not ashamed to publish in their Pulpits, that
at the sound of the money, as it was cast into their Basin, the Souls skipp'd
for joy amidst the flames, and presently flew out of Purgatory, and that
whoever gave 10 Soulz might deliver thence what Soul he pleased, but if there
was but one farthing less, they would do nothing.

These horrible abuse^s being thus daily without all shame committed, it
pleased God to raise up Martin Luther, who first began to inveigh only against
such exorbitant Indnlgences, about the year 1516. but afterward the Pope
instead of Reformation sending forth his Thunderbolts against him, he grew more
wearily to scan the Doctrines of the Roman Church, and so opened a way for the
Reformation, which hence may properly bare date, and therefore here, as an
happy and very proper period we shall give a Conclusion to this 4 th Volume.

SOLI GLORIA SOLA DEO.
The COURANT.
Tory. THe truth is, 'twas a great disappointment, and has utterly spoiled the
wit of an Health to Blewcap! but are not your Whiggs at Chichester most
abominable Varlets, to Massacre our Reverend Father's Jades at this rate?


Truem. Yes indeed, Not Thomson and L'Estrange I see resolve to make Martyrs of
the poor Beasts; one of the Roman Emperors made his Horse Lord Mayor, and an
Ass you know tutored the Prophet, why then may not an Episcopal Steed be
Sainted? We men of Kent I remember got long-tails by being uncivil to Bishop
Beckets Nag, and who knows what heavy Judgments may befall these Clowns of
Sussex for such a damnable Plot against Old Roan or sorrel Ecclesiastic? but
the truth is, all the whole story is a Ly, the Phanaticks killed my Lord the
Bishops Horses, no more than they burnt London, and yet Roger L'Estrange has
charged them with both.


Tory. Well! let the Horses go to the Dogs, only as long unburied as the fellow
did, a few years ago, but in the mean time what can you say touching the man
that was slain there the other day?


Truem. There was a fellow fit for the Employment, that took upon him to be an
Informer, but staying too long after the Brandy bottle, the Meeting it seems
was broke up, this loss of a Jobb and the Liquor together enraged him to that
degree, that he must needs break a worthy Gentleman's Windows, whose Coachman
going out to enquire the cause of that Burglary, the Informer not only abused
his Master with vile Language, but assaulted the Coachman, who in his own
defense, laid him in the Kennell, but no sooner had he recovered his Legs, but
away he runs to the Man's you wot on to make his sad Complaint how he had
suffered by the Whigs for serving the Church. Into the Celler he is carried for
a Cup of Benediction and Consolation, and being Drunk before, adds to the
debauch, and so good Night! Now this accident is to be filled to the Dissenters
account, and you must needs believe that he dyed by means of the scuffle
between him and the Coachman. But pray tell us, what makes Squire Hodge so
desparately mad with the Parliaments, and fall so foul on their privileges at
this juncture, I hope we are not like to have one this Winter?


Tory. No, no, Hang 'um we all hate the very name; the Popes Holiness himself
would be as well pleased to hear of a General Council as we of a Parliament.
You see Roger aforesaid makes it Rebellion and half seas over to Forty one, to
expect an annual Parliament, though there are a Brace or two of as fair laws
for it, as any in the Statute Book.


Truem. I never wonder to hear naughty Boys rail against Birch; no doubt the
Gentleman's Journey to Holland, cost him Money, and he may be allowed now to
swagger; don't you remember how the Collier huff^ against the Mayor when he was
got out of the Liberties.


Tory. Yes, but his saying 'tother day that Rebellion always attended the
Reformation, was a little to broad. I left a note last Night at Sam's to
caution him to more prudence, for if he go on at this rate the people will
conclude him a Papist, though Prance should never make a word on it?


Printed for Langley Curtis. 1682.


