GENERAL DEMANDS, Concerning the Late COVENANT; Propounded by the Ministers
and Professors of DIVINITY in ABERDENE: To some Reverend Brethren, who came
^^ither to recommend the late Covenant to th^^, and to those who are committed
to their charge: TOGETHER With the Answers of those reverend Brethren to the
said Demands: As also The Replies of the foresaid Ministers and Professors to
their Answers.

1. PET. 3. 15. 16. Sanctify the LORD GOD in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meeknes and fear: Having a good Conscience, that whereas
they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely
accuse your good conversation in CHRIST. ABERDENE, Reprinted by JOHN FORBES,
Anno Dom. 1662.



GENERAL DEMANDS, Concerning the late Covenant: Together with Answers to
them, and Replies to those Answers.
THE FIRST DEMAND.
BY what Power, or Warrant, these our Reverend Brethren can sure of us, or of
our People, subscription to this late Covenant; not being sent by his MAJESTY,
or by the Lords of Counsel, nor by any National Synod of this Kingdom, nor
by any Judicatorie established in it? And, how they can enforce upon us, or
upon our People, who are no ways subject unto them, their Interpretation of
the Articles of the Negative Confession? In respect whereof, as also in respect
of that Band of mutual Defense against all persons what-so-ever, this late
Covenant is substantiallie different, from that which was subscribed by the
KING and his Subjects, Anno 1580, and 1581.

ANSWER.
WE are not come hither, to usurp the Authority of any Civil or Spiritual
Iudicatorie, or to enforce upon our Reverend Brethren, and the People committed
to their Charge, the subscription of the late Covenant, or the Interpretation
of the Articles of that Confession which is called Negative, or what-so-ever
else of that kind: But are sent, to represent unto them, in all humility, the
present Case and Condition of this Kirk and Kingdom; crying for help at their
hands also: and, in Brotherly love, to exhort, and entreat, that they will be
pleased, to contribute their best Endeavors, for extinguishing the common
Combustion, which by joining with almost the whole Kirk and Kingdom, in the
Late Covenant, we trust they may lawfully do, without prejudice to the King's
Majesty, or to any lawful Iudicatorie, or to that Confession of Faith above
mentioned: Since the sound Interpretation and Application thereof, to the
Errors of our Times, can make no substantial change, and the Band of Mutual
Defense, wherein we obliedge our selves, to defend the true Religion, and the
King's Majesty's Person, and Authority, against all persons whatsoever, is
joined, at first, with the Confession of Faith. Like as his Majesty's
Commissioner objecting, That our Covenant was suspect, to be an unlawful
Combination against Authority, and to be the main hinderance of obtaining our
desires, has accepted, and was well pleased with our Declaration; bearing,
That we have solemnlie sworn, To the uttermost of our power, with our Means
and Lives, to stand to the defense of the King's Majesty, as of GOD'S
Vicegerent, set over us, for the maintenance of Religion, and ministration of
Justice.

REPLY.
WE have, Reverend Brethren, sufficiently considered and examined your
Answers to our Demandes, by which we expected full satisfaction to all our
Scruples and doubts concerning the late Covenant: But truly, in Modesty and
Brotherly Love, we tell you, that your Answers (what-so-ever you think of
them your selves) have not given us that satisfaction which we expected. We
know that some who rashly condemn every thing which is said or written
contrary to the cause which they maintain, will boldly say of us, that we have
closed our eyes against a clear and ingyring Light: But first, we say with
Job, Our witness is in Heaven, and our record is on high. That LORD who only
sees the secrets of hearts, knows, that we love His Truth, and are ready so
soon as it shall be shown unto us, to embrace and profess it before the
World. Next, we appeal to the Consciences of all impartial Readers, who shall
have occasion to weygh and consider maturelie the weight of our Arguments, and
of these Answers which it has pleased you to give us: wishing them, yea, most
humbly and earnestly entreating them, to judge both of your writtings and
ours, without prejudice, or any partial respect. Yea, we are confident, that
ye also, o^ whose love to the Truth of GOD we are persuaded, will after better
advysement, and more mature consideration of the matters debated, acknowledge,
that we are not against the Truth, but for it. The LORD open your eyes, that
you may clearly see, that Truth for which we stand.

WE objected to you, Reverend Brethren, that you had not a Calling to urge us
to the subscription of the late Covenant, from any acknowledged Authority, or
lawful Judica^^rie established in this Church or Kingdom: to which Objection
ye answer no^ here particularly, as we expected. And whereas you say, That
you are come to exhort us, and our People, in all humility, to join with you;
how is it, that without our consent, and against our will, not having lawful
Authority, which you seem here not to acclaime to your selves, you have
publicly preached to our People, within our Congregation? which is a thing
rep^gn^nt to those places of Scripture, in the which the Spirit of GOD
recommendeth to Elders, or Pastors, the care of those Flocks, Over which the
holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2 as also tells
us, That the Pastors whom the Flock must know, and to whom they must submit
themselves, do watch over the Souls of that Flock, and must give account for
them, 1. Thessal. 5. 12 Hebr. 13. 17. It is also con^rarie to the laws of the
Christian Church in all ages. For by the ancient Canons, Pastors are commanded,
to contain themselves within the limits of their own Charge; and not to
presume to exercise Pastoral Office in another Pastors Diocese, or Parioch,
without leave: As also, they forbid Pastors, to receive to Divine Service, any
man of another Pariochin, that comes in contempt of his own Pastor. Council.
Nicen. ^. Oecum. 1. Can. 16. Council. 2. Oecum* Constantinop. Can. 2. Council.
Carthag. 2. Can. 11. Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 20. Council. Chalced. Oecum. 4.
Can. 13. Council. Nicen. 2. Can. 10. Council. Tribur. Can. 28. Council. Nannet.
Cap. 1. and 2. 2. We did not without reason say, That you, and others of your
Confederation, enforce your Interpretation of the Negative Confession upon
others; seeing we hear, that some Pastors and Prelates are forced to flee to
forraygne Countries, for fear of their (...) because they have refused the
said Interpretation; and those (...)ave stayed in the Country, dare scarcely
appear in the h(...), or streets, and are threatened, that their Stipends shall
not (...) unto them, until they subscrive your Covenant. 3. Whereas you do in
Brotherly love exhort, and entreat us, to contribute our best endeavors for
extinguishing the common Combustion, we praising GOD, for your pious zeal, and
for the lovingnesse and modesty of your speeches, (wherein, by GOD'S help, we
shall labor to keep correspondence with you; that both we and you may show ^^^
selves, to have learned of CHRIST, Meekness, and lowliness of heart) we most
willingly promise to do so, by all means which our consciences will permit us
to use, as also to join our most humble and hearty Prayers with yours, that it
may please GOD in this dangerous exigent, to do good in His good pleasure, to
our Sion, and to build up the walls of our Jerusalem. 4. We may justly say,
that this new Covenant is substantially different from the Old, which was made
Anno 1581. in respect it not only contains that Old Covenant, or Confession,
which was allowed by two General Assemblies, but also your interpretation of
it, which, as yet, has no such Authority, or Approbation. 5. No Band of
Mutual Defense, Against all persons what-so-ever, is expressed in the Covenant
made 1581. And although it were, yet the case is very unlike: For Subjects may
make such a Covenant of Mutual Defense, by Arms, with the consent of the
King, who only, under GOD, has the power of Arms, or of the Sword, in this
Kingdom. But they who made this late Covenant, had not his consent, as that
former or old Covenant had: which is a thing so evident, that no man can call
it in question. 6. As for that which you affirm here, that my Lord
Commissioner his Grace was well satisfied with your Declaration, it becomes
not us, to pry narrowly into his Graces doings: but truly we have more then
reason, to pry most narrowly into the words of a Covenant, which is offered
unto us, to be sworn, and subscrybed, lest we abuse, and profane the Sacred
Name of GOD, and tie our selves to the doing of any thing which is displeasing
unto him. Last of all; whereas ye desire us, to join our selves to you, and to
the rest of your Con^ederacie, who are (as you affirm) almost the whole Church
and Kingdom, truly we cannot but reverence such a multitude of our Reverend
Brethren, and dear Contrymen, and are ready to be followers of them, in so
far as they are followers of CHRIST: But neither can we do any thing against
the Truth, neither can we attribute so much Authority to their multitude, as
otherwise we would, in respect there has been so much dealing for
Subscriptions, in all quarters of this Kingdom, and so many have been
threatened, to give their consent, as we are most credibly informed.

The Second Demand.
Whether or no we ought to subscryve the foresaid Covenant, seeing all
Covenants of mutual Defense, by force of Arms, made amongst Subjects of any
degree, upon whatsoever color or pretense, without the King's Majesty or his
Successoures privitie and consent, are expreslie forbidden by King JAMES of
blessed Memory, and the three Estates of this Kingdom, in the Parliament
holden at Linlithgow, Anno 1585?

ANSWER.
The Act of Parliament forbids in the first part, Leagues and Bands of
maintenance privilie made, such as are called Bands of Manrent, as the act in
Queen MARY'S time, to which it has relation, does bear. And in the second
part, only such, as tend to the public* disturbance of the peace of the
Realm, by moving sedition. But no act of Parliament does discharge, nor can
any just Law forbid, Conventions or Covenants in the general; or such
Covenants in special as are made with GOD, and amongst our selves; not for any
man's particular, but for the common benefit of all; not to move Sedition, but
to preserve Peace, and to prevent trouble: which by all probability had been
to many, before this time, too sensible, if this course had not been taken.
Conventions and Covenants (in the judgment of Jurisconsults) are to be
esteemed and judged of, according to their diverse ends, good or bad: which
made King JAMES of happy memory to take it for an undoubted maxim, That pro
aris and focis, and pro patre patriae, the whole body of the Commonwealth
should stir at once: not any more as divided members, but as one consolidate
lump.

Replye.
In that second part of that Act of Parliament holden at Linlithgo, Anno 1585.
are forbidden, All Leagues or Bands of Mutual Defense, which are made without
the privitie and consent of the KING, under the pain to be holden and execute
as movers of sedition and unquietness, etc. Wherefore we can no ways think,
that any Bands or Leagues of Mutual Defense, by force of Arms, are there
permitted, (that is, not forbidden) seeing first the words of the Act are so
general, for in it are discharged All Bands made among Subjects of any degree,
upon any color what soever, without his Highness, or his Successors, privitie
and consent had and obtained thereunto. Next; All such Bands are declared to be
Seditious, and perturbative of the public Peace of the Realm: or, which is
all one, are appointed to be esteemed so. And therefore, we can not see how any
Bands of that kind can be excepted, as if they were not seditious. 2. We doubt
not, but the late Covenant being considered, according to the maine intention
of those Pious and Generous Gentlemen, Barrons and others our dear Country
men, who made it, especially our Reverend Brethren of the holy Ministry, is a
Covenant made with GOD, and proceeding from a zealous respect to GOD His Glory,
and to the preservation of the purity of the Gospel in this Church and
Kingdom: But we cannot find a Warrant in our Consciences, to grant, that such
Covenants, in so far as they import mutual Defense, against all persons
what-so-ever, none being excepted, no, not the KING, (as it seems unto us, by
the words of your Covenant, but far more by the words of your late
Protestation, the 28 of June; wherein you promise, mutual Defense, against all
external or internal Invasion, menaced in his Majesty's last Proclamation)
are not forbidden by any Band, nor justly yet can be forbidden. For, first, we
have already shown, that they are forbidden in the foresaid Act of Parliament,
Anno 1585. 2. No Warrefare; and consequently, no Covenant, importing
Warrefare, is lawful, without just Authority, which, we are persuaded, is
only in the supreme Magistrate, and and in those who have power and employment
from him, to take Arms: Yea, so far as we know, all moderate men, who duly
respect Authority, will say, that it is so in all Kingdoms, and Monarchies,
properly so called: (Of which nature is this his Majesty's most Ancient
Kingdom,) And, that it is altogether unlawful to Subjects in such Kingdoms,
to take Arms against their Prince. For which cause, that famous and most
learned Doctor Rivetus, in a late Treatise called Iesuita vapulans, speaking of
the judgment of Buchannan, and others, who taught, that Subjects might take
Arms against their Prince, in extraordinary Cases, and extreme dangers, of
the Religion, and Commonwealth, professes first, that he, and all other
Protestants, condemn such doctrine. Secondly; That this Error did proceed
from a mistaking of the Government of the Scottish Kingdom, ^s if it were not
truly and properly monarchical. Thirdly That the rashness of those wrytters,
is to be ascrybed partly to the hard and perilous times of persecution,
wherein they lived, and partly Sc^t^r^m praef^rv^do ingenio, et ad audendum
prompto. Thus he wry^e^h in the 13. Chap. of the said Book, Page 274. and 275.
answering to the re^rimination of ^ Jesuit, who had affirmed, that B^c^a^na^,
Knox, and Goodman, had written as boldly, for the Rebellion of Subjects
against Princes, as any of their Order at any time load done. A thing much to
be noted by us at this time, lest we any more give that advantage to Jesuits,
to make Apology for their rebellious Doctrines and Practices. 3. Not only
making of Covenants, but also all other actions, are to be esteemed and judged
of, first, by the equity of the subject, and matter; then, by the end: For if
the matter pactioned (that is, which the parties mutuallie do promise) be
justly forbidden, by a lawful Authority; and consequently be unlawful in
it self; then the goodness of the end, or project, can not make the paction,
or Covenant, to be good, or lawful.

The Third Demand.
If it be alleged, that in extreme and most dangerous cases, such Acts of
Parliament may be contraveened, Quaeritur, whether there be now such extreme
case, seeing we have his Majesty, in his former Proclamations, avowing,
protesting, declaring, and in this last Proclamation taking God to witness,
that he never intended any Innovation of Religion; and also seeing He has
removed already all that which made men fear Novations, to wit, Service Book,
Book of Canons, and the alleged exorbitancie of the new high Commission.

ANSWER.
If the removing of the Service Book, Book of Canons, and the limitation of
the vast power of the high Commission, containing so much superstition, and
tyrrannie of Prelates, be a benefit to this Kirk and Kingdom, we ought,
under GOD, to ascrybe the same to the peacable Meettings, humble Supplications,
and religious Covenanting of the Subjects; which have given information to his
Majesty, and have procured from his justice and goodness, so great favor, as
is thankfully acknowledged in the last Protestation: which does also express
the many particulars, wherein his Majesty's late Proclamation is not
satisfactorie. And therefore, the Lords of his Maesties Privy Counsel, upon
the Supplication and Complaint of his Liedges, were moved to rescind the Act of
the Approbation, of the foresaid Proclamation, and to rent the subscrybed
Missive, which was to be sent therewith to his Majesty, We are consident, that
the Declaration wherewith his Majesty's Commissioner was so well pleased, will
also give satisfaction to our Reverend Brethren; and that they will not think
it convenient for them to give further approbation to the Proclamation, then
the Counsel has done, although all of us ought, with thankfulness, to
acknowledge his Majesty's benignity.

Replye.
We will not here dispute what has been the maine or principal cause moving
his sacred Majesty to discharge the Service-Booke, and other things which
occasioned the present perturbation of our Church; nor yet whether or not his
Majesty's Proclamation may give full satisfaction to all the fears and doubts
of his Subjects. For our selves, we profess, that upon his Majesty's
Declaration, and gracious Promise contained in his Majesty's last Proclamation,
we believe, first, that his Majesty never intended Innovation in Religion:
Secondly, that he will maintain the true Protestant Religion, all the days of
his life: which we pray GOD to continue long. Thirdly, that all Acts made in
favors of the Service-Booke, etc. are discharged. Fourthly that he will never
urge the receiving of the Service Book* Book of Cannons etc. or any other
thing of that Nature, but by such a fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all
his Subjects. And thence we do collect, that which we affirmed before, to wit,
that there is no such extraordinary or extreme case, as might give occasion to
Subjects to make such a Band, as is directly forbidden by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, and to contraveane it in such a manner, as may seem to import a
resisting of Authority by force of Arms.

The Fourth Demand.
Concerning that Interpretation of the Negative Confession, which is urged upon
us, and wherein the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy are declared to be
abjured, as well as all the points of Popery, which are therein expressly and
distinctly mentioned; Quaeritur, Who are the Interpreters of that Confession?
that is, Whether all the Subscrivers, or only those Ministers conveened in
EDINBURGH, in the end of February, who set it down? If all the Subscrivers;
then what reason have we to receive an interpretation of that Confession from
Laics, ignorant people, and children? If only those Ministers conveened then
in EDINBURGH; then, seeing no man should take an honor to himself, but he who
is called of GOD, as AARON, Hebr. 5. 4. what power and authority had they over
their Brethren, to give out a judicial Interpretation of these Articles of
Faith, and to enforce their Interpretation of these Articles upon them.

ANSWER.
The subscrybers are here misinterpreted in two points, very material: One
is, that they presume upon power, or Authority, which they have to give out a
judicial interpretation of the Articles of the Confession, and to enforce the
same upon others: whereas they only intended, to make known their own
meaning, according to the mind of our Reformers; and in charity to propound
and recommend the same to others, who might be made willing to embrace it:
Although it be true also, that very great numbers of Ministers were conveened,
and testified their consent at that time: and although the private judgment of
those who are called Laics, ought not to be mis-regarded: for it is confessed,
that an Interpretation, which is private ratione personae, may be more then
private ratione medii. The other, which being observed, will answer diverse of
the following Demands, that the Articles of Pearth, and of Episcopal
Government, are declared to be abjured, as points of Popery, or as Popish
Novations: whereas the words of the Covenant put a difference betwixt two sorts
of Novations: one is of such, as are already introduced in the Worship of GOD
and concerning those, whatsoever be the judgment of the Subscryvers, which to
every one is left free, by the words of the Covenant they are only bound, to
forbear the practice of them, by reason of the present exigence of the Kirk,
till they be tried, and allowed, in a free General Assembly. The other sort
is of such Novations, as are particularly supplicated against, and complained
upon, as the Service-Booke, and Canons, etc. which are abjured, as containing
points of Popery. And this we avouch, from our certain knowledge, to be the
true meaning of the controverted words of the Covenant. And therefore, humbly
entreat that no man any more, upon this scruple, withold his Testimony*

Replye.
As for the first of these two miss-takings: If you have not given out that
interpretation of the Negative Confession judicially, but only have made known
your own meaning, according to the mind of the Reformers, as you allege,
then, first, your Interpretation has no obligatory power over others; and
consequently you ought not to obtrude your Interpretation upon us more then we
do our Interpretation thereof upon you. Neither ought any man to be molested,
or threatened, for not receiving your Interpretation; chiefly seeing all who are
of your Confederation have so solemnly vowed, and promised, to be good examples
to others of all Godliness, Sobernes, and Righteousness, and of every duty
which you owe to GOD and Man. Secondly, as for the mind or judgment of our
Reformers, we know no evidencie of it, having public Authority, to obliedge
the Subjects of this Kingdom, except that which is expressed in our National
confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament twenty years before the Negative
Confession was penned: wherein we find no warrant or ground of such
Interpretation as you bring. Thirdly, The Interpretation of the Negative
Confession, set down in your Covenant, as it is not public ratione Personae,
so also not ratione medii: for it has no Warrant, for ought we could ever
perceive, either from the Word of GOD, or from the Testimony of the Ancient
Church, or from the consent of other reformed Churches, or from our National
Confession, registrated in Parliament. As for the second Misstaking, o^
Miss-interpretation of the words of the late Covenant, first, We marvel, that
a General Covenant appointed to be subscrived by all, learned and unlearned,
should have been set down by you in such ambiguous terms. For, truly, all
men here, even the most judicious, do so take your words, as if the Articles
of PEARTH were in them abjured. 2. We have again more attentively examined the
words of the late Covenant, and do evidently perceive by them, That in the
said Covenant, the Articles of PEARTH, and Episcopacy, are condemned, and
abjured, as erroneous, and damnable corruptions. For where you profess, and
before GOD, and his Angels, and the World, solemnlie declare, that you shall
labor, by all means lawful, to recover the Liberty and purity, of the
GOSPEL, as it was established and professed before the foresaid Novations: We
ask you, what is that period of time, to which your words have reference, when
you promise to labor, to recover the Purity and Liberty of the Gospel, as it
was professed and established before the foresaid novations? If you mean that
period of time, when the Service-Booke, and Book of Canons, were urged upon
you; to wit, the last year bypast in Summer, then you acknowledge, that all
that time you enjoined the Purity and Liberty of the GOSPEL; and consequently,
that you yet enjoy it; for no new thing has since that time been publicly
received, and practiced in this CHURCH. If you mean (as undoubtedlie we think
you do) the time preceding the bringing in of Episcopacie, and the Acts of
Pearth, then you comprehend both Episcopacie and the Acts of PEARTH, under
these Novations; for the removing whereof, you promise, to labor, according to
your power: and consequently do dis-allow and condemn them, even before they
be tried in a Free Assembly, and before they be heard who maintain and approve
them as lawful. 3. We may evidentlie demonstrate this, argumento ad hominem,
as we say in the Schools: For those Rites and Ceremonies, which are abjured in
the Negative Confession, are also abjured in your late Covenant; which, as you
say, is all one with the Negative Confession, or with the Covenant made 1581.
But the Rites and Ceremonies which were concluded in Pearth Assembly, are
abjured, as you say, in the Covenant made 1581. and therefore they are also
abjured in this your late Covenant. The first Proposition is evident: for in
your late Covenant, speaking of the Oath contained in that old Covenant, which
was made Anno 1581. you profess, That the present and succeeding Generations
in this Land, are bound to keep the foresaid National Oath, as you call it,
and Subscription, unviolable. The second Proposition also cannot be denied by
you: For, these twenty years by-bast, you have accused those who conformed
themselves to the Ordinances of Pearth, of Perjurie; and that because they had
violated the Oath made Anno 1581. in the which those Articles (as you allege)
were abjured. But perhaps you will say to us, that we think those things not
to be abjured in that Oath made Anno 1581. and therefore we may swear, and
subscrive your late Covenant; and, not-with-standing of our Oath and
Subscription, be tied only to the Forbearance of the practice of Pearth
Articles for a time. We answer, first: The words of an Oath should be clear,
and plain: or, if they be any ways ambiguous, the true sense of them should be
so declared, and manifested, that all may know it. 2. An Oath is to be given,
according to the mind and judgment of him that requires it. And therefore,
seeing you who require this Oath of us, think the Rites or Ceremonies
concluded at Pearth, to be abjured in that Oath made Anno 1581. how can we
swear and sub^rive your Covenant, which renews the foresaid Oath, and
binds us to it? 3. If we should swear, and subscrive the Negative
Confession, as it is included in your Covenant; then ye, who think the
Articles of Pearth to be abjured, and condemned in the Negative Confession,
will think us tied, by our own Personal Oath, to condemn the Articles of
Pearth. 4. Seeing this Covenant was penned by you, who have hitherto not
conformed your selves to Pearth Assembly, and have opposed Episcopacy, and
seeing you all condemn Episcopacy, as if it were that Popish or wicked
Hierarchy, mentioned in the Negative Confession; as also esteem the things
concluded in Pearth Assembly, to be Idolatrous, or Superstitious, how can we
think, that you in your solemn vow made to God, for reformation of this
Church, and resisting, in times to come, the Novations and Corruptions of it,
have passed by these things, which are the only Novations already introduced
by Authority, and from which, as you affirm, the Church has so great need to
be purged: chiefly, seeing ye think them as Popish Superstitious and
Idolatrous, as ye do these other Novations, which are not as yet introduced.
5. If in all your Supplications, Plaints, and Protestations, ye have only
sought the removing and discharging of the Service Book, Book of Canons, and
the new high Commission, not complaining of any other Novations; and seeing his
Majesty has discharged the first two, and has promised to rectify the
third, or last of them; Then, what reason have ye to think, that his Majesty
has not satisfied your Supplications? For, all the Novations, upon which you
complained, are removed by his Majesty, and ye have his Princely Promise, that
no further shall be urged upon us, but by such a fair and Legal way, as may
fatisfie all his Subjects. 6. As for that which your Covenant, by your own
Confession, requires of us, to wi^, The forbearance, and abstinence, for a
time, from the practicing the Articles of PEARTH; We profess sincerely, and
in the sight of GOD, that our Conscience will not suffer us, to subscrive that
part of your Covenant; and that because Laws being standing for them, and our
lawful Superioures requyring Obedience from us, by practicing them, to swear
Forbearance of the practice of them, is to swear Disobedience, and, to wrong
their Authority. 7. How can we, with a good Conscience, abstain presenly from
private Baptism, and private Communion, being req^yred thereunto by sick
persons, and those Parents whose Children cannot be carried to the Church
commodiouslie with their lives; seeing we think it a thing very unlawful, in
such cases, to refuse to administrate those Sacraments in private houses. No^
that we think, that GOD has tied Himself, or His Grace, to the Sacraments;
but because He has tied us unto them, by His Precept: and, not to use the
means appointed by GOD, when our People, or their Children stand in need of
them, is a contempt of the means, and a tempting of GOD.

The Fifth Demand.
Whether or no we can sincerely, and with a good Conscience, subscrive the
Negative Confession, as it is expounded and interpreted by the Contryvers or
Authors of the late Covenant, seeing it makes a perpetual Law concerning the
external Rites of the Church, which GOD has not made, as if these Rites were
unchangeable? And how they who both swear the positive Confession, and the
negative, thus interpreted, can eschew contradiction, seeing the positive
Confession, Chap. 21. evidently declares, that these Rites are changable,
according to the exigencie of time; and consequently, that no perpetual Law
may or ought to be made concerning them? Likewise, we would know, how it can
stand with truth, to abjure all these Rites, as Popish* which are used in the
Church, without divyne institution, expressed in GOD'S Word; seeing even these
who urge the Covenant, practice some Ceremonies which are not mentioned in
GOD'S Word, as the Celebration of Marriage before the Church, in the beginning,
or at the end of divyne Service, with all the particulars of it, and the
stipulation of Fathers and Godfathers, for the Child in Baptism, which are
not mere circumstances, as they use to distinguish, but also Ceremonies,
properly so called?

ANSWER.
The late Covenant makes not a perpetual Law concerning the external Rites
of the Kirk, as if they were unchangable: but, as we have said before, only
binds us, for a time, to forbear the practice of Innovations already
introduced, and does not determine whether they ought to be changed, or not. 2.
According to this true Interpretation, all appearance of contradiction betwixt
the Confession of Faith insert in the Act of Parliament, and the latter
Confession, is removed, beside that the Article 21 of the Confession of Faith,
gives power to the Kirk, in matters of external Policy, and order of the
Worship of GOD, is expounded in the first Book of Discipline, distinguishing
between things necessary to be observed in every Kirk, and things variable
in particular Congregations. 3. We declare again, that the Covenant does not
abjure Pearth Articles, as Popish, and thinks not time now to dispute of
significant Ceremonies, or other holy Rites, and whether the two particulars
named be Ceremonies, or not: since the Confession condescended upon on both
sides, abjureth Rites, which are added without the Word of GOD.

Replye.
First, we have already told you, that we can not subscrive your Oath of
Forbearance of the practice of the Articles already introduced, without
violation of Authority, and of wronging our own Consciences, who think private
Baptism and Communion, not to be indifferent, but also necessary, in some
cases, not indeed, necessitate medii, as if GOD'S Grace were tied to the
external means, but, as we say in the Schools, necessitate praecepti, because
we are commanded to use these means. 2. This late Covenant leads and binds
us to the old Covenant, made 1581* and that old Covenant binds us perpetually
to that Discipline which was then; that is, (as ye allege) to the whole
Policy of the Church, comprehending all the external Rites of it: and so, a
primo ad ultimum, this late Covenant binds us to the whole Policy of the
Church, which was then; and consequently makes a perpetual Law, concerning
external Rites of the Church, as if they were unchangable, All parts of this
Argument are sure: for by your late Covenant, you profess your selves bound,
to keep the foresaid National Oath (as you call it) inviolable: and that
Oath, or Covenant, binds us, to continue In the obedience not only of the
Doctrine, but also of the Discipline of this Kirk. Where by the Discipline of
the Kirk, ye understand (as ye have in all your wrytings professed, especialie
of late, in your Book enti^uled, A dispute, against the English Popish
Ceremonies. Part. 4. Cap. 8. Sect. 6.) the whole external Policy of the
Church, as it was at that time; to wit, Anno 1581. Yea, you confess, that no
other thing can be understood by The Discipline of the Kirk, but that which we
have said already; and consequently we shall be tied by that Oath which you
require of us, to admit and practice no other Rites and Ceremonies, but such as
were then received in our Church. We can no ways pass by this, seeing ever
since the Assembly of Pearth, in your public Sermons, and printed Books, ye
have most vehemently accused us of Perjury, as violating the Oath, or Covenant,
made Anno 1581. and that in respect we have admitted into the Church, some
Rites, or Ceremonies, which were not in it the foresaid year of GOD. Is not
this to make a perpetual Law, concerning the external Rites of the Church, as
if they were unchangeable, and to abjure the practice of all Rites introduced
in the Church since that time; and consequently the practice of the Articles of
Pearth, and that not for a time only, but for ever? 3. Seeing the Negative
Confession, according to your mind, and conception of it, makes the whole
external Policy of the Church, as it was Anno 1581. to be unchangable and on
the contrary, the Confession insert into the Acts of Parliament, declares,
that the Rites belonging to the external Policy of the Church, are changable;
how can you escape a Contradiction, if ye receive both these Confessions? 4.
Whereas by that distinction mentioned in your Answer, of things necessary to
be observed, and of things variable in particular Congregations, ye insinuate
that by the Keeping of the Discipline of the Kirk as it was then, to which we
are bound in the old Covenant, ye understand the observation of those things
which are necessary to be observed in every Kirk, and not of things variable
in particular Congregations: We ask, Into which of the Members of this
distinction ye refer Episcopacie and the Articles of Pearth? that is, whether
they most necessarily be omitted in all Churches, and at all times, or not? If
ye say, that they must be necessarily omitted, and that the Negative
Confession, confirmed with an Oath, does tie us to the omission of them; then
both ye would make us to swear, and subscrive against our Consciences, (for we
are persuaded, that these things are lawful) as also ye would make us to
abjure Episcopacy, and the Articles of Pearth, in perpetuum; which is ^latlie
contrary to your* Declaration in your Answers, 1. 5. etc. If you say on the
other part, that we are not tied by the negative Confession, to the omission of
these things; then, why have ye, in all your wrytings against us, exprobrate to
us, Perjurie, in violating of the Oath con^ayned in the negative Confession? 5.
We would gladly have known your mind, concerning the lawfulness of such Rites
as are nor of divyne Institution, expressed in GOD'S Word. For we ingenuously
profess, that none of your Answers (which hitherto we have seen) to the
Instances, or Examples, brought by us, in our sift Demand, of Rites used by
your selves* in your Churches, as lawful, without divyne Institution, (to
which we could add many more) do give us any satisfaction: nor yet, as we
think, can give satisfaction to any indifferent man. As for example; is
Blessing of Marriages, a mere circumstance? who can be so impudent, as to say
^o? or, if it be a Ceremony, what praecept or practice have ye of it in GOD'S
whole word? If it be alleged, that we have a warrant from that Blessing
pronounced Genesis 1. 28. upon Man and Woman, after their creation; we ask, by
what consequence can that Solemnity of blessing of Marriages used in our
Churches, with all the Ceremonies of it, be drawn from that effectual and
operative Blessing of our first Parents, or rather of whole Man-kynde? Is there
here an institution of a perper^uall observance, or Rite, to be used in the
Church, more then in the 22 verse of the same Chapter, when GOD blessed the
Fowls, and Fishes, and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters
in the Seas? etc. If again it be answered, that Pastoral Benediction, is
mentioned in Scripture, first, what is that to Blessing of Marriages? And
secondly, why are not all other pactions, as well as Marriages, blessed in the
Church, chiefly, seeing Matrimonial Blessing has been, and is, abused in the
Roman Church, which holds, that Marriage is a Sacrament; and consequently,
Matrimonial benediction ought, as it would seem, to be secluded from the
Church, rather then other Blessings?

The Sixth Demand.
Whether or no it be fit to subscrive such an Interpretation, as in matters of
lawfullnesse, and unlawfulness; and consequently in matters of Faith,
contradicts the Judgment of so many Divines, most famous of the reformed
Church, both Ancient and Modern, (who did, and do hold, that these Rites and
Ordinances brought into this Church by the Assembly of Pearth, are in their
own nature lawful, and such as ought not to make a stir in the Church of
GOD) and also condemns the venerable practice of the Ancient Church, and the
most eminent Lights of it, even in those purest times, unto which we apeale
against the Papists in our Disputes.

ANSWER.
We trust, that no sound Divyne, Ancient or Modern, would in this case deny
the expediencie of the forbearance of the practice of Pearth Articles. And
further then this, nothing at this time is required.

Replye.
Your silence, in not answering that which we affirmed, concerning the
judgment of Divynes, Ancient and Modern, of the reformed Church, anent the
lawfulness of the Rites and Ordinances, which were received in our Church, by
the ordinance of the Assembly of Pearth; as also concerning the judgment and
practice of the ancient Church; does make us think, that ye acknowledge the
truth of that which we affirmed there. 2. We have already shown, that the
Oath which ye require of us, imports more then the forbearance of the
practice of Pearth Articles, for a time. 3. The forbearance of some of them,
seems to us, to be merely unlawful, and contrary to that Pastoral duty we
owe to our Flock. 4. The forbearance of any of them, considered with a
relation to the Authority enjoining them, in our judgment, is plain
disobedience.

The seventh Demand.
Whether it be agreeable to Charity or Piety, to require us to abjure these
Rites as Popish; which in the sincerity of our hearts, following the light of
our Conscience, (whereof we take GOD to witness) we have hitherto practiced,
as lawful, and laudablie following the same light, do yet practice them? but
suppose this might be required of us by any; Quaeritur, Whether or no it
becomes them so peremptorily, and upon such a suddentie, to urge us to this,
who these bygone twenty years, have desired earnestly to enjoy the freedom
of their Consciences in their Ministry, even in denying obedience to these
things, and standing Laws for them; and when they were urged to obedience, did
so often protest, and earnestly request, that they might have a time, to be
well informed, and maturelie advysed of the matter, which to the most part of
them was most graciously granted? Let them, therefore, look to that natural
Maxim, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, and to our Savior's
Precept of the same sense, and almost of the same words, Matthew. 7. verse 12.

ANSWER.
We hope, that such a Forbearance of the practice, will prejudge the liberty
of no man's Conscience.

Replye.
It would much prejudge our Consciences, to swear and subscrive the negative
Confession, taking it according to your conception and meaning, who require our
Oath. 2. How can we swear, to labor, ( by all means lawful, as ye require in
your Covenant) to expel those things, whereof we hold some to be necessary,
and all the rest, to be lawful, and laudable?

The Eight Demand.
Whether it be fitting to swear to defend the Kings Person and Authority, with
this Limitation, In the defense and preservation of the true Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, of this Kingdom? As if their Persons ought not to be defended
against all Enemies, although as yet they embraced not the Truth: or having
before embraced it, yet have fallen from it; or as if their Royal Authority
were not to be acknowledged, although commanding things unlawful; and as if
we were not subject thereto, in yielding to suffer under them, when we give not
active obedience to them?

ANSWER.
1. The Answer of the first Demand, may give satisfaction here. 2. The
Specification of the defending the Kings Person and Authority, in the defense
of the true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, is warranded by the
Confession ratified in Parliament, by other Acts of Parliament, by the other
Confession, and by the general Band joined with it. 3. No man will with-holde
his Subscription from the Covenant, because it does not, as it intends not,
to express ever^^ duty we owe to the Kings Majesty, as if the not naming,
were a denying of the duty.

Reply.
What ye have replied in your Answer to our first Demand, we have examined, in
our Confutation of your Answer. 2. If ye consider well all the Circumstances
of the making of your Covenant, ye will find that it had not been amiss, at
this time, to have expressed more fully the Loyalty of your Intentions, to
maintain the KINGS Person and Honor. Next, it is necessary to express it
yet more fully, for our cause, whom ye require, to swear and subscrive your
Covenant; lest we do any thing, in this matter, with a doubting Conscience,
(which is a grievous sin) that is, Doubting whether or no we are tied by our
Oath, to maintain the KINGS Authority, only in so far, as it is employed in
the Defense of the foresaid true Religion; or, at lest, as it is not employed
against it. For it seems to us unlawful, to swear the maintenance of the
KINGS Authority with this limitation precisely. And if ye be of a contrary
mind, we are most willing to confere with you of this point.

The ninth Demand.
VVhethere or no we can sincerely swear to maintain the Authority, truly
and properly Monarchical of the King; and withal swear also disobedience to
these Articles, which are authorized by his standing Laws, and to maintain
the meanest of his Subjectes against him, in their disobedience of his Laws,
as yet standing in vigor concerning these things?

ANSWER.
1. The Answer to the first Demand, is useful here also. 2. Forbearance of
Practice, for a time, in such a case, is rather Obedience, then Disobedience:
for example, Kneelling was thought convenient, because all memory of
Superstition was past, should it not therefore be forborne, because
Superstition is now revived, and flagrant? They who practice, keep the letter
of the Law: but they who forbear, keep the life and reason thereof.

Replye.
Your Covenant requires more of us, then the forbearance of the practice of
Pearth Articles, as we have often times declared. 2. We have also shown, that
the forbearance of Obedience, to standing Laws, without licience of
Superiors, and contrary to their commandment, especially if it be done by
deliberation, and if men tie themselves, by an Oath, to do so, is manifest
Disobedience. 3. The Article of Pearth, anent Kneeling, was not grounded
only, nor yet principally, upon that Narrative which ye mention; but rather
upon the conveniencie and decency of the gesture of Kneeling, in the receiving
of the holy SACRAMENT: which reason does yet continue; as also the other
reason which ye mention, holds yet: for the body of the People of this
Church, were never Papists; and, consequently, have no memory of Popish
Superstition, as those who lived in time of Reformation. 4. We can not see, nor
conceive, how a Vow and Band, of maintaining the meanest Subject of this
Kingdom, against all persons whatsoever; and consequently, against the KING
himself, as we have shown in our second Replye, in disobedience of his Laws,
can consist with that love, reverence, and subjection, which we owe to our
KING. Neither have ye brought any thing in your Answer, to satisfy us in this
point. And because ye allege, as we hear, that ye are mistaken in this
point, and do vindicate your selves, by those words of the Covenant, wherein
ye promise to maintain the KINGS Authority; we pray you to express your mind
more fully, concerning it; and to show us, 1. What ye mean by mantaining the
KINGS Authority, in that part of your Covenant, wherein ye express your loyal
Intention, To maintain the KINGS Person and Authority; and in special, Whether
or no the maintaining of the KINGS Authority, be taken by you, as it excludes
all resisting of his Authority, by force of Arms, even although he should
command things unlawful, and contrary to the Truth? For so we think it
should be taken: and that it should be so taken, we are ready to demonstrate.
Neither can we swear it in any other sense. 2. Whether your promise, of
mutual defense, In the same cause of maintayning the true Religion, and his
Majesty's Authority, etc. ought to be understood, of the maintaining the Kings
Authority absolu^elie: that is, Whether he maintain the true Religion, or no?
Or, on the contrary; if it ought to be understood, of the maintaining the
Kings Authority conditionally, in so far as he maintains the true Religion,
and not any other ways? If you say, that it is to be understoode the first
way, we assent to that part of your Covenant, and have no more scruple anent
it, except that one, which we mentioned in our Reply to your second Answer: to
wit, that the words of your Protestation, seem to import more; and, that your
Paction, or Covenant, is made without the Kings privitie, and consent. If ye
say, that it is to be understood the second way, then we continue urging our
foresaid Demand: to wit, how a man can maintain the Kings Authority, and
withal maintain the meanest of His Subjects, in resisting His Authority? And
how we can be said, to stand for the Kings Honor, when we vow and promise, to
do that which he himself professes to be against his Honor; and which, in
the common judgment of men, is thought to be so? The determination of this
point, is more then necessary, at this time: and, therefore, let us in
sincerity, and Brotherly love, confer of it; that the Consciences of others
who doubt of this, may receive satisfaction.

The Tenth Demand.
Whether or no we ought to swear to such a Covenant, which takes away from us
all hope of a free Assembly, or Parliament, to judge of the matteres presently
debated? for how can these vote freely of any matter propounded to the decision
and deliberation of the Church and Estate; who have already sworn to adheere
to one part of the Question? and how can those who dissent from them, submit
themselves to their judgment, chiefly seeing they are Possessoures, and have
Laws Civil and Ecclesiastic, standing as yet for them?

ANSWER.
We perceive, that this tenth Demand, is made of the Articles of Pearth;
therefore we answer as before; That we promise only forbearance, which can
prejudge no man's liberty in a General Assembly.

Replye.
We have shown, that your Covenant and Oath, imports a manifest Abjuration
of the Articles of Pearth: and therefore, the swearing of it does manifestly
prejudge the liberty of Voting in a National Assembly: For, how can they
freely either reason in an Assembly, concerning Episcopacy, and the Articles of
Pearth; or else, give their judgment, without prejudice, concerning them who
have already promised, sworn, and vowed, first, To adheere to the Discipline
of the Kirk: that is, (according to your Interpretation) to the whole
external policy of the Church, as it was 1581. 2. To labor, by all means
lawful, to remove, and expel, all those Rites, and Ordinances, which have
come into the Church since the foresaid Year of GOD; that the Church may be
restored, to the Liberty, and Purity, which it then had. Whereby ye declare,
that the foresaid Articles and Episcopacy, are contrary to the Liberty, and
Purity, of the Church; and consequently, ye are tied, by your Oath, to vote
against them, if ye be called to the intended ASSEMBLY.

The eleventh Demand.
Whether our subscriving, together with our People, to the Confession of this
Nation, which is ratified and registrated in Parliament, Ann. 1567. may give
full satisfaction to all who doubt of the sincerity of our Profession, if so be
they have no farther aim, but only to know and see our willingness, and
constant resolution, to adheere to the Religion presently professed, and to
oppose all Erroures contrary to it, to our lives end? Now, seeing we are
willing to do this, as we take GOD to witness, we are, how are we hated,
maligned, and traduced as Enemies of the Truth, only because our Consciences
do not suffer us to subscrive to that Interpretation of the Negative
Confession insert in the Covenant, (concerning which we can see no warrant of
the truth of it, nor lawful Authority binding us to it) and to the Politic,
or rather Military part of that Covenant, which is a thing without the compass
of our Calling, and not belonging to that contending for the faith once
delivered to the Saints, of which S. Jude speaks in his Epistle.

ANSWER.
Since no other mean could be found so effectual, for holding out of Popery,
and forbearing of dangerous Novations in Religion, such as the Service Book,
and Canons, which as yet are only discharged, till in a fair and legal way
they may be introduced; and are by no word of the late Proclamation disallowed
although the Service Book, by the Proclamation, February 19. be highly
praised, as serving to edification, and to beat out all Superstition: and
nothing in this Application is abjured, but what was abjured in the former; why
shall we fobeare to use a mean so just, and so powerful, for the preservation
of the purity of Religion?

Replye.
Here ye do not particularly answer to our Demand, and seem unwilling to
give that Testimony of us, Your Brethren, concerning our sincerity in
professing of the Truth; which, all who know and judge unpartially of us, do
think to be due to us. It is sufficiently known, what pains we take, in
disputing and writing against Papists, in confuting their Erroures in our
Pulpits, in leading process against them, according to the Order of the
Church, and in doing all things against Romish erroures, which can be expected
from the most zealous Professoures of the truth. If ye, or any other of our
reverend Brethren, doubt of the sincerity of our Profession, then pose us
concerning any Article contraverted, and we shall be most ready to declare our
mind concerning it before all men, and give a sufficient proof to the world,
that we have pryed as narrowly into the mysteries of Romish Erroures, for
refutation of them, as any of those who impiously, and uncharitablie traduce
us, as favorers of Popery. 2. We have other means, more effectual, and
lawful, (whereas we think this your Mean to be unlawful) for holding out of
Popery: and in which we ought to conside more, then in all the promises and
vows of men; yea, also, more then in all the United Forces of all the Subjects
of this Land: to wit, diligent preaching, and teaching of the Word, frequent
Prayer to GOD, humbling of our selves before him, amendment of our lives, and
conversations, and arming our selves against our Adversaries, by diligent
searching of the Scriptures, and using all other Means, whereby we may increase
in the knowledge of the Truth, and in ability, to defend it against the
enemies of it. 3. The Subjects of this Kingdom, at least a great part of them,
either by their own inclination, or by the persuasion of others, have such an
hard conceit of the Service Book, and Canons, that if his Majesty use a fair
and legal way of bringing them into this Church, especially such a way, as may
give satisfaction to all his Subjects, in all appeara^ce, we need not to fear
the in bringing of them.

The Twelfth Demand.
Whereas we hear of diverse Disorders, and violent miscariages, of those who
have subscrived the Covenant, against our Brethren of the holy Ministry, who
continue in their obedience to the Laws of the Church and Kingdom; which
miscariages being done without all form of Justice, or legal proceeding, are
an exercising of Revenge, by private Authority, and consequently are forbidden
in the sixth commandment; which is one of the reasons which moves us, not to
join our selves unto their society: we would gladely therefore know of our
reverend Brethren, who have come hither, to recommend the late Covenant unto
us; first, whether or no they do allow these disorders? 2. If they allow
them, what reason have they so to do? and if they allow them not, how is it,
that these Disorders and miscarriages, are not publicly by them, and other
Pastors of their Confederacy, condemned, and sharply rebuked in their
Pulpits? Why are the Actors of them not tried, and censured? And why do they
delay to give out some public Declaration, either in Print or writ, to this
effect, being long since exhorted to do so?

ANSWER.
1. Hardly can a zealous people assembled in a Kirk for the Worship of GOD,
be kept from tumult, when Books, and a Worship which they either know, or
conceive to be Popish, are suddenly, and imperious^ie obtruded upon them by
the Leaders: and how far the keeping of the material Kirkes from the
pollution of Worship, belongs to the People, and community of he Faithful,
should be considered. 2. Violence done in other places, and upon other
occasions, we no more allow, then we do approve the aspersions of Perjurie,
Rebellion, etc. which some men do put upon us.

Replye.
It belongs not to the People, or community of the Faithful, to contemn
Authority, and the LORDS Service, done in his own house, on his own Day, so
far as to put violent hands in Praelates, and Pastors, in time of Divyne
Worship, while they are practicing those things which are enjoined by the King,
and his Counsel. Such Disorders, and contemptuous carriages, do not beseem
those whom CHRIST inviteth to come to him, and to learn of him, meekness, and
lowliness of heart; chiefly, seeing there are many other ways, whereby People
may testify their aversation of those Books, and Worship, which they conceive
to be Popish. If it be a sin in Parents, to provoke their Children to wrath;
much more is it a sin in Children, to provoke their Parents, especially
Patrem Patriae, the common Father of the Country, so to wrath. 2. The keeping
of GODS house, from the pollution of Worship, belongs to those who are
clothed with lawful Authority. 3. We not only asked of you, Whether or no ye
did allow the Miscarriages toward our Brethren of the holy Ministry,
mentioned in our Demand? but also, supposing that ye do not allow them, we
asked, How is it, that those Disorders, and Miscarriages, are not publicly by
you condemned; and rebuked? Why are the Actors of them not tried, and censured?
And why do ye not give some public Document to the world, of your aversation
of such Miscarriages? chiefly, seeing they are, as we have shown, a manifest
transgression of the sixth Commandment. We can not sufficiently marvel, that
ye have keept up your minds in this matter, and not answered to so important,
and necessary a Demand. As for your Complaint, of Perjure and Rebellion, etc.
if ye mean the Warning lately written to the Subjects in Scotland, ye shall
know, that the Author thereof himself is much displeased with any offensive
asperitie, which has been found in some written Copies thereof; and has
already done that, for removing of that offen^^: which, we hope, shall give
full satisfaction to all men.

The Thirteenth Demand.
How can we subscrive that Covenant, without incurring many grievous Scandals;
as first, the Scandal of Dissenting from other reformed Churches, and famous
Divynes, the chief Instruments of the Reformation of the Church in EUROPE, who
did hold these Rites which are abjured in this late Covenant, as merely
unlawful, Popish, and Idolatrous, to be in their own nature, lawful.
Secondly, the scandal of dissenting from Antiquity, and vilipending it
altogether in matters of the external Policy of the Church; which we know,
and have found by frequent experience, to be a thing that makes many Papists
more averse from our Profession, then otherwise they would be. Thirdly, the
scandal of Perjurie, which some of us can not escape, who did swear obedience
to the Articles of Pearth, and to our ordinary, at our Admission to the
Ministry.

ANSWER.
That threefold scandal ceasseth upon the right interpretation of the clause
of the forbearance of the Novations already introduced.

Replye.
We have shown your interpretation of the clause of forbearance, not to be
right, and have refuted it, we think, by the very words of your Covenant; so
that none of these three scandalls can be eschewed by us, if we subscrive to
your foresaid Covenant. 2. Suppose the other two might be eschewed, by that
interpretation of the clause of forbearance, yet the third can not be eschewed,
seeing at our Admission we have sworn obedience to the Articles of Pearth, and
to our Ordinary: Wherefore, ye must either prove the Articles of Pearth, and
Episcopacy, to be unlawful, or else, we can not, without violation of our
Oath, made at our Admission, forebeare the practice of the foresaid Articles,
against the will of our Ordinary, and other our lawful Superioures.

The Fourteenth Demand.
Last of all; We pray these Reverend and Worthy Brethren, to consider
impartially, and charitably, seeing we have all these scruples in our minds
concerning their Covenant, as also seeing we are yet most confident, and
assured, of the lawfulness of the Articles of Pearth, together with the
lawfulness and venerable Antiquity of Episcopal Government, how we can, with
a safe Conscience, give our consent that they should preach in our Pulpits, who
come professedly to withdraw our People from that which we in the inmost
thoughts of our souls do embrace as lawful; and from that obedience which
they do owe to their Gracious and Pious Sovereign therein; Whose last
Proclamation has given full satisfaction to us all, and much rejoiced our
hearts, in respect he has therein most solemnly, and by his Oath declared, not
only his sincerity in professing the Truth, but also his pious Resolution, to
continue therein, and maintain it constantly to his lives end, most graciously
and wisely removing these things which have occasioned the late perturbation
of our Church. We wish them likewise, to consider, how they can require this of
us, seeing they would not (we appeal their own Consciences) be content that
they should be so dealt with themselves; we mean, that any should go up to
their Pulpits, and condemn their Doctrine, and practice, and withdraw their
People from that which has been before recommended unto them as Truth.

We conclude: Exhorting earnestly, entreating lovingly, and charging modestly,
these, and all others, our Reverend Brethren, before GOD, and the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing in his
Kingdom, if there be any consolation in CHRIST, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, to look narrowly to
their own Consciences, in these weighty matters; remembering that of JEREMIAH,
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it: To judge charitably of us their Brethren; remembering that of our Savior,
Judge not, that ye be not judged: To deal with us in love and meekness, (if
so be they think us to have gone astray from the Truth; which, GOD knows,
we no ways do perceive) remembering that of S. PAUL, If a man be overtaken in
a fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of
meekness: as also that of S. JAMES, The wisdom that is from Above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy, and
good fruits, etc. And last of all, To seek Peace, and so to follow after it;
that this our dear native Country be not exposed to a dangerous Warrefare,
and to all the woeful Consequents thereof; of which our hearts can not think,
without trembling and horror.

ANSWER.
1. Nothing in the Interpretation of the Covenant, against the lawfulness of
Pearth Articles, and of Episcopal Government. 2. We never intended to draw the
meanest of the Subjects, from that Loyalty of Obedience, which they owe to
their Sovereign, and ours. 3. The Counsel has rescinded the Approbation of
that Proclamation. 4. His Majesty's Religious and Righteous Disposition, has
been to us a Ground, and chief Argument, of our hope of the hearing of all our
Petitions. 5. We have no desire to wrong our Reverend and worthy Brethren; but
rather to pass, in silence, the wrongs which we have sustained by them: and
would approve our selves unto our GOD, and prove faithful in the employments
put upon us: earnestly desiring, that every eye may perceive the wonderful
work of GOD in this Land: lest any of us be found fighting against GOD; and,
that all of us may join Heart and Hand, for the Purity and Peace of the Kirk
of ou^ LORD JESUS CHRIST, Blessed for ever.

JULIE 21. 1638. Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Minister at Leuehars. Mr. DAVID
DICKSON, Minister at Irwing. Mr. ANDREW CANT, Minister at Petslig^.


Replye.
There is too much, as we think, in your Covenant, against the lawfullnesse of
Pearth Articles. 2. Your Band of Mutual Defense, against all persons
whatsoever, may draw Subjects, perhaps, to take Arms against their King,
(which GOD avert) and consequently from that Loyalty of Obedience, which they
owe to their Sovereign, and ours; except ye declare, and explain your selves
better, then ye have hither-to done. 3. What the most honorable Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Counsel, have done concerning the Kings Majesty's last
Proclamation, is not sufficiently known to us, and far less upon what
Grounds and Motives they have (as you say) rescinded their Approbation of the
late Proclamation. 4. His Majesty's Religious and Righteous Disposition, has
been to us, and is, a maine ground wherefore we rest and rely upon his
gracious Proclamation, persuading our selves, that he intends not, nor never
intended, any Innovation in Religion. 5. We shall labor, by all means, to
eschew every thing, which in the least degree may wrong you, our Reverend and
worthy Brethren. As for the Wrongs already done by us to you, (as ye pretend)
when-so-ever it shall please you to specify them, we hope to give you full
satisfaction, and to clear our selves of that Imputation. 6. The work of GOD
toward any Nation, how strange and wonderful so-ever it seem to be, is never
contrary to his Word: and, therefore, we fear not to be found fighting against
GODS Work, so long as we fight not against his Truth, revealed in his Word.
That all-seeing LORD knows, that we mentaine his Truth according to the
light of our Consciences, and are ready to join Heart and Hand with you, for
the Purity and Peace of this Church, in every lawful way, and course, as
sincere lovers of Truth and Peace.

And now, Brethren, before we conclude, again we entreat you, and all others
our dear Contrymen, especially our reverend Brethren of the holy
Ministry, to judge charitablie of us, and of our proceedings at this time; and
in particular, of these our Demandes, and Replies; which, GOD is our witness,
neither hatred of any man's person, nor love of Contention, nor any worldly
respect; but only the Conscience of our Calling has drawn from us. And as for
our Arguments for not Subscriving, which are taken from our due subjection and
obedience to our Sovereign, and his Laws, we protest, and declare, that they
ought not to be so interpreted, as if we intended to accuse you, or others, our
dear Contrymen, of Disloyalty toward our most Gracious KING; or, as if our
purpose were to lay any such Imputation upon you: for they are only used by us,
to show what the words of the Covenant seem to us to import, and how we
conceive of them; as also, what makes us so to conceive of them. We doubt not,
reverend Brethren, but ye know, that as we owe to you, and to your Proceedings,
the favorable judgment of Charity; so we ought to judge of those things,
which we are to swear, and subscrive, with the strict and inquisitive
judgment of Verity; and consequently, we ought to ponder duly, and to
propound particularly and fully to others, (especially to those who require our
Oath and Subscription, and undertake to satisfy our Consciences there-anent)
all the doubts and reasons which make us unwilling or afraid to give our
Subscription thereunto,

JOHN FORBES OF CORSE, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in ABERDENE.
ALEXANDER SCROGIE, Minister at Old ABERDENE, D. D.
WILLIAM LESLIE, D. D. and Principal of the KINGS College, in Old ABERDENE.
ROBERT BARON, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity, and Minister at ABERDENE.
JAMES SIBBALD, Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at ABERDENE.
ALEXANDER ROSS, Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at ABERDENE.

THE ANSWERS OF SOME BRETHREN OF THE MINISTRY, TO THE REPLIES Of the
Ministers and Professoures of DIVINITY in ABERDENE; CONCERNING THE LATE COVENANT

2. CHRON. 15. 15. And all Juda rejoiced at the Oath: For they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought Him with their whole desire: and He was found of
them. To the Christian READER.
THat you may know our Proceedings, how we are brought upon the Stage, and
contrary to our expectation, are put in Print. Coming to ABERDENE, on Friday,
the afternoon, we received the Demands of our reverend Brethren, that night
late; and, for the greater expedition; without delay, we returned our summarie
Answers on Saturnday at night. On the LORDS Day following, we desired to
express our selves to the People in presence of the Ministry, but the
Pulpits and Kirks were altogether refused; and therefore in the most convenient
place we could have, sub dio, and at such hours as were vacant from the
ordinary exercises of public Worship, we delivered our Message in the
audience of many. After our last Sermon, toward Evening, we found that our
labor was not in vain in the LORD: for dyverse persons, of special note,
both for place and wisdom, with willing heart, and great readiness of mind,
did publicly put their hands to the Covenant. Having the week following
seen some parts of the Country, [where besides the Presbyteries Alforde and
Dear, who had subscrived before, the Moderator, and dyverse of the Presbytery
of ABERDENE, the Presbytery and People of Turreff, after they were satisfied
in some scruples, did also subscrive] we returned the next Saturnday to
ABERDENE: where finding that some others had subscrived that week, we resolved
to preach upon the morn. That night we received a Replye, unto which before
our return home, we have made an Answer. All these we desire may be
unpartially considered: and if it shall please the LORD, that any light shall
come from our Labor unto thy Mind, let it be as^ryved not unto us, (who
neither had time nor helps for such a task) but to the brightness of the
Truth, and Cause it self, and to the Father of Lights: to whom be all Glory.

To our Reverend Brethren, The Doctors and Ministers of Aberdene.
THat our Answers (reverend and beloved Brethren) have not given you full
satisfaction, as it may be imputed to our weakness, in the defense of so good
a cause, so it may proceed also from your own prejudice against what could be
said by us which we have some reason to suspect for two causes, one is, that
your Demands which we conceived to have been intended merely for us, and were
sent unto us from you in write, were published before our coming, in Print,
like as ye have now printed and published your Replies before ye had seen our
Answers unto that which we received from you last in write; we having promised
to the bearer, to return an Answer shortly ere we departed the Country. This
may seem rather to be a seeking of victory from prejudice, then a search of
verity for satisfaction. The other cause of our suspicion, is, that the
grounds of our Answers to you, have proven satisfactorie to others, who for
Age and gifts of Learning and Understanding, are pryme men in this Kirk and
Kingdom, and to whom modestly will not suffer you to prefer your selves. But
whether our weakness or your prejudice be the cause, must be now judged by
others, to whose view ye have brought us: whom therefore we with you heartily
desire unpartially to consider our first and second Answers; wishing and
hoping that partiality, prejudice, and all worldly respects and fears, laid
aside, the naked Truth shall be seen of all her lovers. Concerning your
confidence of us, as we in love judge, that ye think not your selves ^o be
stryving against the Truth; so may ye conceive, that we can no more be
brought to your mind, then we can be drawn from the profession of our
Religion, as it has been reformed, sworn, and confirmed by the late and
preceding Covenants, and from following the example of our religious
Reformers, and the many Worthies succeeding them in this Kirk, who would have
been glad to have seen the days which we now do see: and for which we pray,
that both ye and we may be thankful* so shall it not be imputed unto us,
that we have not discerned and used the day of the LORDS visitation: so shall
we all rejoice together in the Day of the LORD.

To the First Replye.
YOur experience in your Disputes against the common Adversary, wherein ye say
ye are so frequent, has (no doubt) taught you, how easy a matter it is to
multiply Objections against the Truth, and Cause of GOD: and your selves
know, that your Objection against our Calling, and the Warrant of our coming
to you, was framed, and published in Print, before it was propounded unto us,
and ere our Answer could be had; but so soon as we did hear your Demands, we
answered incontinent, in the humility and truth of our minds, that we were
to obtrude nothing upon you, or your flock, by any particular Authority, Civil
or Ecclesiasticke; but that we did come, in all meekness, to represent unto
you the present case of this Kirk, and in love to entreat you, to join with
us, for the peace thereof; for which we trust, without wronging any lawful
Authority, we may claim the warrant of the highest and greatest Authority,
although we had not been sent from almost the whole Kirk and Kingdom, lawfully
conveened at this time, for the preservation of Religion, and of the Liberties
and Laws of this Kingdom, so sore shaken, by the usurpation of the Prelates,
and their Favorers. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works, etc. says the Apostle, Hebr. 10. 24. And where ye object, that
without your leave we preached within your congregation; which is aggravated by
you, as a heinous fault, both against Scripture, and against the Canons of
ancient Counsels, which ye have laboriously quoted against us; we entreat you,
to be more sparing, lest the guiltiness, if there be any, reflex upon your
selves: For your Pulpits and Kirks being denied us (not from any injury done
by us, but by your own determination, before our coming) a necessity was laid
upon us, to deliver our message in such places, as your courtesy did permit;
wherein no man will find, that we have failed, if he consider, first, That
there is as wide difference betwixt Ecclesia turbata and pa^ata, the troubled
and peaceable estate of a Kirk, as is betwixt Ecclesia constituenda, and
constituta, and many things are necessary in the one, which perhaps are not
expedient in the other. Ye speak of the Constitution of the Kirk this year,
as if ye had been speaking thereof many years before this time. 2. That the
Word of GOD, and the Canons of Counsels, will have Pastors so to care for their
own flocks, that they forbid them not, to care for the whole Kirk,
especially in the time of a common Combustion. When the house is on fire, every
man ought to run to all rowms, where he may quench it: when a laik stricketh
up in a Ship, every Mariner, yea, every Passenger, ought to labor to stop it.
Even he who is not universal Pastor of the Kirk, is Pastor of the universal
Kirk: and the Apostle has taught us, That we are members one of another, Romans
12. 4. As all the members of one body being many, are one body; so also is
CHRIST, 1 Cor. 12. 12. That the members should have the same care, one for
another, verse. 25. If some members of this Kirk had not cared more kindly, in
this time of common danger, then other some have done, the whole body had been
ere now dangerously, if not desparatly diseased. 3. That we made choice of such
hours, for delivering our Message, that the people might attend your ordinary
times of public worship; which makes your charge, of the peoples contempt, or
ours, of your Ministry, to be most unjust.

In the second part of your Replye to our Answer to your first Demand, ye
might have made choice of words witnessing more respect to the most part of the
Kingdom now, 'and to the Kirk in former times, then of a Confederation, and
negative Confession: we know no other Confederation at this time, but this same
Laudable Covenant, which our Progenitors, and many yet living, made with GOD,
and amongst themselves, at the Commandment of Authority, and according to the
example of the people of GOD in former times. Neither is that short Confession
merely Negative, since the beginning thereof is affirmative, and does
virtually contain the first large Confession ratisied in Parliament, 1567. 2.
No Pastors, in our knowledge, have either been forced to flee to foraigne
countries, or have been threatened with the want of their Stipends, for the
refusing their Subscription: but this we have heard, that some of them have of
their own accord, gone to Court, for procuring of protections against their
Creditors, and against the Laws, and duty of good Subjects, have made lies
between the KING and his People. Others we know have wilfully refused, to abide
with their flock; and being earnestly entreated by them, to attend their
Charge, have left them, and have gone out of the Country, for no reason, but
because the people had subscrived; and, as ye know, that Arguments have been
taken from augmentation of Stipends, to hinder Subscription: so ye may know,
That fear of worldly loss, rather hinders men to subscrive, then scruple of
Conscience. The Prelates flight, seems rather to have proceeded from inward
furies of accusing Consciences, or for fear of a storm, (which being procured
by their own doing, may be easily prognosticated by them) then from the
enforcing of subscription of the Covenant, which in our knowledge was never
required of any of the Prelates, although they be grossly guilty of the breach
of the Covenant, which they did swear and subscrive before. 3. Your help, by
your prayers, and other means, for extinguishing of the present Combustion, we
still desire, but with all entreat, that you would both join with the rest of
the Kirkes of the Kingdom, in public humiliation and fasting, which the LORD
himself does proclaim and call for at this time; so should your prayers be
the more effectual, and also ye be good instruments, according to your power,
with your own people, and the country about, to join in the Covenant, so
should ye find the work of Pacification the more easy. 4. The reasons which
we touched in our Answer, for proving, that ye might, without just offense to
any, join with us, in subsc^iving, are not yet answered: for, first, a sound
interpretation of the Covenant, although proceeding from a private person, and
altogether void of external Authority, can not make a substantial
difference: and if the interpretation be unsound, although it were confirmed by
Authority, it makes not a substantial coincidence. 2. Why is it denied, that
the former Covenant contains mutual defense, since all are obliedged thereby
to de^end Religion, according to their vocation and power, and the KINGS person
and Authority, which can not possibly be done, without mutual defense: and
since that clause of the Covenant, is so expounded, and applied upon grounds of
perpetual reason, in the general Band drawn up, and Printed by Authority, An.
1590. 3. Ye must either prove this Covenant to be substantially different from
the former, which is impossible, or ye must acknowledge this to have the same
Authority with the former, since we are really obliedged in the former
Covenant, and virtually the same warrant of KING, Counsel, and assembly,
remains, and was never yet discharged: by virtue whereof the Covenant might
have been renewed yearly, by all the subjects of the Kingdom, no less then
it has been subscrived yearly by such as pass degrees in Colleges, and such
as were suspect of Papistrie, from time to time. 4. What was done by his
Majesty's Commissioner, was no^ done in a corner, that it needs to be pryed
into, or doubted of, and what was allowed by his Grace, who had so great power
from his Majesty, to declare his Majesty's will, and to receive Declarations
from his subjects, and who was in every point so zealous and tender of his
Majesty's service and honor: who are ye, that it should be dissallowed by you?
Ye will have the Kingdom guilty of combination against Authority, and will not
have the KING to be satisfied, when they have declared themselves to the
contrary, and their Declaration is accepted by his Majesty's Commissioner. This
manner of dealing, is more suitable to Papists, and such Incendaries, then for
you, who desire to prove good Patriots, in using all means of Pacification. 5.
We are sorry, that ye should be the first, who have accounted our Covenant to be
a confederacy against the Truth, since some of your selves, and all every
where have been constrained, to acknowledge, that they aim ^t the same end
with us, to maintain the Truth. And for that which displeases you in our
way, that we deal after such a manner with people, to come in, we answer,
that we have seen in this Land, the Day of the LORDS Power, wherein his people
have most willingly offered themselves in multitudes, like the dew of the
morning: that others of no small Note, have offered their subscriptions, and
have been refused, till time should try, that they join in sincerity, from
love to the cause, and not from the fear of men: and that no threatenings have
been used, except of the deserved judgment of GOD; nor force, except the force
of reason, from the high respects which we owe to Religion, to our KING, to our
native Country, to our selves, and to the Posterity; which has been to some a
greater constraint, then any external violence; and we wish, may prevail also
with you.

To the Second.
WE perceive, that ye pass in silence, that which we answered concerning the
preventing of trouble, which by all appearance had been too sensible to many
before this time, if the Conventions censured by you, had not been kept; we
desire, that ye would here declare your selves, whether ye would have rather
received the Service Book, Book of Canons, and other trash of that kind,
tending to the subversion of Religion, and to the prejudice of the Liberties of
the Kingdom, then to have conveened in a peaceable manner, to present
Supplications to his Majesty, for averting of so great evils. Neither do ye
speak a word of the saying of K. James, which ought to be regarded, both for
the witness sake, who is of so great authority, and for the testimony which
contains so great reason. For, shall not the whole body of a Kingdom stir
pro aris and focis? or shall our Religion be ruined, and our Light be put out,
and all men hold their peace? We told you also, that the first part of the Act
of Parliament, 1585, is relative to another Act in Queen Mary's time, which
specifieth, what sort of Leagues and Bands are forbidden, and sets us free
from the breach of the Act: but ye have answered nothing to this, and still
dispute from the Act of Parliament, rather then from other grounds, better
beseeming your Profession, and ours; and in this will so precisely adhere to
the letter of the Law, that you will have no meetings, without the KINGS
consent, even in the case of the preservation of Religion, of his Majesty's
Authority, and of the liberties of the Kingdom, which we are sure must be
contrary to the reason and life of the Law; since the safety of the People is,
the Sovereign Law. Although it be true also that for our Covenant, we have the
consent of Authority pressing upon all the subjects in the general Band, and
confession of Faith, formerly subscrived for maintenance of the Religion, their
subscription and Oath as a note of their soundness in Religion, and of their
loyalty and fidelity to the KING, and his Crown, wherein Iurisconsults, more
skilled in this kind, then we need to be, have given their Responses and
Verdicts, in favors of us, and of our cause.

2. The point touching Authority, is so full of Thorns and Rocks, uses to be
so vehemently urged, to procure envye against the Gospel of CHRIST, and can so
hardly be disputed and discussed, except in a large Treatise, to the
satisfaction of Kings and Kingdoms; and all having interest, that for the
present we only wish you to hear the testimonies of two grave Divynes, the one
is Whittaker, in his Answer to Master Reynolds preface, page 6. Stirs and
Tumults for matter of Religion, Reynold rehearses, that has been in Germany,
France, Bohemia, as though it were sufficient for their condemnation, that they
once resisted, and did not by and by admit whatsover violence was offered,
either to GODS Truth, or to themselves, contrary to Promise, to Oath, to
public Edicts, to Law, whereby they were warranded to do as they did: more
of this matter, will I not answer, being of another nature, and cleared long
since from the crime of Rebellion, not only by just defense of their doing,
but also by the Proclamations and Edicts of Princes themselves. The other is
Bilson, in his Book of Christian subjecton, in defense of the Protestants in
other Countries, against the objection of the Jesuit, Page 332. affirming, that
subjects may defend their ancient and Christian liberties covenanted and agreed
upon by those Princes to whom they first submitted themselves, and were ever
since confirmed and allowed by the Kings that have succeeded, they may require
their own right, save their own lives, beseech, that they be not used as
slaves, but like subjects; like men, not like beasts; that they may be
convented by Laws, before judges; not murdered in corners, by Inqusitors. This
is also the judgment of Rivetus in his Commentary, Psalm. 68. which being
looked upon by you, will furnish a full answer to what ye have cited at length
from his Iesuita Vapulans. For betwixt Jesuiticall treasonable and pernicious
doctrine, and practices against Princes and Magistrates, refuted by him, and the
loyal and sound doctrine of Protestants, your selves know the difference and
opposition, like as it is clear as the Sun, by that short Confession, by the
Application thereof, to the times in this present Confession, by our public
Protestation, and by the Declaration exhibited to his Majesty's Commissioner,
that we mean not only mutual concurrence, and asistance in the cause of
Religion, but also to the uttermost of our power, to defend the KINGS Majesty
his Person and Authority. We would be glade, that ye and others were witnesses
to our private Prayers, and the most secret of our thoughts and affections,
concerning our loyalty to our dread Sovereign; so should ye either cease to
write in this sort against us, or be forced to write against your own
Consciences.

3. When we justify our Conventions and Covenants, from their purposed ends,
we mean not only the last and most remote ends, but the nearest and immediate,
and if nothing in these can merit just censure, the Conventions and Covenants
no more in that which ye call the Object, nor in their ends, can be culpable:
what Aspersions have been put upon our Reformation, and Reformers, by the
malice of our Adversaries, can not be unknown to you. But we wish, that your
engynes and penns may be better employed, then to join with them in so bad a
cause, which we expect also from your prudence, considering the people and
place where ye live.

To the Third.
YE do well and wisely, that ye search not curiously into the minds of
Princes, and Reasons of State: but whether all his Majesty's subjects be
satisfied with the last Proclamation, needs, no deep search. For although
possibly some had been more pleased with a Proclamation, commanding the
Service Book, such especially who neither will see no errors in it, or have
publicly professed, that they have been groaning for it, yet the Protestation
of the Supplicants against it, as it gives most humble and hearty thanks to
His gracious Majesty, for what is granted; so it testifies upon undeniable
evidences, that the Proclamation is not a satisfaction of our just desires:
for, first, the Proclamation supposes the Service Book to be no Innovation of
Religion. 2. That it is not contrary to the Protestant Religion. 3. That the
Proclamation gives not order for discharging all the Acts made in favors of
the Service Book, especially that of the 19 of February, which gives unto it
so high Approbation, as serving for mantaining the true Religion, and to beat
out all Superstition, and no ways to be contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom;
but to be compyled and approved for the universal use and edification of all
His Majesty's Subjects. 4. It is so far from disallowing the said Book, that
it puts us in fear, that it shall be pressed in a fair and legal way, and
therefore, notwithstanding the Proclamation, the necessity of Covenanting,
which contains nothing contrary to the Acts of Parliament, nor to the duty
of good Subjects* but is the largest Testimony of our Fidelity to GOD, and
loyalty to our KING, (whatsoever it may seem to you to import) does yet
continue, that His Majesty may be pleased, to grant the full satisfaction of
our reasonable Petitions, and that our Religion, and Liberties, may be
preserved for afterward. Whosoever profess themselves, to be perfectly
satisfied with the Proclamation, do proclaim in the ears of all the Kingdom,
that they are better pleased with the Service Book and Canons, then with the
Religion, as it has been professed in this Land since the Reformation.

To the Fourth.
WE were assured, that your Demand proceeded from a Mistaking, and therefore,
according to our knowledge, did ingenuously, for your satisfaction, expound
unto you the mind of the Subscrivers; but find now, that we have labored in
vain, at your hands, from which we have received this Reply; unto which,
concerning the first Miss-interpretation, we answer: 1. That although we do
neither use threatenings, nor obtrude our Interpretation upon you, as bearing
any obligatory Power, yet pardon us, that we march you not, and put you not in
the Balance with the greatest part of the Kingdom, both Ministers, and others,
in whose name we recommend this Interpretation unto you, by all fair Means,
and force of Reason: and in so doing, we are so far from the breach of our
Solemn Vow, and Promise, that we esteem this to be no small proof of that
godliness, and righteousness, wherein we are bound, by our Covenant, to
walk. 2. The autori^ative judgment of our Reformers, and Predicessors, is
evidenced, not only by the Confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament, but
also by the Books of Discipline, Acts of General Assemblies, and their own
Writs; wherein, if ye will, ye may find warr^nd for this Interpretation; and in
respect whereof, it is public ratione medii, besides those midses of
Scripture, of Antiquity, and of the Consent of the Reformed Kirks, which are
named for midses by you.

Concerning the 2 Missconstruction, it is no marvel that Prejudices, and
Preconceived Opinions, possessing the mind, make men to fall upon
Interpretations of their own; but in the South parts of the Kingdom, where many
learned and judicious men, both Pastors, and Professors, were assembled, at the
first subscriving thereof, we remember of none that did fall into that
Misstake. And the two sorts of Novations, such as are already introduced, and
such as are supplicated against, are so punctually distinguished, that there is
no place left to Ambiguitie: but on the contrary, the Novations which we
promise to forbear for a time only, cannot be supposed in the following
words, to be abjured for ever, as Popish Novations. 2. Upon a new examination
of the words, ye perceive, that the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy, are
condemned as erroneous Corruptions, because we promise, to labor, to recover
the former purity and liberty of the Gospel: unto which our Answer is, that
it appears, that you will have all the Covenanters against their intention,
and whether they will or not, to disallow, and condemn, the Articles of Pearth,
and Episcopal Government, lest they be tried in a General Assembly: but it is
known to many hundreds, that the words were purposelie conceived, for
satisfaction of such as were of your judgment, that we might all join in one
heart, and Covenant, for establishing Religion, and opposing Erroures. And for
your Argument, whether the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy, be against the
purity and liberty of the Gospel, or not, which is not determined by these
words of the Covenant: but it cannot be denied, first, That if in a Free
Assembly, they be found to be against the purity and liberty of the Gospel,
they ought to be abolished: in the mean time, it being left free, by the words
of the Covenant, to all, who will, to stand to the defense of their
lawfulness. Secondly, how can it be denied, that many corruptions, contrary to
the purity and liberty of the Gospel, were they never so innocent in
themselves, have accompanied these Novations, such as the superstious
observation of Days, feriation and cessation from work, on those days,
Feasting, Guysing, etc. many gross abusses have entered in the Sacrament, upon
Kneeling before the Elements, and upon the lawless usurpation of Prelates: in
respect whereof, even they who allow of Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, may
swear to recover the purity of the Gospel. And thirdly, who can be so great a
stranger at home, as to deny, that many corruptions of Popery, and Arminianism,
have entered in, in the Kirk, and have been vented, and defended, in schools,
and Pulpits; by reason whereof, we are bound, every one of us, according to the
measure of our light, to labor for recovery of our former Purity? And
therefore, if you had cast your eyes upon the condition of this poor Kirk, as
ye have pryed narrowly, into the expressions of the Covenant, ye might have
spared both your own labor, and ours, and not labored to skarre both your
selves and others, with this shadow.

In your Argument, ad hominem, you should have considered, that whatsoever be
our judgment, as we are particular persons, yet, at this time, we were to be
taken, as Commissioners, from the whole company of Subscrivers, who, about this
point, are of different judgments: and if some of your own judgment, had
either come alone in our place, or had been joined in Commission with us, we
had anticipate your Objection: and this ye have been forced to see; and so your
selves, in propounding your Objection, have answered your own Syllogism, in
making us to say, that ye may swear and subscrive seeing ye think not these
things to be abjured in that Oath made Anno 1581: neither was it for you, to
inquire in our private Opinion, nor necessary for us, to make it known, but to
have conceived of our minds, according to our Commission, and the will of those
who sent us. Your Arguments need to be no impediments unto your swearing of the
Covenant. For upon your grounds, ye would not have sworn the short Confession,
any time bypast: yea, ye can not swear the Confession of any Kirk; nay, not
the Articles of the Creed, because of the diverse Interpretations of the
Article of Christ's descent into Hell; or swearing them in Scotland and England,
ye behoved to swear them in diverse senses. There be some words of the Lords
Prayer, as Give us this day our daily bread; and of the ten Commands, as the
words of the fourth Command, which are diversely understood; must Christians,
therefore, forbear to join in saying the Prayer, or swearing Obedience to the
Commandments? Neither for this do we admit any Ambiguity, or Equivocation:
the words certainly have but one true sense, and signification, but diverse
persons conceive and understand them, according to the different measures of
their light. Since then your Disputation is builded upon such a Supposition, it
must either fall to the ground, or hardly can any Confession of Faith, or
religious Covenant, be sworn. Offend not, therefore, if we in modesty, present
unto you, a dish of your own dressing; we mean, the like Argument, ad
hominem. The Rites and Ceremonies, which are not abjured in the negative
Confession, are not abjured in this late Covenant. But the Rites and
Ceremonies, which were concluded in Pearth Assembly, are not abjured, as ye
say, in the negative Confession, made Anno 1581: therefore, they are not
abjured in this late Covenant. The first Proposition is evident, because in the
late Covenant we are bound no further, concerning the negative Confession, but
to keep it inviolable: and therefore, what Rites are not abjured there, are not
abjured here. The second Proposition cannot be denied by you; for these twenty
years bygone ye have thouhgt your selves free of Perjury, notwithstanding of
the Oath in 1581, and of your conforming your selves, to the Ordinances of
Pearth. And whereas ye allege, afterward, as before, that our Supplications
are satisfied, the contrary is known, by our public Protestation, and by our
last Supplication, and Complaint, presented to his Majesty's Commissioner. And
urging of the Service Book, was a sufficient reason, for forbearance of Pearth
Articles, till an Assembly; at which time it may be determined, whether it be
expedient, that this Kirk be any more troubled with them. Neither needs your
Conscience to hinder you to subscrive the forbearance of these Novations, as if
swearing of forbearance, were a swearing disobedience to Authority: first,
Because the swearing of forbearance of a thing in your opinion, indifferent, in
the case of Scandal, and of sensible fear in others, of Superstition, is the
swearing of Obedience the Commandment of GOD, which forbids us, to destroy
him, for whom Christ died, although man should command the contrary. 2. Because
the Articles of Pearth were concluded, for satisfying the KING, and not to
press any man with the practice of them, as was openly professed unto the
Opponents, before the face of the whole Assembly: and because the Act it self
gives warrant, to forbear the practice at this time, when the memory of
superstition is revived which makes us to think, that they who have forborne
the practice of these Articles, since the superstitious service Book was
complained upon, make most truly conscience of obedience of the Act of
Pearth, and Parliament, ratifying the same, and are most conform unto the
Confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament, declaring, that Ceremonies ought
to be changed, when they rather foster superstition, then edify the Kirk,
using the same. Last of all; Ye say, ye can not swear forbearance, because ye
can not abstain from private Baptism, and private Communion; where we
perceive, that in your judgment, private Baptism and Communion, are not any
more things indifferent, but necessary, necessitate praecepti, in so far,
that the not using of them, is a contempt of the means, and a tempting of GOD.
By this your Doctrine, first, The state of the Question, anent Pearth Arricles,
is quite altered* for ye, and your Associates, did ever, to this time, allege
the Question, to be of things indifferent: but now ye find some of them so
necessary, that although the general Assembly of the Kirk, should discharge them,
yet ye behoved still, for conscience of the Commandment of GOD, to practice
them. If ye have the same judgment of kneeling before the Elements, and of
festival days, it comes to pass amongst us, which has been incident to
the Kirk, informer Ages, that things have been first brought in, as
indifferent, then urged as necessary. If confirmation also in your judgment,
be not indifferent, but necessary, we desire to understand, with what
conscience it has been slighted, and utterly neglected by the Prelates, these
20 years past? and how it is, that ye have carried so small regard to the
Canon of the Kirk, and Act of Parliament, and to the benefit of young
Children, as not to require, urge, and press the practice thereof, both in
your own charge, and throughout the whole Kirk? This would seem to be partial
dealing, to press some Ceremonies, and neglect other some; while both by the
same Canon of the Kirk, and Act of Parliament, are appointed. 2. Ye do hereby
condemn the practice of the Kirk of Scotland, from the time of Reformation,
till Pearth Assembly, and put no small guiltiness upon other reformed Kirkes,
who use not that at all, but rather abstain from it, as dangerous, which ye
now do profess, to be so necessary. 3. We wish you wisely to consider, whence
it is, and what can be the true cause, that ye living in that part of the
Kingdom, should be more pressed by the people, with the practice of private
Baptism, and Communion, then all the Kirkes in the Kingdom beside, where
these twenty years past, rarely any such motion has been made: is it not
because that Popery prevails there, and the people have a superstitious
conceat of Baptism and Communion, as absolutely necessary to Salvation; as if
GOD had tied his grace to the Sacraments; and children dying without Baptism,
and others without their last Viaticum, did perish? Thus ye minister the
Sacraments in private, as necessary, Necessitate praecepti; and the people
seem to desire, and receive them, as necessary, Necessitate medii: an Evil
very curable, in that city where the Assemblies of the people, for public
worship, are frequent, wherein the Sacraments might be ministered frequently
enough, with great solemnity, and edification, 4. And though we do not deny,
but Baptism privatlie ministered, by the Minister of CHRIST, according to the
Institution, be true Baptism, and, that a child thus privately baptized, be
not to be baptized again, (although it be true also, that private Baptism
makes way to this Error of Re-baptizing:) yet we hold, that the necessity of
the Commandment, stands only for Baptism in public, since no precept
requires Baptism, but when the ministration thereof can be had orderly, with
all the circumstances requisite; whereof this is one, that it be ministered in
the presence of that visible kirk, whereof the children are to be members: for
not only the minister of Baptism, and the parents of the children, but the
Congregation also has interest in the baptism of every member that enters
in their communion: which therefore, ought to be a public action, no less
then the cutting off of a rotten member, by Excommunication, ought to be done
publicly. 5. It is known, that private Baptism has bred, and fostred the
opinion of absolute necessity of Baptism, of Baptism by Women, and private
persons, of Baptism by supposition, etc. and, that the ministration of the
Sacraments, in private places, has been, and is, the ready way to bring people
to the contempt and neglect of the Sacraments in public, and to the
profanation thereof in private. 6. When all the forms of ministration of
Baptism, shall be compared, both that of the ancient Kirk, keeping Easter,
and Pentecost, for the solemn times of Baptism, and the other of the Popish
kirk, and other kirkes, not well purged of the dregs of Popery, ministering
Baptism and Communion at all times, in private places, and before few persons;
it shall be found, that no better course could be taken, then that which has
been wisely appointed and observed, in the Kirk of Scotland, since the
Reformation; that the Sacraments be ministered in the ordinary meetings of GODS
People; unto which they had regard, and not unto the places of material
Kirkes: which we add, lest any should think, that we entertained any
superstitious conceat of places.

To the Fifth.
TO the first Exception, we have even now answered, and need to add no farther,
concerning private Baptism and Communion. 2. We looked, that your Argument, ad
hominem, had been closed in the fourth Reply, and wish, what ye had to say,
against the Dispute, of Popish English Ceremonies, or any other Treatise of
that kind, or any of us in particular, had been keept to another time: for,
would any of us, refuse to swear the short Confession, because ye have
expounded some Articles thereof, contrary to our mind? Our desire is, that ye
keep your own meaning of the negative Confession, and we keep ours, according
to our diverse measures of light; and, that both sides promise, Forbearance, as
is required in the Covenant, which may very well stand both with your meaning,
and ours: of ours, there is no question; and of yours, there needs none to be
moved by you, since ye think them indifferent: and therefore, in such a case,
may promise, to forbear them. From this ground, and from the different use of
the word Discipline, and Policy, it is easy to answer, both your Sorites, and
Dilemma: for the late Covenant binds you to keep the former, according to the
common meaning of the Subscrivers; and not according to your Interpretation or
ours, in particular: and the horns of your Dilemma, may be turned about against
your selves: for we ask of you, Unto which of the members of the Distinction
do ye refer Episcopacy, and the Articles of Pearth? if they were abjured for
ever, before Pearth* Assembly, how is it that ye have admitted and practiced
them, since that time; for this were Perjury? And if they were not abjured, but
by the short Confession were left indifferent, why may ye not, for any
impediment ye have from that Confession, forbear now the practice of them? We
looked not for Velitations of this sort, which the change of Commissioners sent
unto you, might have prevented, but for some solid and grave reasons, why ye
could not subscrive the Covenant, whether presented from our hands, or the
hands of others, our Learned and reverend Brethren, of your practice and
judgment, who might have been sent unto you in our place. In the mean time,
because many are entangled with the word of Discipline, and Policy, we desire
the Reader to remember, that sometime the word is taken for the Rule of
Government of the Kirk, and censure of Manners, by Office bearers appointed by
Christ; and thus it is unchangeable: sometimes for the constitutions of
Counsels, and Acts of Parliament, about matters of Religion; and thus it is
alterable, or constant, according to the nature of particular Objects: and
thirdly, it is taken for the ordering of the circumstances, to be observed in
all actions Divine, and Humane; and thus it is variable. We appeal with you,
to the indifferent Reader, who is judicious, whether it be necessary for your
Subscription, to know our Opinion of such Rites and Ceremonies, as are not of
Divine institution. We have reason, [for any thing that ever we heard to the
contrary, these twenty years past] to cleave unto the words of the Covenant,
concerning such Rites as are brought into the Kirk without, or against the
word of GOD. The Blessing of Marriage (now the second time instanced) we
conceive, neither to be circumstance, it being neither time, place, order of
doing, nor any such thing, nor a Ceremony properly so called, more then the
Blessing of the People, commanded in the Law, and practiced before the Law, or
praying for a Blessing upon the Ordinance of GOD, that it may be sanctified
unto His People: we neither exalt Marriage so high, as with the Papists, to
think it a Sacrament; nor do we abase it so low, as to think it a paction or
contract, merely Civil, it being the Covenant of GOD, which cannot be
disolved by consent of the parties, as other civil Contracts may be: and
therefore, as we will not use it superstitiously, according to the prescript of
the Service Book; so will we not for the abuse of Popery, although it were a
Paction merely civil, it being so important, with-holde Ecclesiasticke
Benediction from it.

To the Sixth.
SIlence carries sometimes the appearance of consent, sometime it is from
weakness; and since ye know also, that it may at sometimes come from
wisdom, and moderation; why do ye not rather keep silence your selves, then
make such an interpretation of ours? We deny not, but Divines, both ancient and
modern, are against us, concerning the lawfulness of the things
contraverted: but we withal affirm, first, that Divines, both ancient and
modern, are against you also; and both may be true, for both are but
propositions indefinite, in a matter contingent. 2. That almost all Divines
universally are for us, and for the forbearance of things indifferent, in such
a case, which is the point urged by us, and cleared before. Secondly, we deny
not, but the Oath contains many other Articles but concerning that of the
Novations already introduced, if ye could have believed us, and so many
thousands as have subscrived, it contains no more, but the forbearance of
them, for a time; neither can any farther be extorted from the tenor of the
Covenant it self, according to your grounds. If ye will interpret it according
to the meaning which ye thought it had the last year, and which we urge you not
to change. and to promise forbearance, can neither be contrary to that duty
which ye ow to your flock, nor be disobedience to Authority, but a mean to
edify GODS people, and obedience to GOD.

To the Seventh.
FIrst, The reason propounded in the seventh Demand, for refuseing your
subscription, because ye supposed Pearth Articles to have been abjured, as
Popish, is answered to the full, and impediment put out of your way. This other
that ye propound, concerning our conception and meaning of the short
Confession, may be as easily removed, if ye will once believe, that we urge not
upon you our meaning but leave you to your own, till the matter be examined in
an Assembly. 2. Ye call some of those Novarions, necessary; but without
warrant of that Assembly which concluded then, as indifferent, and all the rest
you will have to be laud^ble: thus by progress of time, things formerly
indifferent, become necessary; and what was but lawful before, and had much
ado to gain that reputation, is now become laudable; where ye plainly
discover the cause of your unwillingnesse to subscrive, not so much to be the
commandment of Authority, as the necessity and excellency of the things
commanded. Till ye, therefore, change this opinion, ye cannot promise
forbearance, neither upon our dealing, nor at the commandment of Authority,
although forbearance should serve for the peace of the Kirk, and Kingdom.

To the Eight.
FIrst, we remit the reader to our Answer, and your Reply, which we hope,
shall be found no confutation. 2. We observe, that ye have not answered our
Argument, for our swearing the defense of the KING, and his Authority, with a
specification, which ye call a limitation; wherein we have followed the
Confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament, the KINGS Confession, and act of
Parliament; upon which ye will not do well, to fasten so foul Imputations,
and put so hard constructions, as ye do, upon us, for inserting in our
Covenant, what they have said before us. If our specification be right, why
censure you it? If it be wrong, why fasten ye not your censures upon the
fountain from which it is derived? the loyalty of our intentions, to maintain
the KINGS Person, and Honor, is so fully expressed, that it has given content
to those who are nearest his Majesty: and we should wrong, not only them, but
also the Covenant, and the subscrivers thereof, if we should make new
Declarations to others, of greater distance, who wrong both the KING, and
themselves, in craving them. 3. To do with a doubting Conscience, is a
grievous sin; but to make and multiply do^b^s, for hindering a good work, and
to oppose against a shining light, is no less grievous. Ye spoke before of a
limitation, and now ye have added precisly; as if the n^ming of one duty, were
the excluding of all other duties. We all, by our Oath of Alleadgeance, by his
Majesty's laws, and by other obligations, acknowledge, that we owe many other
duties to the KING, which were very impertinent to expres in this Covenant. 4
What kind of conference ye mean, whether by word or write, we know not; but
(while we were among you) ye know what notice you were pleased to take of us;
and we have no delight, to resent it*

To the Ninth.
FIrst, We are ashamed, to draw this Rug-saw of contention, to and fro, in a
continual Reciprocation, concerning the forbearance of Pearth Articles: and
therefore, forbearing to do so any more, we refer the Reader to our former
Answers. 2. We do not affirm, that the only reason, why kneeling was
appointed, was because all memory of superstition was past. There be indeed
other reasons expressed in the Act, but such as the Authors thereof may be
ashamed of, as both perverting the Text, Psalm. 95. as making kneeling to be
necessary, in every part of GODS Worship, and as giving matter to many
Treatises, proving kneeling before the Elements, to be Idolatry, according to
the Act, unto which we now refer you: but this we say, (which is manifest by
the Act it self) that in the case of present superstition, or fear thereof,
all other reasons had not been forcible, to enforce kneeling then, nor can
have force to continue kneeling now. This fear has been great, this year by
past, throughout the Kingdom, by reason of the many superstitions of the
Service Book, which, it may be, ye no more acknowledge, then ye do the
superstitious disposition of the people, because they are not that which they
were at the time of Reformation. 3. We would hear what malice it self can say
against the words of the Protestation, That it shall be lawful unto us, to
defend Religion, and the KINGS Authority, in defense thereof, and every one of
us of another, in that cause of maintaining Religion, and the KINGS foresaid
Authority, and to appoint, and hold meetings, to that end; like as our
Proceedings have been in themselves most necessary and orderly means, agreeable
to the laws and practice of this Kirk and Kingdom, to be commended, as real
duties of faithful Christians, loyal subjects, and sensible members of the
body of the Kirk and Kingdom, and tend to no other end, but to the
preservation of Religion, and maintenance of the KINGS Authority. To your
interrogatoures, (which ye seem to propone, rather to be snares to us, then
for satisfaction to your selves) we answer once for all in general, that if
this were the opportunity of that disputation, we shall be found to deny
nothing unto Authority of that which the word of GOD, the law of Nature, and
Nations, the Acts of Parliament, these Royalists, sound Divines, and loyal
Subjects, give unto Kings and Princes GODS Vicegerents on Earth; and that not
from respect to our selves, but to the Ordinance of GOD, by whom Kings reign.
But seeing so often and so instantly, you press us in this point, ye force us
mutually to propone to you such Questions, as, it may be, ye will have no great
delight to answer. 1. We desire to understand of you, whether ye allow, or
disallow, the Service Book, and book of Canons? if ye disallow them, as an
innovation of Religion, why have ye not either joined in supplication with the
rest of the Kingdom, or made a supplication of your own, against them, or some
other way testified your Dislike? Next; whether it be pertinent for men of your
place and Quality, to move Questions of State, touching the Power of Princes,
and Liberties of Subjects, after His Majesty's Commissioner, and wise
Statesmen, have received Satisfaction of the Subjects, for suppressing such
motions as yours? 3. Whether do the Subscrivers more tender His Majesty's
honor, by supposing his constancy, in profession of Religion, and equitable
Disposition, in ministration of Justice; or ye, who suppose he shall fall upon
his Religious and Loyal Subjects, with force of Arms, contrary to both? 4.
Whether the joining of the whole Kingdom, in the Subscription of the Covenant,
or the entertaining of Division, by your writing, preaching, and threatening of
your People, otherwise willing to join, be a more ready mean to settle the
present Commotions of the Kirk, and Kingdom? 5. If the Prelates, and their
Followers, laboring to introduce Popery in the Land, make a Faction by
themselves, or as the Guisians in France, did abuse His Majesty's name, in
execution of the bloody Decrees of Trent, (which GOD forbid) we ask, Whether
in such a Case, the lawful defense of the body of the Kingdom, against such a
Faction, be a resisting of the Magistrate, and a taking Arms against the KING?
If ye affirm it to be, is not this to take part with a Faction, seeking their
own ends, against the commonwealth of the Kirk, and Kingdom, and honor of the
KING? If ye say not, Why then sinde ye fault with our Protestation, of
defending the Religion, Liberties, and Laws of the Kingdom, of the Kings
Authority, in defense thereof, and every one of us of another, and in that
cause, as if it were an unlawful Combination against Authority? 6. Whether do
ye think Christian Magistrates to be of so absolute and unbounded power,
notwithstanding of any promise or paction made with the Subjects at their
Coronation, or of any Law made for establishing their Religion and Liberties,
that there is nothing left, but suffering of Mar^yrdome, in the case of public
Invasion, of their Religion and Liberties? If ye think, that any defense, is
lawful, why misconstrue ye the Subscrivers of the Covenant? If not, how can
ye be free of Flattery, and of stirring up Princes against their loyal
Subjects, for such ends as your selves know best? We verily believe, that ye
shall report small thanks, either of so good and just a KING, or of so
duetifull Subjects, for entering within these Lists. It is enough, that such
Questions be agitated in the Schools, and that with as great prudency, and as
circumspectly as may be.

To the Tenth.
FIrst, ye take us in our fourth Replye to be the penners of the Covenant, and
yet will rather wrest the words of it, to your own meaning, then receive the
Interpretation thereof from us: for we prejudge not your liberty of conception
of that short Confession, but permit it to your selves, whatsoever may be the
private meaning of some who have sub^crived; yet there is nothing in the late
Interpretation that c^ndemneth the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy, as
Popish Novations. Ye may voice and reason in an Assembly as freely concerning
them, and give your judgment of them, without prejudice, notwithstanding of
your Oath, according to your own grounds, as you would have done at the
Assembly of Pearth. 2. We hop^ ye be not so ignorant of the estate of the
Kirk, neither will we judge so uncharitably, as to think you so corrupt, that
in your opinion there is nothing has entered in the Kirk, since that time,
designed by you, beside Episcopacy, and the Articles of Pearth, which can be
thought prejudicial to the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel.

To the Eleventh.
FIrst, ye find fault with us, that we have not upon this occasion, given you
that testimony which we owe to you, of your sincerity, in professing the
truth; and therefore, to supply our defects, have taken an ample Testimony to
your selves, of pains in disputing, in wrytting, and preaching against Popery,
in processing of Papists, and in doing all things which can be expected from
the most zealous, of frequent prayer to GOD, of humbling your selves before
him, of your holiness of Life, and Conversation, etc. which have made us who
were desirous to hear that Testimony, rather at the mouths of others, that we
might be no more challenged as deficient in that kind, but give unto you your
deserved praise, to inquire in matters; whereupon, if we would believe the
report of others, we hear, that for all your pains, Papists, and Persons
Popishly affected, are multiplied, and Papistry increased in your town, more
then in any other town of the Kingdom, and no less under your Ministry, then
any time before, since the Reformation; that there be in private houses Messes,
Crucisixes, and other monuments of Idolatry; that ye have not many converts
from Popery; that Jesuits, and Priests; are countenanced there; that your
People at home, and your Magistrates abroad, complain, that ye are but too
sparing of your pains in preaching, and often fill your places with Novices:
but this we are sparing to believe, and wish, that the not employing of your
Tongues, and Pens, in the defense of the Service Book and Canons, which are
so pestred with Popery, [if the seeds of Romish Heresy, Superstition,
Idolatry, and Papal tyranny, come under that censure] and your willingness to
join with the Kirk and Kingdom, in Fasting and Humiliation, had been also
Testimonies of your sincerity against Popery. 2. The laudable means of
Preaching, Praying, etc. which we wish may be still in all faithfulness used
by you, may very well agree with the renewing of our Covenant with GOD; and
both being joined, have, in a short time past, produced more powerful effects,
to the comfort of many thousands, then all our Prayers and Preaching has done
for a long time before: which testify, That, as it is warranded by the Word of
GOD; so the motion has pr^ceeded from GOD. All the Arguments and Subtilties
that can be devised, will never make a People, (who at this time have found GOD
dwelling, and working in their hearts) to think the contrary. 3. The natural
inclination of people to Popery, and the persuasion of others, of their
disposition, may make* the people to conceive other ways of the Service Book,
and Canons, that ere it be long, they may be brought in, in a fair and legal
way: and therefore, it is necessary, for preventing of those, and other Evils
of that kind, that the Subjects join in a Covenant, both for themselves, and
their Posterity.

To the Twelfth.
FIrst; we have ever preached according to our measure, and have given example
of reverence to Authority, and the LORDS Service: but we neither acknowledge
the usurped Authority of prelates, for lawful Authority, nor the Service
Book, for the Lords Service. And therefore, it was so much the more
intolerable for the Prelates, without Authority from the Kirk, or Parliament,
to bring in the Service Book into GODS own house, upon the LORDS own Day.
Which makes it nothing strange, that people zealous of the Truth, and of the
Service of GOD, were stirred up, to oppose: and we are very confident, that
these who have opposed, do bear as loyal respect to the KINGS Majesty, and
will be as loath to provoke him to just wrath, as their opposites are. In the
mean time, why do ye not acknowledge, that the children were higher provoked
to wrath, by the Prelates, whom ye account reverend and holy Fathers? 2. As the
preservation of our own private Possession, from Invasion of others, belongs
to our selves, under the KINGS Protection; so the keeping of GODS House, from
Pollution, and Superstition, belongs to Authority, to the community of the
Faithful, and to every one in his own place, and order. 3. We told you before,
that we did no more allow violences of that kind, nor we did allow the ^oule
aspersions of Rebellion, Heresy, Schism and Perjury, put upon the Noblemen,
(and remnant Covenanters.) And where ye ask of us, Why these tumults are not
publicly by us condemned, and rebuked? we ask again of you, why ye did not
condemn and rebuke such dealing, since that is no less transgression, both
against the sixth and nynth Command, then the other is against the sixth? And
whereas ye are now so peremptory, in drawing a Declaration from us,
answearable to that which ye have given concerning the foresaid Aspersions and
Calumnies, we having no commission, to declare the minds of others in this
point, or to give Documents, for our own private judgment, do heartily
disallow every wrong of that kind. As for the Apology of D. JOHN FORBES of
Corse, seeing the wrong has been done not unto some few particular persons,
such as ye say have been wronged by some of the people; but unto the body of
the Kingdom, consisting of Noblemen, Barons* etc. who are highly offended
thereby, it were in us Presumption, and without the bounds of our Calling, to
take upon us, to receive any Declaration of that kind, especially wherein so
many things are reprovable; as first, That his bitter speeches were occasioned
by some printed Books, affirming, that Episcopacy, and Pearth Articles, were
Antichristian, and abominable. Supposing it were true, did he think the
Noblemen, and whole Covenanters, to be the Authors of those Books? And was this
dealing agreeable to that Christian meekness so much required of us before? The
Writers of those printed Books, are not the first who have spoken so: For
Master KNOX spared not, (in a Letter of his) to call this kneeling, A
Diabolical Invention. Secondly; The swearing of Forbearance of the practice of
Pearth Articles, and the Confirmation of the said Doctrine, which we neither
deny, nor affirm, to be imported in the old Covenant, but only in the
Interpretation thereof, we declare, That Promise is only made, to forbear for
a time, does not deserve so bitter a Censure as this apology bears upon us.
3. If the KINGS Majesty, Counsel, or the Subjects of Scotland, had asked his
opinion, and advice, he might have used the greater liberty. 4. It is ill
apologized, to call it a holy indignation, and worse defended, since it is
such a wrath, as works not the righteousness of GOD. 5. Whereas he desires
to be accounted in the number of these, qui proficiendo scribunt, and scribendo
proficiunt, we could wish, that he had profited better by writing, then he has
done by writing his Irenicum first, and now this his Warning, after his
Irenicum: for which if he make no better Apology, then confessing Asperity of
words, proceeding from an holy indignation, it will come to pass of his
Apology, as it fared with his Irenicum, unto which was applied fitly, what was
spoken in the like case,

Aut fabrum forceps, aut ars ignara fefellit (...) voluit cudere cudit (...).
6. Whereas ye desire us, to do the like, if ye mean of us personally, we
have declared our judgment, and shall be careful to approve our selves to
GOD, and the consciences of all men, in every such duty: and if ye mean us,
and those that sent us, we shall not faill to report unto them, what ye desire,
although our Commission from you had been the more acceptable, if ye had spoken
more reverently of our Confession and Covenant, then ye have been pleased to
do, in the words of your desire, and had put your hand unto the Covenant;
which would presently have joined us in a greater Affection, and made way for
union in judgment, and perfect peace, which is the desire of our Souls.

To the Thirteenth.
YE pretended a threefolde Scandal, which should follow upon your
Subscription: 1. The Scandal of Dissenting from other Reformed Kirks, and
famous Divynes. 2. The Scandal of Dissenting from Authority. 3. The Scandal
of Perjury. We answered, That the contraverted words of the Covenant being
rightly conceived, and interpreted according to their true meaning, and not
after the gloss which ye have put upon them, do put you out of danger of all
the three Scandalls, which ye seem to acknowledge of the first two, and may by
the like reason acknowledge of the third, of Perjury. We dispute not of the
lawfulness of the Oath given at your Admission, by what Authority it was
exacted, with what conscience it was given, nor how ye can answer for the
Scandal risen thereupon: but conceiving it according to your own grounds, none
of you will say, that ye have sworn the perpetual approbation and practice of
these things which ye esteem to be indifferent, whatsoever bad consequent of
Popery, and Idolatry, Superstition, or Scandal should follow thereupon: we
speak here only of things indifferent, in your own judgment; for ye have
declared before, that ye think the Ministration of the Sacraments in private
places, no more indifferent: and therefore, can not forbear the practice of
these, although your Ordinary, and other lawful Superiors, should will you to
do so; wherein Pearth Assembly, for which you stand, is wronged by you two
ways: 1. That ye differ in judgment from them, about the indifferency of the
five Articles: and next, that at the will of your Ordinary, and we know not
what other lawful Superiors, ye are ready to forbear the practice of these
things which the Assembly has appointed to be observed. What Oaths ye have
given at your admission, we know not, because there is no Ordinance made,
Civil, or Ecclesiastic, appointing any such Oath, and because the Prelates,
who arrogated that power, presented to the intrants diverse models of Articles,
to be subscrived, dealing with some more hardly, and with others more
favorably, according to their own diverse motivs, and considerations. For some
immediately after Pearth Assembly, without any warrant from the Kirk or
Parliament, were made to swear at their Admission, that they should both in
private and public maintain Episcopal Jurisdiction, and in their private and
public Prayers, commend the Prelates to GODS merciful Protection; that they
should subject themselves to the Orders that presently were in the Kirk, or by
the consent of the said Kirk, should be lawfully established. The word
lawfully, was not in the Principal first subscrived, [as we have learned] and
if it had been expressed, it is all one, for the Superiors were judges to this
lawfulness and unlawfulness. We will not labor to reconcile every Oath given
by Ministers, at their entry with the present Covenant; but wish, and exhort
rather, that they may be recalled, and repented of, as things for which they
can not answer before a general Assembly.

To the Fourteenth.
IF the words of the Covenant be plain, concerning the mere forbearance, and
speak nothing of the unlawfulness, no man's thoughts can make a change. 2. By
this Reply ye wrong your selves, in forging from the words of the Covenant,
impediments, and drawing stumbling blocks in your own way, to hinder your
subscription: ye wrong the subscryvers, in changing the state of the question,
and in making a divorce betwixt Religion and the KINGS Authority, which the
Covenant joineth together, hand in hand: and, most of all, ye wrong the KINGS
Majesty, in bringing him upon the stage, before his Subjects, in whose minds
ye would beget, and breed, suspicions of opposing the truth, of making
innovation of Religion, and of dealing with his Subjects, contrary to his Laws
and Proclamations, and contrary to the Oath at his Coronation. We are not here
seeking inscitiae (...), or starting hole of ignorance, or of the smallest
disloyalty of affection; but would willingly decline that for the present,
which neither his Majesty's wisdom, nor the prudence of Statsmen, nor the
modesty of good subjects, will allow you or us to dispute. The Crowns and
Scepters of Kings, would be more tenderly touched, then the ordinary subjects
of School disputes. The naked naming, and bare proposal of certain
suppositions, such (as some are made by you) can not but reflex upon Authority,
and sound harsh in the ears of all his Majesty's good subjects, who wish, that
he may long and prosperously reign over us. 3. His Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel, has proven more favorable to this cause of maintaining the
reformed Religion, then many Pastors, whom by reason of their place and
Calling, it beseemed to go before others; and although according to their
wonted custom, they gave warrant, to make his Majesty's Proclamation, yet on
good grounds, remonstrated unto them by the Supplicants, they willingly
refused their approbation thereof; hoping that his Majesty should be moved to
give greater satisfaction thereafter: and this is not our saying, but a
public doing, before many honorable witnesses; of which number some were
directed unto you; whose report ye have no reason to call in question. 4. It
becomes us, to judge charitably of the intentions of our Superiors; and most
of all, of the intentions of our dread Sovereign. Yet, if that hold good which
the supplicants have offered to prove, that the Service Book, and Canons,
contain a real innovation of Religion, we must judge otherwise, de condition
operis, of the matters contained in the Book, then de intention operantis, of
his Majesty's intention; although the intention of the Prelates, and their
Associates, the Authors and contrivers of the Books, be most justly suspected
by us. 5. It is no delight to us, and can be but small comfort to you, to
mention the wrongs, which by you are done to us all who have joined in this
Covenant, and do adhere to the Religion as it was reformed in this land; in
your estimation and writings, we are Rebellious, perjured, heretics,
schismatics, blind guydes, seducers, miserable interpreters, ignorants: shall
such men as these be your revere^d Brethren. Is this your meekness and
charity? Is this the duty ye expect from us? But setting these aside, ye have
wronged us, in withholding your hand and help from so good a Cause, of purging
Religion, and reforming the Kirk, from so many gross abuses, and opposing all
those who have modestly labored for Reformation. Your speeches in private, in
your chambers, beds of sickness, and in your missives, and in public, at
tables, and in Synods, which are come to our knowledge; we wish rather should
be remembered, and repented of, by your selves, then be recited by us, who
desire not to work you any trouble. 6. Although there be a perpetual harmony
betwixt the Word and Works of GOD, far contrary to that which we find to be
amongst the Children of men; yet often it comes to pass, that the Word and
Warnings of GOD, which we hear with our ears, are not believed, till we behold
with our eyes, the plain Commentaries thereof, in His Works. Many Proofs, and
notable Documents, have been observed of the Finger of GOD, in the Work in
hand, the Characters of the great Works of GODS, more then ordinary Providence,
since the beginning, are legible here. Then did the LORD begin this work, when
the Adversary was raised to a great hight, and become intollerably insolent.
The beginnings were small, and in the eyes of the World, contemptible; such as
use to be the beginnings not of the works of men, but of the Magnificke works
of GOD: the power of GOD sensible in the hearts of many, and manifested by the
joy; the tears and cries of many thousands, at the solemn renewing of this
Covenant, has been a matter of admiration, and amazement, never to be
forgotten, to many wise and ancient Pastors, and Professors, who did also find
an unwonted flame, warming their own breasts; the plots, and workings of the
Adversary, have wrought against their own Projects, and have served for our
ends, more then all that have been thought, or done by our selves; that we may
justly say, what they devised, for evil, the LORD has turned to good; many
thousands conveened, diverse times, in one place, have been keept in such
order, and quietness, without the smallest trouble, in such soberness, and
temperance without excess or riot, that hardly can History furnish a Parallel:
and what effects there be already throughout the Land, of Piety in Domesticke
worship, in observing the exercises of Religion, in public, of soberness in
diet and apparel, and of Righteousness and Concord, we trust shall be
sensible by the Blessings of GOD upon us, and shall be examplary to the
Posterity. These we present unto you, and unto all, as a Commentary, written by
the LORDS own Hand; wishing again, that neither ye nor others, be found
fighting against GOD. Who so is wise, and will observe these things, even they
shall understand the loving kindness of the LORD, Psalm. 107. 43. LORD, when
thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed,
for their envy at the People, Isai. 26. 11.

Master ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Minister at Leuchars. Master DAVID DICKSON
Minister at Irwin.


DUPLYES Of the MINISTERS and PROFESSORS of ABERDENE, TO The second Answers of
some Reverend Brethren, CONCERNING THE LATE COVENANT.

If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: Let
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. JEREM. 15. 19. Honor
all men: love the Brotherhood: fear GOD: Honor the KING. 1. Pet. 2. 17.



To the Unpartiall READER.
IT may be you have not, as yet, heard the true relation of our proceedings,
and carriage, toward those two reverend Brethren, who came lately hither, to
recommend to us, and our People, the late Covenant: We declare therefore to
you, that we hearing of their coming, and intention, and being of a contrary
mind, resolved, that before we should give consent, that they should preach to
our people, we would propone to them, by way of certain Demands, the chief
reasons which made us to be averse from their proceedings; promising to admit
them to our pulpits, if they should give us satisfaction, concerning the late
Covenant. We intended not to print these Demands at the first; but afterward
considering how much our people might be confirmed by them, in that pious
resolution which they have, to continue in the obedience of the Laws of this
Church and Kingdom, concerning Episcopacy, and those things which were
concluded in Pearth Assembly; we thought good to put them to the Press, but
determined not to make use of them, by divulgating them, except we saw that our
people stood in present need of them; which indeed came to pass: for upon
Friday, the twenty of Iullie last, these reverend Brethren came to this Town,
and having that same night received our Demands in writ, they returned their
Answers unto them on Saturday following, late in the evening: but they came
no^ to our hands, who replied unto them, until Sunday in the morning. Neither
had we leisure to read, or consider, until both the Sermons were ended in our
Churches. Wherefore we did meet together that day, at four hours afternoon,
that we might peruse them. And at that same time, hearing that these reverend
Brethren had preached in audience of dyverse of our people, conveened in the
court of a Nobleman his lodging, not having obtained our consent thereto, and
in their Sermons had used a form of answering to our Demandes, which they did
publicly read, affirming, that they had given full satisfaction to us, in a
written copy of their Answers, which they had sent to us: and by that means,
had labored to dissuade and draw our People from their obedience unto the
Articles of Pearth, and the Laws of this Kingdom ratifying them: we knowing
how insufficient their Answers were, to give satisfaction to any, who would
duly ponder our Demands, gave license to the Printer to devulgate them, and
the next day did write our Replies to their Answers, intending to put them to
the Press on tuesday. But we were earnestly entreated by a noble Man, to send
back to them the copy of their Answers, that they might revise and perfect
them, and also to delay the printing of our Replies until Friday following.
Which we willingly granted. But wherefore this was desired of us, you may
conjecture; seeing they neither added, nor diminished, nor altered any thing in
their Answers. Upon the next Friday at night, we gave our Replies to the
Printer: and to these reverend Brethren, who returned not to this City, until
Saturday following, we sent a copy of our Replies in write, on the LORDS Day:
unto which we received not their Answers, until they came from the Press, to
wit, on Tuesday the fourteenth of August: that is, eyghteene days after they
had received our Replies. What success these Brethren had in their Sermons,
which they preached here, upon two several LORDS Days, it is sufficiently
known: neither have they reason to talk so much of it as they do, in their
Preface to the Reader. The first of these days, some few who were thought to
be that way inclined before, subscryved their Covenant: But the next LORDS Day,
they scarce prevailed with any at all. And a great many, who heard them both
these days, professed, that they returned from their Sermons, more averse from
the Covenant, then they were before. Now good Reader, we present to thee our
Replies, to their second Answers; which for shortness cause, we have called
Duplyes: we pray you consider them unpartially. And if you reap any benefit by
perusing them, let it no^ be ascrived unto us, but to the invincible force of
divine Truth. We conclude with Zer^babell, saying, Blessed be the GOD of
Truth: And let all the People shout, and say, Great is Truth, and mighty
above all things.

To our Reverend Brethren Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON* And Mr. DAVID DICKSON.
THat your Answers, Reverend and Dear Brethren; have not in any degree
satisfied us, we impute it not to your weakness, whom we know to be able Men,
and much exercised in the matters debated betwixt us: but we impute it to the
weakness of your cause, and to that inabilitie which is in all men, as well as
in you, to bear out against the Truth. We are sorry that ye are not so
respective, and favorable, in your judgment of us: for ye plainly declare in
your Preface, that ye suspect us of prejudice: and that for two reasons. The
first is, that our Demands, which ye conceived had been merely intended for
you, were published before your coming in Print: as also, that our REPLIES
were Printed before we received your last Answers to them. When^e ye conclude,
that we were rather aiming at victory, moved thereto by prejudice, then at
satisfaction by searching of the Truth. This reason is grounded upon a
mistaking: for although our Demands at the first, were intended for you only,
yet afterward we resolved to Print them, as also our REPLIES, (the Printing
whereof did nowayes depend upon your second Answers.) not for love of
contention, nor desire of vict^ry (GOD knows) but for such reasons, as we
have expressed in our Preface to the unpartiall Reader, whom we hope we have
satisfied in this point. Your other reason is, that the grounds of your Answers
to us, have proven satisfactory to others; who for Age and Learning, are prime
men of this Kingdom: and to whom our modesty will not suffer us, to prefer
our selves. Far be it from us to be so presumptuous, as to prefer our
selves to so many Learned and worthy Divines: and as far be it from us, to
measure the soliditie, and sufficiency of your Answers, by the Habilities or
Induments of these, who have acquiesced in them. If this your reason were good,
the Papists might more probably accuse us of prejudice, (as indeed they
unjustlie do) because their Answers to our Arguments, have proven
satisfactorie to many thousands of those, who for profunditie, and subtilitie
of wit, are inferior to none of the World: but we regard not this slender
motive, remembering these words of our Savior, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, because Thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes: even so, O Father, for so it seemed good in
Thy sight. Besides, if ye compare the Divines, Ancient and Modern, who are of
our judgment, with these who favor your opinion, either in number, or in the
excellency of their gifts, ye shall find that in this, the advantage is
greatly ours. In the mean time ye shall know, that we can bring far better
reasons to free our selves of prejudice, then these which ye have brought
against us, to wit, the soliditie of our Arguments, which have put you to such
straits, (pardon us to say that, which every one who have eyes may see) that
often times ye do not so much, as attempt to answer them, being glad to pass
them by, with the show of an Argument in contrarium, or some other like shift:
our humble and earnest attestations, in calling GOD, the only competent
Judge; as witness of our sincerity, in the inmost thoughts of our soul; our
seriously professed Resolution, to concur with you, if we should get
satisfaction from you, the modesty, ingenuitie, and peaceablenesse of our
writings to you, and on the contrary, your too great disdainfulnesse and
asperitie in your second Answers; bewraying not only the weakness of your
minds, far by our expectation, but also the weakness of your cause to
unpartiall Readers, who ascrive this to the pungent force of our Arguments;
judging, that they have made you somewhat more cholerike then you were before.
To this we will add the great reluctance, which some of the most Judicious
Subscribents did find in their Consciences, before they subscrived your
Covenant; together with the Limitations, and Reservations, wherewith they
subscrived it; evidently arguing their* strong apprehension, of the dangerous
ambiguitie and haske sounding of the words of the late Covenant: so that even
these who are now joined with you, have been much affrighted with those things
which terrify us. As for your Protestation in the end of your Epistle, that ye
can no more be brought to our mind, then ye can be drawn from the profession
of our Religion, as it has been reformed, sworn, etc. Although this imports
no small prejudice, possessing and overruling your minds; yet looking to the
invincible force of that Truth which we mantaine, we even yet hope that at
last it shall prevail with you; espe^iallie considering that our con^roversie
is not concerning the Reformed Religion; whereunto we as sincerely adheare as
any whatsoever, but concerning the equity of that form of Covenant which ye
lateli^ made. Wishing you and all others, to adheare truly and sincerely, to
the same true Religion; and to all the duties which in it are recommended to
you: we most humbly, and earnestly pray the Almighty GOD, to pity his
Church in this Kingdom, and to unite all our hearts in Truth and Peace, in
these most dangerous days: which although they be to you days of gladness,
as ye profess, yet to those who love the peace of Sion, and the tranquillity
of this Kingdom, they are sad and melancholious days, in respect of the
black clouds of GODS wrath, hanging over our heads, and threatening us with
storms of fearful Calamities: which we pray the Almighty GOD* to avert.

THE FIRST DUPLY.
IN our Disputes against the Papists, (which have been frequent, and by GODS
grace not unfruitful,) as we have learned, that to multiply objections against
the Truth, is a thing easy, as ye say, but fruitless and vain: so also we
have learned, that to multiply Evasions, against solid Arguments brought for
the Truth, is a thing no less easy, but altogether unprofitable: which we
pray you take heed to. How forcible are right words? but what does your arguing
reprove? JOB 6. 25.

2. Ye say, that our objection, against your calling, and the warrant of your
coming to us, was framed and published in Print, before it was proponed unto
you, and ere your Answer could be had. Indeed our Demands were at the Press
at your coming, that they might be in readiness; but were not published,
before your selves in your Sermons did publicly read them, and dispute against
them, in audience of such of our People as were there present for the time;
albeit that written copy of them was delivered to you only, and not at that
time communicated by us to any other.

3. Your Authority which ye acclaim, is neither from his Majesty, nor
warranded by Act of Parli^ment, nor by the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel, nor
by any National Synod of this Kingdom, nor by any Judicatory established in
it. And both in your first Answer, as also now again ye profess, that ye came
not hither to us^rpe the Authority, of any Civil or Spiritual Judicatorie. As
for your multitude, (which ye call almost the whole Kirk and Kingdom) it being
destitute of Authority foresaid, makes no warrant of ordinary calling.
Therefore, ye seem to pretend an extraordinary calling from GOD, alleging an
extraordinary necessity at this time, which truly we see not in any such
degree, as may deserve and warrant so great a change from the received order,
which is publicly by Laws established in this Kirk and Kingdom. That saying
of the Apostle* Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works, which ye allege for your extraordinary employment, imports not an
extraordinary calling, but an ordinary duty, to be performed by all
Christians, according to their Callings.

4. The Word of GOD, and the Canons of Counsels, do so permit to Pastors, the
care of the whole Kirk, as they must remember to do all things, decently and
in order, and not to interpone themselves in their Brethrens charges, and
against their will. And praised be GOD, there was not any Combustion, Error or
Confusion, in these places of our charges, as ye do allege: Neither did our
People stand in need, of such help from you. And if ye mean the Combustion of
our National Kirk, we do think your remeed not convenient; as being, in our
judgment, not agreeable to the right way of Truth and Peace.

5. Whereas ye allege, that if some members of this Kirk, had not cared more
kindly, in this time of common danger, then others have done, the whole body
had been ere now dangerously, if not desperately, diseased; we answer, that we
most heartily wish, any disease of this Church, to be rymously prevented and
cured. But with all we wish this to be done without a rupture, and such a
dangerous division: chiefly seeing our Church is not infected with any such
Errors, nor is in such dangers, as may give just occasion, of so fearful a
division: which in it self is a sore disease, and from which in holy
Scripture, we are often, and very earnestly dehorted. Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, in his Epistle to Novatian, recorded by Eusebius, Lib. 6. Historiae
(...). Cap 37. worthily says, You ought rather to have suffered any thing
whatsoever, for avoiding of cutting as under the Kirk of GOD: and Martyrdom
for keeping the Kirk from Schism, is no less glorious, the^ which is
suffered, for not committing Idolatry. And in my opinion also it is greater;
for in suffering Martyrdom for not committing Idolatry, a man suffers for
one, even for his own soul; but here a man suffers Martyrdom for the whole
Kirk.

6. Ye affirm, that we have no reason to complain of your carriage, here
toward us, in respect ye for your Sermons preached to our People, made choice
of vacant hours, that they might attend the ordinary times of Worship. But
indeed this satisfies not our complaint: for we justly complained of your
preaching to our People, without our consent, at any hour; and of your
laboring, to make them subscrive the late Covenant, before ye had given
satisfaction to us, concerning the equity of it.

7. Ye reprove us for these harmless words of a confederation, and negative
Confession. That little Confession, was long ago called negative, a part
majore. And as for that other word, it is well known to al those who are
expert in our Mother tongue, and in the Latin, that covenanting, and
confederation, do signify one, and the same thing: and therefore, both these
words are alike respectfull, in our judgment. Whereas ye say, that your
Covenant is made with GOD, and do call it his Covenant: and likewise for
justifying your swearing, and subscriving thereof, do bring some places of
Scripture, wherein mention is made of a Covenant, and Oath, betwixt GOD and his
People; we shall then allow the same name, and respect unto your Covenant, when
ye shall make it manifest, that your Covenant in all points therein contained,
has no less warrant from the written word of GOD, then that Covenant which
the Israelites did swear in the days of JOSHUA, Joshua 24. verse 25. and in the
days of JEHOIADA the Priest, 2. Kings 11. v. 17. and in the days of King ASA,
2. Chron. 15. v. 15. and that which is mentioned by Isaiah, 44. v. 5.

8. As we are still informed, that some have fled the Country, and some have
subscrived for fear; so no Pastors in our knowledge have gone to Court, for
the causes alleged by you. We do not presume to judge of the Consciences of
men, and we wish you to judge more charitably, of these reverend Prelates, then
ye do. The occasion of this present storm was pretended to be the
introduction of the Books of Service, and Canons, and the high Commission.
These causes are now removed; and yet the storm continues so vehement, (as ye
seem to grant) that the Bishops have just fears warranding their flight, to
save their persons; which we judge to be too great violence, for any such
cause, against persons in so sacred a calling.

9. We shall assuredly, (by the grace of GOD) still contribute, as ye desire,
our prayers, and all other means agreeable to our consciences, for extinguishing
of the present combustion. And for that effect, every one of us shall secretly,
and humbly, mourn before the LORD, and shall search and try our ways, and
turn unto the Lord. And as we have already humbled our selves publicly, with
Fasting and Mourning for that effect, so are we ready in time to come, to do
the like, when it shall be indicted or allowed by Authority, according to the
established order in this Kirk and Kingdom. Yea, also we are ready to join
with you in the late Covenant, so soon as we shall receive satisfaction to our
consciences, concerning the lawfulness thereof; which as we have protested
before, so do we yet protest, and profess.

10. The Reasons which ye touch in your first Answer, for proving that we
might without just offense to any, join with you in subscriving the Covenant,
are sufficiently answered in our first Replye. For, First, It is not yet
decerned in a National Assembly, whether your Interpretation added to the old
Covenant, be in all points sound or unsound; and therefore we have reason to
think, that this new Covenant, is not substantially one with the old: chiefly
seeing it adds to the old Covenant, not only your Interpretation of it, but
also a promise of forbearance of the practice of Pearth Articles, until they
be tried in an Assembly; and like-wise a Band of Mutual Defense, by force of
Arms, made without the KINGS privity and consent. Secondly, Your inference of
Mutual Defense, against all persons whatsoever, drawn from the words of the
old Covenant, is merely invalide. For nothing was pactioned or promised in the
old Covenant, without the KINGS Majesty his privity; but the Band of Mutual
Defense, against all persons whatsoever, in this your new Covenant, is without
the command or consent of the KING, to whom only the Sword is given in this
Kingdom, immediately by GOD. See to this purpose the words of KING James the
sixth of blessed Memory, in his Book entitled, The Law of free Monarchies, in
the English edition of his royal works, at London, Anno 1616. Page 206. That
which ye add concerning the General Band, is also little to the purpose, for
that Band had the KINGS warrant, whereas his Majesty does now forbid your
Covenant. Thirdly, Although the former Oath subscrived, did appertain only to
the persons of the subscrivers, all the days of their lives; yet you have in
your Interpretation, extended the Obligation thereof, to the present and
succeeding Generations in this land, without any warrant either from public
Laws, or from the words of the Oath it self: which also is a substantial
Difference betwixt that Oath, and your late Covenant. Whereas ye allege, that
the warrant which the old Covenant had from KING, Counsel, and Assembly,
remains virtually, and was never yet discharged; we answer, it remains
not, and that because KING James of blessed Memory, disalowed that little
Confession, in respect of the inconveniency of the multitude of Negatives, as
is clear by his Majesty's words, published in the printed sum of the
conference holden at Hampton Court, Anno 1603. And no former Act of Counsel,
made in the time of any former King, does sufficiently warrant our Consciences
to subscrive any Oath now, which seems to us to be disagreable to the Act of
Parliament; and which our present Dread Sovereign LORD, the KINGS Majesty, by
his public Proclamations; and other Intimations of his Royal pleasure,
forbids us to subscrive. And as for the Acts of these two Assemblies, which
did enjoine subscription to the said little Confession, they were relative to
the KINGS Mandate, which is now expired by his own Declaration, and with his
Royal breath, according to that common Maxim: Morte mandatoris expirat
mandatum. Extra. D^ officio and potestate judicis delegati, Cap. 19. relatum
est in glossa. For the injunction was given for that time only, as we
conceive* being warranded by the words of these Assemblyes.

11. These that were suspect of Papistrie amongst us, have not been urged by us
to subscrive that negative Confession; but only some Articles relative to the
National Confession. And as ^or such as receive degrees, in Philosophy, in
our Colleges, they do swear only to the true reformed Religion, as it is
publicly professed and preached, according to GODS word, in this Kirk of
Scotland, and established by public Authority, with a general abjuration of
all, both Popish, and other Heresies contrary thereto. And those who receive
degrees of Divinity, do more expressly swear to the Orthodox determinations of
the ancient Catholic Kirk, as is evident by the words of the Oath, whereof
the tenor follows.

E Go A. B. sancte and ex animo coram omniscio and omnipotente Deo consiteor
and profiteo sidem eam quae de sancta Trinitate, and Mediatore Emmanuele a
sanctis Patribus in sex primis OEcumenicis conciliis, contra Pauli Samosateni,
Sabellii, Arii, Macedonii, Apollinaris, Nestori^, Eu^^chetis, and Mon
thelitarum haereses proposita explicata and defensa est, esse vere Christianam,
orthodoxam, Catholicam, ex sacris Canonicis scripturis ha^stam; Symbolum quoque
sancti A* hanasii ut similiter orthodoxum me recipere. Item me ex animo
de^estari haeresin Pelaginam, ejusque reliquias Semipelagianas, and eas
haereses quae Imaginibus aut ulli merae creaturae religiosam concedunt
ad^rationem. Item, me monarchiam Papae Romani in universam Ecclesiam, and ejus
cum in spiritualibus tum in temporalibus primatum, and judicii Papalis in
religionis controversiis infallibilitatem, tanquam antichristiana deliramenta
rejice^e. Omnes etiam alias haereses tum ol^m invectas, tum recens sub Romani
Pontificis tyranmde natas anathematizo. Agnosco Spiritum sanctum in Canonicis
V. and N. Testamenti scripturis per Prophetas, Evangelistas, and Apostolos
loquentem, esse nobis unicum, supremu^, infallibilem, and ordinarium omnium de
fide vitaque Christiana contraversiarum Iudicem. Et S. scripturam Canonicis V.
a^ N. Testamenti libris comprehensam esse unicam, certam, stabilem, perfectam,
totalem regulam fidei vitaeque Christianae, tum quoad textum, tum quoad
interpretationem authenticam seu divinae authoritatis; and hanc quae hodie in
Ecclesia Scoticana palam and publica authoritate ex sacro D E I verbo
proponitur decredendis, sperandis, amandis, doctrinam esse orthodoxam,
Catholicam. Et ipsam hanc Ecclesiae Scoticanae doctrinam, ^e ad extremum usque
vitae meae hali^um constanter per D E I gratiam professurum and pro ^^^
vocatione defensurum sancte promitto, juro. Insuper almae h^i^ Universitati c^i
hunc scholasticum ( docturae Theologicae) honore^^ d^^ebo, me nunquam ingratum
futurum, sed semper ei ex animo fa^turum, ejusque commoda, pie serio, sedulo,
fideliter promoturum sanct^ etiam ^oram eodem omniscio and omnipo^ente D E O
promitto, juro.

We, who were graduated here, did swear this Oath, and now, for satisfaction
of others, we all do sincerly attest GOD, that we do, and shall adh^are to
it, constantly, all the days of our life.

12. Ye do again object to us, that we have presumed to disallow your
expl^nation of the late Covenant, which has been publicly allowed by his
Majesty's Commissioner: adding thereto, that we will have the Kingdom guilty
of combination against Authority, and that we will not have the KING to be
satisfied; whence ye ^nferre, that our dealing is more suitable to Papists, and
such incendiaries, then for us; who desire to prove good Patriots, in using all
means of pacification. But certainly ye wrong us: ^or what was done by his
Majesty's Commissioner, anent your Declaration and explanation of your
Covenant, is evident by his Grace own letter, lately written to us of that
matter; whereby his Grace has declared, that he was no ways contented
therewith, and that his Majesty has not received any satisfaction thereby. The
same is evident also, by his Grace own Manifesto, prefixed to our Demands, your
first Answers, and our first Replies; reprinted at Edinburgh, by his Gr.
special command. To the which Manifesto, or Declaration of his Majesty's high
Commissioner, we remit the Reader, for his full satisfaction, in this, and some
other points of your Answers.

13. We intend not to bear upon you, and your associates, (who take to your
selves the name of the Kingdom, here in this your Answer) guiltiness of
combination against Authority, as we have protested and declared, in the end of
our ^romer Replies: but in the tenderness of our Consciences, we do uprightly
^ignifie to you our scruples, which hinder us from approving or subsc^iving
your Covenant. And we are so free of that odious imputation, of taking part
with any Incendiaries, or imitating any proceedings of that kind; as we
heartily wish, and shall endeavor, to prove good Patriots, and Christians, in
such evident love of truth and peace, as it shall be manifest, that we neither
have been, nor shall be Authors, or Fomen^ers, o^ this miserable combustion.

14. Ye are sorry, ye say, that we should account your Covenant, to be a
Confederacy against the truth; and ye affirm, that ye labor with men, to
join with you in sincerity, and not through humane fears. Now, reverend
Brethren, in the fear of GOD, laying aside all humane fear, we do sincerely
declare, that if we thought your Covenant, in all points agreeable to the
^rue^h, we should make no opposition there^o. And we do heartily wish, that
according as ye do here profess, ^o indeed no man be threatened wi^h worldly
terroures, to go your way. We aim^ indeed, at the same end which ye profess,
to wit, at the Truth and purity of Religion, and peace of Church and Kingdom:
But we are not as yet persuaded, that your way is lawful and convenient, for
attaining to this end.

The II. DUPLY.
WE desire al troubles to be prevented by allowable means, but are not
persuaded to reckon in that number, this your covenanting, and conventions,
which we esteem to have been the occasion of much trouble. As concerning your
question, whereunto ye so earnestly require our Answer, to wit, whether we
would have received the B^okes of Service and Canons, or used such means, as
ye have used for avoiding them? ye shall know, that if we had been of your
judgment, concerning those Books, we would neither have received them, nor
yet used any means unlawful for opposing of them, (such we think your
Covenant and conventions, prohibited by Authority to be, until we be better
informed) but would have used humble supplication to his majesty, for removing
those evils: and if we had found no remeed thereby* would have resolved,
according to the practice of ancient Christians, either to ^^ee his Majesty's
dominions, or else patiently to suffer what^oever punishment it should have
pleased him to ins^ict. In the mean time, concerning those Books of Service
and Canons, we rest content with his Majesty's gracious Proclamation: and if
hereafter our opinion of them shall be asked by Authority, we shall sincerely
and unpartially deciare it.

2. Your urging of us again, with the saying of KING James, for^eth us to
manifest his meaning by his own words, perhaps contrary to your wish or
expectation. That most wise and religions KING, near the beginning of his
Book, concerning the Powder Treason, writes expressly, that such a rising up
of the body, pro aris, and focis, and pro patre patriae, ought to be according
to every ones calling and faculty. Which words at least do import, that the
moving of the Politic body, in whole, or in part, ought not to be against the
will and direction of the head. This is clear by that which the same KING has
written in his Book entitled, The true Law of free Monarchies, whereby many
strong Arguments, he does a^ length demonstrate, that in a free Monarchy,
(such he proves this his ancient Kingdom of Scotland to be) the Subjects for
no occasion or pretext whatsoever, may take Arms, without power from the KING;
and much less against him, whether he be a good KING, or an oppressor;
whether godly, or ungodlie; although the People have might and strength
humane. And comprehends the sum of all his discourse concerning this matter,
in these words following. Shortly, then, to Lo^d. edit. ann. 1616 page 200.
201.
take up in two or three sentences, grounded upon all these Arguments, out of
the Law of GOD, the duty and alleadge^nce of the People to their lawful KING:
their obedience, I say, ought to be to him, as to GODS Lieutenant in Earth,
obeying his commands in all things, except directly against GOD, as the
commands of GODS Minister; acknowledging him a judge set by GOD over them,
having power to judge them, but to be judged only by GOD, whom to only he
must give count of his judgment. Fearing him, as their judge; loving him as
their Father; praying for him, as their Protector; for his continuance, if he
be good; for his amendment, if he be wicked; following and obeying his lawful
commands, eschewing and fleeing his fury in his unlawful, without resistance,
but by sobbes and tears to GOD, according to that sentence used in the
primitive Church in the time of the persecution,

Preces and lachrymae, sunt arma Ecclesia: that is, Prayers and Tears, are the
arms of the Church. 3. Ye told us before, and now again do repeat it, that
the first part of the Act of Parliament 1585, is relative to another Act in
Queen Mary's time, forbidding Bands of Manrent. We knew that sufficiently
before ye told it, and passed by that part of your Answer, as not percinent
for our Argument: so that ye needed not now again, to put us in mind of it.
But we may justly challenge you, for not answering that which we objected,
concerning the second part of that Act; for it reaches farther, then that Act
made in Queen Mary's time, and of new statuteth and ordains, That in time
coming, no Leagues or Bands be made amongst his Majesty's Subjects of any
degree, upon whatsoever color or pre^ence, without his Highness or his
successoures privity and consent, had and obtained thereto; under the pai^e to
be holden and exe^ute as movers of sedition and unquyetnesse, etc. Whereunto
also is consonant the 131. Act made in the 8 Parliament of King JAMES the sixth,
Anno 1584; where it is ^^atuted and ordained by the KING and his three estates,
that none of his Highness Subjects of whatsoever quality, estate, or function
they be of, spiritual or temporal, presume or take upon hand to convocate,
conveane, or assemble themselves together for holding of Counsels,
Conventions, or Assemblyes, to treat, consult, and determinate in any matter of
estate, Civil or Ecclesiastical (except in the ordinary judgments) without
his Majesty's special commandment, or expres license had and obtained to that
effect, under the pai^es ordained by the Laws and Acts of Parliament, against
such as unlawfully convocate the KINGS Liedges. And whereas ye find fault,
that we dispute from the Act of Parliament, and that we do precisely adheare
to the letter of the Law, we pray you to consider, that the nature of this
question leads us to the Act of Parliament. Beside, it seems strange, that
ye should challenge us in this kind, since for justifying of your union (as ye
call it) ye have amassed a great number of Acts o^ Parliament, and inserted
them in the book of your Covenant. We omit the misapplying of these Acts,
which were made against Popery, and not against all these things, which ye do
now resist as Popish. Neither can we perceive, how these Acts of Parliament
adduced by you, to justisie your union, prove that point. Moreover, some of
these Acts cited by you, as namely, the 114 Act made in Parliament Anno 1592,
in so far as it is against Episcopal Government, and all other of that sort,
are expressly rescinded by a poste^ior Act made in Parliament Anno 1612. How
could ye in a legal dispute, for justifying your union, produce rescinded
Acts, as if they were standing Laws, and pass by the posterior Acts, which
are yet Laws standing in vigor, whereby these other Acts are rescinded?
(...). i. e. Constitutiones tempore posteriores, po^^ores sunt his qu^ ipsas
praecesserunt. ^^* de constitutionibus Principum, L. 4.

4. We do adheare in our former Replye, not only to the Letter, but also
(according to our conception, without prejudice of better information) to the
very reason and life of the Law. The sentence cited by you, to wit, Salus
Reipub. suprema lex esto, or the XII. Tabularum fragmenta de officio consulis.
Regio imperio duo sunto: iique praeeundo, indicando, consulendo praetores,
judices, co^sules appel lantor: militiae summum jus habento, ne mini paren to.
Salus populi suprema lex esto.
safety of the Commonwealth should be the chief Law, serves for a good
direction to Rulers, in making or changing of Laws, or in judging according to
them: whence in the Laws of the 12 Tables, these words are applied to this
purpose. This is observed by KING James of blessed memory, in his often
mentioned Book of the true Law of free Monarchies: For albeit, says he, that
I have at length proved, that the KING is above the Law, as both the author and
giver of strength thereto; yet a good King will not only delight to rule his
Subjects by the Law but even will conform himself in his own actions
thereunto, always keeping that ground, that the health of the Commonwealth be
his chief Law. And where he sees the Law doubtsome, or rigorous, he may
interpret or mitigate the same, lest otherwise summum jus be summa injuria: But
this sentence does nowayes warrant Subjects to refuse obedience to standing
Laws, against the will of the Supreme Lawgiver, who is a speaking Law. For
this were to open a door to all confusion, which would not prove the safety,
but the ruin of the Commonwealth. As for that which ye said before of the
General Band, and Confession of Faith, and which here again ye do allege
for your Covenant, we have signified our opinion thereof, in our preceding
Duply. The responses and verdicts of Juris-Consults concerning your Covenant,
are not known to ^s, nor yet the reasons and inducements, which moved them to
give out their declaration in your favoures, as ye allege.

Of Obedience, due by Subjects, to Authority.
5. The point touching Royal Authority, is not so full of thorns and rocks as
ye give out, if men would be pleased unpartially to hold the plain and patent
way, laid before us by holy Scripture, and by Orthodox Antiquity, and by many
Eminent Divines in the reformed Church, and learned Politics; which we shall
here make manifest, after the vindication of those three famous Theologues, (
Whitaker, Bilson, and Rivet) whom ye would have the Reader to esteem favorers
of your opinion.

6. Doctor Whitakers words against William Raynold, translated into English,
out of the Latin Edition at Oppenheme, Anno 1612. Page 51. are these, He
relates the timults and troubles, which were raised for Religion, in Germany,
France, and Boheme: as if that one thing were sufficient to condemn them,
because once they did oppose themselves, and resisted the violence offered to
GODS Truth, and to themselves: Whereas notwithstanding, Faith, Oath, and
public Edicts, and finally the Laws themselves gave them warrant to do the
same. I will not say more of this matter, which is nowise pertinent to the
present purpose, especially seeing not only their just Apology, but also the
Edicts of the Princes themselves have liberated them from the crime of
Rebellion. By these words of Doctor Whitaker, which ye have cited, the Reader
may easily perceive, that he does nowayes mantain or allow taking of Arms by
Subjects, without warrant of the public Laws, and approbation of the Prince;
but excuses what was done in those wars, by the allowance of the Laws and
Edicts of Princes.

7. So also Doctor Bilson, in his Book entitled, The true difference betwixt
Christian subjection, and unchristian Rebellion, Printed at Oxford Anno 1585,
Page 382. in the words cited by you, declares evidently, that he speaks of
such Republickes and States, as have defenses warranded by fundamental
Covenant, in that Government. But what is that Doctors mind, concerning the
duty of Subjects, in a free and absolute Monarchy, is evident by his own
words in that same book, Page 380, where disputing against a Jesuit, he says;
War for the Catholic Religion, is both lawful and honorable, you say: you
must add, of the Subjects against their Prince, or else you range clean
besides our question. We strive not what causes may lead Christian Princes to
make War on their Neighbors, but whether it be lawful or tollorable for
the Subject, to bear Arms against his natural and absolute Prince. You
prove, which is nothing to our purpose. But, Sir, in this enterprise, the
person must b^ respected as well as the cause: Be the cause never so just, if
the person be not authorized by GOD to draw the Sword, they be no just nor
lawful Wars. Private men may not venture on Wars, unless they be directly
warranded by him that has the Sword from GOD. And again in that same Book,
Page 502, Our Savior for teaching his, that they should be brought before
Kings and Rulers, and put to death, and hated of all men for His Name sake:
adds not, as you would have it, and he that first rebelleth, but, he that
endures to the end, shall be saved; and again, Not with violence restrain
them, but in patience prossesse your own souls. This is the way for all
Christian subjects to conquer tyrants* and this is the remedy provided in the
new Testament against all persecutions, not to ^esist powers, which GOD has
ordained, lest we be damned: but with all meeknes to suffer that we may be
crowned. And Page 513. he showe^h, that manifold forms of Commonwealthes, make
diverse men speak diversely of the Magistrates sword. And Page 518 he pleads,
that the Subjects in England, have not that lawful warrant, to draw the sword
without consent of their Prince, as the Germans have without consent of the
Emperor; and this discourse he prosecuteth in ^ome following pages.

8. The same is the meaning of Doctor R^vet, (as we take it) in his commentary
upon the Psalm. 68. where he distinguishes between an absolute principality,
and such a principality as is only conditional, pactionall, conventionall. Of
this second sort are to be understood, his words of just and necessary defense.
But of the absolute principality speaking in that same place, he recommendeth
to Subjects, rather suffering of martyrdom. And this to be his meaning,
appears more clearly by his last declaration concerning this question, in his
late treatise entitled, Iesuita Vapula^s: where being pressed by an advesary,
he handles this question of purpose. In the mean time, we wonder very much,
that ye have not directly answered to these remarkable words of Doctor Rivet,
alleged by us in our Reply, wherein he plainly averreth, that the doctrine of
Bu^han^^^, Knox, and Goodman, concerning Subjects resisting their lawful
Princes, is not approved by any sound Protestant. We expected from you, a full
and particular Answer, and now again we would gladly hear, whether ye
approve the judgment of Rivet, concerning that doctrine of these writers, or
not.

9. Thus having vindicated these three divynes, which ye allege for you, we
come now to those testimonies which we promised, for clearing of the plainness
of the way touching Authority. First, it is evident by holy Scripture, that it
is unlawful for Subjects in a Monarchical estate, (such as is this Kingdom of
Scotland) to take Arms for Religion, or for any other pretense, without
warrant and power from the Prince, and Supreme Migistrate. For the Scripture
teaches us, that the Sword belongs only to the KING, and to them who are
sent by him, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. That we ought to keep the KINGS
commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of GOD, Eccles. 8. 2. And, that
we should be subject, not only for wrath but also for conscience sake; because
the powers that be, are ordained of GOD: whosoever therefore, says S. Paul,
resists the power, resists the ordinance of GOD, And they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. In the words of the Apostle S.
Paul, there is a remarkable opposition betwixt subjection and resistance, (...)
and (...); implying, that all military (...), whether defensive, or offensive,
if it be against the superior Power, which GOD has set over us, is forbidden.
In like manner we read Matthew. 26. 52. that all they that take the Sword, shall
perish with the Sword. Now certain it is, that in a free Monarchy, Subjects
have not the Sword from GOD, except by the hand of the KING, to whom only GOD
has immediately given it. And therefore whosoever takes the Sword without his
warrant, has just reason to fear the foresaid warning of our SAVIOVR. Many
other places of Scripture might be adduced to this purpose, which for brevity
we omit, and do proceed in the next rowme to some testimonies of ancient
Fathers, and other writers.

10. T^rtullian, in his Apologeticke, chap. 30. and 33. and 37. tells us,
that the ancient Christians in his time, although having a^ heathen and
persecuting Emperor, did honor him, as chosen of God, and second from GOD,
and first after GOD, and did choose rather to suffer, then to make resistance
by force of Arms, although they lacked not number, and strength to do it.

11. The like example have we in that renowned Thebean Legion of 6666 Christian
Soldiers, called Agaunenses, from the place of their suffering, who without
making resistance, as they had strength of hand to have done, suffered
themselves rather to be slain, for their Christian profession, by the Officers
of Maximian the Emperor, executors of his cruel commandment against them.
This fell out in the 18 year of Diocletian, as Ado Viennensis writes in his
Chronicle, which was the year of GOD 297, as Cardinal Baronius reckons in
his Annalls. And of that their Christian cowrage, and pious resolution,
Venantius Fortunatus, an ancient Bishop of Poictiers, has left unto us these
Encomiasticke lines, in the second book of his Poems* Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 8.
Edit. 4. Page 781.

Queis, positis gladiis, sunt armae dogmate Pauli,
Nomine pro CHRISTI dulcius esse mori.
Pectore belligero poterant qui vincere ferro,
Invitant jugulis vulnera chara suis.
12. Gregory Nazianzen, in his first Oration, speaking of the persecution by
Julian the Apostate, when the Christians were more in number, and stronger in
might of hand, to have made open resistance, if they had in their consciences
found it agreeable to their Christian profession, declares plainly, that they
had no other remedy against that persecution, but patient suffering for Christ,
with gloriation in Christ. (...).

13. S. Ambrose, having received imperial commandment, to deliver the sacred
Houses, or Churches, to be possessed by the Arians, declares what he thought
convenient to be done in such a case; to w^t, neither to obey in that which he
could not perform with a good conscience, no^ yet to resist by force of Arms.
His words to the people, ( Con^ione 1. contra Auxentium) are these; Quid ergo
turbamini? volens nunquam vos deseram, coactus repugnare no^ novi. Dolere
potero potero slere, potero gemere; adversus arma, milites, Gothos quoque,
La^rhymae mea arma sunt. Talia enim munimenta sunt sacerdotis. Aliter nec debeo
nec possum resistere.
Why, then, are ye troubled? I shall never willingly leave you. If I be
compelled, I can not gain-stand. I may be sorry, I may weep, I may sigh. Against
Arms, Soldiers, the Goths also, my Tears are Arms: For such are the
Guardes of a Priest. Otherwise I neither ought nor may resist. And in the
second book of his Epistles, and 14 Epistle, to his Sister Marcellina, speaking
of that same purpose, he says; Non ego mi vallabo circumfusione populorum. --
Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus. -- Tradere Basilicam non possum, sed repugnare
non debeo.
I shall not fortify my self with a multitude of people about me. -- We
beseech, O Emperor, we fight not. -- I may not deliver the Church; but I ought
not make resistance.

14. Such also was the^ doctrine and practice of many other great Lights, which
shined in the days of Julian the Apostate, and in the days of the Arrian
Emperoures, and Gothicke Arrian Kings.

15. S. Augustine, writing of a lawful War, acknowledges that only to be
lawful, which has authority from the Prince. For it is Interest enim quibque
causis* quibusque authoribus homines gerenda bella suscipiant: ordo tamen ille
naturalis, mortalium pa^i accomodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli
authoritas, atqu^, consilium penes Principem sit. Aug. Lib. 22. contra Faustum,
Cap. 75.
much to be regarded, (says he*) for what causes, and by whose authority, men
undertake Wars: But that natural order, which is accommodated to the peace
of mortal men, requires this, that the authority and counsel of undertaking
war, be in the power of the Prince.

16. The imperial Laws do say the same, ff. Ad legem Iuliam majestatis. Leg.
3. Eadem lege tenetur, and qui injussu Principis bellum gesserit, delectumv^
habuerit, ex^rcitum comparaverit. Et Cod. ut armorum usus inscio Principe
interdictus sit. Nulli prorsus nobis insciis, atque inconsultis quorum libet
armorum movendorum copia tribuatur. These are the words of the Emperoures
Valentinian and Valens. Et Cod. de ^e militari, Leg. 13. Nemo miles. Nemo miles
vel sibi vacet, vel aliena obsequia ^e nutu principali peragere audeat, etc.

17. Bodin, in his first Book de Republica, Cap. 10. Number. 155 and 156. ( Page
244. Edit. Latin. 4. Ursell. Anno 1601.) reckons among the proper rights of
Majesty, the right and power to make War: and this he shows to appertain,
in a free Monarchy, to the Prince only.

18. To this meaning says Peter Martyr; As concerning the efficient cause, it
is certain that War may not be made without the authority of the Prince. For
Paul says, that he bears the Sword: therefore he may give it to whom he
wills, and may take it from whom he wills. Loc. Com. Class. 4. Cap. 16. 2.
And a little after, to wit, 7. he recites and commends a saying of
Hostiensis to the same purpose.

19. Calvin, in the four^h Book of his Institutions, in the last Chapter of
that Book, disputes the Question at length, and by many strong Arguments
evinceth, and concludes, that it is nowise lawful for Subjects, to resist
their Prince by force of Arms; whether the Prince be godly, and just; or
ungodly, and unjust in his conversation, and commandments: and, that nothing
remains to Subjects in such a case, but to obey or suffer. Where understand,
that Fleing is a sort of Suffering. Neither are his words subjoined in the 31
Sect. to wit, I speak alwise of private men, etc. contrary to this. For first
Calvin in this Dispute, indifferently uses the names of private men, and
Subjects: And therefore, in the 22 Sect. at the beginning of it, he terms
those of whose duty he disputes, Subjects. Hugo Grorius, de jure belli and
pacis, l^b. 1 cap. 4. number. 6.
And indeed, whosoever is a Subject, is also, in respect of the supreme Ruler,
a private man. Although Magistrates, who are under the KING, be public persons,
in respect of their Inferiors; yet being considered, with relation to him that
is Supreme, 1. Pet. 2. 13. they are but private. As in Dialecticke, an
intermediate genus, although in respect of the inferior species, it be a
genus; yet in relation to the superior genus, it is but a species. All Power
of Governing, is so subjected to the Supreme Power, that whatsoever is done
against the will of the supreme Ruler, is destitute of that Power; and
consequently, is to be esteemed for a private act. For, as we are taught by the
Philosophers, Order can not be, but with a reference to that which is first.
Hence King JAMES, in his Book of The true Averroe^ 5. Metaphys. comment. 6.
Law of free Monarchies, Page 206. affirms, that all the People are but
private men, the authority being alwise with the Magistrate. Secondly, this is
manifest from the very words of Calvin, in that same 31 Sect. for there he
excepteth none from the necessity of obeying, or suffering, when Kings command
things unjust; but only popular Magistrates, appointed for restraining the
licentiousness of Kings. Now, where such Magistrates are erected, it is
certain, that a King, in such a Commonwealth, has not the supreme power: For
if he had the supreme power, none could force him, since an Inferior can not
force his Superior. This can not be done, but only by him, who is Superior,
or at least equal. Thirdly, this is clear also by the examples adduced by
Calvin; namely, the Lacedamonian Ephori, the Roman Tribunes, and the Athenian
Demarchi. When the Ephori were set up in Lacedaemon, the Kings of Lacedaemon,
were but Kings See Hugo Grotius, de Iure belli and pacis, Page 66. where he
cites sundry ancient Authors.
in name, and had not the Supreme power, as it is confessed by the Learned. So
when the Tribunes had their full power in Rome, the Supreme power was in the
People: and in like manner it was in Athens, when the Demarchi had power.
Therefore, from this nothing can be inferred for the lawful resistance of
Subjects, to a Monarch, or King, properly so called. Fourthly, Calvin applying
this to the Kingdoms that now are, says no more, but that peradventure the
three Estates assembled in Parliament, have that same power, which the
forementioned Ephori, etc. had. Here it is to be marked, that he says only,
peradventure it is so; which can be no warrant to a man's conscience, in a
matter of so great importance. For he that resists his Superior by force of
Arms, should not only think, that peradventure he has power, but should be
assuredly persuaded, that he has power so to do. When there is no more said,
but that peradventure such a thing is, it may be as reasonably said,
Peradventure such a thing is not. Neither does he give this power even
peradventure, but to the three Estates assembled in Parliament. Hence the
learned Rivet, speaking of Calvin his mind in this place, says, that he
gives no power to people over Monarchs, properly so called* Rivet, in his
Iesuita vapulans, Cap. 13.
The same also is observed, concerning Calvin his mind, by Albericus Gentilis,
in his third Royal Dispute.

20. The same doctrine also is delivered by King James of blessed Memory, in
his Book entitled The true Law of free Monarchies, by Hugo Grotius in his
first Book de jure belli and pacis, Cap. 4. by Leonhartus Hutterus, in his
common places, Loc. 32. Cap. 3. Johannes Gerhardus in the 6 Tom. of his common
places, in his Treatise de mastistratu politico, Number. 483. where he discourses
accuratly of this matter: Zepperus in his 3. Book de Politia Ecclesiastica, in
the last Section of the 13 Chapter, Page 573. Edit. Herborn. 1595. Alberious
Gentilis, in his regal disputations, disput. 3. de vi civium in Regem semper
in^usta. John Bishop of Rochester, in his work written against Bellarmine, de
potestate Papae in rebus temporalibus, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Class. 2. Where he
adduceth a clowd of many more Authors. M. Antonius de Dominis, in his Book
called Ostensio errorum Prancisci Suarez, Cap. 6. 27. Johannes Angelius
Werdenhagen, I. C. in his Politica generalis, Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Quest. 14.

21. By these Testimonies we intend not to lay upon you, or any of our Country
men, any imputation, or to take upon us to give sentence concerning their
proceedings: but only being invited hereto by your last Answers, we thought
it our duty, to signify to the Reader, that many ancient and late famous
Writters are not of that opinion, either to think the question touching
Authority, so full of Rocks and Thorns, as you call it, or yet to favor such a
defensive taking of Arms, as you think to be allowed by Whitaker, Bilson, and
Rivet.

22. Now to prosecute what remains of your Answer: whereas ye say, that when
ye justify your Covenants and Conventions, from their purposed ends, ye mean
not only the last and most remo^e ^nds, but the nearest and immediate; we pray
you tell us what ye mean by the nearest and immediate end: if ye mean the
object it it self, (which the Schoolmen call finem intrinsecum and proximum)
then the lawfulness and equity of the matter, vowed and promised in the
Covenant, is all one with the goodness of the end of it. Whence we infer,
that seeing the matter promised by you in this your Covenant, to wit, your
mutual defense against all persons, none excepted, is in our judgment
unlawful, and forbidden by a lawful Authority; the end, of your Covenant is
merely evil: but if by the nearest end ye mean any thing which is diverse
from the object, then we still affirm against the last part of your first
Answer, to our second Demand, that Conventions, and Covenants, and all other
actions, are to be esteemed and judged of, first or principally by the equity
of the object, and then by the goodness of the ends of it, whether they be
fines proximi, or fines remoti.

23. We do not join with the Papists, blamers of our Reformation, (as ye
seem to bear upon us) because they hate and oppugn our reformed Religion,
which we love and defend. Neither do we take upon us to censure the
proceedings of our Reformers: but we stryve, by the Grace of GOD, so to carry
in our own time, and to walk wisely in a perfect way, as our adversaries the
Papists, may get no advantage to plead for their unwarrantable doctrine and
practices, by any pretense of our example.

The III. DUPLY.
IN your third Answer, passing lightly from our Reply, ye fall into some
unexpected digressions, concerning the Service Book and our thoughts thereof:
we esteem it a matter beyond the compass of humane judicatory, to sit upon the
thoughts of other men. As for those outward expressions, which ye allege upon
some of us, of not seeing erroures in that Book, or groaning for it; ye shall
understand, that such multiplicity of Popish erroures, as was alleged by some
of you, to be in that Book, was invisible to some of us. Although to enter in a
particular examination or consideration, of every point and sentence in that
Book, is not now time nor place. Neither did any of us profess groaning for
that Book in particular, but for an uniformity of divyne service throughout
this National Kirk, and a more perfect form then we yet have, that the
public Service were not permitted to the several judgments, and private
choice of every Minister and Reader. Which also was thought convenient by the
National Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, holden at ABERDENE, Anno 1616.

2. Whether that Service Book (now discharged) contains any Innovation of
Religion, or any thing contrary to the Protestant Religion, (as ye allege) we
do not dispute now. But we do assuredly believe, the piety and sincerity of
His Majesty's intention, ever to have been, and still constantly to be, as it
is graciously declared by His Majesty's late Proclamation. And we are certainly
persuaded* that His Majesty has given order, to discharge all the Acts of
Counsel, made anent the Canons and Service Book; and are credibly informed,
that they are discharged by Act of Counsel, [at Holy-Rood-House, the fifth of
Iullie last] according to the order given by His Majesty. Also, we see no such
just cause of Fear, as may import your alleged necessity of Covenanting;
seeing His Majesty will not press any thing of that nature, but in such a
fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all his loving Subjects: that he
neither intends innovations in Religion nor Laws; as we declare in our
former Replye, to which ye have not sufficiently answered. Neither was it
necessary, for removing of any just Fears, that his sacred Majesty should
disallowe that Service Book, as ye require; but it was sufficient, to discharge
it, in manner foresaid.

3. Ye do conclude your Answer unto our third Replye, with an uncouth and
incredible Position, whereof ye bring no proof at all, but only this bare
Assertion; Whosoever profess themselves, to be perfectly satisfied with the
Proclamation, do proclaim in the ears of all the Kingdom, that they are
better pleased with the Service Book, and Canons, then with the Religion, as it
has been professed in this Land since the Reformation. This your Thesis, is so
evidently weak, that we need no more for the overthrow thereof, but to oppose
thereunto this our plain and undeniable Antithesis; Who profess themselves to
be perfectly satisfied with that Proclamation, whereby the Service Book, and
Canons are discharged, and the Religion professed in this Land since the
Reformation, is established, do proclaim in the ears of all the Kingdom, that
they are better pleased with the Religion professed in this Land since the
Reformation, then with the Service Book, and Canons.

The IV. DUPLY.
YE^ alleged before, and now again do affirm, that we have mistaken your
Interpretation of the old Covenant, as if it had been given out judicially by
you, and, as if ye had intended to enforce it upon others. To free your selves
of this imputation, ye said in your first Answer, that ye intended only To
make known your own meaning according to the mind our Reformers, and in
charity to recommend it to others. Hence we inferred in our Replye, that ye
ought nor to obtrude your Interpretation upon us, nor molest any man for not
receiving the same. To this now ye say in your second Answer; Although you
neither use threatenings, nor obtrude your Interpretation upon us, yet we must
pardon you, if ye match us not with the greatest part of this Kingdom, in whose
name, by all fair means ye recommend it to us. Truly, Brethren, we are not
offended with you, for preferring the judgment of so many, to our judgment,
who are but few in number: neither need ye to crave pardon of us for this. But
concerning these fair means, and that force of reason whereby, ye say, ye
recommend your Interpretation of the old Covenant to us, pardon us, if the
experience we have, both of your writings and proceedings, make us to oppose
this your assertion. For in your writings we expected indeed, but have not
found that force of reason, whereof ye speak: and as for the proceedings of
those who have subscrived your Covenant, we of all men have least reason to
believe that they use no threatenings, seeing we hear daily so much their
threatenings against our selves.

2. Whereas for clearing of that which ye said before, concerning the mind of
our reformers, ye affirm, that The authoritative judgment of our reformers is
evident, not only by the confession of Faith ratified in Parliament, but also
by the books of Discipline, Acts of General Assemblies, and by their own
writes: First, we marvel, how ye can say, that the private writings of Master
Knox, and others, who with him were instruments of that great work of
Reformation, have public Authority to obliedge the Subjects of this Kingdom.
The legislative, and obligatory power of the Church, is only in Synods or
conventions of Bishops and Presbyters, and not in particular persons expressing
their minds apart. Next, this Church in the former age, by abrogating the
office of Superintendants, established in the first book of Discipline, has
declared, that the statuts and ordinances contained in those books, are not of
an authority perpetually obligatory, but may be altered or abrogated by the
Church, according to the exigencie of time. The same likewise is manifest by
the abrogation of summary excomunication, which this Church did abolish,
although it was established in General Assemblies, wherein Master Knox, and
other Reformers were present. We need not to insist much in this, seeing so
many of you, who are Subscribents, mis-regard the ordinances of our Reformers,
prefixed to the Psalm Book, concerning the office of Superintendants, or
Bishops, Funeral Sermons, and set forms of Prayer, which they appointed, to
be publicly read in the Church. Hence the Reader may perceive, that ye have no
warrant for your Interpretation of the old Covenant, from the authoritative,
and obligatory judgment, of the Reformers; feeing ye can not ground it upon
the Confession of Faith ratified in Parliament. As for those other means
mentioned by us, to wit, Scripture, Antiquity, and consent of the re^ormed
Churches, that they truly make for us, and against you, the unpartiall Reader
may perceive by these our Disputs.

Whether or not Episcopacie and Pearth Articles, be abjured in the late
Covenant.
3. As for the second mistaking mentioned by you in your Answer, we did show
in our Replye, that in your Covenant, Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, are
abjured. And for proving of this, we asked of you, what ye meaned by the
recovery and liberty of the Gospel, as it was established and professed before
the foresaid Novations? and what is that period of time, to which your words
there have reference? that is, Whether it be that period of time, when the
Service Book, and Book of Canons, were urged upon you? or if it be the time,
when Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, were received in this Church? But,
truly, your Answer to this, is nowise satisfactory, nor has so much as a
show of satisfaction. For ye are afraid to express that period of time, lest
ye beforced to grant, that which we before objected. And yet your speech
bewrays you: For seeing ye answer only to that which we said concerning the
last of these two periods, we collect, that by the recovery of the liberty and
purity of the Gospel, as it was established before the foresaid Novations, ye
mean the reducing of the Policy of this Church, unto that estate in which it
was, before Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, were established. And hence we
infer, as we did before, that in that part of your Covenant, ye condemn and
abjure Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, as contrary to the Purity and Liberty
of the Gospel.

4. Ye seem to answer, that in that part of your Covenant, ye condemn not,
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, but those abuses and corruptions, which have
accompanied them; such as the Superstitious observing of days, cessation from
work on those days, Feasting, Guysing, and the gross abuses, which have
entered in the Sacrament, upon kneeling before the Elements: and, that in
respect of these abuses, we who allow Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, may
swear without prejudice of our cause, to recover the Purity and Liberty of the
Gospel, as it was established, and professed, before these Novations.

5. But, first, let any indifferent, or unpartiall man, who knows the state
of our Church, judge, whether or not it be lykely, that your Vow, of the
recovering the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as it was before Episcopacy,
and Pearth Articles, were introduced, imports only an intention of removing
of the consequents of Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, and not of the removing
of those things themselves? Truly we are persuaded, that they who know the
state of this Church, and your mind, concerning these things, will think this
your Gloss of your own words, to be violent, and excogitated for eluding our
Argument.

6. Secondly: Who can think, that ye, and others, contryvers of the late
Covenant, who condemn P^arth Articles, and Episcopacie, as much as ye do the
consequents of them, have only vowed, to remove their consequents, and not
remove themselves?

7. Thirdly, is it possible, that any can promise and vow, to labor for the
curing of so many, and so great pretended deseases of this Church, (we mean
these abuses which ye say, have accompanied Pearth Articles and Episcopacie,)
and in the mean time promise, and intend nothing concerning the removing of the
causes of them?

8. Fourthly, how can we, without great prejudice of our cause, acknowledge,
that these gross abuses mentioned by you, have entered in the Sacrament, by
kneeling before the Elements (ye should have said at the receiving of the
Elements) for seeing kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, is confessed
by us to be a matter indifferent; if in our Oath, we acknowledge these gross
abuses to have entered in upon kneeling, it will probably follow in the
judgment of some, and in our judgment, who recommend this Oath unto us, it
will follow infallibly, that kneeling for the evil consequences thereof, ought
to be removed. Do ye not here cunningly deal with us? For although ye urge us
not, as ye say, to swear and promise the removing of kneeling, yet ye urge us,
by your own confession, to promise the removing of these abuses occasioned by
kneeling: which being acknowledged by us, ye will then take upon you to
demonstrate, that kneeling it self ought to be removed: for ye hold it for a
Maxim, that things indifferent, being abused and polluted with Superstition,
should be abolished. We cannot sufficiently marvel, how ye who are of this
mind, can say to us, that we who allow Pearth Articles and Episcopacie, may
swear to recover the liberty and purity of the Gospel, as it was before, etc.
For ye mean, that we may do so, without prejudice of our cause. But we have
already shown, that according to your judgment and doctrine, if we swear that
which ye would have us to swear, our cause shall be much prejudged, yea,
utterly lost.

9. Fifthly: How can we swear, to remove those gross abuses entered in upon
kneeling, as ye allege; seeing we think, that no such abuses have entered in
upon it? Yea, our People, try them who please, will show, that they are as free
from all erroneous conceits, concerning that holy Sacrament, as any living in
these Congregations where kneeling is daily cried down.

10. Sixtlie, as for these abuses and corruptions, reckoned up by you, as the
consequents of the observation of Festival days* to pass by that which before
we marked concerning Kneeling, to wit, that the granting of this were a great
prejudice to our cause, some of these are not abuses at all, as, cessation from
work. Again, some of them have not come in upon the observation of the Articles
of Pearth, as Guysing, and Feasting, (ye mean excessive Feasting, for otherwise
it is not an abuse) which only fall forth on Christmas Festivitie. For sure we
are, that these abuses have not come by the anniversary commemoration of
CHRIST'S Nativitie, in the which by the ordinance of Pearth Assembly, all
Superstitions observation, and Profanation of that day, or any other day, is
prohibited, and appointed to be rebuked. This the reverend and learned Bishop
of Edinburgh, in his defense of the Act of Pearth Assembly, concerning
Festivities, Page 63. proves, because (says he) we have lacked preaching
upon Christ-mas-day, these fifty seven years bygone, in our Church, yet Riot,
Prophannesse, Surfeit, and Drunkenness, have not been wanting.

11. Seventhly, as for Superstitious observation of days, (whereof hitherto we
have had no experience) we marvel, that ye can reckon it, amongst the
consequents of the observation of days: seeing in your judgment, it is all
one with the observation of days. For ye think the observation of any day,
except the LORDS Day, to be, in the own nature of it, Superstitious, and
Will Worship.

12. As for the last part of your Answer to our Argument, concerning the
foresaid period of time; where ye allege, that many corruptions of Popish and
Arminian doctrine, have entered in the Kirk, etc. we ask you, Whether ye
design here another period of time, then ye did before? or if ye design only
this self same period of time, in the which both the foresaid practical
abuses, and these Doctrinall corruptions, have entered into this Church,
accompanying, as ye allege, Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy?) Or, last of
all, If ye design no period of time at all? If ye take you to this last,
professing, that ye have here designed no period of time; then ye answer not
our Argument, wherein we particularly, and expressly posed you, concerning that
period of time, unto which your words cited often before, have reference. If ye
design the same period of time, then look how ye can escape our preceding
Arguments, concerning that period of time.

13. But if ye design an other period of time, then we ask you, Whether it be
prior or posterior, to the period of time already mentioned; to wit, the time
preceding the bringing in of the Articles of Pearth? Ye can not say, that it
is posterior to it: for ye complained of Arminian corruptions, even before
Pearth Assembly; branding some of the most learned of our Church, with that
Aspersion. And of Popish corruptions of Doctrine, ye complained, when Pearth
Articles, and Episcopacy were established. For the Doctrins, of the lawfulness
and expediency of these things, are, in your judgment, merely Popish, and
Antichristian. Neither can ye say, that it is prior to the foresaid period of
time: for the time preceding the inbringing of Pearth Articles, comprehends
all that tract of time which interveened betwixt the Reformation, and Pearth
Assembly.

14. But we will yet more evidently convince you, by two other Arguments, drawn
from that part of your Covenant, of which we are now speaking, and from the
words of this your Answer to our fourth Replye; for first in your Covenant ye
promise, and also will have us to promise with you, To forbear for a time, the
practice of Pearth Articles, until they be tried, as ye say, in a free
Assembly. But this ^orbearance imports a manifest prejudice, and wronging of
our cause: for this is a fore-acknowledgement, either of the unlawfulness, or
else of the inexpediency of the matters, concluded in Pearth Assembly. For
wherefore ought we in this exigence of the Church, to forbear the practice of
Pearth Articles, rather then of other Rites of the Church, except for some
greater evil comprehended in them? This will appear more evident, if we shall
consider the reason alleged by you, Page 17, wherefore we ought now to
forbear the practice of these Articles: to wit, because in the case of
Scandal, and sensible fear of Superstition, we ought to do so. Now this case
of Scandal is not in your judgment, a temporary, but a perpetual consequent
of Pearth Articles. For ye think it will ever Scandalize the Papists, as if we
were approaching to them: Likewise ye think every one of them, and especially
Kneeling, to be inductive to sin, ex condition operis, by the very nature
and quality of the work it self. Whence it follows, that they are necessarily
and immutablie scandalous; for whatsoever agrees to any thing, in respect of
the nature of it, it agrees necessarily and immu^ably. If therefore we in this
respect, swear the forbearance of Pearth Articles, we shall be holden to
forbear Pearth Articles, not for a time, but for ever.

15. Next, we pray you consider, what is meaned by the foresaid Novations, in
that part of your Covenant, wherein ye promise to labor to recover the liberty
and purity of the Gospel, as it was before the foresaid Novations. Certainly
these words cannot be understood of Novations to be introduced, and which have
not as yet entered unto our Church. For the liberty and purity of the Church is
not as yet lost, yea, not impared by them, and so needs not to be recovered
by the removing of them. They must then be understood of the Novations
mentioned in the Paren^hesis of your Covenant; that, is of all innovations
already introduced by Authority, and their alleged consequents, which ye
promise to forbear, until they be allowed, and tried by a free Assembly.
Hence any man may conclude, that although in your Parenthesis, ye promise only
to forebeare these Novations for a time, yet in the words immediately following,
ye condemn and abjure them. For the recovering of the liberty and purity of
the Gospel, as it was established before the foresaid Novations, imports
manifestly a removing of all these Novations, which either in themselves, or in
respect of their consequents, are contrary to the purity and liberty of the
Gospel. But all Novations already introduced, are in your judgment of this
kind, and therefore your vow, of the recovering the liberty and purity of the
Gospel, imports a removing of all the foresaid Novations.

16. To conclude this Argument: Ye may see, that we have pryed no more narrowly
into the expressions of your Covenant, then we had reason; and have labored,
not to scarre our selves, and others, with mere shadows, as ye affirm.

Of our Argument, Ad hominem, and the weak Retorsion of it, by the Answers.
17. Now we come to our Argument, or Syllogism, Ad hominem, which has so
pinched you, that ye have not attempted to answer^ to any of the propositions
of it. Our intention in that Argument, was to prove, that whether Pearth
Articles be abjured in the late Covenant, or not; yet ye [who came hither, to
give us satisfaction concerning the Covenant] can not, with a safe conscience,
aver, or declare to us, that they are not abjured in it. This we did
evidently prove, reasoning thus: Whatsoever Rites are abjured in the old
Covenant, they are also, in your judgment, abjured in the late Covenant. But
Pearth Articles, and Episcopocie, are, in your judgment, abjured in the old
Covenant: Ergo, they are, in your judgment, abjured in the late Covenant: and,
consequently, if ye deal sincerely with us, ye must aver, that they are also
abjured in the late Covenant.

18. To this ye say, first, that whatsoever be your judgment, as ye are
particular persons, yet, at this time, ye were to be taken, as Commissioners
from the whole company of Subscrivers. Truly we did take you so; and did
think, that ye who were Commissioners from such a multitude of good Christians,
would have told us your mind sincerely, concerning the full extent of the
late Covenant; and, that ye would neither have affirmed any thing as
Commissioners, which ye do not think to be true, as ye are particular persons;
nor yet would have labored, so to ensnare us, as to have bidden us subscrive a
Covenant, really, and indeed, in your judgment, abjuring those things, which
we, with a safe conscience, can not abjure. For, in your judgment, Pearth
Articles, and Episcopacie, are most really abjured in the late Covenant,
although ye plainly affirm the contrary, in your Answers to our fourth,
fifth, and sixth Demand. And (which is much to be noted) in your Answers to
our tenth Demand, ye affirm, concerning your selves, that ye, in this late
Covenant, have promised only forbearance of Pearth Articles. We wonder much,
how ye can say so. For whosoever by their Oath have tied themselves to a
Confession, in the which they firmly believe Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy,
to be abjured, those have indeed abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy. But
ye in the late Covenant, have tied your selves by your Oath, to the little
Confession, or old Covenant, in the which ye firmly believe, Episcopacy, and
Pearth Articles, to be abjured: Ergo, in your late Covenant ye have abjured
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy: And not only ye, but all those who are of that
same mind with you. Whence we inferred, in that tenth Demand, that none of you
can vote freely in the intended Assembly, concerning Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie.

19. Secondly, ye say, that if others of the subscribents, who are of our
judgment, (that is, who are not persuaded that Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie, are abjured in the old Covenant,) had come as Commissioners at
this time to us, our Argument ad hominem, had been anticipated, because it
would not have been pertinent for them. But ye are deceived, for we have ever
looked principally to these, who were the first contryvers of the late
Covenant, or had special hand in it, that is, to your selves, and to others,
who these many years bygone, have opposed Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, as
Popish corruptions, abjured in the old Covenant; and consequently have, in this
late Covenant, [in the which that former Covenant is renewed] by your own
personal Oath, abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie. If then that other
sort of Commissioners had come unto us, we would have said to them, that we can
not swear the late Covenant, because Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie are in it
abjured. And this we would have proved by the like Argument ad hominem, that
is, by an Argument grounded upon the judgment of the contrivers of the late
Covenant: as ye may easily perceive.

20. Thirdly, ye say, that we have perceived the insufficiency of our
Argument, because we objected this to our selves: that seeing we think Pearth
Articles, and Episcopacie, not to be abjured in the old Covenant, we may
subscrive the new Covenant, in the which that old Covenant is reuewed. Truly
ye might have alleged this, if we had propounded that objection, and had left
it unanswered. But we answered it, and brought some reasons [which ye wisely
did pass by, perceiving the force of them] to show, that we can not
conveniently subscrive your late Covenant, notwithstanding of our judgment, of
rather opinion of the meaning of the old Covenant. We say opinion: for to speak
truly what we think, we doubt, and so do others with us, concerning the
meaning of some parts of the old Covenant, touching matters of Ecclesiastical
policy, and have not so full a persuasion in our minds concerning those parts,
as may be to us a warrant of our Oath.

21. Fourthly, whereas ye say, that it was not for us to inquire in your
private opinion, concerning the meaning of the late Covenant, in that part of
it, where it tyeth us to the inviolable observation of the old Covenant, no^
was it necessary for you, to make it known to us; We answer, that we inquired
not your private opinion, but the common judgment of all those, who with you
these twenty years bypast, have accused us of Perjury, for the alleged
violation of the old Covenant, sworn by our Predecessors. And truly we had
more then reason to do so; because we most justly feared, that ye, who have so
often accused us of Perjury, for practicing Rites and Ceremonies abjured as ye
allege, in the old Covenant, sworn by our Predecessors, would much more
vehemently; yea, also with a greater show of probability, accuse us of Perjury,
for violation of the old Covenant, sworn and ratified by our selves in this
late Covenant, if we should stand to the defense of Pearth Articles in time to
come. It became us therefore, for eschewing of this inconvenient, to inquire of
you, and you also sincerely and plainly to declare to us, whether or not we may
subscrive and swear the new Covenant, as it includes and ratifieth the old,
and yet be really free from all abjuration, or condemning of Pearth Articles,
and Episcopacie? And likewise whether or not ye, and all others who are of your
mind, will hold and esteem us free from abjuration of them, notwithstanding of
our subscriving of your Covenant. These Questions require a punctual Answer.
For if our subscriving of your Covenant, may either import a real abjuratio^ of
Pearth Articles, or if it may make you to think, that by virtue of our
subscription, we are really, and indeed, bound to reject them for ever; neither
can we, with a good conscience, subscrive your Covenant; neither can ye, with a
good conscience, require it of us.

22. Fifthly, from our refusing to subscrive the late Covenant, in so far as it
renews the old Covenant, or little Confession; because that Confessi^
according to your Interpretation, or conception of it, imports an abjuration
of Pearth Articles, ye collect, first, that upon this ground we would not have
subscrived the late Confession any time bypast. Secondly, that we can not sweat
the Confession of any Church, no, not the Articles of the CREED, Petitions of
the LORDS PRAYER, nor Precepts of the ten COMMANDMENTS, in respect of the
diverse Interpretations, which men give of them. We answer, first, that since
the little Confession, is not of Divine Authority, and since the Humane
Authority which it had, has these many years bygone ceased, (as The Peaceable
Warning, lately given to the Subjects in Scotland, proves) we would have
refused our Subscription unto it, ever since we heard, that it imports an
Abjuration of all Rites, and Ceremonies, which were not received in our Church
in the year 1681; except we had gotten some evidence to the contrary,
sufficiently satisfying our minds. Secondly: As for the Creed, LORDS Prayer,
and ten Commandments, your Argument taken from the variety of men's
Expositions of them, is far from the purpose. For, since we are persuaded, that
the Author, or Penmen of them, neither intended, nor yet delivered any thing
in them, but Truth: and that their expression is authentic, we are bound to
embrace, and receive them, notwithstanding of the variety of Interpretations,
which men give of them: neither is it lawful to us, to refuse our
Subscription, or assent, to them, whatsoever be the judgment or assent of
those who require it of us: being alwise bound to acknowledge the infallible
Authority of them, even when we doubt of the true meaning of them. Thirdly: As
for any of these later Confessions of Churches, if the case be such, as now it
is in this particular of this late Covenant, that is, if we be not bound by any
standing Law, to subscrive it, and if it be so liable to the variety of
Interpretatio^s, that it may probably import that which we think to be
contrary to the Truth, and if these who require our Subscription, be, in our
judgment, Opposers of the Truth, in any point contained in that Confession,
and may make advantage of our Subscription, alleadgeing, that we are tied by
it, to consent to their Doctrines, or Practices: we may justly, in such a case,
deny our subscription to that Confession, for the ambiguitie of it; and much
more may desire those who urge us to subscrive it, to declare unto us, before
we give our Subscription, Whether or not, that Confession, in their judgment,
will tie us to their Doctrines and Practices.

23. Last of all: In modesty, as ye say, but with a jesting complement, ye
present unto us, a Dish of our own dressing: ye mean, the like Argument, Ad
hominem; which is this: The Rites and Ceremonies which are not abjured in the
negative Confession, are not abjured in this late Covenant: But the Rites and
Ceremonies, which were concluded in Pearth Assembly, are not abjured, as ye
say, in the negative Confession, made Ann 1581; therefore they are not abjured
in this late Covenant. The first Proposition, as ye say, is evident, because in
the late Covenant we are bound no farther, concerning the negative Confession,
but to keep it inviolable: And therefore, what Rites are not abjured there, are
not abjured here. Likewise ye say, that the second Proposition, can no be
denied by us, in respect these twenty years bygone, we have thought our selves
free of Perjurie, notwithstanding the of Oath made 1581, and of our conforming
our selves to the Ordinance of Pearth. Good Brethren, ye have retorted this
Argument very weakly upon us. For, first, we flatly deny the Major of your
Syllogism; and withal do repel the confirmation of it. For although Pearth
Articles, were not abjured in the late Covenant, in so far as it renews the
negative Confession; yet they may be, and, as it is already proven, they are
abjured in that other part of your late Covenant, where ye vow and promise, To
recover the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as it was established and
professed before the foresaid Novations. Next, as for your Minor, or Second
Proposition, we suspend our Judgment of it, until we be better informed
and advised: doubting, as we said before concerning the meaning of those parts
of the old Covenant, which concern matters of Rite or Ceremony. Neither does
the confirmation of your minor trouble us; for we have thought our selves free
of Perjury these twenty years bygone, not for any certain persuasion which we
had, that Pearth Articles are not abjured in the old Covenant; but because we
did not personally swear that Covenant, and are not tied to it, by the Oath of
those who did subscrive it: which we are ready to demonstrate by irrefragable
Arguments. Ye see then your Argument retorted upon us, pearceth us not at all:
and the Reader, may perceive that our argument has been so forcibly thrown
upon you, that ye have not taken upon you to answer any part of it. If ye had
had evidence of the truth for you, ye would not only have retorted our
Argument, but also by answering it punctually, shown, that it straiteth not
you: and if ye had been exact Resolvers, ye would not have gone about to have
satisfied us with a naked Argument in contrarium.

24. Before we leave this point, that it may be known to all, what reason we
have to insist in this our Argument, ad hominem, and that we have proponed it,
not to catch advantage of you, but to get satisfaction to our own minds,
concerning the Covenant, and your sincerity in urging us to subscrive it, we
will collect out of that which has been already said, some interrogatories,
which we pray you to answer punctually, if ye intend to give us satisfaction.
The first is, whether or not your declaration of the extent of the late
Covenant, to wit, that it extends not it self to the abjuration of Pearth
Articles, be not only vera, true in it self, but also verax, that is, consonant
to your mind, and to the mind of the chief contrivers of it? The reason
wherefore we propone this question, ye will perceive by these that follow.
Secondly, seeing ye and others the chief recommenders of the old Covenant, have
been ever of this mind, that Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, are abjured in
it; we ask, whether ye all tying your selves by this late Covenant, to the
inviolable observation of the old Covenant; have tied your selves to it in all
the particular points, which ye conceived to be contained in it, or only in
some of them? did ye by mental reservation, except any part of that old
Covenant, or in particular did ye except that part of it, in the which
perpetual continuance in the doctrine and discipline of this Church is
promised? Or if that part was not excepted, did ye put any new gloss upon it
which it had not before? And if ye did not, whether or not ye renewing the Oath
of perpetual observation, of the doctrine and discipline of this Church, as it
was Anno 1581, have not only really, but also according to your own conception
of that part of the old Covenant, abjured all Rites and Ceremonies, added to
the discipline of this Church, since the foresaid year; and consequently, the
Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie? Thirdly, seeing ye so confidently aver,
that Pearth Articles are abjured in the old Covenant, how can ye deny them to
be abjured in the new Covenant, except ye acknowledge a substantial
difference, betwixt the old and new Covenant? Fourthly, if ye grant that they
are really and indeed abjured in the late Covenant, how can ye faithfully and
sincerely say to us, or to any other, that they are not abjured in it? Fifthly,
how can ye, and all others, (who with you have really, and also according to
your own conception of the old Covenant, abjured Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie, by renewing of it) voice freely, in the intended Assembly,
concerning these* things; seeing ye are tied by your Oath, to condemn and
abrogate them? Sixthly, How can we concur with you in an Oath, wherein we are
infallibly persuaded that ye have abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie?
Seventhly, If we concur with you in that Oath, will ye not (as we objected in
our Reply, but ye have not answered it) think us bound by our Oath, to condemn
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie? and will not ye think your selves bound in
conscience to tell us, and all others, that which ye think to be truth, and
may make much for your cause, to wit, that the words of the Covenant have but
one sense, and that in that one sense Pearth Articles are abjured?

25. Ye, and all others, may now see, how injustly ye said, that we would have
the Covenanters, against their intention, and whether they will or not, to
disallow, and condemn Pearth Articles, and Episcopal Government, lest they be
tried in a free Assembly. GOD knows, how far we detest all such dealing, and
this vindication of our two Arguments [we added also a third, but ye have
swallowed it] brought by us, to prove, that Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie,
are abjured in your late Covenant, will sufficiently clear us of this
imputation, to all unpartiall Readers.

26. We did not only allege, as ye say, that your supplications to his
Majesty were fully satisfied by the last Proclamation; but grounding an
Argument upon your Answer, to our fourth Demand, we reasoned thus: If in all
your supplications, ye have only sought the removing of the Service Book, book
of Canons, and new high Commission; not complaining of any other Novations,
already introduced: and, seeing his Majesty has granted this unto you, what
reason have ye to say, that his Majesty has not satisfied your supplications?
this our Argument, ye have turned to a mere alleadgeance, lest ye should have
troubled your selves, with answering it.

Whether, or not, we may forbear the practice of Pearth Articles, until they
be tried in a free Assembly.
27. We come now to the consideration of that, which your Covenant, by your own
confession, tyeth us to; to wit, The forbearance of Pearth Articles, until
they be tried in a free Assembly. And first, whereas ye say, That the urging of
the Service Book, is a sufficient reason for forbearance of Pearth Articles,
till an Assembly; we profess, that we can not see the equity, and force of
this reason. For the Service Book may be holden out, albeit Pearth Articles
were not forborne at this time; yea, although they should never be removed. And
the more obedient, Subjects were at this time, to his Majesty's laws already
established, the greater hope might they have of obtaining their desires.

28. Ye bring two Arguments, to prove the lawfulness of the forbearance of
Novations already introduced. One is, that the Articles of Pearth establishing
them, were concluded only for satisfying the KING, and not to press any man
with the practice of them: And because the Act it self (ye mean the Act
concerning Kneeling) gives warrant, to forbear the practice of them at this
time, when the memory of Superstition is revived. But this reason does nowise
satisfy our consciences. For, to begin with the last part of your Answer; The
Memory of Superstitious Celebration of the LORDS Supper, is not renewed in this
Kingdom, for ought we know. And, if ye mean, that it is renewed by the Service
Book; suppone that were true, yet, ye know, the Service Book is discharged, by
the Act of Counsel, at his Majesty's commandment. Secondly, the Act of
Pearth, gives no warrant to forbear Kneeling* upon every suspicion or
apprehensio^ of Superstition, re-entring unto this Church. Your Argument, which
ye brought to prove this, from the narrative of that Act, in your Answer to
our ninth Demand, is confuted most plainly by us in our Replye to your Answer:
and we shall again speak of it in our Duplye, to your second Answer concerning
that Dema^d.

29. As for the other two parts of your reason, they are contrary to the very
words of the Acts of Pearth Assembly. The first part is contrary to the
Narrative of all these Acts, wherein no mention is made of satisfying the KING,
but of other motives taken from the expediencie, or utility of the matters
themselves. The second part is contrary to the tenor of the Decision, or
Determination of these Acts: in the which by these formal words, The Assembly
thinks good: the Assembly ordains: Kneeling in the celebration of the
Sacrament, Festival days, etc. are enjoined.

30. We hear of a childish, and rediculous concept of some, who think that
these words, The Assembly thinks good, import not an Ecclesiastic
constitution, but a mere advice or Counsel. This apprehension proceeds from
ignorance: for that phrase is most frequently used by Counsels, in their
decrees. In that Apostolic Counsel, mentioned Acts 15, the word (...), and
(...), are expressly used, verse 22. 25. 28. In the Counsel of Ancyra, Can. 1.
and 2. the word (...) is used. In that great and first OEcumenick Counsel of
Nice, Can. 5. ye have these words; (...). Can. 8. (...), Can. 11. (...). In the
third Counsel of Carthage, Can. 1. 2. and 3. the word placuit is used, and in
codice Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae Gr^co Latino, passim habetur vox Placuit
(...). And from the Greek word (...), the Decrees of the Apostolic Counsel
were called (...), Acts 16. 4. Yea, also the civil Decree of Caesar Augustus,
Luke 2. verse 1. is called (...), edictum, placitum. And in the Civil Law, the
Constitutions of Emperors, are called Principum placita, Instit. de Iure
naturali,. 6. and 9. Quod Principi placuit, Legis habet vigorem, says
Ulpianus, ff. de Constit. Principum, Lege 1: Where Quod Principi placuit,
signifies as much, as Quod Princeps constituit.

31. Your other reason, [which ye bring to prove the lawfulness of the
forbearance of Pearth Articles] is, that it is lawful to swear the forbearance
of a thing indifferent, in the case of scandal, and sensible fear of
superstition, in others. Yea, ye think, that by doing so, ye have sworn
obedience to the commandment of GOD, which forbids the doing of that
whereby others may be scandalized. This reason moves us no more then the
first: for, as for your fear of farther superstition, it is now groundless,
and causeless, in respect of the gracious promises contained in his Majesty's
Proclamation. But although it were a fear justly conceived, and although the
eschewing of an Evil justly feared, be a thing good and desirable; yet we
ought not* for the eschewing of it, disobey the lawful commandments of our
Superioures. For this were to do Evil, that good might come of it; which the
Apostle condemns, Romans 3. verse 8.

Of Scandal; and whether or not we may deny obedience to the Laws of our
Superiors, for fear of scandal causelessly taken?
32. As for that other motive of scandal, for which ye allege, that we who
think the matters concluded in Pearth Assembly, to be indifferent, and lawful,
may swear the forbearance of them; we pray you, tell us, what kind of scandal
it is, which, as ye allege, is taken at the practice of Pearth Articles? Ye
know, that passive scandal, is either procured by the enormitie or
irregularitie of the fact it self, [to wit, when either it is a sin, or else
has a manifest show of sin] or else it is not procured, but causelessly taken
by some, either through malice, or else through weakness. Now, which of these
two sorts of scandal would ye have us to acknowledge, in the practice of
Pearth Articles? If the first, then ye would have us to condemn Pearth
Articles, before they be tried in a free Assembly: which is contrary to your
protestation, and no less contrary to our resolution. For, if we acknowledge
any enormitie in the practice of Pearth Articles, ex ipsa condition operis, we
shall be holden to condemn them, and abstain from them for ever.

33. If ye will have us to acknowledge, that the scandal following upon the
practice of Pearth Articles, is of the second sort, that is, is causelessly
taken; and* that for such a scandal, whether it be taken through weakness, or
malice, we ought to abstain from the doing of a thing indifferent, although it
be enjoined by a lawful Authority* (for ye generally affirm, that all things,
which are not necessary, and directly commanded by GOD himself, ought to be
omitted, for any scandal whatsoever, although it be causelessly, yea, and most
maliciously taken, and that notwithstanding of any humane precept, or law,
enjoining them. See the Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies, Part. 2.
Cap. 8. Sect. 5. and 6. Item Cap 9. Sect. 10.) then we protest, that we differ
so far from you in this point, that we think, that for no scandal, causelessly
taken, can we swear such a forbearance of Pearth Articles, as ye would have us.
And we marvel from whence ye have learned this strange, and most haske
doctrine, that for scandal, causelessly, yea, maliciously taken, a man may
totally, and absolutely, deny obedience, to the laws of Superioures.

34. The Author of the dispute even now cited, alleges for his opinion, some
Schoolmen, acknowledging the truth of it: and he names Cajetane, and
Bennez, who (says he) affirm, that we should abstain, even a spiritualibus
non necessariis, when scandal arises out of them. He might have cited for
this tenet, Thomas, and all his interpreters, [even although he had been but
slenderly acquaint with them] as well as these two: for they all do say so.
But truly he much mistaketh them, when he alleges them for his opinion.
For, first, none of them* ever taught, that we ought to abstain totally and
altogether, from any spiritual duty for the scandal, either of the weak, or
malicious. Secondly, when Thomas and others following him, say, That bona
spiritualia non necessaria sunt dimittenda propter scandalum, they speak
directly de eis quae sunt sub concilio non vero sub praecepto, of matters of
Council, and not commanded by any Authority, divine or humane: and the most
which they say of them, is, that such things sunt interdum occultanda, vel ad
tempus differenda, that is, may at some times, and in some places, be omitted,
for eschewing the scandal of the weak. Thirdly, the most accurate Casuists,
and interpreters of Thomas, differ much about this question, Whether or not,
things that are commanded by positive Laws, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, may be
omitted at any time, for eschewing Scandalum pusillorum, the scandal of the
weak. Dyverse of them deny this, to wit, Navarrus, in Manual. Cap. 14. 44.
Vasquez, Tom. 5. Tract. de scandalo, dubio primo,. 5. Becanus in summa
Theologiae, Part. 2. Tom. posteriori, Tract. 1. Cap. 27. Quaest. 5. Ferdin. de
Castro Palao in opere morali, Tract. 6. Disp. 6. Punct. 16. Duvallius, in 2am.
2ae. D. Thomae, Tract. de Charitate, Quaest. 19. Art. 5. And for their
judgeme^t they cite Thomas, Durandus, Almainus, Anton. Florent. and many
others. Fourthly: Those of them who think, that things commanded by humane
Laws, may be omitted in the case of scandal, admit not as ye do, such an
omission of the thing commanded in the case of scandal, as is conjoined with a
flat disclaiming of the Authority of the Law. For they tell us, that we ought
not, for any scandal of the weak, deny obedience to the Precepts, or Laws, of
our superioures, whenever all other circumstances being considered, we are
tied, or obliedged, to the obedience of them. The omission, then, of the thing
commanded, which they allow, is only a partial and occasional forbearance,
and not a total abstinence from obedience, or disclaiming the Authority of the
Law. See Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 3. Quaest. 18. Punct. 4. and Suarez. de
triplici Virtute, Tract. 3. Disp. 10. Sect. 3.. 9.

35. But the forbearance of Pearth Articles, which ye require of us, is
conjoined with a flat disclaiming of the Authority of all the Laws which
established them. And ye will have us to forbear these Articles, at this time,
when all the particular circumstances, which we ought to regard, being
considered, we are tied to obedience of them, especially, if we look to the
will and mind of the Lawgivers, and of our present Superioures. We justly say,
that you will have us to disclaim, altogether, the Authority of these Laws.
For whosoever resolve and determine, not to practice Pearth Articles, until
they be tried in a new Assembly, and established by a new Parliament; these are
purposed, never to obey them, except they be tied by new Laws and Acts,
concluded in a new Assembly, and Parliament: And, consequently, are resolved,
never to regard and obey the laws or Acts of Pearth Assembly, and the
Parliament 1621, which established these things. But so it is, ye would have us
to resolve, yea, to promise, and swear, not to practice Pearth Articles,
until they be tried in a new assembly, and established by a new Parliament:
Ergo, ye would have us to promise, not to practice Pearth Articles, except we
be tied, or obliedged, by new Laws, to practice them: and, consequently, would
have us, never to regard, or obey, the Acts of Pearth Assembly, and Parliament
1621.

36. This kind of forbearance, to wit, which is conjoined with a plain
disclaiming of the authority of the Laws made by our Superiors, can not be
excused with your pretense of scandal causelessly taken. This we prove: First,
by a position granted by your selves, and so evidently true, that no man can
deny it. The Author of the Dispute, against English Popish Ceremonies, Part. 1.
Cap. 4. Sect. 4. says, That it were Scandal, not to obey the Laws of the
Church, when they prescrive things necessary, or expedient for the eschewing of
Scandal: And, that it were contempt, to refuse obedience to the Laws of the
Church, when we are not certainly persuaded, of the unlawfulness or
inexpediency of things commanded. Now, if such a refusing of obedience, be both
a Contempt, and a Scandal, it follows manifestly, that no man for eschewing
of Scandal causelessly taken, ought in such a case to refuse obedience. Hence
we reason thus: whosoever are not persuaded of the unlawfulness or
inexpediency, of the things commanded by their Superiors; and on the contrare
think them to be expedient ad vitandum Scandalum; these ought not for eschewing
of Scandal, refuse obedience to the Laws and ordinances of their Superiors.
But so it is, we are neither persuaded of the unlawfulness, nor of the
inexpediency of Pearth Articles: yea, on the contrary, we think that the Acts
of Pearth Assembly, enjoineth things very expedient for eschewing of Scandal:
Ergo, we ought not for eschewing of Scandal causelessly taken, to refuse
obedience to them. The Major of this our first Argument, is already proven. The
Minor is conform to the light of our own consciences, as GOD knows: and
therefore so long as we are of this mind, we can not deny obedience to the
ordinances of our Superiors, for any fear of Scandal causelessly taken.

37. Secondly, that which may be removed by information or instruction, can not
be warrant to us, of a total abstinence from the obedience of Laws, or, which
is all one, of an avowed disclaiming of the Authority of them. But the Scandal
of the weak, taken by the practice of Pearth Articles, may be removed by
information, or instruction: Ergo, it can not be a warrant to us, of a total
disclaiming of the Authority of the Laws, whereby these Articles were
established.

38. Thirdly: If for scandalls taken, especially by the malicious, we may
disclaim the Authority of a Law, then we may ever disclaim the Authority of
all Laws, of the Church or Estate. For there is nothing commanded by Laws,
but some either through weakness, or through malice, may take offense at it.

39. Fourthly, we ought not for eschewing scandal causelessly taken, to injure
or offend any man, by denying to him, that which is due to him, and therefore
we ought not, for eschewing scandal causelessly taken, to offend and injure our
superioures, in Church and Policy, by denying to them that obedience which is
due to them. The antecedent is clear by many examples. For if a man be
excommunicated, shall his Wife, Children, and servants slay his company, and so
deny to him these duties which they ow to him, for fear that others be
scandalized, by their keeping of company with an excommunicate Person? And if
they may not for eschewing of scandal, abstain from these duties, which they
ow to a private person, much less may we abstain from that obedience, which
we ow to our superioures, having public charges in Church and Policy, for
eschewing of scandalls causelessly taken by others.

40. Fifthly, what if the thing commanded, be enjoined by the civil Magistrate,
under pain of death, and by Ecclesiastical Authority, under pain of
excommunication, shall we for fear of a scandal causelessly taken, which may be
removed by information, or for the scandal of the malicious, who will not be
informed at all, abstain from the doing of a thing lawful and expedient,
enjoined by Authority, and by so doing, incur these most grievous punishments
of Death temporal, and spiritual? We believe, that your selves, who speak
most of scandal, would be loath to take such a yoke upon you.

41. Sixthly, The denying of obedience, to the lawful commandments of our
superioures, is forbidden in the fifth Commandment, and consequently it is a
sin. Shall we then for a scandal causelessly taken, deny obedience to our
superioures, and so incur the guiltiness of sin? Ye commonly answer to
this, that the negative part of the fifth Commandment, which forbideth the
resisting of the power, Romans 13. verse 2. and in general the denying of
obedience to superioures, is to be understood with the exception of the case of
any scandal taken by others. For if we see, (say ye) that any may, or will
take offense, at the doing of that which is commanded by our superioures, we
are not holden to obey them: and our denying of obedience to them in such a
case, is not forbidden in that Commandment.

42. But, first, we ask, what warrant ye have to say, that the negative part
of the fifth Commandment, is to be understood with the exception of the case of
scandal, more then other negative precepts of the second Table? Secondly: As
men may take offense, either through weakness, or malice, at our doing of the
thing commanded; so they are most ready to stumble at our denying of obedience
to the lawful commandments of our superioures: for they will take occasion,
by our carriage, to do that, unto which by nature, they are most inclined; to
wit, to vilipend Laws, and the Authority of their superioures. Shall we, then,
for the eschewing of a scandal causelessly taken, not only refuse to our
superioures, the duty of obedience, which they crave of us; but also incur
an other scandal, and that a far more perilous one. Thirdly: we have already
shown, that the negative part of the fifth Commandment, is not all ways to be
understood with the exception of the case of scandal causelessly taken. For,
Wives, Children, and Servants, must not deny obedience, and familiar
conversation to their Husbands, Parents, and Masters, which are excommunicated,
for fear that others, through weakness, or malice, be scandalized thereat.
Fourthly: As ye say, that the precept concerning obedience to superioures, is
to be understood with the exception of the case of scandal causelessly taken;
so we, with far better reason, say, that the precept, of eschewing scandal
causelessly taken, is to be understood with the exception of the case of
obedience peremptorly required, by our lawful superioures, as we shall show in
our next Argument.

Whether the Precept of Obedience to Superioures, or the Precept of eschewing
scandal, be more obligatory?
43. Last of all: when a man is peremptorly urged by his superioures, to obey
their lawful Commandments, and in the mean time fears, that if he do the
thing commanded by them, some, through weakness, shall be scandalized, by his
carriage; in this case, he is not only in a difficulty, or strait, betwixt the
commandment of Man, and the Commandment of GOD, who forbids us to do that
whereby our weak Brother may be offended; but also he seems to be in a strait
betwixt two of GODS Commandments; to wit, betwixt that precept which
forbids the doing of any thing, whereby the weak may be scandalized, and
that other precept which forbids the resisting of Authority; and tells us,
that whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of GOD. Now, seeing
GODS Precepts are not repugnant one to another, neither does GOD by his Laws
lay upon us a necessity of sinning, out of all question, in this case, we are
fred from the obligation of one of these precepts: and that which does not so
strictly tie us, or is less obligatory, must needs give place to the other,
which is of greater obligation. Ye commonly say, that the precept of obedience
to humane Authority, must give place to the precept of eschewing scandal,
although it be causelessly taken: And, to confirm your Assertion, ye say, that
the ordinance of a superior, can not make that fact to be free of scandal,
which otherwise would be scandalous; and, that a fact, upon which any scandal
follows, ought not to be done for the commandment of Man. Whence ye collect,
that, in such a case, we ought not to regard, or obey the Commandment of our
Superiors.

44. This your Reason can not be good, because we can easily retort the
Argument, and say to you, that in such a case we ought not to regard the
scandal causelessly taken by our weak Brethren, so far, as to deny simply, and
absolutely, Obedience to our Superiors for it: and that because the sin of
Disobedience ought to be eschewed and no Scandal of weak brethren causelessly
taken, can make that fact, not to be the sin of disobedience, which otherwise,
that is, extra casum scandali, would be the sin of disobedience. For it is
certain, that (laying aside the case of scandal) to deny obedience to the
ordinance of our Superiors, enjoining, and peremptorly requiring of us, things
lawful, and expedient, is really the sin of disobedience. Ye will say, that
the scandal of weak brethren, may make that Fact, or Omission, not to be
disobedience, which otherwise would be disobedience; because we ought not for
the Commandment of man, do that whereby our weak brother may be offended: and
so the precept of obedience binds not, when offense of a weak brother may be
feared. On the contrary we say, that the lawful commandment of Superiors,
may make that scandal of our weak brethren, not to be imputed unto us, which
otherwise would be imputed unto us, as a matter of our guiltiness; because we
ought not, for fear of scandal causelessly taken, deny obedience to the lawful
Commandments of our Superiors.

45. Again, ye say, that when scandal of weak brethren may be feared, the
precept of Obedience is not obligatory, in respect the thing commanded by our
Superiors, although it be in it self lawful, yet it becomes unexpedient, in
respect of the Scandal which may follow upon it. Now, (say ye) the ordinances
of our Superiors are not obligatory, when the things commanded by them are
unexpedient. We, on the contrary, say, that when our Superiors require of us
obedience to their lawful commandments, the precept of eschewing scandal, is
not obligatory; in respect we ought not, for Scandal causelessly taken, omit
necessary duties, which GOD in His Law requires of us: In which number, we
most justly do reckon, The duty of Obedience. which we owe to the lawful
Commandments of our Superiors.

46. As for that which ye say, that when Scandal may be taken at the doing of
the thing commanded, then the thing commanded becomes inexpedient, and so
ought not to be obeyed; that ye be not more deceived by this error, we pray
you mark, that a thing comcomanded by our Superiors, in Church, or Policy,
may be two ways inexpedient, to wit, either in respect of some particular
Persons, who through weakness or malice do stumble at it, or else in respect
of the body in general, because it is contrary to Order, Decency, and
Edification. If the thing commanded be inexpedient the first way only, we may
indeed, in such a case, for eschewing the scandal of the weak, forbear the
practice of the thing commanded hic, and nunc, in some particular places, and
times: providing alwise we do this* Without offense of our Superiors, and
without the scandal of others* who by our forbearance may be made to vilipend
the Authority of Laws. But we can not in such a case totally and absolutely,
deny obedience to a Law, as we have already proven. Neither is your Argument
brought to the contrary valide, in respect we ought more to look to the
utilitie and benefit, which the body of the Church may receive by the thing
commanded, and by our obedience to our Superioures, then to the harm which
some particular Persons may receive thereby.

47. If the thing commanded, be in our private judgment inexpedient the second
way, we ought not for that to deny obedience to the Laws of the Church; for
when the inexpediency of a thing is questionable, and probable Arguments may be
brought pro and contrae, concerning the expediencie of it, we have sufficient
warrant to practice it, if the Church by her public decree has declared, that
she thinks it expedient. Your error, who are of the contrary mind, is very
dangerous, and may prove most pernicious to the Church, for it makes the
Church obnoxious to perpetual Schism, and disconformity in matters of
external Policy: in respect men ordinarily are divyded in judgment,
concerning the expediencie of these things Suppon, then, that in a Synod
consisting of an hundredth Pastors, threescore of them think this, or that
particular Ceremony to be expedient for the good of the Church; and in respect
of the plurality of their voices, make an Act to be concluded for the
establishing of it, shall the remnant four^y, who are of the contrary
judgment, deny obedience to the Act of the Synod, because they are persuaded,
that the thing concluded is inexpedient, and shall they by doing so, rent the
body of the Church? Truly, if we were all of your mind, we should never have
Peace nor Unity in this Church. Ye will say, perhaps, that this our Argument,
is Popish, and leads men to acquiesce, without trial, or examination, in the
decrees of the Church. We answer, that in matters of faith, the truth whereof
may be in^allibly concluded out of GODS word, we ought not, without trial, to
acquiesce into the decrees of the Church. And in this respect we dissent from
the Papists, who ascrive too much to the Authority of counsels, as if their
decrees were infallible. But in matters of Policy, if we be certain, that in
their own nature they are indifferent, and if the expediencie of them only be
called in question, seeing no certain conclusion, concerning their expediency,
can be infallibly drawn out of GODS word, which has not determined, whether
this or that particular Rite be agreeable to order, decency, and edification; we
ought to acquiesoe into the decree or constitution of the Church, although it
be not of infallible Authority: and that partly because it is impossible, that
otherwise we can agree in one conclusion, concerning matters of this nature,
and partly, because if we deny obedience to the decrees of the Church in such
matters, our disobedience shall prove far more unexpedient, and hurtful to the
Church, then our obedience can be.

48. Seeing, then, whatsoever ye have hitherto said, concerning the question
proponed by us, may be easily answered, with a retortion of the Argument, upon
your selves; that we may eschew all such Logomachie, we must take some other
course, and try which of these two precepts is in it self of greater moment,
and obligation: for thence we may collect, which of these two precepts does
obliedge us in the case foresaid; the other giving place to it, and not
obliedging us at all, in that case. If ye say, that the precept which
forbids us to do that whereby our weak Brother may be scandalized, is in it
self more obligatory, or does more strictly ty us to the obedience of it, as
being of greater moment, ye must bring a solid reason for you, which we think
ye will hardly find. We know ye say, that the precept concerning Scandal, is
more obligatory, and of greater moment; because it concerns the loss of the
soul of a Brother: But this reason is not valide; first, in respect our
Brother, if he be scandalized, by our obedience to our superioures, sins not
by our default, who do obey: for our carriage in giving obedience, is such, as
may rather edify our Brother. Secondly: the precept which forbids
disobedience, concerns the loss both of our own souls, and of the souls of
others, who may be entysed to that sin, by our denying obedience, to the
lawful commandments of our superioures. Thirdly, if that precept of eschewing
scandal, causelessly taken, do so strictly obliedge us, when our superioures
require obedience of us, it may happen, that a man shall be in an inextricable
perplexity, not knowing whether he shall obey, or deny obedience to the
commandments of his superioures: in respect he may fear the scandal of the
weak, whether he obey, or deny obedience. For, as we said before, many are most
ready to be scandalized by our denying obedience to our superioures, in things
lawful, and otherwise expedient: and that because we by nature are most
unwilling to be curbed, and to have our liberty restrained, by the laws of our
superioures. For this cause (as Calvin judiciously notes, Instit. Lib. 2. Cap.
8.. 35.) GOD to allure us to the duty of obedience to our superioures, called
all superioures, Parents, in the fifth Commandment.

49. But we, with good warrant, do aver, that the precept which forbids
resisting of the Civil power, and in general the denying of obedience to the
lawful commandments of our Superiors, is of greater obligation and moment.
And, first, we prove this by an Argument taken from the diverse degrees of that
care, which we ought to have of the Salvation of others: for this care tyeth us
to three things; to wit, first, to the doing of that which may be edificative,
and may give a good example to all. Secondly, to the eschewing of that which
may be scandalous, or an evil example to all; that is, to the eschewing of
every thing, which is either sin, or has a manifest show of sin. Thirdly: to
abstain even from that, which although it be lawful, yet it may be, to some
particular persons, an occasion of sin. Of these, the first two are most to be
regarded, in respect they concern the good of all, which is to be preferred to
the good of particular persons. Hence we infer that the precept of obedience
to Superiors, which prescriveth an Act edificative to all, because it is an
exercise of a most eminent and necessary virtue, is more obligatory, and of
greater moment, then the precept of eschewing scandal, causelessly taken, by
some particular persons.

50. Secondly: That the precept of obedience to our superiors, is of greater
moment, and consequently more obligatory, then the precept of eschewing
scandal, is evident by these reasons which are brought by our Divines, to show
wherefore the fifth Commandment, has the first place in the second Table: to
wit, first, because it comes nearest to the nature of Religion or Piety,
commanded in the first Table, whence (as your own Amesius notes in his
Medulla, Lib. 2. Cap. 17.. 13.) the honoring and obeying of Parents, is called
by profane Authors Religion and Piety. Secondly: This precept, is the ground
and sinewe, (says Pareus, in his Catechetick explication of the fifth
precept,) of the obedience which is to be give^ to all the rest of the precepts,
of the second Table. Two reasons are commonly brought of this: one is, that all
Societies, oeconomick, Civil and Ecclesiastical, do consist and are
conserved, by the submission or subjection of Inferiors to Superiors, which
being removed, confusion necessarily follows. The other is, that the
obedience of this precept, makes way to the obedience of all the rest. For our
superiors are set over us, to the end, that they may make us to do our duty
to all others. And consequently our obedience to them, is a mean instituted by
GOD, to procure our obedience to all the rest of the Precepts of the second
Table. Now, would ye know what follows out of this, let your own Amesius,
whose words are more gracious unto you, then ours, tell you it: Seeing (says
he, Cap. citato,. 6.) humane society has the place of a foundation or ground,
in respect of other duties, of Justice and Charity, which are commanded in
the second Table of the Law: therefore these crimes which directly procure the
perturbation, confusion, and eversion of it, are more grievous then the
violation of the singular Precepts. Now we subsume: the denying of obedience to
Superiors, enjoining such things as in themselves are lawful and expedient,
directly procures the perturbation and confusion of humane society. And
therefore it is a crime greater then the violation of other particular precepts
of the second Table. For this cause, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his
Epistle ad Novatum, cited before, declaring how much the unity of the Church
(which is most frequently marred by the disobedience of Inferiors to their
Superiors,) ought to be regarded, says, that Martyrdom suffered for
es^hewing of Schism^, is more glorious, then Martyrdom suffered for ^sch^wing*
Idolatry.

51. Thirdly: These offices, or duties, which we owe to others by way of
Justice, are more strickly obligatory, then these which we owe to them, only
by way of charity. And consequently, these precepts which prescrive duties of
justice, are of greater obligation, then these which prescrive duties of
charity only. But we owe the duty of obedience to our Superiors, by way of
Justice, and therefore it is more obligatory, then the duty of eschewing
Scandal causelessly taken, which is a duty only of charity. The Major, or
first proposition of this Argument, is clear of it self, as being a Maxim not
only received by the Scholasticks and Popish Casuists, but also by our
Divines. See your own Amesius, in his Medulla, Lib. 2. Cap. 16.. 58. 59. 60.
61. 62. 63. where he not only proponeth this Maxim, but also proves it by
two most evident examples. The Minor is likewise clear: For, first, the duty
of obedience, which we owe to the public Laws of the Church and Kingdom,
belongs to that General Justice, which is called Iustitia legalis. For the
legal Justice, as it is in Inferiors, or subjects, it is a virtue inclining
them to the obedience of all Laws, made for the benefit of the Commonwealth,
as Aristotle declares in his fifth book of the Ethics, Cap. 1. Secondly:
Debitum obedientiae, the debt of obedience, which we ow to our superioures, is
not only debitum morale; a debt or duty, unto which we are tied by moral
honesty, and GODS Commandment, but also debitum legale, or debitum justitiae,
( quod viz. fundatur in propriojure alterius) a debt grounded upon the true and
proper right, which our superioures have to exact this duty of us; so that
they may accuse us of injury, and censure us, if we perform it not. There is a
great difference betwixt these two sorts of debt; and the last is far more
obligatory, then the first: As for example, a man owes moneys to the poor, by
a moral debt, but to his creditor he owes them by a legal debt, or debt of
justice: and therefore, he is more strictly obliedged to pay his creditor, then
to give alms. Suchlike, by moral honesty, and GODS precept also, a man owes
to his neighbor, a pious carefullnesse, to impede sin in him, by admonition,
instruction, good example, and by ommission even of things lawful, when he
foreseeth that his neighbor in respect of his weakness, will be scandalized
by them. But his neighbor has not such a right to exact these things of him,
neither can he have action against him, for not performing of them, as our
lawful superioures have for our due obedience.

In what sense the administration of the Sacraments, in private places, was
thought indifferent* in Pearth Assembly.
52. In our Reply we professed, that we can not abstain presently from private
Baptism, and private communion, being required t^ administrate these
Sacraments to such persons, as can not come, or be brought to the Church.
Hence, first, ye take occasion to object to us, that the state of the question
concerning Pearth Articles, is quite altered, in respect we and our associates,
did ever before allege the question to be of things indifferent, but now we
think them to be so necessary, that although the general Assembly of the
Church should discharge them, we behoved still to practice them: We answer,
first, that the Assembly of Pearth has determined nothing, of the
indifferency or necessity of these things. Secondly: If any who allowed these
Articles, did at that time in their discourses and speeches call them
indifferent, they meaned only, that in the celebration of these Sacraments, the
circumstances of place and time are things indifferent of their own nature: or,
which is all one, that we are not so tied to the administration of them in the
Church, and at times appointed for Sermon, but we may celebrate them in private
houses, and at other times. But judicious and learned men, even then thought
the denying of these Sacraments to persons, who can not come, or be brought to
the Church, to be a restraining of the means of grace, altogether unwarrandable
by GODS word. Whence ye may collect, whether or not they thought it to be
unlawful. Thirdly: Ye have no warrant from our Reply, to say, that we would
not abstain from private Baptism, and Communion, although our national
Assembly should discharge them. For as we are very unwilling to omit any
necessary duty of our Calling: so we carry a singular respect to lawful
Authority, and to the Peace, and Unity of the Church, abhorring Schism, as the
very Pest of the Church. But of this we shall speak hereafter in the thirteenth
Duply.

53, Next, ye say, if we have the same judgment of kneeling, in the receiving
of the Communion, and of Feastivall days, it comes to pass among us which
has been incident to the Church in former ages, that things have been first
brought in as indifferent, then urged as necessary. Certainly, Brethren, none
are so guilty of this, as your selves, and your associates: for ye have now
made some things to be esteemed necessary by your followers, which have been
accounted indifferent, not only since the Reformation, but these fifteen
hundredth years bygone. And in some other things, which the ancient Church did
wisely forbid, ye do now make the Liberty of the Gospel to consist. As for us,
we stand as we stood before, and do yet think kneeling in the receiving of the
Sacrament, and the five Festival days, to be Rites indifferent in their own
nature; but indeed very profitable, and edificative, if Pastors would do their
duty in making their people sensible, of the lawfulness and expediency of them.

54. We are of the same judgment concerning Confirmation, which Calvin,
writting upon Hebr. 6. 2. acknowledges, To have been undoubtedly delivered to
the Church by the Apostles: and with the same Author, in the fourth book of his
Institut. Cap. 19,. 14. we wish, that the use of it were again restored: so far
are we from that partial dealing with the Articles of Pearth, which ye object
unto us. What has moved our most reverend Prelates, to abstain hither^o from
the practicing of it, we know not: they can themselves best satisfy you in
this point. And we modestly judge, that this omission has proceeded from
weighty and regardable causes. It was sufficient for us, to have a care of our
own duties, in our particular stations. But the urging and pressing of that
practice upon the Bishops, requires higher Authority, then ours. In the mean
time, ye know the Bishops never disclaimed the Authority of the act of Pearth,
concerning Confirmation, or of any other of these Acts, as ye have done, who
have been hitherto professed and avowed disobeyers of them all. Wherefore we
wish you, hereafter not to bring this omission of the Bishops, in the matter of
Confirmation, as an Argument for that forbearance of Pearth Articles, which ye
require of us: for there is a great difference betwixt the omission of a duty
commanded by a Law, and an avowed, or professed, yea, sworn disobedience of
the Law.

55. Last of all, whereas ye say, that we, by mantaining the necessity of
private Baptism and Communion, do condemn the practice of this our Church,
from the Reformation, till Pearth Assembly, and put no small guiltiness upon
other reformed Churches, who use not private Baptism and Communion at all, but
abstain from them as dangerous: we answer, that we have, in all modesty,
proponed our own judgment, concerning private Baptism, and private Communion,
nominem judica^tes (as Cyprian said of old, in consilio Carthag. in praefat.)
nor taking upon us, to censure or condemn the practice either of this Church,
in times preceding Pearth Assembly, or of other reformed Churches. We can not
indeed deny, but we dissent from them: and if this be a condemning of them, we
may no less justly say to you, that you condemn the practice and doctrine not
only of our Reformers, in the particulars mentioned before in this same Duply,
but also of diverse reformed Churches, and of the ancient Church, as we
declared in our sixth Demand, and shall again speak of it in our sixth Duply.

A Defense of our Doctrine and Practice, concerning the Celebration of Baptism
and the LORDS Supper in private places.
56. Ye desire us, wisely to consider, whether the desire which our people have
of Baptism and Communion, in time of sickness, be not occasioned by prevailing
of Popery, and through a superstitious conceit that people have of these
Sacraments, as necessary to Salvation. We are loath to come short of you in
duties of charity, especially in good wishes; and therefore, we likewise wish
you, wisely to consider, whether the neglect of these Sacraments in the time of
sickness, which is in many parts of the Kingdom, proceed not from some want of
a sufficient knowledge, and due esteem of the fruits of these high and Heavenly
Mysteries.

57. It is well that ye acknowledge, that we minister these Sacraments in
private, as necessary only by the necessity of the Commandment of GOD; but
withal ye conceive, that our people imagine, or seem to imagine them to be so
necessary means, as that God has tied his grace to them. We desire you to
judge charitably of those who are unknown to you; and withal we declare, that
neither we do teach our People, nor do they think, for ought we did ever
know, that Baptism is so necessary a mean unto Salvation, that without it GOD
can not, or will not say any: yea, on the contrary, we are confident, that
when Baptism is earnestly sought for, or unfeignedly desired, and yet can not
be had, the Prayers of the Parents, and of the Church, are accepted by GOD, in
stead of the ordinary mean, the use whereof is hindered, by unavoidable
necessity: and so in this we depart from the Ambrose in obitum Val^tiniani. See
Doctor Field in his 3. book of the Church. Cap. 32.
rigid tenet of Papists. On the other part, we likewise teach, and accordingly
our People learn, that Baptism is the ordinary mean of our entrance into the
Church, and of our Regeneration; to the use whereof, GOD, by his Commandment,
has tied us.

58. If the commandment of our Savior, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye, therefore, and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, tie not Parents to seek Baptism to their Children, and
Pastors to administer, when it is sought, then have we no commandment at all,
for baptizing of Infants, which is an Anabaptisticall absurdity: But if Parents
and Pastors, are tied by this Commandment, then Parents ought to seek Baptism,
to their dying Children, not baptized before (for then, or never) and Pastors
must accordingly perform that duty then, which is incumbent upon them. This
is that which KING James of blessed memory, in a conference at Hampton Court,
Page 17, reports himself, to have answered to a Scottish Minister, while he
was in Scotland: The Minister asked, If he thought Baptism so necessary, that
if it be omitted, the child should be damned? No, said the KING; but if you
being called to baptize the child, though privatlie, should refuse to come, I
think you should be damned.

59. Ye say, (to avoid the strength of this Argument) that the necessity of
the commandment, stands only for Baptism in public; and, that no precept
requires Baptism, but when it can be had orderly, with all the circumstances
thereof: whereof ye say this is one, that it be administered in the presence of
that visible Kirk, whereof the Children are to be members. Thus, first, ye
condemn as unlawful the administration of Baptism even in the Church,
Godfathers, and Godmothers, being present, if the whole Congregation Altar
Da mascen, p. 828. and 853. Re-examination of the Assembly of Pearth, page 227.
be not present there; and the like doctrine we find in others, also cited on
the Margin, which sounds so harshly in the ears of some of your own
adherents, that they can not be persuaded that this is your doctrine. Secondly:
the Commandment of CHRIST tying us to Baptism, has no such addition either
of the presence of the Congregation, or yet of the material Kirk. This
belongs but to the solemnity, and not to the necessary lawful use of
Baptism. Where GOD has tied this solemnity to Baptism, ye can not show by
holy Scripture: but where GOD has tied us to Baptism, we have already shown.
It is true, solemnities should not be lightly omitted: but the Law says, When
evident equity requires, they may be dispensed with In regulis juris in sexto
Reg. 42.
for according to that same Law, That which is chief and principal, should not
be ruled by that which is accessory, but contrariwise. As for the place of
Baptism, we may say of it, as Tertullian says of the time thereof, in the 19
chapter of his Book of Baptism, Every day is the LORDS, every hour, day, and
time, is fit for Baptism: it may want of the solemnity, but nothing of the
grace. Neither is such a number, as ye require to be present, necessary in this
case. Our Savior has taught us, Matthew. 18. 19. That if two shall agree on
Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them,
of his Father which is in Heaven: For says he, where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. We beseech you,
therefore, Brethren, to take heed, that ye prescribe not to men's consciences,
Rites of necessity, without clear warrant from GODS word, by which ye will
never be able to prove the necessity of this circumstance required by you in
Baptism.

60. The practice of the primitive Church, both in the Apostles times, and
thereafter, agrees with this doctrine and practice of ours. Saint Philip
baptized the Eunuch on the way, Acts 8. Anantas baptized Saul in a private
house, Acts 9. Saint Paul baptized the Jaylour in his house, Acts 16. If ye
answer as others do, that the necessity of the infancy of* the Church,
excused the want of the presence of a Congregation: we reply, that the same
necessity is found in the cases whereof we speak: for as unpossible it is for a
dying insant, who about midnight is at the last gasp, to enjoy the presence
of the congregation, as it was impossible for any of the before mentioned, the
Eunuch, Saul, or the Iailor, to have had a Congregation present at their
Baptism, yea, more impossible; and why should there not be the same effect,
where there is the same reason?

61. The practice of the ancient Church, in this, is also clear for us. This is
manifest from the 76* Epistle of S. Cyprian, from the Oration Gregory Nazianz.
Orat. 40.
of Gregory Nyssen, against them who delayed their Baptism, from S. Basil, in
his 13 Homily, which is an exhortation to Baptism, Tom. 1. from Gregory
Nazianzen, in his 40. Oration, whose words (...). Upon these words, Nicetas
his Interpreter, speaks, thus; Baptismum suscipe quamd^u minime circum te
pugnant is qui te baptismi aqua tingere parat, and qui poecuniarum tuarum
haeres futurus est. Ille videlicet studiose age^s atque contendens ut ea quae
ad vitae exitum necessaria sunt, suppeditet, hoc est, ut te salutari aqua
tingat and dominicum corpus impertiat, hic contra ut testamento haeres
scribatur.
we have cited upon the margin. Hence although two fet times were appointed,
for solemn Baptism, yet the case of necessity was ever excepted. This is clear
by the foresaid Testimonies, as also by these following, Sir c^us Epist. 1.
cap. 2. Tom. 1. Council. Gelas. Epist. 9. ad Episcopos Lucani^, Tom. 2. Council.
Conc. Antisiodor. cap. 18. Tom. 2. Conc. Matiscon. 2. cap. 3. Tom. 2. Council.
Conc. Meldens. cap. 48. Conc. Triburiens. cap. 12. Council. in Palatio Vernis
cap. 7. Conc. Wormatiens. cap. 1. Tom. 3. Council. The learned Causabon, in his
16 exercitation, considering all this, says, Woe to them, that in the
administration of this Sacrament, deny their duty to dying Infants, under
pretense of I know not what Discipline. To this same purpose the learned Martin
Bucer, in the 15 Chapter of his censure of the English Liturgy, considering
Baptism of sick Infants privately, says, In this Constitution, all things are
hol^ly set down. This same practice also is allowed by Doctor Whitaker, in his
Book against Reynolds, Page 48.

62. The Congregation, say ye, whereof the child is to be a member, has
interest in this, and therefore ought to be present, no less then at
excommunication, whereby a rotten member is cut off. In this case of necessity,
there is no prejudice either to the child, or to the congregation, through the
want of the congregations presence: for there is no neglect, nor contempt of
the congregation in this case, or of any of the members thereof: and the child
by Baptism, though privately administered, is ingrafted into CHRIST, and so being
joined to the head of the Church, becomes also united unto the Church, which
is his body. If excommunication require the presence of the whole congregation,
because the power of binding and loosing, is delyvered by CHRIST to every
particular Church, or congregation, collectively taken as it is affirmed in the
Dispute against the English Popish* Ceremonies, Part. 3. Cap. 8. Page 182. then
it is not alike with Baptism, the power whereof is committed to the Pastors of
the Church, Matthew. 28. But although that ground be not true, as we think it is
not, yet excommunication is done in presence of the People. For this censure
may not be inflicted, but only for public offenses; and therefore must be
public, as the offense is, That others also may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and have
no company with the delinquent, that he may be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. and so
your similitude holds no^.

63. As for the administering of the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper, we say it is
most profitable, for comforting of the Souls of men, sighting with the terrous
of death; and that the case may fall out, wherein they most ardently desire it,
and consequently, that Pastors who are the Stewards of GODS House, ought not to
deny to his Children, so hungring and thristing in this conflict, that heavenly
refreshment: which we are not ashamed, with the ancient Fathers, to call,
(...), or Viaticum, though ye seem to condemn this. It is manifest by the
writtings of the ancient Fathers: Iustine Martyr, in his 2. Apology: Eusebius,
in the 6 Book of his Story, 36. Chapter, and others, that the Sacrament was
administered to sick persons privately. The famous OEcumenick Counsel of Nice,
in the 13 Canon, and second Consilium Nicenum, Can. 13.
part thereof, appoints the same, or rather confirms the ancient Laws
thereanent. The like we may see in the 76 Canon, of the fourth Counsel of
Carthage. See Balsamon also, upon the 20. Canon of the Counsel of Carthage,
where speaking of dying persons, (...).
he says, That the LORDS Supper should be carefully administered unto them;
and Baptism, if they be not baptized. Hence Bishop Jewel in his Dispute against
Hardings, Page 32. says, That certain godly persons, both men and women, in
time of persecution, or of sickness, or of other necessity, received the
Sacrament in their houses, it is not denied. The ancient Fathers also call this
Sacrament viaticum, or a provision for our journey. So the Fathers, in the
fourth counsel of Carthage, speak, Canon 78. So Gaudentius in his second
Treatise on Exodus. So in S. Basil his Liturgy, we find this Prayer, that the
participation of these sacred things, may be the viaticum of eternal life. So
Council. Vas. 1. Can. 2. So Paulinus in vita Ambrosii. Whence Causabon, in his
answer to the Epistle of Cardinal Perron, Page 49. says, The Church of
England not only distributeth, the Balsamon his words are, (...).
mystical bread to the faithful in the public Congregation, but also
administrateth to dying persons this viaticum, as the Fathers of the Counsel
of Nice, and all Antiquity, call it.

64. Learned Calvin was of this mind: Many and weighty reasons, says he,
Epist. 361. move me to think, that the Communion should not be denied to sick
persons. Zepperus, in his first Book of Ecclesiastical policy, and 12.
Chapter, has these words of this matter, One thing rema^neth yet to be
resolved, to wit, concerning the communion of sick persons. Albeit some think
otherwise, yet it seems, that the holy Supper may not, nor ought not, to be
denied to them that seek it. For if it was appointed for the confirming of our
faith, and increase of our Comunion with Christ; if we ought by the use of it
to testify our faith and study of repentance; why should they be deprived of
so great a good, who fight with long diseases, or are in danger of their life?
When does Satan labor more strongly to ^hake ^^d brangle our faith, then
when we are exercised with bodily diseases? When do our consciences tremble
more, and stand in need, of the most ample corroboration of faith, then when we
find that death is knocking at the door, and that we are called to compear
before the Tribunal of GOD? Hieronymus Zanchius, is of the same mind. Thus he
writes in an Epistle of his to John Crato, Physician to the Emperor, I have
nothing to say of the question proponed by you, but that I subscrive to your
judgment, providing this be done when necessity requires, and it be
administered to them, who through sickness, cannot come forth with others in
public. For since CHRIST denies this to none of his D^sciples, how can we
refuse it to sick persons, who desire it before they depart hence, and that not
out of any superstition, but that their minds may be the more comforted, and
raised up? Martin Bucer, in the 22. Chapter of his forementioned censure,
considering that part of the Liturgy, wherein the administrating of the
Communion to sick persons is ser down, says, Things here commanded, are
agreeable enough to holy Scripture: for it avails not a little, to the
comforting of troubled Souls, to receive the Communion of the LORD. Yea, he
has written a particular and most devote Treatise, directing Pastors how to
administer the Communion to sick persons: and yet we trust, ye will not call
him a Papist, since he was ^o hateful to Papists, that after he was dead, they
raised up his bones and burnt them. Peter Martyr, writting upon the 10. Chapter
of the 1. Epistle to the Corinth. speaking of the LORDS Supper, has these
words, They say it most be given to sick persons: I confess says he, but the
mystery may be celebrated before the sick persons. It is to be remarked also,
that often times it falls out, that some persons are affixed to their beds by
sickness, for the space of five or six, yea, ten years, or more: And how can
we deny the comfort of this holy Sacrament to those all that space, especially
when they earnestly long for it?

65. This doctrine and practice of ours, tends not to the contempt of the
Sacraments, (as ye would bear upon it) it is plain contrary: for by this
practice, we show, how much we reverence the Commandment of GOD, and how
highly we esteem of his ordinances, which we so earnestly seek after; whereas
on the other parr, the practice of others, leads people to the contempt of
the Sacraments, because they are moved the reby, to think, that there is no
such necessity and efficacy in them, as Scripture, and the consent of
Christians, has ascribed thereunto. As for other abuses, rehea^sed by you, as
fruits of private Baptism, since you bring no proof for what ye say in this,
we oppone our just denial, to your bare and unjust assertion.

66. Lastly, ye advertise the Reader, that ye think not the material Churches,
but the ordinary meetings, necessary to the lawful administration of the
Sacraments, lest any should conceive that ye entertain a superstitious conceit
of places. We think, ye might have spared this advertisement: for we find, that
they who oppugn our doctrine and practice in this point, are so far from being
in danger of the extremity mentioned by you, that on the contrary they ^each,
Altar Da ma^cen. p. 341. disp. against the English Popish Ceremonies, Part. 3.
Cap. 1.
that the Church is a place no more holy, then any other, and that it may be
indifferently used to sacred or civil uses: which in our judgment is not
agreeable, either to holy Scripture, or to sound Antiquity. See Eusebius in his
ecclesiastic History, Lib. 10. cap. 3. Ch^ysost. homil. 36. on the first
Epistle to the Corinth. S. Augustine, in his first Book of the city of GOD,
cap. 1. Codex Theodasianus, Lib. 9. Titul. 45. de his qui ad Ecclesias
confugerunt. Conc. Gangrens. Can. 21. Sect. 2. Re-examination of the Articles
of Pearth. page 143.

The V. DUPLY.
THe indifferent Reader may perceive, by our former Duply, that your Answer to
our first exception, taken from the obedience, due to Authority, and from our
judgment, concerning the administration of Baptism, and the LORDS Supper, to
dying persons in private places, has not given satisfaction.

2. We asked of you, in our fifth Demand, how we can subscrive the negative
Confession, as it is propounded by you, without contradicting the positive
Confession, approved by Parliament* holden A^no 1567, since the positive
Confession, chap. 21. declares, that Rites are changeable, according to the
ex^gency of time, and consequen^ly that no perpetual Law, may or ought to be
made of them, and the negative Confession makes a perpetual Law, concerning
the external R^^es of the Church; at least according to your judgment, who
urge the subs^riving of this Covenant and Confession upon us? we urged f^r^her
in our Reply, that the late Covenant binds us to the old Covenant made Anno
1581; for by your late Covenant, ye profess your selves bound to keep the
fore^aid national Oath (as ye call it) inviolable: and that old Covenant, or
Oath, binds us to the discipline which was then; and that discipline
comprehends all the external Rites of it, (as ye have in all your writings
professed, especially in that late Book entitled, The dispute against the
English Popish Ceremonies: whence in your Sermons, and printed Books, since the
Assembly of Pearth, ye have been still accusing us of Perjury.) So from the
first, to the last, the la^e Covenant binds us to the policy which was then;
and consequently, makes a perpetual Law, concerning the Rites of the Church,
as if they were unchangeable.

3. Your Answer to this Argument, is not sufficient, nor to the purpose. 1. Ye
put off, without any Answer, that which we allege out of a Dispute, against
the English Popish Ceremonies; and, in stead of answering, wish, that what we
have thence, or from any other Treatise of that kind, were kept to another
time. Pardon us, that we wish greater ingenuity, and a more direct Answer.
Consider the words of that Treatise before cited, Part. 4. Cap. 8. Sect. 8. No
man amongst us can certainly know, that the Discipline meaned and spoken of in
the Oath, by those that swear it, comprehends not under it those points of
Discipline, for which we now contend, and which this Church had in use at the
swearing of the Oath. Shall we, then, put the breach of the Oath in a fair
hazard? GOD forbid. The same we find to be the judgment of others also, who
have opposed the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopal Government. Since,
therefore, we desire to be resolved, concerning the right meaning of the
negative Confession, lest by it we condradict the positive Confession, approved
in Parliament: Had we not reason to propone this difficulty to you, who require
our subscription, and came hither, to resolve our Scruples? If ye condemn the
judgment of these your Brethren, who were Authors of these Treatises, why do
ye not openly profess, that ye, and the rest of the Authors of the late
Covenant, disallow it? If ye do approve it, as we have great reason to think
ye do, since ye have still opposed the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy, and
do expressly refer us to those Treatises in your ninth Answer: How do ye
not see, that, with a good conscience, ye can not require us, to swear, and
subscrive, that which ye know to be contrary to our mind? Remember, we pray
you, the words of the former Treatise, in the place before cited, put the case,
it were doubtful and questionable, what is meaned by the word Discipline in
the Oath; yet pars tutior, the safer way were to be chosen; which is affirmed
there to be this: that the points practiced by us, are abjured in the negative
Confession.

4. Secondly: whereas ye say, That none of you would refuse to swear the short
Confession, because we have expounded some Articles of it contrary to your
mind: we reply, that this answer satisfies not: for you swearing the
negative Confession, notwithstanding of the contrary Interpretation of them who
differ in judgment from you, shows not, how the apparent contradiction
betwixt it, and the positive Confession, objected by us, is reconciled by you
the propounders and urgers of it. Moreover, if we did urge you to subscrive the
negative Confession, when in the mean time we were persuaded, that our
interpretation of the Articles thereof, were contrary to your judgment; we
were bound to labor to inform your judgment, before we did exact your Oath:
and, consequently, by the law of Charity and Equity, ye are obliedged, not to
require our Oath, till first ye do that, which is sufficient, to make our
judgment conform to yours: which as yet ye have not done.

5. Thirdly: ye say, your desire is, that both of us keep our meaning of the
negative Confession, according to our diverse measures of light, and only
promise forbearance: which, ye say, we may do, because that we think the
points controverted, to be indifferent: we answer, that ye still flee the
point in question: for it is another thing for us, to keep our meanings, and
another thing for us, to swear a Covenant, when we are not persuaded of the
truth thereof. Ye might, and may still enjoy your meaning for us: but how we
can keep our meaning, and subscrive your Covenant, we see not; since we think
the one repugnant to the other. Neither is it forbearance only that is
required, as we have shown before; nor yet can we swear forbearance, the Law
standing still in vigor, and Authority requyring obedience. Lastly: we think
not all the points contraverted, to be indifferent, as was before declared.

6. Thus it may appear, how ye have dealt with our Sorites, as ye call it. The
like dealing we find anent our Dilemma; the horns whereof, (as ye speak) ye
labor to turn against our selves, by asking. To which of the members of the
distinction, we refer Pearth Articles and Episcopacy? If say ye, they were
abjured in the negative Confession, we are perjured for the practicing of them:
and if left indifferent* by that Confession, we may, notwithstanding of that
Confession, forbear the practice of them. First, Your Question is not
pertinent: For the distinction is not ours, but yours. And to what purpose is
it to you, to know, to what member of your distinction, we refer the Articles
of Pearth, and Episcopacy? Secondly: There is no strength in either of the
Horns of your Dilemma: For, by turning it wrong, you have made it your own.
The one horn is, That if the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacy, be left
indifferent, by the short Confession, we may forbear the practice of them.
First, This meets not the horn of our Dilemma, which was, if we be not tied,
by the negative Confession, to the ommission of these things; then why have ye,
in all your writings against us, exprobrated to us, Perjury, for violating of
the Oath contained in that Confession? To this no word by you is answered here.
Secondly: Suppone these things were left indifferent by the negative
Confession; yet may we not forbear the practice of them: because, since that
Confession, Laws have passed on them; which remaining in vigor, require our
Obedience as we said before.

7. The other horn of your Dilemma, is, that if these points were abjured for
ever, before Pearth Assembly, then we, who practice them, are perjured. To
which we answer, That it follows not: for we never did swear to that
negative Confession. And therefore, though these points were abjured therein,
yet are we free from all guiltiness of Perjury. And in the mean time, ye have
not resolved, how he who is persuaded, of the lawfulness of those points, can
swear the negative Confession, if by it the Swearer be tied, to the abjuring of
those points, which was the other part of our Dilemma. Thus if ye will consider
rightly, ye may perceive, that, our Dilemma stands unmoved, with the horns
of it still toward you. Ye farther insinuate, that our Reasons, are not solid
and grave, but velitations of such a sort as ye looked not for. Let the
judicious Reader, pronounce his sentence of this; only we wish, that ye had
chosen rather to satisfy, then to contemn our reasons. That which ye here
again add, concerning the change of Commisioners* is answered in our fourth
Duply.

8. To give light to your former discourse, ye subjoine a distinction of
discipline, into three members: First, ye say, it is taken for the rule of
Government of the Church, and censure of manners, by office bearers appointed
by CHRIST: and thus, ye say, it is unchangeable. Secondly, for constitutions of
counsels, and Acts of Parliament, about matters of Religion: And thus, ye say,
it is alterable, or constant, according to the nature of particular objects.
Thirdly: for the ordering of circumstances, to be observed in all actions,
divyne, and humane: and so ye say it is variable. First, by these distinctions,
the matter seems rather to be obscured, then cleared. For ye do not
express, in which of these senses the discipline mentioned in the negative
Confession, is to be taken, which was the point required of you.

9. Secondly: ye seem by this distinction, to entangle your selves yet more.
For, first, if ye take the name of discipline, in any one, or any two of these
senses, what say ye to these following words of your dispute against the
English Popish ceremmies, Part 4. cap. 8. Sect. 8. The Bishop does but
needlessly question, what is meaned by the discipline whereof the Oath speaks.
For howsoever in Ecclesiastical use, it signifies often times, that Policy,
which stands in the censuring of manners; yet in the Oath it must be taken in
the largest sense; namely, for the whole Policy of the Church. For, 1. The
whole Policy of this Church, did, at that time* go under the name of
discipline: and those two Books wherein this Policy is contained, were called
the Books of discipline. And without all doubt, they who swore the Oath, meaned
by discipline, that whole Policy of the Church which is contained in those
Books.

10. Secondly, when that little Confession was framed, the government of the
Church was only by Presbyters, and not by Bishops: and, therefore, if ye think,
that the name of discipline, in that Confession, comprehends under it the
first part of your distinction, (which, as we conceive, ye will no^ deny) ye
may easily perceive, that we are urged by you, to swear, and subscrive against
our Consciences; since we think the rule of the government of the Church, which
then was to be changeable; and, that the Government was lawfully changed, by
following Assemblies, and Parliaments, from Presbyters, to Bishops.

11. Thirdly: If these Constitutions of Counsels, concerning objects
alterable, mentioned in the second member of your distinction, be one, and the
same, with ordering of variable circumsta^^es* mentioned in the third member;
why have ye distinguished the one from the other? But, if they be different,
then ye grant, that Ecclesiastic constitutions, may See the^ Dispute against
the English Popish Ceremonies, part. 3. cap 7. sect. 5.
be made concerning some alterable matters of Religion, which are not bare
circumstances; which is repugnant to your ordinary doctrine; whereby ye
mantain, that nothing changeable, is left to the determination of the Church,
in matters of Religion; but only circumstances of Actions. We can not see, how
ye can mantain this doctrine, and yet oppose the determinations of the Church,
concerning Ceremonies, which are indifferent.

12. We had reason to inquire your judgment, concerning Rites or Ceremonies,
which are not of divine Institution, whether they be lawful, or not, though ye
still shun the declaring of it. Since by your Covenant, ye intend a reformation
of Religion, and a recovering of the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as ye
speak; if ye in your judgment, condemn such Ceremonies, (as ye insinuate) we
can not expect, but that, if ye obtain your desires, all such Rites shall be
expelled and condemned, especially since by this your late Covenant, ye tie
your selves to that old Covenant, wherein ye disclaim and detest all Rites
brought into the Church, without the word of GOD. The late Confession of
Helvetia, cap. 27 Confession of Bohem. cap. 15. English Confession, art. 15.
Confession of Auspurg. art. 15. art. 7. Confession of Wirtemberg. art 35.
Confession of Sweveland, cap. 14. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 30.
Oecolampadius Epist. Lib. 4. page 818. Zepperus Polit. Eccles. page 138. 142.
143. Zanchius, in quartum praeceptum. Melanchton, in many places. etc.
Now, we can not concur with you, for promoving this end, because such a
judgment, is plain contrary to ours, yea, contrary to the universal judgment
and practice, of the Ancient Kirk, repugnant also to the judgment of the
Protestant Churches, and most famous Divines therein, as may appear by the
quotations on the margin. But if ye be of the same mind with us, and think,
that there are some Rites of that kind lawful, why do you hide your mind
from us, and others, since the acknowledgement and manifesting of this Truth,
would be no small advancement to your cause, by removing this great offense?

Of Matrimonial Benediction, and Godfathers in Baptism.
13. As for solemn blessing of Marriage, we asked, what warrant ye had for it,
by precept or practice, set down in GODS Word. In your Answer ye insinuate,
that it is a blessing of the people commanded in the Law, and more plainly we
find this set down in the Dispute, against the English Popish Ceremonies, Part.
3. Cap. 2. Sect. 10. Yet plain it is from Scripture it self, that Matrimonial
Benediction, ought to be given by a Pastor, for GOD has commanded his
Ministers to bless his People, (Numb. 6.) First, who ever before you, did
ground the necessity of solemn blessing of Marriage upon these words, Numb. 6.
23. Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless
the children of Israel, saying unto them: the LORD bless thee, and keep thee:
etc. Learned Melanchton, was not so well versed in Scriptures, as to see this.
For he says in his Epistles, Page 328. Ye see that the Rite of the Ancients
is, that the Bridegroom and Bride, are joined before the Altar, in the sight of
GOD, and with the incalling of GOD. Which custom undoubtedly has been
ordained by the first Fathers, that we may consider that this conjunction was
appointed by GOD, and is assisted by Him.

14. Secondly: By this commandment of GOD, to bless the people, Numb. 6.
either there is a necessity laid upon the Church, to bless Marriages solemnly,
or not. If ye say, there is not a necessity, then there is no Commandment of
GOD there-anent, for it is necessary to obey GODS Commandment. If ye say,
there is a necessity, what say ye then to your friend Didoclave, who in his
Altar of Damascus, page 866, affirms, that neither the presence of the
Congregation, nor blessing of the Minister, is necessary to this action? And if
ye dissent herein from him, ye are holden to prove your opinion, by a necessary
consequence from holy Scripture, which we are persuaded ye are not able to do.

15. Thirdly: the commandment, to bless the people, is no less, if not more
general, then that, 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in
order: on the which words, both ancient and recent Divynes, do ground the
lawfulness of the Ceremonies which we allow.

16. Fourthly: Since that commandment, of blessing the people, is general,
what reason have ye, for not including other civil important Contracts,
especially that are performed with a Vow, or promissorie Oath? A vow made to
GOD, is a Covenant with GOD* as well as the Matrimonial Oath. All Vows and
Oaths, are Acts of religious Worship, although they be joined to civil
Contracts: and, therefore, if because of the Covenant with GOD, ye bless
Marriage solemnly, ye ought to do the same, to other civil Contracts, wherein
there is the like Covenant, by virtue of an Oath or Vow.

17. Fifthly: Whereas ye say, that though Marriage were a paction, merely
Civil, yet because it is so important, ye would not withold Ecclesiastic
Benediction from it, notwithstanding of the abuse of Popery: we would
understand, how this agrees with the current Doctrine of those that are of
your mind: for we read in the Abridgement of Lincoln, page 17. that we should
cast away even such things, as had a good original, (if they be not still
necessary, and commanded of GOD) when once they are known to be defiled with
Idolatry, or abused by it. So in the dispute against the English Popish
ceremonies, Part 3. cap. 2. Sect. 2. it is affirmed, that Rites, ancient,
lawful, and agreeable to GODS Word, should, notwithstanding, necessarily be
abolished, because of their superstition, and wicked abuse. Ye add, that ye
will not use Marriage superstitiously, according to the prescript of the
Service Book. Ye did not find the Service Book, neither in our Demands, nor in
our Replies; yet we know not, how ye so often reach unto it.

18. Lastly: of the stipulation of Godfathers in Baptism, instanced by us, in
our fifth Demand, ye have spoken nothing particularly, either in your first or
second Answers. We have no precept, or example See Peter Mart. on the 6. chap
of the Epistle to the Romans and Gerardus, in Loc Theolog. Tom. 4.
of it in holy Scripture: yea, some of our learned Divynes affirm, that it was
instituted by Pope Higynus: and ye will not deny, that it has been much abused
in Popery. How comes it to pass, then, that this Ceremony is allowed, and
used by some of you? we say, some; for we are informed, that some of your
mind, do not use it at all. See D. Morton, in his defense of the three
ceremonies, page 24.

The VI. DUPLY.
IN your first Answer to our sixth Demand, ye answered nothing to that, which
we affirmed concerning the judgment of Divynes, ancient and modern, who
either have absolutely allowed these Rites, which were concluded in Pearth
Assembly, or else have thought them tolerable, and such as ought not to make a
stir in the Church: neither did ye touch that, which we objected, concerning
the venerable custom, and practice of the ancient Church, and the most eminent
lights of it, which ye condemn in your interpretation of the negative
Confession, contained in the late Covenant. Wherefore, in our Reply to that
Answer of yours, we did hold your silence, for a granting of the truth of
that which we said, concerning so many Divynes, ancient and modern, who stand
for us. Now in your second Answer to that Demand, ye labor to bereave us of
this advantage, and granting that Divynes, both ancient and modern, are against
you, concerning the lawfulness of things controverted, (a thing to be noted by
the Reader, and which should make you more sparing in your speeches of us who
favor Pearth Articles, then ye are) ye say, first, that Divines, ancient, and
modern, are against us also: and that both these propositions may be true, in
respect they are both indefinite in a matter co^tingent. But our proposition
concerning the judgment of Divines who stand for us, was more then indefinite.
For albeit we said, not, that all are for us; yet we said, that many, yea, so
many; meaning, that a great many are for us, and against you, in matters of
lawfulness, and unlawfulness, and, consequently, in matters of faith. This
expression of the number, ye were glad to pass by: because ye can not say the
like of these, who favor your judgment, concerning the unlawfulness of those
things. For, scarce know we any modern Divines, without his Majesty's
Dominions, that peremptorly condemn these Rites, as unlawful, which were
concluded in Pearth Assembly: and of Ancients, we mean the Fathers of the
Ancient Church, we know none at all, who are of your mind. How is it, then,
that for these your new positions, ye make such stir, and do take such
dangerous courses in hand.

Secondly: Ye say, that almost all Divines allow of such a forbearance, of
things indifferent, as ye require of us. But ye will not be able to make this
good: For, who of our Divines, have any-where allowed, in subjects such a
forbearance of things indifferent, and lawful, as is conjoined with a total
and sworn disobedience to standing Laws, against the Prohibition of their
Superiors.

Thirdly: That which ye say, concerning Innovations already introduced; to wit,
that nothing is required of us, concerning them, but a Forbearance of them for
a time; and, that we may condescend to it, without either disobedience to
Authority, or wronging of our Flock; it is already refuted, in the two former
Duplyes.

The VII DUPLY.
OUr Reason proponed in the seventh Demand, is not sufficiently answered,
neither the impediment removed, as we have formerly made manifest, especially
in our fourth Duply. Whereas, for removing of our scruple, concerning your
interpretation of the short Confession, ye tell us, that ye urge not upon us
your meaning, but leave us to our own, till the matter be examined in an
Assembly: We answer; we love not the swearing of an Oath, without clear
interpretation thereof; and we approve not subscription of such a Covenant,
with diverse, or doubtful meanings: neither do we think that a convenient
mean, for solid Pacification. And as we are free, in professing our meaning,
concerning the Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy; so we require of you the like
plainness, or then the reason of your tetyrednesse.

2. The Pearth Articles ye do unjustly call Novations, if by this name ye
understand, things repugnant to our reformed Religion, or forbidden by our
public Laws: for these Articles are not of this sort. Those of them which we
call necessary, the Assembly of Pearth did not conclude as indifferent, (as ye
allege) neither can any such thing be inferred from the words of the Acts of
that Assembly. Therefore, we have no reason to change this opinion, as ye would
have us to do. We hold all the five points, to be lawful, and laudable, and
some of them more then indifferent, which also the words of the Synod it self
do imply: so that, without just reason, it has pleased you to say, that
things formerly indifferent, are become necessary; and what was but lawful
before, and had much ado to gain that Reputation, is now become laudable. Thus
again, we do plainly declare unto you, that the cause of our unwillingnesse to
subscrive, or promise forbearance, is both the commandment of Authority, and
also the necessity and excellency of some of the things commanded: besides
that, we think them all lawful, and laudable. What we would do, at the
commandment of Authority, in the forbearance of the practice of those things,
for the peace of the Church, and Kingdom, shall be declared in our Duply to
your thirteenth Answer, wherein ye urge this point again.

The VIII DUPLY.
Whereas ye do remit the Reader, to your former Answer, and our Reply; we
also remit him thereto, and to our first Duply; hoping that he shall rest
satisfied therewith.

2. We have, in those places, answered your Argument, concerning your swearing,
the defense of the KING, and his Authority, with a specification, as ye call
it; and have shown, that what has not been looked to so narrowly, in this
matter heretofore, is requisite now, for the reasons expressed in our eight
Reply, and first Duply. Concerning the full expression, of the loyalty of your
intentions, to mantain the KINGS Person, and honor; whether, or not, ye have
given just satisfaction, to those who are nearest to the KINGS Majesty, (as ye
say) we refer you, and the Readers, to that, which ye, and they, will find
near the end of our first Duply. We wonder greatly, ye should affirm, that we,
by craving resolution, do wrong the KING, and our selves; or that ye, by
giving of it, should wrong them who are nearest his Majesty, and also the
Covenant, and the subscrivers thereof. For our requiring of resolution, in this
matter of so great importance, is a pregnant Argument of our loyalty toward
our dread Sovereign, and of our care, to have alwise our own consciences void
of offense, toward GOD, and toward Men. And your giving of satisfaction unto
us, would have served for farther clearing of your Covenant, and the
subscriptions thereof. Your pretense, that by giving us satisfaction, ye should
wrong them who are nearest his Majesty, is grounded upon a wrong supposition,
as if they had already received satisfaction by your Declaration.

3. GOD is witness, we do not wittingly and willingly multiply doubts, for
hindering a good work, or to oppose against a shining light, (as ye would have
the Reader to think of us) but in all humility, and uprightness of heart, do
declare our mind, and do intimate our unaffected scruples. And we think it
very pertinent, at this time, to crave resolution of them, and to desire your
answer, concerning this maine duty, which is not fully expressed in your
Covenant; whereas a more full expression of it, had been very needful, at this
time.

4. Lastly: Whereas ye complain, that we took not sufficient notice of you,
while ye were amongst us; ye may easily consider, that our public charges, and
employments, together with the shortness of the time of your abode here, do
sufficiently vindicate us, from any imputation of neglect in that kind: and
our doors were not closed, if it had pleased you, in Brotherly kindness, to
have visited us: which we ought rather to have expected of you, seeing ye came
undesired, to the place of our Stations, to deal with us, and also to deal with
our people, against our will, before we had received satisfaction.

The IX. DUPLY.
AS ye do refer the Reader, to your former Answers; so do we refer him to
our former Replies, and Duplyes.

2. The meaning of the Act of the Assembly of Pearth, citing the words of the
Psalm. 95. is not (as ye do interpret it) any perverting of the Text, neither
tends it to infer thereupon, absolute necessity of kneeling, in all
worshipping of GOD, or in this part of his Worship, in the celebration of the
holy Communion: but only to inserr the lawfullnesse, and commendable decency of
kneeling, in divyne worship; and that it is such a gesture, as our lawful
superiors may enjoine to be used, in GODS worship; and that religious
adoration, and kneeling, is to be done to GOD only, although they sin not, who
use another gesture, where this is not required by Authority, but another
appointed, or permitted.

3. We do not kneel before the Sacramental Elements, making them the object
of our Adoration, either mediate, or immediate: neither does the Act of Pearth
Assembly import any such thing. But all our Adoration, both outward, and
inward, is immediately directed to GOD only, with Prayer, and thanksgiving, at
the receiving of so great a benefit. Wherefore, your objecting of Idolatry,
against us here, and in your other Treatises, is most unjust. We marvel also,
how ye do here refer us, to those Treatises, which in your twelfth Answer, ye
seem to disclaim, finding fault, that any of us should lay hold on them, or
build any thing upon them. As likewise ye here allege, that the Assembly of
Pearth made Kneeling necessary in all points of GODS Worship; and,
consequently, in receiving the holy Eucharist: not remembering, that in your
seventh Answer, ye said, the Assembly had concluded the five Articles as
indifferent.

4. Concerning the Service Book, (which now is not urged) we have already
answered. Neither find we any reason, of your uncharitable construction of us,
or of the disposition of the people, as if they were now become superstitious.
Nor does this time give any just cause of such fears, as are sufficient to
overthrow the reasons of that Act of Pearth Assembly.

5. We did not in malice, but in love, say, that such a defense as ye profess
here, according to your Protestation, and such meetings and conventions do
require the KINGS consent, and Authority, to make them lawful, according to
our judgment: whereof some reasons we have expressed before in our second
Reply, which as yet ye have not satisfied.

6. It seems, that ye are either not able, or not willing, to answer
particullarly and plainly, to our interrogatories proponed in our ninth Reply:
and we would understand some reason, why ye do so, in such a free and
brotherly conference; seeing although ye do otherwise interpret our meaning,
yet truly we did not propone them to be snares to you, but to obtain
satisfaction to our selves and others, for a peaceable end. As for your
Questions, which ye throw against us, with plain profession to work us
coffeehouse thereby, we shall here make an answer to them in meekness, and
evident demonstration of our peaceable disposition.

Questions Answered.
7. YOur first Question, concerning the Service Book, and book of Canons, is
nowise pertinently proponed to us. If we did urge upon you the said books of
Service and Canons, as ye do now the Covenant upon us, we should particularly
and punctualy, declare our mind concerning them.

8. To your second Question, we answer, that it is our duty to enquire
carefully, what is incumbent upon us by the Law of GOD, and man, toward our
Prince. We do not move questions of state, but do answer to your
propositions, resulting upon matters of state, and we do labor, as it well
becomes all good Subjects, to be well informed, before we put our hand to any
thing, which concerns our due obedience to our Prince. As for that which here
again ye allege, of his Majesty's Commissioner, and wise Statesmen, as
having received satisfaction from you, we refer you, as before, to our
Answer made thereto, in our first Duply.

9. To your third Question, we answer; our assertion concerning the
unlawfulness of Subjects their resisting the Authority, of free Monarchs, by
force of Arms, even although they were enemies to the Truth, and persecuters
of the professors thereof, can not in the judgment of any reasonable man,
import that we have the least suspicion of our KING, that either he shall
change his Religion, or shall fall upon his religious and loyal Subjects with
force of Arms. We have often declared in these our Disputs, that we are fully
persuaded of our KINGS Majesty's constancy, in profession of the true Religion,
and equitable disposition in ministration of Justice. And in testification
hereof, we rest satisfied with his Majesty's Proclamation, against which ye
have protested.

10. To your fourth Question, we answer, because that we do esteem
subscription to your Covenant, neither to be warrantable by GODS word, nor to
be a convenient mean for pacification, we hold it our duty, both to withold
our hands from it, and to dehort our people from it.

11. To your fifth Question, we answer: 1. We hold it a wrong ^upposition which
ye make, that the Prelates and their followers, are laboring to introduce
Popery, and to make a faction. 2. We know our gracious KING, to be so just, and
so wise, and so ripe in years and experience, that he will no^ suffer any of
his Subjects, to abuse his Majesty's name, in the execution of any injustice.
3. To make resistance by force of Arms, against the KINGS public standing
Laws, and against his Majesty's public Proclamations, is not (in our
judgment) a convenient or lawful way, for defending of the Religion, of the
Liberties, and Laws of the Kingdom, and of the KINGS Authority; but on the
contrary it brings scandal upon our profession. See our Reasons in our
second Duply.

12. To your sixth Question, we answer, that in all free Monarchies, there is
nothing left to subjects, in the case of persecution, by their own Sovereign
Princes, but patient suffering, with Prayers and Tears to GOD, or fleeing from
their wrath, as we have at length proved in our second Duply. This doctrine did
the people of Alexandria, learn of their holy Bishop Athanasius, as is evident
by their own words, in their Protestation, subjoined to the Epistle of
Athanasius, ad vitam solitariam agentes. If (say they) it be the commandment
of the Emperor, that we be persecuted, we are all ready to suffer Martyrdom.
(...). Tom. 1. Oper. Athanas. Page 868. Edit. Paris. 1627. As for the nature of
the Government of this Kingdom of Scotland, read the Book of King JAMES the
sixth of blessed memory, entitled, The true Law of free Monarchies, and the
Preface of the first Book of Regiam Majestatem; where it is expressly said, of
the KING of Scotland, that He has no Superior, but the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, Ruler of all things. This our Answer, neither proceeds from flattery,
neither from any intention, to stir up Princes against their loyal Subjects,
nor from any aim at other worldly ends, (as ye do uncharitably judge) but
from our due fidelity to our KING, from our true love to our Country, and from
our upright desire to the Glory of GOD, and the comfort of our own Souls, in
the Day of our Accounts.

The X. DUPLY.
ALthough we take you to be of the number of those who penned the late
Covenant, yet pardon us, to call your Glosses of it in question, so long as ye
do not satisfy our Arguments, which prove them to be contrary to the very
words of your Covenant. We have shown, in our Replies, and now again in our
fourth Duply, that the words of the Covenant import a perpetual adherance, to
the who^e external Policy of the Church, as it was Anno 1581; and the removing
of Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, as of things contrary to the Liberty and
Purity of the Gospel. Whence we still infer, that these who have sworn the
Covenant, are tied by their Oath, to vote against Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacy: and, consequently, can not, without prejudice, either dispute, or
give out a decisive sentence concerning them, in the intended Assembly.

2. Ye say, ye will not judge so uncharitable of us, as to think us so corrupt,
that, in our opinion, since the time designed by us, nothing has entered into
the Church* beside Episcopacy, and the Articles of Pearth, which can be
prejudicial to the liberty and purity of the Gospel. We are glad, that
although ye judge uncharitably of us, yet ye judge not so uncharitably: and,
although ye think us corrupt, yet ye think us not so corrupt, as not to be
sensible of these things. We told you our mind before, in our fourth Duply,
concerning these abuses, which ye think to have been occasioned by Pearth
Articles: and now we tell you, that if Pearth Articles, and Episcopacy, for
these their alleged consequents, be altogether removed, the benefit which ye
think our Church may receive, by removing of them, shall not, in any measure,
equal her great losses.

The XI. DUPLY.
We complained in our Demand, of the uncharitableness of your Followers, who
calumniate us, as if we were favorers of Popery. And to show how unjust this
calumny is, we declared, that we are ready, to swear, and subscrive, our
national Confession of Faith, ratified and registrated in Parliament: to which
Declaration, we have now added our Oath, which we did swear, when we received
the degree of Doctorate in Theology, and have solemnly again renewed it, Page
81. 82. In your Answer to that Demand, ye slighted our complaint, and did not
so much as once mention it; which made us in our Reply, to complain also of
you, who have shown your selves so unwilling to give us that testimony of our
sincerity in professing the Truth, which all who know us, think to be due to
us. We expected, that in your second Answer to that Demand, this fault should
have been amended. But, contrary to our expectation, we perceive, not only that
ye are insensible of the grievous injury done to us, by the calumnious
reports of others; but also, that ye have busied your own wits, to enquire,
as ye say, in matters, to search, and to try our ways, and to expisca^e what
ye could against us, by the unfriendly testimony of some, who, perhaps, are
displeased with us, as Achab was with M^ca^ah, for the freedom of our
admonitions. Charity, ye know, thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13. 5. and covers a
multitude of transgressions, Prove. 10. 12. 1. Pet. 4. 8. But uncharitable
inquisition, and prying into other men's doings, not only discovers those
infirmities, unto which GOD will have every one of us subject, for humbling of
us; but also brings even upon good men, a multitude of undeserved Aspersions.
Brethren, we intend not to give you a meeting in this; for our resolution is,
not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with good, Romans 12. 21. And
we are glad to suffer this for his cause, whose Truth we mantaine, pitying in
you this great defect of Christian and Brotherly compassion; and praying GOD,
not to lay it to your charge. Wherefore, we will not search and try your ways,
as ye have done ours: but we will reflect our thoughts upon our selves, and see
whether or not we be guilty of these things, which ye here reprehend in us.

2. Ye say, first, That we have taken an ample testimony to our selves. But
what, we pray you, have we testified of our selves; but this only, that in
sincere and zealous profession of the Truth, we are not inferior to others;
and, according to our measure, have striven to be faithful in all the duties
of our Calling? Ye have, indeed, put more into our Apology, and say, that we
have praised our selves, from our frequency of Prayer, extraordinary
Humilations, and holiness of Life, and Conversation, etc. For, as ye are loath
to speak any good of us; so ye would have the Reader believe, that we speak too
much good of our selves. But in this, as ye wrong us, so ye make the Reader to
see, how negligently ye have read and considered our words. For, whereas in the
second part of our Reply, we told you, that we have other means, and more
effectual, then your Covenant, to use, for holding out of Popery; mentioning
in particular, extraordinary Humiliation, frequency of Prayer, amendment of
life, diligence in Preaching, and searching the Scriptures, etc. Ye imagine,
that we do arrogate to our selves, some singularity, in using these means; not
considering, that it is one thing to say, that we may and ought to use these
means, and another thing, to say, that we are singular, and eminent, above
others, in the diligent use of them.

3. Next: Whereas ye say, that ye were desirous, rather to hear that testimony,
at the mouths of others, (as if ye had never heard our Pains and Labors, for
the Truth, commended by any) who knows not, but in this case, in the which
we stand for the present, it is lawful, and most expedient to men, to
vindicate themselves, and their fidelity in their Callings, from the contempt
and calumnies of others. We have in the Scriptures, notable examples of GODS
dearest Saints, who in such cases, yea, in other cases also, without any
derogation, to their singular humility, did fall out into high expressions, of
their own virtuous and pious carriage. Who ever spoke so humbly of himself as
Paul, who calls himself less then the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. and
yet elsewhere he says, that he was not a white behind the very chiefest
Apostles; and, that he labored more abundantly then they all, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
2. Cor. 11. 5.

4. The defects, which by your strict and curious Inquisition, ye think ye have
found in us, may be reduced into two points: One is, that we are too sparing in
our pains, in Preaching; and, that we often fill our places with Novices. The
other is, that the small pains which we have taken, are not fruitful. And, to
prove this, ye say, that Popery has no less increased in our City, under our
Ministry, then any time before since the Reformation. As for the first of
these, to omit that which modesty will not permit us to speak, either of our
own pains in teaching, or of yours, it is very well known, that in the case of
sickness, and extraordinary employments in our callings, which but seldom do
fall forth to us, it is both lawful, and commendable to see, that our places
may be filled, either with some actual Minister, or, failing of that, with
able students of Divinity, approven by public Authority, whereof your selves
can not be ignorant, in respect of your frequent Peregrinations, from your
Stations.

5. As for the next point: Although it were true, yet the Parable of the seed
sown in diverse sorts of ground, and the dolorous complaints, which these most
painful and thundering Preachers, Eliah, 1. King. 19. 10. Isaiah, 53. 1. Paul
Gal. 1. 6. and 3. 1. yea, of CHRIST himself, Matthew. 23. 37. and Luke 19. 41.
42. made of the hard success of their labors, may learn you to be more
beninge in your censures of us, then ye are. In the mean time, it is known to
his Majesty, to the Lords of secret Counsel, and to all the Country here; as
also it is evident, by many public extant Acts of the said secret Counsel,
and of our Diocoesian Assemblies, that we have been as diligently exercised, in
opposing of Popery, as any Ministers in this Kingdom. Neither has our success
herein been so badde, as ye have given it out: for since our entry to the
Ministry here scarce has any man been diverted from the truth, to Popery;
some Papists have been converted, to the profession of the Truth, and others
who were incorrigible, have been forced to depart from this Country. Yea, we
think, that our success, in dealing with the Papists, had been undoubtedly
greater, if they had not been hardened in their Error, by your strange and
scandalous Doctrins, repugnant to Scripture, and sound Antiquity.

6. That which ye say in the second part of your Answer, concerning the
powerful effects of your Covenant, meets not with that which we did object,
concerning the unlawfulnes of it. For, that which is not in it self lawful,
can never be truly profitable to any. And Solomon has told us, that their is
no wisdom, nor understanding, against the LORD, Prove. 21. 30.

7. As for the last part of your Answer, we have so often told you that your
fear of the inbringing of the Service Book, and Canons, is causeless: and ye
have so often denied this, that it were folly to weary the Reader any more with
this matter. In the mean time, we tell you, that if your Covenant be unlawful
in it self, (as we still think it to be) your fear, although it were justly
conceived, will never free your Souls of the guiltiness of it.

The XII. DUPLY.
TO justify or excuse your omission, of public disallowing and condemning the
public disorders, and miscarriages of some who have subscrived the Covenant;
especially the offering of violence to Prelates, and Ministers, in time of
divine Service, and in the House GOD, whereof we spoke in our twelfth Demand,
and Reply: ye answer, first, that ye acknowledge not the Service Book, for the
LORDS Service. Ye might say the same of any Service Book, (If ye allow the
Reasons lately set forth in Print against the Service Book) for there a
Prescript form of Prayer, is condemned, which directly crosses the practice of
the universal Church of CHRIST, Ancient, and Recent.

2. Ye allege, that ye acknowledge not the usurped Authority Altar. Da. masc.
page 120. Disp. against the English Popish Ceremonies, part, 3. cap 8. digress.
1
of Prelates, for lawful Authority. For ought we can perceive, by the Doctrins
of those with whom ye join, ye acknowledge no lawful Authority at all in
Prelates, above your selves, and other Ministers: and ye seem so to insinuate so
much here, by blaming us, for calling them, Reverend and holy Fathers. We are
persuaded of the lawfulness of their Office, and therefore are not ashamed,
with Scripture, and Godly Antiquity, to call such as are advanced to this
sacred Dignity, Fathers, and Reverend Fathers. Neither should personal faults,
alleged by you, hinder our observance, till what is alleged be clearly
proven. For, so long as things are doubtful, we should Favorabiliores rei
potius qua^ actores ha bentur. ff. Lib. 50. Reg. 125.
interpret to the better part, Luke 6, 37. And it is a rule of Law, that in a
doubtful case, the state of a Possessor, is best; and, consequently, of him
that hither-to has been in a possession of a good name: as also, that in
things doubtful, we should rather favor the person accused, then him that
accuses.

3. If ye be of this same judgment, with us, concerning the lawfulness of
their Office, why do ye not reverence them, as well as Melan. in an Epistle to
Camer. in Council. Theolog.
we? But if their very Office seem to you unlawful, we esteem your judgment
contrary to holy Scripture, to all sound Antiquity, and to the best learned
amongst reformed Divines. Hear what Melanchton says, I would to GOD, I would
to GOD, it lay in me, not to confirm the Dominion, but to restore the
Government of Bishops: for I see what manner of Policy we shall have; the
Ecclesiastical Policy being Melan. in an Epistle to Camer. in Council. Theol.
page 90. Quo jure enim licebit nobis dissolvere (...) Ecclesiasticam? Si
Episcopi nobis concedant illa, quae aequum esse eos concedere? Et ut liceat,
certe non expedit. Semper ita sensit ipse Lutherus, quem nulla de causa, quidem
ut video, amant, nisi quia beneficio ejus sentiunt se, Episcopos excussisse and
adeptos libertatem minime utilem ad posteritatem. So in an Epist. ad Episc.
Augusten. Deinde velim hoc tibi persuadeas de me deque multis aliis nos optare
ut pace constituta Episcoporum potestas, sit incolumis. Et hanc plurimum
prodesse Ecclesiis judicamus*
dissolved: I do see, that hereafter will grow up, a greater tyranny in the
Church, then ever was before. And again, in another Epistle to Camerarius, he
says, You will not believe how much I am hated, by those of Noricum, and by
others, for the restoring of Iuridiction to Bishops. So our Companions fight
for their own Kingdom, and not for the Kingdom of CHRIST. So in other places.
See Bucer, de Regno CHRISTI, Page 67.

4. Thirdly, Ye allege the zeal of the People; by reason whereof ye say, that
it was nothing strange, that in such a case, they were stirred up to oppose.
Suppone they had opposed, yet, that they should have so opposed, as to have
offered violence to sacred Persons, Prelates or Ministers, who are spiritual
Fathers, seems to us very strange, for all that hitherto ye have said. There
is no zeal, without the extraordinary instinct of GODS Spirit, which can
warrant men destitute of Authority, to lay their hands on such persons. Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, says the LORD, Psalm. 105.
Let all things be done decently, and in order, says S. Paul, (...)
1. Cor. 14. 40. GOD is not the author of confusion or timult, but of peace,
says that same Apostle there, verse 33. To this purpose Gregory Nazianzen in
his 26 Oration, speaking of the chief causes of division in the Church, says,
One of them is unrulie, ferventness without reason and knowledge, and that
another is, Disorder and undecencie, (...).

5. The Son should account the person of his Father sacred, ff. de obsequiis,
Leg. 9. So we ought also to esteem of our spiritual Fathers: and, therefore,
to offer injury to their persons, and that, in time of divine Service, must
needs be a grievous sin. In the Novell Si quis cu^ sacra mysteria celebrantur,
in sa^ctam Ec clesiam ingredie^s, Episcopo, aut clericis aut Ministris aliis
Ecclesiae injuriam aliquam inferat: jubemus hunc verbera sustinere, and in
exilium mitti. Si vero haec sacra Ministeria conturbaverit, aut celebrare
prohibuerit: capitaliter puniatur. Hoc ipso and in Litaniis, in quibus
Episcopi, aut Clerici reperiantur custodiendo. Et siquidem injuriam solum
fecerit, verberibus exilioque tradatur. Si vero etiam Litaniam concusserit,
capitale periculum sustinebit: and vindicare jubemus non solum civiles, sed
etiam militares judices.
Constitutions of Justinian, Authent. Collat. 9. Tit. 6. Novella 123. de
Sanctiss. Episcopis, etc. Cap* 31. there is a remarkable Law to this purpose,
cited upon the Margin. The like Law we find in Cod. Justin. Lib. 1. Tit. 3. de
Episcop. and Clericis Leg. 10. Now although in these imperial Laws, the
sanction be severe, yet we wish no such severity to be used amongst us, but
praying GOD, to forgive them who have transgressed: We desire them to consider,
that anciently amongst Christians, such doings were greatly disallowed.

6. Chrysostom, speaking of the reverence due by people to Pastors, says, A
man may now see, that there are not so great s^offs and reproaches, In his
second homily upon these words salute Priscil la and Aquila. Tom 5. Edit.
Savil. page, 327.
used by the unfaithful, against the Rulers, as by those that seem to be
faithful, and to be joined with us. Let us therefore inquire whence comes
this negligence, and contempt of piety, that we have such a hostility against
our Fathers. There is nothing, there is nothing that can so easily destroy the
Church, as when there is not an exact jointure of Disciples, to their Masters;
of children to parents, and of them that are ruled, with their Rulers. He that
but speaks evil against his brother, is debarred from reading the divine
Scriptures, (for what have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth says
the LORD; and subjoineth this cause, Thou sit and speak evil of thy
brother,) and think thou thy self worthy to come to the sacred porches, who
accuses thy spiritual Father? How agrees this with reason? For if they who
speak evil of Father or Mother, should dye, according to the Law; of what
judgment is he worthy, who dare speak evil of him who is much more
necessary, and better, then those Parents? Why fears he not, that the Earth
should open, and swallow him, or that thunder should come from Heaven, and burn
up that accusing tongue? See him also, Lib. 3. de Sacerdotio, Cap. 5. and 6.

7. In the next place, ye say, that the keeping of GODS House, from pollution
and superstition, belongs to Authority, to the community of the faithful,
and to every one in his own place, and order: but, certainly if every one, or
all the community, keep their own place, and order, they can do nothing in
this, by way of force, without, far less against Authority. Hence Zanchius, in
his first Book of Images, These. 4. says, Without Authority of the Prince, it
is lawful to none in this Country, to take Idols out of Churches, or to
change any thing in Religion: he that does so, should be punished, as
seditious. This he confirms by reason, and by the testimony of S. Augustine,
Tom. 10. de Sermon Domini in Monte, Homilia 6. And a little after, he
subjoineth; Augustine handles this Argument piouslie, he dehorteth his people,
from such a practice, and says, That it is pravorum hominum, and furiosorum
circumcellionum.

8. As for your vehement accusations and threatenings, (here, and Answer 14)
against the writer of the late Warning to the Subjects in Scotland, ye may
easily perceive, by the printed Edition of that WARNING, and by the Printed
Editions of our Replies, that, that offense is taken away. And now, reverend
Brethren, why are ye pleased thus to digress from the matter in hand, to waken
and hold on foot, personal quarrels against your brother, by digging up buried
words, and renewing haske interpretations thereof, contrary to his loving
intentions, and after that himself, for satisfaction to all men, has so
publicly disallowed and abolished these words? This uncharitable dealing, can
bring no advantage to the cause which ye mantain, but rather makes it the more
to be disgusted, in consideration of your too great eagerness to stir up hatred
against your neighbor, and to work him trouble; whom ye ought not to
persecute with implacable wrath, which works not the righteousness of GOD;
nor to exasperat against him his other dear Contrymen: but rather, as well
beseems your profession and calling, ye ought to exhort them to the most
favorable construction of things, and to Aug. Lib. de unico Baptismo, Cap. 13.
O quam de testandus est error hominum, qui clarorum virorum quaedam non recte
facta laudabiliter se imitari puta^t a* quorum virtutibus alieni sunt.
christian placability, and to the entertaining of their wonted loving
affection toward him. As for these our present questions, we desire
Theologically only, and peaceably, to confer of them with you, or any other
our reverend Brethren, of our own calling.

9. Ye say that Master Knox spared not to call Kneeling a diabolical
invention. If ye allow this saying, how can it be, that in your Covenant,
intended for removing of Innovations, and recovering of the purity of the
Gospel, ye expressly aimed not at the abolishing of this ceremony, which is so
hateful in your eyes? But if ye do not approve this his saying, why did ye
not choose rather, in charity to cover this escape of so worthy a personage,
then openly to blaze it abroad?

10. Ye have needlessly drawn into your discourse, mention of Irenicum. Of which
work, for mittigation of your unpeaceable censure, be pleased to take notice of
the judgment, of that most worthy Pastor, and most grave and learned Divine,
D. James Usher, Archbishop of Armach, Primate of all Ireland, in this his
Epistle written to the Author.

VIR EXIMIE.
SUmma cum voluptate (...) tuum perlegi: eamque Patriae tuae foelicitatem sum
gratulatus, quod novum tandem produxerit (...), Eusebius. lib. 5. Hist. Eccles.
(...).
qui eam ipsi praestitit diligentiam and virtutem, quam olim exteris Ecclesiis
(quum non admodum dissimiles de adiaphoris obortae lites earum pacem
perturbarent) exhibuit ille vetus; qui (...). (...) 2. Sam. xi.


Nulla salus bello: ipsique bello salus si qua sit, non alio quam pacis nomine
ea continetur. Nam and de pace belli Uriam, opinor, a David^ aliquando
interrogatum meministi. 7. Judic. vii. xxii.


I am vero, pro (...), scriptum remitto tibi ego (...): sed quod jucundum
praebeat spectaculum midianiticorum satellitum inter se manum conserentium, and
mutuo isto bello Ecclesiolae nostrae, pacem promoventium.

Tu quicquid, hoc est, munusculi, ut ab homine optime ergate affecto
transmissum suscipe, and me (ut facis) ama.

Pontanae, in Hibernia, III. Id. Decembr. anno reparatae salutis 1632. Tuus in
CHRISTI Ministerio conservus JACOBUS ARMACHANUS.

Me juvat alma quies, gens haec fera bella minatur,
Et quoties Pacem poscimus, arma crepat.
ARTH. JONST. Paraph. Psalm. 120.
The XIII. DUPLY.
YE repeat your former Answer, concerning your interpretation of the clause of
forbearance, which we have already refuted in our former Replies, neither do
ye bring here any new confirmation thereof: And therefore all the three
scandals, mentioned in our 13 Demand, do yet remain unremoved.

2. Although your interpretation were admitted, which we can not admit, yet at
least the third* scandal were nowise avoidable thereby, (whatsoever may be
supposed concerning the other two,) and that because of the reason expressed in
our 13 Reply; to which your Answers here are not satisfactory. 1. Ye do
insinuate, that ye think our Oath of obedience to our ordinary, and Pearth
constitutions, not lawful in it self: which we are persuaded is very lawful.
2. Ye would seem to infer the unlawfullnesse of it, by challenging, the
Authority whereby it was exacted; and alleging that their is no ordinance
made Civil or Ecclesiastic, appointing any such Oath. This reason (although
it were granted) has no strength at all, to prove that which ye intend, to
wit, that either our Oarh is in it self unlawful, or that we may now lawfully
break it: for our swearing of that Oath is not against any lawful Authority,
either divyne or humane: and in such a case, Oaths concerning things lawful,
ought to be kept, whether they be required by appointment of a public
ordinance, or not: which whosoever denies, he opens a patent door to the
breaking of lawful Oaths, in matrimonial and civil Contracts, and many other
cases, daily incident in humane conversation. Also the exacting of that Oath,
was clearly warranded by two Acts of Parliament, viz. Parliament 21. of King
JAMES the 6. holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1612. Chap. 1. and Parliament 23. of
King JAMES the 6. holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1621. Act 1.

3. Ye take upon you to call in question, with what conscience that Oath was
given. How often, Brethren, shall we exhort you to forbear judging of other men's
consciences, which are known to GOD only? Judge not, that ye be not judged.
Matthew. 7. 1.

4. Ye allege, we can not answer before a general Assembly for our Oath, and
the scandal risen thereupon. No man needs to be ashamed, before a general
Assembly, or any other judicatory, of his lawful and due obedience, which he
has given to the public constitutions of the Church of Scotland, and to his
Majesty's standing Laws; or of any lawful Oath, whereby he has promised that
obedience. As for the scandal, it was not given by us, but unnecessarily, and
unjustly taken, by you, and some others, upon an erroneous opinion, obstinatly
mantained against the lawfulness of the matters themselves.

5. Ye say, that conceiving the Oath, according to our own grounds, none of us
will say, that we have sworn the perpetual approbation and practice of these
things, which we esteem to be indifferent, whatsoever bad consequent of Popery,
Idolatry, Superstition, or Scandal, should follow thereupon. We answer, 1.
These bad consequents are alleged by you, but not proven. 2. Evils of that
kind should be avoided, by some lawful remedy. And we do not esteem it
lawful for us, to disobey Authority in things lawful, although in themselves
indifferent: for obedience commanded by the fifth Precept of the Decalogue, is
not a thing indifferent. There be other means which are lawful and more
effectual against such evils, as we have specified in our eleventh Reply: 3.
We did not swear perpetual approbation, and practice of indifferent things;
but knowing these things in themselves, to be approvable, we did swear
obedience to the public Laws, requyring our practice in these things, so long
as the Law stands in vigor, and our obedience thereto is required by our
lawful Superioures. 4. This course we hold to be more agreeable to our duty,
then upon private conceptions of scandalls unnecessarily taken, to break off
our due obedience to that Authority which GOD has set over us.

6. Out of our assertion ( Reply 4.) concerning the administration of the
Sacraments in private places, to sick persons, in case of necessity, ye do
collect, that we cannot forbear the practice of these, although our ordinary,
and other lawful superiors, should will us to do so. And hence ye infer,
that herein Pearth Assembly, for which we stand, is wronged by us two ways: 1.
That we differ in judgment from them, about the indifferency of the five
Articles: and next, that at the will of our ordinary, and ye know not what
other lawful superioures, we are ready to forbear the practice of these
things, which the Assembly has appointed to be observed.

7. As for your maine Question, Whether a duty necessary by divyne Law, may
be, or may not be omitted, in case, our ordinary, and other lawful
superioures, should will us to omit it? before we answer to it, we must expound
what we mean by our other lawful superiors, because of your jesting pretense
of ignorance hereof. We mean hereby, the Kings Majesty, the Parliament, the
secret Counsel, and other Magistrates, and ecclesiastical Assemblies,
whereunto we owe obedience in our practice required by them, according to
public Laws.

8. The Question it self ye do express more clearly in your Answer to our 4.
Reply, where ye allege, that we find some of the Pearth Articles so necessary,
that although the general Assembly of the Church should discharge them, yet we
behoved still, for conscience of the commandment of GOD, to practice them.

Thus are we brought to this general Question;

Whether, or no, any thing necessary (or commanded) by divine Law, may, in any
case, without sin, be omitted when public humane Authority discharges the
practice thereof? For resolving of this question, we desire the Reader to take
notice of these Theological Maxims, received in the schools, and grounded upon
holy Scriptur.

9. Affirmative precepts, do bind at all times, but not to all times, but
only as place and time require; that is, when opportunity occurreth. [
Praecepta affirmativa obligant semper, sed non ad semper, nisi pro loco and
tempore; id est, quando opportunitas occurrit.] But negative Precepts, do
bind at all times, and to all times. [ Praecepta negativa obligant semper, and
ad semper. Thom 2a 2ae, qu. 71 art. 5. ad 3m Bonavent. in 1. sent. did. 48.
art. 2. qu. 1. in Resolutione. Scotus in 3. sent. did. 9. qu. unica, number 4.
] As for example; A man is not obliedged to speak the truth at all times; for
he may be some time lawfully silent, but he may never lawfully lie.

10 Of Affirmative necessary duties, some are the weightier matters of the
Law, [(...)] as Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, Matthew. 23. 23. Others less
weighty, such as are those of the Pearth Articles; which we call necessary, and
ye do reject.

11. The exercise of some affirmative necessary duties, may be some times
omitted, by Authority, without sin, for the public peace, or some pressing
necessity. Thus Moses permitted repudiation of a man's married wife, not fallen
into adultery; neither did he urge strictly the affirmative duty of adherence,
and that for the hardness of their heart. Wherein Moses had respect to the
peace and unity of the Tribs of Israel, as Alexander Alensis observes in his
Sum of Theology, Part. 3. Qu. 46. Membro 1. Art. 1. and Art. 2. David did
not execute, in his own time, judgment against Ioab, for his murdering of
Abner, and Amasa, because the sons of Zeruiah were too hard for him.
Circumcision was omitted, because of the uncertainty of their abode in one
place, when the people were with Moses in the Wilderness.

12. Exercise of ecclesiastical Discipline, against open obstinate offenders,
is an affirmative duty, incumbent, by divyne Law, upon the Pastors, toward
those who are committed to their charge. Yet it may, and ought to be forborne,
when it can not be used without an open rupture, and unavoidable Schism.
Because in such a case the public peace is rather to be looked to, lest in our
inconsiderate zeal to Gregor. respons. ad 7. interrogationem Au gustim Ca^
tuariensis. In hoc enim tempo re sancta Ecclesia quaedam per favorem corrigit,
quaedam per mansuetudinem tolerat, quaedam per considerationem dissimulat, at
que portat, vt saepe malum quod adversatur, portando and dissimulando
compescat. Prosper, Lib. 2. de vita contemplativa, Cap. 5. Propter hoc ergo,
blanda p^etate portandi sunt, qui increpari pro sua infirmitate non possunt.
separate the Tares, we pluck up also the Wheat. And what we can not get
corrected by censure, we can do no more but mourn for it, and patiently wait
till GOD amend it, as Augustine proves at length, Lib. 3. contra Epistolam
Parmeniani, Cap. 1. and Cap. 2. and Lib. de fide and operibus, Cap. 5. For in
this time (says Gregory) the holy Church does correct something by fervor,
something she tolerateth by mecknes, some things by consideration she
dissembleth, and bears, so that often by bearing and dissembling, she
compesceth (or puts away) that evil which she hates. And Prosp. says; for
this cause therefore, they most with gentle piety be borne with, who for their
infirmity, may not be rebuked.

13. When a doctrinall error (not being fundamental) prevails by public
authority in any Church, a private Pastor or Doctor espying it, may lawfully
and laudably, sorbear public striving against it, when he evidently
perceives, that unavoydable Schism would follow thereupon. In such a case he
should content himself, to seed his hearers with that wholesome Milk of the
Word, which they may receive, and delay the giving of stronger Food, unto them
because of Nazianz. Orat. 26. tom. 1. page 446. and 447. Edit Graecol. pa ris.
Anno. 1630.
their infirmity: Considering that more necessary and weightier duty, which
he owes for preservation of order and peace; and laboring, in a mild and
peaceable manner, to cure them. To this purpose belongs that saying of
Gregory Nazianzen, Let no man, therefore, be more wise then is convenient,
neither more legal then the Law, neither more bright then the Light, neither
more straight then the Rule, neither higher then the Commandment. But how
shall this be? If we take knowledge of decency, and commend the law of
nature, and follow reason, and despise not good order. ((...).) Eccles. Lugd.
Lib de tenenda veritate Scripturae post medium (in Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. Part. 2.
Edit. 4.) Qui non tranquille and pacifice moderatur quod sentit, sed statim
paratus est ad contentiones, dissentiones, and scandala, etiamsi non habeat
Haereticum sensum, certissime habet Haereticum animum.
And that of the ancient Church of Lions in France, near eight hundredth years
ago; Who does not calmlie and peaceably moderate that which he thinks, but
is ready incontinent to contentions, dissentions, and scandalls, although he
have not an heretical sense, most certainly he has an heretical mind.

14. Divine Institution, by the Ministry of the Apostles, craveth Deacons,
ordained by imposition of hands, for all their life time, Acts 6. Yet in our
reformed Church of Scotland we have no such Deacons. Which oecomenicall defect,
necessitated by detention of Church mantenance necessary for their
sustentation, we hope shall not be imputed to our Church, as sin, so long as
she despises not that Institution, and acknowledges, and lamenteth, this
deficiencie, and endeavors, by peaceable lawful means, to have it ^emedied.

15. Although some affirmative Duties, necessary by divine precept, do give
place, sometimes, to other more weighty, and more pressing duties, (as the
saving of a stranger may be omitted, for saving my father or my brother, or my
son, out of the same danger, when I am able only to save one of them. And many
such like examples do occur:) yet it is never lawful to condemn or oppugn
such Duties, as evil, or superstitious, or scandalous in themselves, neither
to rank them amongst things in themselves indifferent.

16. Hence we do infer, that notwithstanding of the necessity of those of
the Pearth Articles, which we call necessary, yet sometims the practicing of
them, may become not necessary, and the omission thereof not sinful, public
authority, and necessity of the peace of the church, so requiring. Some time
indeed, the omission of a thing prescrived by an affirmative Divine or Humane
Law, may befaultlesse: But it is never lawful for Subjects, to transgress the
negative part of the divine Thom. 2a 2ae qu. 43 art. 7. prop ter nullum
scandalum quod sequi videatur, debet homo praetemissa veritate, falsitatem
decore*
Precept, by resisting with force of Arms, that power whereunto GOD has
subjected them, and to which he has forbidden them, to make such resistance.
Neither is it at any time lawful, for Pastors and Teachers, to teach erroneous
Doctrine.

17. Ye do attribute to us, as a great absurdity, that at the will of our
ordinary, and other lawful Superiors, we are ready to forbear the practice of
these things which the Assembly has appointed to be observed. And this ye
infer from the necessity of administration of the Sacraments, sometimes in
private places, according to our judgment. Certainly, ye will have much ado,
to make good, by right Logic, this your inference from such an Antecedant. But
to speak of the matter of the Consequent, for satisfaction to the Reader, we
find no such absurdity in it, as ye seem to proclaim. For, if some Duties
appointed by divyne Law, give place sometimes to other weighty duties, such as
is the keeping of public peace and good order, as we have already shown, much
more may a thing, notwithstanding of any humane Law appointing it to be
observed, before these respects omitted, at the will and direction of those
superiors, to whom we ow our obedience required by that humane law, and who
have power to dispense with our practice in that part.

The XIV. DUPLY.
IF the words of the Covenant be plain, (say ye) concerning the mere
forbearance* and speak nothing of the unlawfullness, no man's thoughts can make
a change. But we have given our reasons, which justly move us to require
greater plainness; neither have we as yet received satisfaction, concerning
those reasons.

2. In our 14 Reply, we said, that your Band of mutual defense against all
persons whatsoever, may draw subjects, perhaps, to take Aims against their
King, (which God avert) and consequently from that loyalty of obedience, which
they ow to their Sovereign, and ours; except ye declare, and explain your
selves better, then ye have hitherto done. To this ye answer, that, by this
Reply we do a threefold wrong: one to our selves, another to the subscrivers,
the third to the Kings Majesty. But ye have not directly answered to the point
proponed by us.

3. The wrong which ye say, we do to our selves, is in forging from the words of
the Covenant, impedime^ts, and drawing stumbling blocks in our own way, to
hinder our subscriptio^. This your wrongous asseveratio^, we justly deny,
protesting, as we have often done, that we do walk sincerly in this matter,
according to our light, not forging to our selves impedime^ts, nor drawing
stumbling blocks in our own way; but clearly showing the impediments, and
stumbling blocks, which the contryvers of the Covenant have laid in our way,
by their very incommodious expression, irreconciliable [in our judgement] with
your exposition.

4. Ye say, we wrong the subscrivers, in changing the state of the Question,
and in making a divorce betwixt Religion, and the KINGS Authority, which the
Covenant joineth together, hand in hand. We do nowise wrong the subscrivers,
when we propone uprightly our just scruples, as we in our consciences do
conceive them, whereby we are moved to with hold our hands from that Covenant:
whereof one is, the fear of unlawful resistance to Authority, if we should
hold to that Covenant; howsoever ye will not suffer to hear patiently this
objection, because in your Covenant ye do profess, the conjunction of
Religion, and the KINGS Authority: which profession of yours, does not
sufficiently serve for a full answer to our objection, against those other
words of that same Covenant, whereupon our scruple did arise* To clear this, we
wish you to answer directly (to this our present Demand:) whether or no, in
case of disagreement, (which Godavert) think ye that the Covenanters as
obliedged, by virtue of their Covenant, to make open resista^ce, by force of
Arms? If ye think they are obliedged to make resistance, then we desire your
Answer to the Reasons and testimonies brought in our 2. Duply, proving the
unlawfulnes of such resista^ce. But if ye think that they be not oblidged, the^
declare it plainly.

5. But most of all, ye say, we wrong the Kings Majesty, in bringing him upon
the stage, before his subjects, in whose minds we would (as ye do (...)
allege) beget and breed suspicions of opposing the true (...)aching innovation
in Religion, and of dealing with the s(...), contrary to his Laws and
Proclamations, and contrary to the Oath at his Coronation. We answer* ^e have
not brought, but have found his Majesty upon this unpleasant stage, opposing
himself openly to your Covenant, with solemn protestations, against all
suspicions of opposing the truth, or making innovation of religion, or dealing
with the subjects contrary to his laws and proclamatio^s, or contrary to the
oath at his co^^natio^. this his Majesty's declaration against which ye have
protested, we have willingly received, and do truly believe it.

6. What the most honorable Lords, of his Majesty's privy Counsel have done,
concerning his Majesty's last proclamation, and upon what motives, their Hs.
themselves do know, and his Majesty's high Co^missioner, has publicly
declared in his printed Manifesto, contrary to some of your asseveratio^s,
concerning the proceeding of that honorable board.

7. Ye profess here, that, it becomes you, to judge charitably of his
Majesty's intentions, although ye disallow the Service Book, and Canons, as
containing a real innovation of Religion; and do affirm, that the intention
of the Prelates, and their associats, the Authors and contrivers of the books,
is most justly suspected by you. We have told you already, that, concerning the
matters, contained in those books, it is not now time to disput, the books
themselves being discharged by his Majesty's proclamation, and a royal promise
made, that his Majesty will neither now nor herafter, press the practice of the
forsaid Canons and Service book nor any thing of that nature, but in such a
fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all his Majesty's loving subjects; and,
that his Majesty neither intends innovation in Religion or Laws. As for the
intentions of his sacred Majesty, we do heartily and thankfully acknowledge
them, to be truly conform to his Majesty's gracious declaration, in that his
last Proclamation. And, indeed, it becomes both you and us, to think s^ of
them. Neither do we take upon us, to harbor in our breasts, any uncharitable
suspicion, concerning the inte^tions of those others of whom ye speak; seeing
they stand or fall to their own Master, and the thoughts of their hearts are
unknown, both to you and us: and in a matter uncertain it is surest to judge
charitably. Yea, we have ma^^y pregna^^ Arguments to persuade us, that those
reverend Prelates, and their Associates, had no such intention, as ye judge.

8. Ye make mention of three wrongs, done by us to you: the one, in the
Warning, whereof ye have an answer already given in our 12. Duply, where ye did
use great exaggerations, then either the intention of the warner did merit, ^^
became your chartiy and profession. And by your repetition of it in th^^ place,
ye show, that ye have too great delight to dwell upon such expostulations,
whereas theological reasons of the matter in controversy, would better become
you in such a Disput. The second wrong is, that (as ye allege) we have
wronged you, in withholding our hand and help from so good a cause, of purging
Religion, Hieronym. Apologia adversus Russinum quae incipit Lectis literis,
prope sinem. T^libus institutus es Disciplinis, ut cui respondere non potueris,
caput auferas; and linguam, quae tacere non potest seces? Nec magnopere
glorieris, si facias quod Scorpiones possunt facere, and Cantharides. Fecerunt
haec and Fulvia in Ciceronem, and Herodias in Ioannem: quiae veritatem non
poterant audire: and linguam veriloquam d^^riminali acu confoderunt. --
Adversum impiissimos Celsum atque Po^phyrium quanti scripsere nostrorum? Quis
omissa causa, in superflua criminum objectione versatus est.
and reforming the Kirk, from so many gross abuses, and opposing all those who
have modestly labored for Reformation. But certainly, the wrong is done to us
by you, in that ye do, without warra^^ of Authority, obtrude upon us, and those
committed to our charges, the swearing of an Oath, which is against our own
consciences: and because of our just refusal and opposition, ye do wrong us
also, in misinterpreting our pious and upright meanings, and in making and
stirring up collateral, and personal quarells against us, and threatening us
therewith. Thus (if GOD by his special grace did not uphold us) might we be
driven, by worldly terrors, to do against the light of our own consciences.

9. The third wrong, wherewith ye charge us, and for the which ye do infinuate,
that we may fear trouble, is (as ye allege) in our speeches, in public, and
private, and in our missives, etc. Hereunto we answer, ^^ in our former
Replies, that whenever it shall please you, to specify these speeches, we
hope to give you, and all peaceably disposed christians, full satisfaction, and
to clear our selves of that imputation; so that none shall have just reason, to
work us any trouble. In the mean time, if our ing^nuity would permit us, (as it
dothnot) to think it a decent course, to make use of hearkeners, and catchers
of words, and to wait for the haulting of our Brethren, some of your own
speeches might be represented unto you, wherein ye would find weakness.

10. As for these owtward, or external Arguments, which ye bring here, to
prove your Covenanting, to be the work of God, from the success of your
enterprise, from the multitude of subscrivers, and from their contentment, and
from their good carriage, (which we would wish, in many of them, to be more
charitable, and peaceable, and so more christian, then it is) we cannot
acknowledge, to be a Co^mentary written by the Lords own hand, (as ye pretend)
in approbation of your Covenant; unless ye first clearly show us the text or
substance of your Covenant, to be written in the holy Scriptures, in all points
thereof; especially in those points, wherein ye and we do controvert, and which
only, at this time, can be pretended against us, seeing we make oppsition only
in those points. And we wish heartily, that leaving these weak nots of Truth,
to the Papists, chief acclaimers of them, amongst christians, (that we speak
nothing of aliens from christianity) ye would be pleased to adhere, with us
into the holy Scriptures, as the only sure and perfect rule of true Religion,
and the heavenly Lamp, which God has given us, to show us the way of truth
and peace: wherein the GOD of Truth and Peace direct all our steps, for JESUS
CHRIST our Savior, who is our Peace: To him be Glory for ever: Amen.

JOHN FORBES of Corse Doctor and Professor of Divinity in ABERDENE. ROBERT
BARON, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, and Minister in ABERDENE. ALEXANDER
SCROGIE, Minister at old Aberdene, D. D. WILLIAM LESLIE, D. D. and Principal
of the KINGS College in ABERDENE. JA: SIBBALD, D. of Divinity and Minister at
ABERDENE AL: ROSSE, D. of Divinity, and Minister at ABERDENE.


FINIS.

