THE Complete Jockey; Or the most exact RULES and METHODS To be observed for
the training up of RACE-HORSES.

SHOWING, How to prepare them for any Heats or Courses, with the manner of
their Keepings, Instructions for their Dressing and Looking to their Scourings,
Diets, Matches, and Racings, with every Particular to be observed therein; the
like not published to the World before.

To which is added, The most Experienced way for Buying Horses; and
Instructions to avoid being Cheated upon the like occasion; with a relation of
the Cheats and Tricks the Jockies and Horse-Coursers put on the unexpert Buyers.

Written for the Pleasure and Profit of all Gentlemen and others, who take
delight in any thing of this Nature.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

OF Race-Horses.
CHAP. I.
The best Method, and speediest way for Ordering of Race-Horses, to fit them
for any Match in what Estate soever they be.
AT such time as a Horse is matched, (or designed to be matched) for a Race, or
Course, let him, to whom the Horse belongs, or whosoever shall have the
ordering of that Affair, be very circumspect in observing the Condition or
Ability of Body in which the Horse is at the time of such his being matched,
which chiefly ought to be taken notice of in three several Rules or Methods,
the which I here shall undertake to lay down for the better satisfaction of
those whom it hereafter may concern.

1. The first of which is, if your Horse be Foggy, Gross, or over-fat when he
has been lately taken from Grass, or Soil.

2. The second likewise to be observed is, If he be more than ordinary Lean,
either by reason of two hard Riding, or any Disease has pulled him down by
hindering his feeding.

3. Thirdly, If he be in good plight, and has had good keeping, dealt well by,
and moderately rid or exercised.

Now in the first of these you cannot take less than two Months, or ten Weeks,
to bring your Horse into a fit condition for a Match, which must be done by
moderately Dieting him and often Exercising him, which wastes the superfluous
grease, and makes him longwinded, both which will make him more fit and apt to
win the Wager laid upon his Head.

As for the Second, If your Horse be exceeding poor, then about six Weeks space
must be allowed, with good feeding and moderate exercise.

Now for the Third and Last of the forementioned conditions, which is a medium
betwixt both; lesser time will serve to fit him for the match you do design to
have him run. About a Month or five Weeks will be sufficient, if you observe
the Dieting of him, which must be indifferently well.

But seeing I have given you an account of the particular Estates or Conditions
of Horses; So now I must give you some cautions therein to be observed: First
then, note if your Horse be fat and unwieldy, you must have a regard to his
Exercise, for if he be overfree, and is willing to put out his strength and
abilities to the utmost, so that his flesh quickly fall away, you must restrain
him, and not put him to too hard Exercise, for he cannot bear it like those,
who are hardy by nature, and grow fat with any Diet, or any reasonable Exercise.

Yet farther, if your Horse be in a poor condition by any hard or ill usage or
disorder of Body, yet notwithstanding any thing in the like nature, grows
quickly into good liking, and so continues for a considerable time; you need
not, neither shall you be so tender of him as in the case of that just before
mentioned, nor at all restrain him from his Exercise, for if you do, he will
soon grow unfit for your purpose.

Thus far have I thought fit to instruct such as are unskilful, or have not the
most expedient Method, for preparing Horses for Races.

And now I think it most convenient to give my Reader a full satisfaction and
ample instruction as to the dieting and using of Horses, and lay open the
secrets most necessary to be observed by all according to truth and the most
innate Sincerity. And first of the fat Horse, because in him are comprehended
the other two, by reason he may be made lean, or between both, as the Master of
him thinks most convenient, etc.

CHAP. II.
The way and manner of dieting or feeding a Horse to fit him for a Race, being
Fat or Gross, immediately after his being taken from Pasture or Soil, as to the
first two weeks.
NOW if you lay a Wager, or match a fat or unwieldy Horse, which has been made
so, either by being kept at grass in long idleness; or standing at his Stall,
and there over-lavishly fed; to bring him to a fit condition to perform your
expectation, for the first Fort-night you must be up as soon as day appears, if
not before, to attend him, and having put on his Bridle, which you must be sure
always to let hang upon the Rack close by him, dipped either in Beer or Ale,
which will not only put him in mind of his being rid, but also make him the
more familiar with it, and love it the better when on. This being done, cleanse
the Stable of the filth, and then fall to dressing of him, which according to
the best method, is as follows.

First, Curry him well in every part, but begin with the Head, then his Neck,
Back, and Hinder-parts, after that his Shoulders and Forelegs as low as the
Knees, that done, use your dusting Cloth, or something in the like nature, and
with it dust him over in every part, then rub him well with your hard brush,
beginning first at the Head, and omitting no place whatsoever there, as the
Temples, Nose, Ears, Under-jaws, and Forehead, then proceed to the others
parts as before, not forgetting his shanks, nor setting on of his Hoofs, going
backwards by degrees till the whole Body be well rubbed, after that take your
wet hand and stroke him over gradularly, not leaving him rough nor wet in any
part. Then with your wet hands or a soft Cloth rub gently his Yard, Testicles,
Sheath, Ears, between his Thighs, and all other private places whatsoever:
After which, with a Hair-cloth or any other hard Cloth, if that be wanting, rub
him over again, being sure to observe the rubbing of his Face well, as his
Cheeks, between his Jaws, and on his Forehead, the rising of his Neck, and
Fetlocks, and other places as you shall see occasion.

Which being well done, take a clean woollen cloth something fine, and cleanse
him with the same, beginning at the Head, and so proceeding as you were taught
before, leaving no part unrubbed; Lastly, with a Curry-comb well wetted, comb
out the Main and Tail very decently; thus much for rubbing and cleansing; which
is as necessary in the ordering of Race-Horses, as their meat. The next thing
to be observed is, to cover his Body with a large Cloth for that purpose,
either of thick Kersy or thin Stuff according to the season of the Year, or as
heat or cold shall best agree with the nature of the Horse, upon which put his
Saddle, girting the foremost Girth very hard, but the other slack; then under
it thrust two wisps of clean straw, which may stretch it to an equal
straightness with the first, then putting a thick Breast-cloth on you may
mount, but if you please you may first spurt some Beer or Ale into his mouth,
which will make him champ and feel his Bit the sooner, and be sure that you
Stable be made clean before you bring your Horse in again, the Dung and foul
Litter being laid at the door, and it well stored with fresh; for if the Horse
stand not upon good store of Litter, and have it likewise to lie cry in, he
will not thrive well nor seem half so pleasant as he will with it; for which
purpose of all the straw, Wheat-straw is the best, and must be used on this
occasion unless it cannot be got, and then the next to it is Oat-straw, for
both Rye and Barley-straws do much annoy your Horse, by reason the one does
cause him to be much troubled with the heart-burn, and the other to loosen him,
and make him scour extremely.

Being thus upon his back, you must ride him easily for the space of half an
hour, for if you gallop or strain him presently you do him much injury, by
reason that it stretches his Sinews too much on the sudden, which is apt to
engender cold humors in the Joints and Nerves, so that the Horse will be stiff
after it, if not carefully, if not quickly remedied by bathing his Legs with
Oil of Swallows or Earthworms; but after by gentle riding they are made
pliable, you may gallop him easily, but let it be by any means upon plain and
firm ground, or if you live near any steep Hills, whose ascent is smooth and
firm, let it be up them, then walk him down in your hand, a foot pace, or a
small amble, that so he may cool by degrees; the best time to begin to exercise
is before the Sun rise, or as soon as it is risen at the farthest, then after
his breathing, when he begins to be cool, lead him to some pleasant Spring or
River, and there let him drink his fill.

Then gallop him again, but not too hard, when you have done so, for about the
space of a quarter of an hour, bring him again to the Brook or River, and let
him drink if he so pleases, but if not, then give him a gentle course or two to
raise thirst in him, the which no doubt will do it, for take this as a general
Rule, that before and after water, you be sure to breath him gently.

After he has drank three times, and been breathed the like number, you may
bring him home, and coming to the Stable-door, where the Dung and the foul
Litter is laid, let him stand upon it; after you are alighted from his back for
some time, and by softly tapping or hitting his hinder Legs with your switch or
whip, make him stretch them as far as he can backwards, and by pleasant
whistling provoke him to Urine, which if he refuse to do once or twice, yet at
last he will do it freely; and thereby you will preserve your Stable from filth
and noisomness, which otherways would much offend the Horse.

He being come into the Stable, rub his Forelegs with wisps of clean Straw,
putting all your strength thereto, but first, be sure to tie his Head up close
to the Rack in his Bridle, then his Breast, or Fore-cloth being taken off, rub
his Head, Breast, and Neck. After that, unloose his Body-Cloth, and rub him
well in every part, but especially in the Saddle-place, his Saddle being hung
up in his sight; and after he has been well rubbed with dry Cloths, cover him
up again with a linen coverer, and upon that put his woollen Cloth, or more if
the Weather be cold, if warm, they will be sufficient, but be sure to observe
they are dry when you put them on.

After you have girted them close upon him, stop in little wisps of light straw
quite round him, between the Cloths and the Girts, let them by no means be
knotty or hard, lest they hinder him of his sleep, and make him lie uneasy by
hurting his sides; when he is thus clothed, cleanse his feet, by pulling out
the gravel or earth that they may have got into them, and with warm Cow Dung
stop the same up close; after that is done, put about half a small armful of
Hay, that is very sweet and good, into his rack, bound up as hard as possibly
you can bind it, but first let it be cleared from Dust or Seeds as well as may
be, and take not off his Bridle till he has eat it or most of it, for it being
bound up hard will make him pull it with more than ordinary eagerness, and then
consequently he must eat it with a good stomach, but let him not stand above
one hour and a half in his Bridle, but having taken it off rub well his Face,
the ridge of his Neck, and each part of his Head with a rough Cloth made of
Flax or Hemp, but the latter is the best, because if it be new, the smell of it
is very wholesome, and being apt to make him sneeze, will thereby cleanse his
Head of gross and crude humors lodged therein.

This being done, cleanse the Manger of all the scattered Hay, or other things
offensive that may be in it, then take about two double handfuls of the best
old Oats that are free from Chaff or Seeds, be sure they be the largest and
fullest you can get, for the goodness of Oats is known by their weight, such as
many do call Polonian Oats, or some more vulgarly cut Oats, for these of
necessity are wholesomest and best; for if you give your Horse those that are
musty or wet, they will cause several little risings in the Horses Body, or
more properly termed swellings, and such as be not old breed little worms in
the Belly and cause pain; it is very hurtful for to give your Horse any Oats
that are not thoroughly dressed, for they will not only cheat him in his
feeding, but make him slight them; nor are black ones to be allowed of, unless
in time of necessity, and then they are not wholesome.

Therefore be sure when you give him his portion of Oats, which must not exceed
a quart at a time, you must sift them so, that all the light Oats and Husks may
fall away, and whatsoever else you imagine offensive, as Dust or Seeds, Straw
or other Grain, after which put them into the Manger; and observe whether he
eat them heartily or not, if he do, you may supply him with the like quantity
again, ordering them as the former, so depart and leave him to himself till
about ten or eleven of the Clock, at which time you coming again to him rub his
Head, Face, and Neck, with the Hempen Cloth before recited, then give him
another like quantity of Oats or somewhat more, order them also in the like
manner before you give them to him, after which leave him for the space of two
hours, and let him remain during that time in as much darkness as your Stable
is capable of, and not only then, but always in your absence; for the more
obscure and dark he is kept, the better will he eat his meat, and the better
will he take his rest; for note, a Horse will seldom lie down in a Stable that
is very light, unless he be much wearied either with standing or Travel; to
cause the more darkness many are used to line their Stables, or at least the
Stall where the Horse designed for Race stands, with Sacking or Canvas; not
only to make it dark, but to keep him the warmer, by sheltring him from wind
and dust.

After the end of the said two hours which is about one of the Clock; you must
visit him again, and give him another the like quantity of Oats ordered as the
former, and rub his head, neck, and face, as before; which done, give him a
small bundle of Hay hard twisted together, and let him alone to eat that by
himself, and so let him continue till four of the Clock if the days be long,
but if short, not past three.

Then according to the time come to him again, and the Stable being well
cleansed, wet the Bit of his Bridle in Beer, and so fasten the Reins of it to
the Rack as soon as you have put it on, which being done, take off his cloths
and dress him according to what you were taught in the morning; he being well
dressed, bring him forth and put his Saddle upon his Cloths as formerly, and
endeavor to make him piss upon his Dung and old Litter cast without the
Stable, then as soon as you please you may mount him, and ride him as in the
morning, only let this difference be generally observed, that you ride him not
up any hills that are steep in the evening, but upon the plainest and firmest
ground you can find; or if you will for change, sometimes in smooth, green
Meadows that are dry, or by running waters if they lie convenient, or that
there be any near you; and let him take all the Air he can, and often suffer
him to gaze upon the Stream, but suffer him not to stand still, but keep him in
a continual motion either Galloping or short Pacing which many give the term of
racking; if he at any time as you lead him in or out of his Stable, offer to
smell to any Horse-dung though not his own, hinder him not, for that will cause
him to evacuate and fit him the better for his meat.

When he is well watered and well aired at the cool of the day (or if it be
within night it matters not) bring him home (for note, there is nothing better
to rid him of gross and foul hmours than to be abroad with him early and late)
and when he is come to the Stable, observe that nothing, according to former
ordering of him be omitted, but all done with care and diligence, the which I
hope by this time you have so well taken notice of that I need not to repeat it
over again; let his diet be likewise the same, and let him stand at it by
himself two hours or more, according to the Season of the Year, in his cloths;
in Winter you may let him stand till nine before he has his Bait for all night,
in Summer later if you please; then coming to visit him you must give him near
three pints of Oats sifted, dress him in every part, give him a small bundle of
Hay in his Rack, and after having raised his Litter leave him till the enssuing
morning.

When betimes you must abroad with him again and use him as you have been
taught, so that in the space of two weeks you may bring him to such a pass, as
he will be fit to ride or take any moderate heat, but beware how you strain him
too much, for it will do him a great injury; thus having after the exactest
manner instructed you as to the first fortnights keeping, I shall next proceed
to give you Rules and Methods for giving him Courses, or as some term them
Heats, etc.

CHAP. III.
Orders most carefully to be observed in the Coursing or Heating your Horse.
TO begin with which, I must inform you that you must not give above two
Courses in a Week, for if you do you will spend him too much, although he be
never so lustly, and thereby weaken him and make him unfit for your Race.

The next thing to be observed is, that one of the times must be upon the day
you design he shall run the Match; the two days must be as equally distant from
each other as you can divide the Week, therefore you ought to make your Match
accordingly; Mondays and Fridays, or Tuesdays and Saturdays are the fittest if
you can so model the affair, for those days have the most distance between
them; if your Match be designed on the Monday let that and Friday be his
heating days.

But if on Tuesday or Wednesday, then Saturday must be the other that must
serve to both, because it is unseemly to do it on the Sunday, and so you may
observe of whatsoever day it shall fall out to be, that you keep as near as you
can an equal distance of time between his Courses or Heats.

But again, you must be sure to observe in what weather you ride him at such
times, for if it be wet, that is, if it either Rain, Snow, or Hail, you must
not give him any heat till such time it be fair, unless necessity urge it, as
when it rains most part of the Week or so; and then you must choose the time
when it holds up best, and let him be covered very warm, not only his Body, but
his Head, Neck, Ears, Breast and Shoulders; for his Head you must provide a
covering made with little bags to put his ears in, and be sure you keep him
abroad as little time as possible, for the damp raw Air will at such times
endanger much his health.

But to the last particular that is to be taken notice of in this Chapter; be
sure if the weather be fair and serene, get him dressed and abroad with him as
soon as daylight appears, but not before, by reason it is very incommodious in
this case both to the Horse and Man, and thus much concerning his Courses or
Heats, which is the most necessary thing to be observed in preparing him for
your Match; now to the second order of his Keeping and Feeding.

CHAP. IV.
The manner of his second Fortnights Feeding, and the care to be observed
therein.
IN this as in the former, you must be circumspect to observe the cleaning of
his Stall, giving fresh Litter, and keep it lighted up that his Bed may be
always soft, and the old with his Dung and Stale cast out at the Stable-door,
then when you come to him in the Morning give him a quart or somewhat more of
well dressed Oats, dressed as you were taught before, ever you put on his
Bridle, which being eaten, dress him in every part with such cloths, brushes,
and combs, as you formerly have done, which being perfected according to the
best of your skill, sursingle on his cloths, and then set his Saddle upon his
back and ride him abroad, galloping and racking him moderately, and between
each time of so doing water him, and let his bringing home and Stabling be in
each particular observed as in the foregoing fortnight, the which you have been
so amply taught that I think there is no need of repeating it over again, only
this take notice of, which is not yet laid down; when you have brought him into
his Stall before you pull off his Bridle take a wisp of the best hay you can
get, and holding it hard in your hand after it is well dusted, let him eat it
thence, and give him all the occasion you can to pull hard at it, and if he
devour it with a good Appetite supply him with more, and do so three times at
least if he will eat it, for by so doing you will bring him to be familiar with
you and win much upon his good nature; when he refuses to eat or that you think
he has eaten enough, take off his bridle after he has stood in it about an
hour, then rub him all over and dress him as formerly, which ended, give his
Bait of Oats in quantity and manner as has been often declared, but by no means
forget to sift them. Then having his diet-bread by you pretty stale, which must
be about three days old at least, it being then the wholesomest and most
commodious for him to eat, and after having eaten it to digest; the manner of
making it according to the most skilful prescribers is as you shall be showed
in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V.
The first Diet to be given in the ordering your Race-Horse, and the way to
make it.
FIrst, to make this Diet-bread you must take half a bushel of the best
Horse-beans, well sifted from any Seeds or Husks, or three pecks, if your Horse
be a great feeder; to the latter you must put one peck of the best Wheat you
can get, to the former quantity proportionably; you may grind them, divided if
you please, and so mingle them afterward, but in my opinion they will be best
ground together, after which dress the meal as fine as you can, so that there
be few or no husks or bran left in it; then take the best Ale-yest you can get,
by no means let it be sour or dirty, about three quarts will do, and put to
that as much water as will just make the Meal up into Dough, which must be
kneaded with all your strength in a Trow, or some such like thing for that
purpose. If you are not strong enough to knead it with your hands you may tread
it with your feet, being sure to leave no knobs in it, when it is thoroughly
kneaded, cover it from the dust and let it remain the space of an hour, then
knead it again, and after you have so done make your Loaves up about the
bigness of six-penny-loaves or bigger if you please, and after you have baked
them exceeding well in an Oven, take them out, set them trans-verse to cool,
that is, with their bottoms upwards.

When you have kept them three days, which you must do ever you give any of
them to your Horse for fear of making of him sick, which if they do, he will
refuse to eat it for the future.

The next thing to be observed is, that if the bread be moist or clammy, so
that it stick to his mouth and he cannot freely swallow it, or do seem not to
like it, you must cut it into thin slices and dry it in the Sun, or if the Sun
shine not, in some Stove or by the Fire, but not too hard, then take it and mix
it with his portion of Oats by smalling it amongst them, so that then he will
eat it freely, and it will do him no harm, but be sure to pare away the crust,
but note that you must never give it him alone, but always being crumbled and
mixed with his Oats, the quantity of Bread you so mix must not exceed three or
four slices at a time.

You having given him one bait, in the morning, about eleven or twelve a-clock
visit him again, and after well dressing him give him his bait or portion of
diet, as before, both of Bread and Oats.

About two of the Clock or somewhat later if you design not to course him the
following day, and so take the distance of time as has been formerly observed
in all his diets, only let his motions be curiously observed and each action
taken notice of, for by that you may know in what liking or estate of body he
is, and how he thrives upon his diet.

Again observe, that if you design to heat him the day following you must not
from the time just before mentioned give him any bread with his Oats, but let
him eat them by themselves, and when he has eat them put him on his Bridle and
dress him well in each part, the manner of which I hope we need not now
declare; then his cloth being put on in decent manner, clap on his Saddle and
ride him abroad in the Air, gallop and rack him gently and let him take his
watrings as before, them bringing him home let him stale and dung at the door
if you can get him to do it; and being brought into the Stable, after rubbing
down give him his portion of Oats, but no Hay, for that is not convenient
before a heat.

Now I have given you a most exact account concerning the ordering and dieting
your horse, the next thing necessary is, to inform you what Muzzles are most
convenient for Race-Horses, and what is the occasion of their being put on, and
the danger that there is in some of them.

First then, Muzzles were made to prevent horses from biting and tearing their
Racks, Mangers, and Stalls, to keep them from eating Loume or Mud-walls, their
own Litter or the like, which is very dangerous and hurtful to them, for it is
not requisite they should eat any thing without your knowledge, or what you
give them.

But as for these Muzzles there are many kinds, some close, some broad, others
with little round holes in them, these are commonly made of Leather which often
proves very annoiable to your Horse.

First then, any Leather that is alumed is very hurtful to the head by reason
of its sharp scent and saltness, the next is that which is greased or dressed
with course Oil, the smell of which often makes your Horses head-ake, and
causes him to leave his meat, be sick and hard bound, so that he cannot dung
kindly.

Now there are another kind of Muzzles that are very requisite which are much
in use, which are made of pack-thread or whipcord. These are most convenient in
the Summertime and will not offend the horse, if you wash them once in two or
three days or have fresh ones to put on.

Another sort there are which are commonly used in Winter, which are made of
strong Canvas fit for the head of your Horse, so far as need requires, and
bound with strong filleting, on one side a loop being made, and on the other a
string to fasten it round his Poll, and under his Chaps; some for warmth use to
put double Canvas, but take notice there must be a breathing Place with
network just against his mouth and nostrils to let the Air in and out, or else
if it be hard tied on it will go near to stifle him.

Thus much as touching Muzzles, now I will return again to the ordering your
Horse, and give you a farther account of several other particulars in the
management of him, beyond what has already been discoursed upon.

If in the ensuing morning, you coming to visit your horse find him laid, raise
him not, but let him rest, but if he be upon his Legs take a quart of Oats and
wash them well in Beer or Ale, then dry them indifferently well and give him
them to eat; and when he has so eaten them, put on his Bridle and rub him down
exceeding well, after that put on all his cloths and then for Saddling of him;
after which, hold up his head as high as you can reach, and into his mouth
break a new-laid Egg and oblige him to swallow it, after which spurt some Beer
into his mouth and carry him abroad to Air, observing at the door as formerly.
Being mounted, ride him gently, and by degrees increase his pace till it come
to a gallop, and if he be so inclined let him smell to any Horse's dung he
meets with upon the Road.

Now I shall give you another instruction worth observing; that is, the day you
are designed to run the Race when you come within a mile or less of the
starting goal or post for that purpose assigned; take off his cloths, which
being done clap your Saddle upon his back, sending some person with his cloths
to the end of the Race intended, and ride him on gently till you come to the
weighing or starting post; show him the post and make him as far as he is
capable, sensible of what he is designed for to be done withal.

The Signal for the start being given put him on at near three quarters speed,
or if his strength will allow it, more, but be sure you put him not to more
than he is able to perform, hold the Reins pretty straight in your hand, but by
no means check him in his Course, but let him run on cheerfully, and give him
all the encouragement you can, and so let him run the whole Race through.

If you, during the Course find his strength to fail him, or that he begin to
yield, give him what ease you can, and do not force him to too great a
swiftness, but use him so that he may be at all times well pleased with his
courses and free to run, and so in a short time you bring him to perfection,
but if he be any way discouraged at first, he will never perform according to
your Expectation.

Now the next thing material to be observed is upon what ground you run, and
then consider which ground your horse takes most delight to run upon, for this
may turn to your great advantage, the which you may best take notice of in his
Heats or in his first Race, whether it be smooth, rough, dry, wet, or a little
rising that he most eagerly covets, and for the future choose it if possible in
all your Races.

When the Race is ended, wherein if he have been exceeding hard put to it, by
no means let him stand still but gallop him moderately about some green Field,
the better to let him take breath by degrees and cool accordingly, the which
when you find he has pretty well done, have him into some dry gravel-pit or
other deep place out of the wind, or if there be none convenient, then to the
thickest Bushes or Trees you can meet with, and there having his cloths ready,
with a large blunt knife or some old piece of Iron or Wood flat like a Ruler,
yet having a blunt edge, scrape the sweat off from his Body, laying the
strength of both your hands to the same till none appear in any part, and
between whiles give your horse a turn or two, and then scrape him again till he
has done sweating, at which time pull off his Saddle and scrape the place on
which it was; likewise then with dry cloths, rub him in all parts, not omitting
any place, exceeding well, put on his cloths and girt his Saddle on upon them,
immediately after which you must gallop him gently for a considerable space,
then rub him slightly not taking off his cloths, especially from his head and
neck; then you may alight and walk him in your hand about the Heath or Field,
but be sure you suffer him not to graze if he should offer it, and when you
perceive him cool and dry, ride him home gently; you may gallop him softly if
you please; when you come home to the Stable-door endeavor to make him piss
and dung, but beware you put him not into the Stable till he be quite dry and
very cool, where being entered fasten his bridle to the Rack, and have this
following dose in readiness, which you must give him in a drenching horn, or
some such like thing, which will cleanse his body and much help nature to
recover strength, if he be any ways weakened by his running.

CHAP. VI.
The Dose or Scouring is made thus.
FIrst, get a Pint of the best Canary, and add to it one ounce, three drams of
clarified Rosin beat into powder, and stir it about in the Wine, then add more,
half a pint of Olive Oil the best that can be got, (for if it any ways stink it
will make your horse sick and cause him to cast it up again) and mix it well
with the former, then take an ounce and three quarters, or if you will, two
ounces of Sugar Candy, beat it small and put it to the rest, all which being
well mixed together place them in an earthen Vessel upon a gentle fire till
they boil, then take it off and let it stand till it be blood-warm, and so give
it your Horse; if he refuse to take it you must force him to it by pouring it
down his throat, and holding up his head till he have quite swallowed it down.

The virtue of it is to take away by scouring and sometimes by gentle Sweat all
foul and gross humors, that too much heat or overstreining had caused to gather
in the Stomach and Bowels, it dissolves crewdy grease that having been melted
is again settled in hard knobs, and brings it away in what part soever; in
fine, there is not a wholsomer drink can be given to any horse, especially
after running.

CHAP. VII.
The Way and Method of looking to, and keeping your Horse after he has taken
this Potion.
WHen the Horse has taken it, then immediately rub his Legs and pull off his
Saddle and all other his cloths, leaving him nothing on, then curry him well,
and after brush him, and with a dusting cloth dust him, and again with a new
hempen cloth or cloth of hair, rub his body in every part, but in so doing your
greatest pains must be about his head, neck; and breast; this being perfected
put on his cloths and keep him as warm as possible, and put several handfuls of
straw under his girts, and then let him remain without either meat or drink for
the space of two hours, during which time you must watch him, and seldom let
him stand still for fear of getting cold, during the time the Potion is in
working; nay, seep or standing still (which he will choose if he be left alone
to himself) are alike dangerous, by reason that the blood and vital Spirits
have not their operation so well as in times of motion, nor the heat of the
body power to force up the humors that lie as it were absconded in the several
parts. When he has stood in his Bridle, and fasted so long as is
beforementioned, or if you think convenient somewhat longer; then take ears of
wheat about one hundred, and offer them to him to eat, but let them not be
bearded in any-wise, but ever you suffer him to take them, feel him all over in
what condition or estate of body he is, and if you find him sweat on a sudden
or any cold clamm overspread his Limbs, which many call a cold sweat, or if
you observe him to pant, tremble, or fetch his breath short, withold your
hand and give not any thing; for if you do, it will much endanger him, these
being the Symptoms that the Potions has not done working, but that it is
striving with the vicious humors and soul indigestures of the Body, therefore
put on his slip and taking off his Bridle stop all the Lights of the Stable,
the better to keep it dark, and secure your Horse from too much Air, and let
him take his ease in your abseuce for the space of two hours or more, by which
time the Potion will have done working and his sickness will pass away.

Then coming to him again, if you find him well you may give him the ears of
wheat by four or five at a time till the whole parcel is wasted, after that if
he will eat any more you may suffer him to have the like quantity again, and
after them a small bundle of Hay bound up very hard and thrown into his Rack,
but during the time of his eating it, be sure to rub him over as you have been
taught; but more especially his head.

Within the hour following give him his quantity of Oats as before, mingling
with them a pint of husked Beans, as clean from husks and dust as can be, then
take tree slices of bread and (the crust being cut away) crumble them among the
Oats and Beans, and so give them to him, and after he has eaten them let him
stand about two hours and a half, or three if you please.

Then coming to him give him some Bait again of each the same parcel as before,
then dress him down well and put on his cloth, but put not on his Saddle, nor
back him, neither let him have any water that night, but keep him within doors,
for if you do otherwise you will endanger your horse.

CHAP. VIII.
The manner of making these Balls and their Virtue, with an account of what
Diseases they are most powerful to cure.
TAke the powder of Elicampane-Roots, Cummin-seeds and Fenugreek-Seeds, of each
two ounces beaten and sifted as fine as you can possible, to which put two
ounces of Sugar Candy, brown if you please, beat that likewise; fine flower of
Brimstone the like quantity, one ounce of the juice of Liquorice, then wetting
them with half a pint of White Wind, set them over the fire, after which take
one ounce of the Chemical oil of Aniseeds, and three ounces of the Syrup of
Coltsfoot, add to these of Olive-oil, Honey, and Syrup or melted Sugar, all of
them being the best you can get, one pint and a half, that is, of each half a
pint, proportionable, then mingle all these Ingredients together, and thicken
them into paste with fine wheat flour, and so make them up into Balls for your
use; you must not make them above the bigness beforementioned, or if you please
you may make them up as you use them; put them or the Paste up into a gally-pot
and stop it close, and it will keep a long time.

For the use of them take these instructions, for their virtues are very great.

First then, if you use them for any sickness or dullness in your Horse, anoint
or rub them over with sweet Oil or Butter, and so give them to him each Morning
as you were taught before, and after give him a gentle breathing and let him
drink, but if the weather be foul, take him not out.

But if for cold, or any infirmity in his Stomach, you may give them to him
till you perceive it is wasted and gone.

The Virtues of them are for several other things, as Glanders, Heaviness to
purge away any molten grease, to recover a lost Stomach, Faintings, and
Heart-Qualms, and to make any tolerable Horse fat to admiration, but to your
Race-Horses you must give for strengthening and cherishing the Spirits. But now
to the fourth and last fortnight for preparing your Horse, which must begin
with his last diet.

CHAP. IX.
The manner of making his last Diet.
IN this you must use three Pecks of Wheat, and but one of Beans, and let them
be ground together upon the black Stones as small as possible they can be, then
dress it through an exceeding fine dressing-cloth; for note, that every Bread
must be finer than the former: Then put to it the forementioned quantity of
Ale-Yest, but be sure it be not sour, nor the Grounds. Then knead it together,
and make it up into Loaves as formerly; but to this, above what has been spoken
of, you must add the Whites of two or three and twenty Eggs, and instead of
water put milk, so much as will make it up.

They being baked, let them stand their usual time, and then cut the Crust
away, or as some call it, chip them, after which, dry a quart of Oats well, and
after that sift them, so that there be no defect left in them, to which, put
your Beans in like manner ordered, and at the usual times, give them all three,
mingled together to him.

As for his Heating and Coursing-days, the first week they must be punctually
observed, but the second you must abate him one, that is, heat him but once,
and that must be Mondays hear. After he has stood one hour more in his Bridle,
you may take three pints of Oats, and steep them in Beer or Ale for a short
time, and then give them to him, and they will much cherish him, and allay his
thirst.

This being done, about an hours space after, you shall give him the former
quantity of Beans, Oats, and Bread in the same order, and manner, or if you
think it more convenient, you may give them several, and not mingle them; let
him by no means want for feeding at night, for when you make him his last, give
him not only his Bait, but leave him a bundle of Hay in his Rack bound up very
hard.

Next Morning, as soon as day appears, you must give him his first diet, then
rub him well in every part; after which, put on his cloths and air him, that
is, ride him abroad, and use him as formerly, permitting him to drink freely;
both Gallop and Rack him, but do not ride him hard.

When you return, dress him, and feed him with Oats, Beans, and Bread, as
heretofore, and some Hay, but not so much as you were used to give him.

As for your heating days, they must likewise be observed in all points as
formerly, nor upon any occasion neglected, unlese upon such as has been
declared, nor must you increase them, nor strain your Horse more than you were
wont; four heats or courses will be sufficient for the first fortnight, and
four purges or scouring for the whole time of his being made fit for Racing,
all which must be observed with diligence and caution, according to the
forementioned Methods and Instructions; but now to the third, etc.

CHAP. X.
The third Fortnights Dieting and Ordering your Horse.
NOw for the manner of Making his Bread, it must be as follows, finer than
formerly was wont, must it be made; therefore take but two pecks of Beans, and
with fine Wheat make it up a Bushel, let them be ground together as formerly,
and dressed exceeding fine, so that there be hardly a Husk or a Bran to be
seen; then with a like quantity of yest as before, mingle the meal and add
water to it, so much as is just sufficient to make it stick close together;
when it is well kneaded and worked up, you must bake it as you have been taught.

After which, it having stood about three days or somewhat more, pare away the
Crust and give it your Horse, (that is) three slices crumbled amongst a quart
of fine dressed Oats and a quart of split Beans; your observance shall be in
these as in the former two weeks, his Dressings, Airings, times of Feeding, and
likewise his heating days must be particularly observed. And take notice of
this,

That you must not, after he has been heated, give him any of the Scowring, but
that being laid aside, give him in the room of it Balls about the bigness of a
Pullets Egg, which are great Cordials, and restoratives, and you must give him
one at a time; thus sitting in the Saddle or otherwise if you please, hold up
his head as high as is convenient, and put one of them into his Mouth and
oblige him to swallow it, but before you give it him, you must rub him down, or
according to your match; for you must not heat him for four or five days before
you intend to run your Race, but you may air him very well, and give him gentle
breathings, that he may in no wise lose his wind, but give him none of the
forementioned scouring drink.

One thing more I have considered to quicken his Spirits and make him lively,
which is to burn Storax, Olibanum, Frankincense and Benjamin mixed together,
which drive away all ill scents and airs, and there is nothing more wholesome
for the brain.

As likewise, when you give your Horse his Oats, Beans and Bread, wash the two
former in neither Ale nor Beer, but take a pint of Muscadine, and about the
Whites of ten Eggs, and steep them therein, but you need not do this above four
times in a week; at other times, give them to him dry as formerly.

Beware likewise how to give him any Hay, unless immediately after his heats,
and then holding a small wisp in your hand, let him pull it thence by degrees,
but if his Belly be apt to shrink up, you may give him more to keep it straight.

Again, all the last week, if your Horse be given to eat his Litter you must
keep him muzzled as you have been formerly taught, but if he be not subject to
the same, nor to eat any other foul thing, three days before you run him will
be a sufficient space to keep him muzzled.

The day-morning before you intend to run him, you must air him gently, and
when you have brought him home, dress him and rub him as formerly, and be sure
to diet him exceeding well, omitting no point, neither before nor after his
being carried abroad, only toward might you may stint him of the third part of
his usual Bait, but let his last Diet be full Proportion, as likewise his
dressing; another thing is also to be observed, which is, that you must not
keep him out late, but let him be in his Stable at Sunset or before, and
likewise the day before the Match, you shall shoe him, poll him, and all
things else that you shall think convenient for fitting him out in the best
wise, but beware that it be not unskilfully performed, for then you may much
injure your Horse, or give him some cause to be offended at your curiosity, or
as many call it Adornment. It is reported by some who have had long experience
in this way and manner of ordering of Horses, that several are so skilful as to
understand the meaning of such ornaments, and what they are to be put to, the
next day, which makes them conceive such Pride that they will not eat any meat
till the time they have run the Race, unless it be forced upon them.

It is true, all Authors that treat of Naturalities do affirm that horses are
most knowing and subtle Creatures, and that they are endued with many noble
Qualities and generous Perfections.

Now for brading their Tails and Manes, and tying Ribbons on their forehead,
or at their ears, I hold altogether unnecessary, for so doing does not only
offend him, but many times hinders him in the performance of his Race, by
reason that they make him cast his head often to look at them, and if he has
not been used to them, many times make him start out of his way, and so lose
his ground; therefore in my opinion, only to comb out his Mane and Tail (and if
they be too cumbersome you may clip them a little) is the best Method in that
case.

Be sure there be nothing left undone that you intend to do to him, till the
morning he is to run, for if there be, it may chance to vex him, and thereupon
some Horses will grow sullen and will not run freely.

The morning you are to run, make him a visit before it is well light, and
after you have pulled off his Muzzle and rubbed his head in every part thereof,
offer him a quart of Oats steeped in a pint of Muskadine or Tent, but before
you put them in bruise them a little, if he chance to refuse it, put him some
Oats in the whites of Eggs only; or to be better sure of his eating, some of
the best and finest Bread, and some whole Wheat, well sisted and dressed,
mingle with his Oats, in which you must use no Beans; but be sure you give him
but a little of any of these diets, for if you fill him he will be unfit for
the Race and may fail your expectation, which otherwise he no doubt would have
answered in each particular, to your great satisfaction.

If he empty not his Body freely, take him abroad and air him a little, and see
if you can possibly get him to dung and urine, the which if he do (the which no
doubt by this time you will have taught him to do) bring him into the Stable
again, and put his Muzzle on; but on the contrary, if he will empty without any
farther trouble in the Stable, it is needless to lead him out, and far better to
let him remain till the time you are designed to run, or about half an hour
before, according as the distance is from the place he is kept at to the
starting place.

Just as you are going to lead him, dip the Bit of his Bridle in Muskadine or
Alicant, and then drawing off his Muzzle, draw on his bridle, but if you see
him inclinable to empty, let him do it before, and to incite him to do it the
more speedily, give him about a pint of washed Oats, Bread and Wheat as before
you did; then spread soft wax, such as shoo-makers use, under your Girts and
Saddle, which done girt it gently on his back, so that he scarcely feel it is
on; then spread a large white Linen cloth over his Saddle, and over it all his
other cloths, which likewise being slightly girt, stick wisps under his Girts
or Sursingles, but let them be very soft; then cover him with some piece of
rich Tapestry or Cloth of State to make him show gallant, after which pour down
his throat with a drenching horn, one pint of Muscadine, Alicant, or for want
of either, Canary.

Then lead him forth with courage, and suffer him to move gently, and if he
offer to smell to any dung, either old or new, suffer him by any means to do
it, or if he offer not, endeavor to make him, for it will cause him to
evacuate, which will much lighten him and help him in the Race; nay use double
diligence herein, by leading him to such places as you think will soonest
provoke him to it, as heaps of rushes, brakes, or heath, little bushes, high
tufted grass, or the like; but if there happen to be no such in your way, then
you may spread, and light up some Straw under his feet, making it rustle; then
whistle, and touch him gently with your switch or whip to make him stretch, the
which no doubt will effect your desire.

Again, If he foam at mouth by champing hard upon his Bit or otherwise, you
must take care to have a fine linen cloth ready to wipe it off, and a vessel of
fair cool water, to cleanse and wash his mouth still as you observe the froth
or foam to rise.

Then having walked him gently to the place designed for starting, you must
take off all to his Saddle, and having rubbed him down with care in every part
(which must be done with hard wisps) search and cleanse his feet, and spurt
some water in his mouth; after which, your self or whom you assign to ride him,
may take his Back, and observing the fair start, put him swiftly on, and run
the Match.

-- No doubt with good success, for this manner of ordering will seldom fail
your expectations, if your horse in himself be but sound and of good Mettl'd
Limbs and strength to bear him out.

Now I shall give the curious to understand as necessary a point belonging to
horses as has ever been discoursed of in any Tract whatsoever, the which will
be very useful for all those whose employ it is to trade in Horses, and be as
the Sailers Card, to direct them in that affair, and keep them from being
over-seen, or cheated in any Market or Fair whatsoever; with each particular
observation, rule and method to be taken notice of in the Limbs, body, and
head, as eyes, mouth, nose, ears, and the true manner to know a good Horse from
a bad.

But to begin, first, there are these things to be observed, if you will choose
a Horse that shall be for your turn, and please you in every part, and in all
his actions, travels, or other labors, as Hunting, Racing, War, drawing of
Coach, Chariot, or any rural service whatsoever, but take notice that no one
Horse can be capable of all these.

Therefore you must choose your Horse according to what you design him for, and
so manage him accordingly.

But to imperfection in general, the which I will undertake to demonstrate in
the sound Horse, who is no ways defective, because in him may lively appear all
the maladies and mischances that may or can befall any horse whatsoever.

First then, be advised, that whenever you design to buy a Horse, take especial
notice of all his parts, and the full proportion of his body according to his
natural shape, or if you can observe any imperfection in his Limbs that may
arise by accident, whereby they are lessened or made bigger, take special care
to find out the cause of it if possible, by which you may know what you buy,
and whether to like or dislike him.

In which, your observances in election must be drawn from two heads, the first
of which is general, the latter peculiar or proper.

For the first of which, it is to be understood upon what occasion you buy your
Horse, or for what use he is designed, what color is best, or best pleases
you; next his stature, breed and likeliness, these are general, because every
man in this will please himself according to his fancy, nor ever can we imagine
all men to be of a mind in this, therefore it is best to let them choose
according to their own pleasure, nor much matters it.

The next, which is a peculiar or a particular Query, is to know what
Country-breed he is of, whether English or Foreign, to know which you must
enquire of those who have had the breeding of him, or if that cannot be known,
by reason of his being so often bought and sold, take these particular
observations; if he be Spanish breed, his Limbs are small and straight, dry and
spare, like a Hart's; if Barbary, a fine little Head and a well-set Breast and
Shoulder; if of Naples, he is hawks-nosed and clear-eyed, his eyes seeming to
sparkle; if Dutch or Flemmish, his legs will be generally rough and
large-hoofed; as for French and English, they are almost alike, only the
English are stronger set and more hardy for any exercise whatsoever.

Now to his color, for the color of a Horse is much to be observed, by reason
one color is far better than another, though there be good Horses of all
colors; the best colors, as the most experienced do affirm, are the Roan, the
White, the Lyard, the Bay, the Sorrel, the Dapple Gray, the Flea-bitten, the
Black; Iron-grey, and White, but above all, the Bay is chosen and accounted the
best, both by the French and the English, especially if they have a Star in
their foreheads, and their feet spotted with white spots, the Lyard for
courage is esteemed, which is a mingled Roan, the Mouse, Dun and Grizled, were
formerly in great esteem, as also the Dapple-Grey, and such as come nearest
them, the Iron-Grey, the White Sorrel and Brown-Bay. Plato commends much the
White, whom Virgil does not esteem; others commend the Black, especially if he
have a white Star in his forehead, or be streaked with white down his face,
the black if he be not mingled with Silver-hair, nor have any white about him,
is naught for Service, the Flea-bitten Horse is always singular good for Travel
and other Labors, and will hold out the best of any; the yellowish or glew'd
unless he be spotted or straked with white is naught, yet if he be well marked
he often proves indifferent well; and if he have a black List down his back
from the nape of his neck to his tail, he is excellent good for a Stallion if
his propertion be according; the red Bay, and the blue gray are much subject to
Melancholy. The Flea-bitten and the Black with White are Sanguine, the Roan,
the Sorrel, and the Black without White subject to choler.

But as to their Paces, which are these, Trot, Rack, Amble, or Gallop, the
which you must choose, according as you design to put him to, either for Racing,
Hunting, Traveling, or Fight; if it be for moderate Traveling, an easy Trot
is best, the which you may know if he be prone to by observing his Legs.

Thus when his near fore-leg and his off hinder-leg, move together, or his near
hinder-Leg and his off fore-Leg; and farther observe, that if when he moves, he
be quick to raise his Legs from the ground, and do it short and with an even
distance, making but little treads, he will likewise pace very well; for if he
lift up his feet blunderingly or carelessly, it denotes he is given to Stumbling
and will be often troubled with Lameness; if he strike his Legs across, or take
no wideness in his steps, it denotes he is subject to trip, enterfere or fall;
if he take not his step even, it shows an unwillingness to travel and a
weakness in his Limbs; if he tread large steps, he is subject to overreach and
strain himself if he be put to the Speed.

Again, if you choose a Horse for ease and pleasant Journeys, you must choose an
Ambler, which you may know thus, if he move both his Legs on the same side
together, fore-Leg and hinder-Leg, and that he must do, large, nimble, and
easy; for if he tread short and shuffling he is no good Ambler, yet if he be
very nimble at his first beginning to pace, it denotes he cannot long hold it.

Now for hunting either of Buck, Stag, or Hare, for speed on the Road, or to
ride Post, if you choose a Horse, then you must take one who has naturally or
has been taught the racking Pace, which is neither trot nor Amble, but between
both, and is the easiest of all, though it gain not so much ground, the which
you may observe by the same method as you did ambling.

The next I have to treat of is gallopping, which is natural to all the former
Paces, but the Amble; for an ambling Horse will immediately be brought to
Gallop, by reason it consists almost of the same nature with it, only a slower
and not so much straining; for it being a swift Pace, by long use has so inured
the Horse to it that he cannot without some time and instruction frame his legs
to it, but will fall into a Pace; if he be overmuch spurred, beaten or forced,
that can properly be called no Pace, but a confusion of all together, but
perfects all things, so in time you may bring him to gallop as you please if no
imperfection in his Limbs restrain him.

Now I shall lay down such observations as you may infallibly know a good
Gallopper by. First, if he raise his feet swift and clearly from the ground but
not too high, and that he neither roll nor boggle in his way, nor strikes his
Belly with his feet. If he take large reaches with his forelegs, and his
hinder follow quickly, in which you must likewise observe that he do not cut
under the Knee, or on the Shank, which is called by some the Gallopping, but by
others the swift-cut, or that he throws not his Legs cross or twist them as it
were, nor that he set one foot upon, or clap it against the other, but that he
keep him steady and even in all his course, and still with his fore-foot head
the way.

The Horse who has these properties always gallops most neatly, and a Man may
trust to him in any time of danger, that is, if he be beset with Thieves, or
pursued by an Enemy, in time of War, if he be but able of Body, and well kept.

If your Horse raise all his feet together, and gallop as it were on a heap, or
round, then he is not swift, but will tread sure and hold out well, by reason
of his strength and limbs, and is fit for War or carry double.

Again, observe if a Horse, gallops but softly and treads firm, not being
Subject to fall nor stumble, yet his Legs seem tender, and he lifts them up as
it were in fear, and throws them in and out as if he was hurt or pained, then
he is not for gallopping uses, nor ever will he, by reason he has some obscure
disease or stiff lameness in his Joints that is hard to remove.

Now as to his height or stature, the which must be observed according to the
use you put him to, or as your self shall think fit, a well-made Horse with
strong Joints, but not much flesh upon his Legs, you must choose, about sixteen
hands high; if you take one for carrying double or any other great weights; as
likewise for drawing either in Cart, Wagon or Coach, and if for recreation
only, the finest and neatest limbed and shaped you can light of, and not
exceeding fourteen hands in stature, or if you please less, according to the
proportion of your own body.

Thus far having given you, as I well hope, a satisfactory instruction, I shall
now proceed to inform you of the Deformities and Imperfections, secret
Distempers and Infirmities that lie hidden many times from the eyes of the
Buyer, the which are not a few, so that it would be almost impossible to
discover them all, so that every one might understand them; therefore I shall
endeavor to give you as plain and full an account as is necessary, or that can
be understood according to the best opinions of the skilful.

To begin then, when any one offers you a Horse to sell, after you have seen
him tried, as to the former experience, and understand his Age, and Breed, then
cause his Saddle and all other his Cloths, nay his very Bridle, if so be you
can get him to stand still without it, to be took off, and then place your self
just before him, and look wishfully upon him, and take especial notice of his
Countenance at all times, whether he look pleasant and lively, well and
steadfast, without change or alteration; the which if he do, it is a sign that
he is of a good Spirit, and in good health, as to bodily sickness or inbred
diseases; the next thing to be observed is his ears, for if they be thick,
stiff and taper from the roots to the tips, as also long or of a convenient
size well fastened and strong at the roots, it is a great sign of mettle,
perfection and completeness, for such ears are an ornament to any horse.

But if they be contrary, as thick at the ends, lolling, and often moving, it
denotes him dull, sloathful, heavy, and stubborn, and of a very ill temper.

Now if his face be clean and his forehead rising, the similitude of a feather
in his forehead, upon his cheeks or any part of his face, but it is the greater
sign if it be above his eyes, or if he have a white Spot, Star, or Streak of a
pretty large Size, drawn even, or a snip of white upon his nose, it is a sign
he is good and beautiful.

But on the contrary, if his face seem swelled, bloated or puffy, fat, dull,
cloudy, or lowering, his forehead flat and square, which the Vulgar term
Mare-faced, the rach if any he has in his front, standing very low, or in the
middle of his face, his Star or Streak uneven or crinkled, his nose ball'd or
raw, and the hair in many places off from his face, are very bad marks and
signatures of great deformity.

Again, if his eyes be shining, full and round, stand Eagle-like, out from his
head, and little or none of their whites to be seen, if they be full and
sparkling, it denotes him cheerful, swift-sighted and comely, full of spirit
and of good nature, yet fierce and fiery.

But if his eyes look askew, seem dull, and withered, little and slow in
motion, they denote much imperfection, and are unhandsome to behold; if they
are the color of Foxes or Ferrets eyes, he will be quickly moon-eyed or
wall-eyed, and, if not timely prevented, blind; if he chance to have a thick,
dull Philm over it, and in it white specks, it not only shows a timorousness in
your Horse, but subjection to causeless starting, and also in danger of having
a Pin and Web or white skin over his sight; if they run either water or matter,
or seem bloody or raw, they proceed from an old Surfeit or an over-heating,
which was done by immoderate riding: Corruption ingendring in the Head by
exceeding draughts or the like, as dead eyes that are low sunk do; that, if he
lives long he will be blind, and that he was gotten by a very aged Stallion and
is of no good breed; if the Whites be as much seen as the Black it signifies
great weakness, unnatural and sullen in himself.

Again, if you observe by feeling or otherwise, his Chaps or Jaw-bones Lean,
Spare, and large spaces between them, his Windpipe Head great and wide, not
surrounded or encumbered with Nerval small Ropes or the like; and that his neck
seems to shoot through the Jaw, or be placed in the nether part of it within
the same; it is a token of large and strong wind, and that your Horse will hold
out a Race very well if all his Limbs be proportionable, and that he is of a
good heart, and has a head not subject to Diseases: But on the contrary, if his
Jaws be fat, gross and full of kernels or knobs, and that there is but a little
space between the bones, it denotes short wind, foulness of Stomach and Belly,
and subject to Glaunders, Broken-winded, or Strangury, and many times apt to be
troubled with grievous Colds.

Now if his Jaws be close and firmly fixed as it were to touch each other, so
that they cause the flesh to rise about them as if swelled, it denotes
short-wind, gross and vicious humors settling there, and especially if it rise
more in one place than in another, and the form of the risings be long, for
then some inward infection is gathered, which if not taken in time will turn to
an Impostume or worse.

If he have wide Nostrills, and they open and shut and seem in a continual
motion, so that the insides or redness upon every little Straining or Snorting
appear, yet the compass of his nose but small, his mouth not wide but deep,
with small dry Lips, meeting without the least hanging over, do likewise
promise the horse good. And well-winded, courageous and hardy.

But if contrary, quite otherwise; as short-winded, tender and weak, a
shallow-mouthed Horse will never bear his Bridle well, but if it be not buckled
fast, the Bit will be apt to fall out of his mouth, or he will be much apt to
slaver.

Again, if his upper Lip be uneven, and will not meet with his under, but
either shut over or flap, it is a certain sign that he has a lingering Disease
or is exceeding slow, as also if he have a Rheum or dropping at the nose, if
that be clear it will if not timely stopped (the which it is hard to do) turn
to the Glaunders; if one nostril runs it is worse than if they did both.

-- Now as to his teeth, be sure to observe that when you buy a Horse, to look
in his mouth, and take a diligent care to see if he have lost none of his
teeth, or if he have, what they are, whether Grinders, Fore-teeth or Tushes;
for thereby you may give a shrewd guess at his Age, although the mark be out of
his mouth; but to avoid being cheated buy not a horse that has lost any, for if
he have lost some the rest will quickly follow.

The next thing to be considered is his Breast, for if that be broad,
strong-set, rising or full-fleshed, and adorned with marks or feathers; then
you may confide in his strength, and he will not deceive your expectations; but
if he be the contrary, it denotes weakness of Body and unfitness for Labor,
and that he is given to that ill quality in Horses, viz. to stumbling, as
likewise to cutting and tripping; as also if his Breast seem to sink or give
inwards, it shows him of no courage or metal.

The next thing to be considered is his Legs; that is, his forelegs only, of
the hinder hereafter I shall treat; first observe the Joint next to his
shoulder, which is properly called his Bow or Elbow, and from thence his Thigh
as low as his knee, and observe they be well Sinew'd and covered with brawny
flesh, no ways giving out nor tumid, and that he stand firm without bending or
moving his Joints, which if he do, it is a sign of strength, as likewise they
are all marks of the same.

The next is to observe if he carry an even or equal pace with his Legs, but
especially with his knees, and that they be neat, well knit, and not too
fleshy, of a just proportion; for take notice if they differ in magnitude he
has had his knee broke, or else some distemper harbors there, as the Gout,
etc. if you find any cuts or scars with hair growing in them, he is apt to
fall, which will be hard to cure or rid him of.

Then leaving his Knees, observe his Shanks as low as his Fetlock, and if they
be well Sinew'd, finely made and shaped proportionable to his Thighs, and that
they neither bend in nor out, and that there be no ridge nor seam descending
from the knee-joints on the inside, there is he good and sound in those parts;
but on the contrary, if there be scars, scabs, or knobs on the inside, it is by
reason of his high striking, called by most the swift-cut; but if above his
Fetlock or Hoof, it is interfering or short-cutting, but in this be sure to
take good observation, for if under the skin, all over there appear little
Knobs or Scabs, it is caused by some ill usage or nasty keeping, or else
Symptoms of the Maunge, that will in a short time break forth to the full if
not prevented.

Farther, if his Legs be full-fleshed, fat, or Dropsical, he will in no wise be
fit for servile Labor; if on the inward bend of his Knee there be long scars,
seams or scabs, the which have not been occasioned by the swift-cut, they will
prove very dangerous for it denotes a Mallander that in a short time will turn
to a Canker or Ulcer.

Now let us descend to his Pasterns, the first of which must be sure to be
cleaner and strongly knit with Sinews or Ligaments, the second straight, stiff
and smoothly fixed, not more inclinable to bend one way than another, but not
overlong; for it shows a weak Horse: Or if the former be gouty or swelled, it
denotes strains and overreaching Sinews.

The next thing to be considered is the hoof, the which is as great a piece of
Curiosity to be observed, as any that belong to the choosing a good Horse, for
if that fail, all the other properties avail not.

First then, a good hoof should be smooth of color; black and inclining to
long, something hollow and full, sounding; for, take notice that a white hoof
is not so good by reason of its tenderness; so that it is apt either to let the
shoe draw, or it self to batter or spread, by being in too much wet or hard
riding.

The next is a withered hoof that seems to scall, or have welts or seams upon
it; which denotes the Horse to be aged or much worn by hard travel or
over-heats; another sort of hoofs there are which are called short hoofs, and
are so brittle, that they will not bear any shoe above a day at the most, if
rid or labored; if his hoof be exceeding round, it is bad for deep and dirty
ways, by reason the horse cannot tread sure; a flat hoof that is light and full
of pores or holes is a sign of his being foundred; if you perceive by striking
the hoof a hollow noise, or that it be hollow within, it signifies some
internal defect, and old fester not cured, that has wasted the pith, and
therefore is not good.

The next thing observable is the Coronet or Socket of the hoof, the which
being well fleshed, smooth, without Chops or Scars, and well decked with hair,
is a sign of its being in good plight and sound; but if the contrary, he is
often troubled with ring-worms, a crown-scab, or the like dangerous misfortune.

Having taken particular notice of the former properties of goodness or defect,
remove your self to the right side, and then take especial notice how his head
is fixed to his neck; see first that it be small at the setting on, and so by
degrees descend taper to his shoulders, not thick, but rather broad; and
observe that his head stand not too high nor too low, with a high, yet thin
Crest, his Mane declinable, long, soft, and a little curling, which are signs
of comeliness; as on the contrary, a thick joult-head, and thick neck, short
and brawny, shows much dullness and deformity.

If there be any swelling in, or under the nape of the Neck, it will certainly
turn to the Poll-evil or some Fistula, which is altogether as bad if not taken
in time.

Again, to have a thick Neck, and lank or fallen near the Withers, to have a
gross and flat, or sunk Crest, are signs of great defect in strength; excessive
store of hair upon the Mane, especially if it be straight and hard, signifies
dullness and want of courage; a thin Mane, that is not made so by any accident
or distemper, shows the horse to be of a fiery nature; if it fall away, it
shows either Itch, Worms, or Mange to lodge there.

The next thing worthy to be observed, is his Back or Chine, which must be
broad, straight, and smooth, well measured and even, to which his Ribs must be
well grafted, firm, and round, his fillets or haunches straight, stout and
strong, nor must there be above three Inches breadth between his farthest rib
and huckle bone, that is the nearest to the same, as the short ribs, which are
all signs of a perfect and well shaped Horse.

The next thing is, to take a special observation of the shape of his Body, if
it be plump, smooth, and contained within the compass of his ribs, and not
hanging over or paunching out; his stones or genitals must likewise be
contained close in their Purses or Cods, as it were girt to his Yard, the which
shows the Horse to be of good mettle, well made and free from Diseases in those
parts; but if the contrary, it shows him defective and uncomely.

First then, if he have a narrow back, he will be prone to Saddle-galls, hurts
and bruises in riding; to have a sway-back is a token of great weakness in the
Chine, or if his Ribs be very fat and straight, they in Travel will hinder him
from fetching his full wind, and so consequently make him tire; if now his
hinder Ligaments or Fillets be slack, hang flabbing and unseemly, they will be
a great hinderance to him if he travel in steep way, and he can by no means
hold any pace up a hill if it be very steep, and but very untoward in carrying
any burden.

Again, if his Belly be gant, and seems to be close within his ribs, or near to
his back, if his Stones hang down and swag about in the Cods, they are great
signs of imperfection and uneasiness in the Horse, caused by some Distemper,
and likewise he will be apt to founder.

The next things to be taken notice of are his Buttocks, they must be smooth,
round, and even, not standing too high nor too low, but as near as can be level
with his Body; but many choose a long Buttock'd Horse for riding double or the
like, which if they do, they must observe that they rise behind and wear the
Dock spread to the setting on thereof, which makes a Horse show well, and are
signs of strength.

Now for the narrow Buttock or ridged rump, they are both weak and uncomely,
and will not conveniently bear any thing behind.

From which I shall descend to his Thighs or Hips, first observe if they be
well brawned, sinewed, and that they from the first setting on to the Bow-Joint
are made taper, lessening by degrees, and be well fleshed, all which if they be
not, shows weakness and unaptness for service; after which take special notice
of the Hock or middle Joint, and with your hand feel if it be well knit, full
of Gristles, Sinews, and Ligaments, that it be not fleshy nor swelled, and that
it have large Veins, be pliant and apt to bend at each motion of the horse,
something bowing it must be and firm. All these are good signs; but if there be
cuts, scars, or festers in the inside of the Joint or elsewhere, it is
dangerous and not easy to be cured.

If there happen any swelling or heat over the Joints in general, then it is no
other but a blow; but observe if such swelling be only in one place, and that
on the inside in the hollow of the Joint, and the Veins strut, feel hot, and
beat much, or throb, and that the swelling be soft, it is a blood spavin; but
if brawny and hard, a bone-spavin; but if it chance to be just upon the hock or
outbow, behind or a little under it, then it is or shortly will be a Curb, etc.

Now for his hinder-legs, you must observe whether they be fine, neat, and
clean, full of strong Sinews, and not very fat, which shows him sound in those
parts; but on the contrary, if his legs be very fat, fleshy, large, it
signifies him bad for Service; if they be tumid or swelling, it denotes the
setlings of molten grease there; if any scabs happen to be something above the
Pasterns, they denote the scratches or chops; cuts or scars beneath them denote
Pains or Aches, all which are dangerous and require great skill and diligence
to cure them.

Now for the Tail, it cannot stand amiss nor out of place upon fair Buttocks;
but upon an ill pair if it be never so well placed, it will not seem handsome;
the posture it ought to stand in, is even with the parting of the Buttocks,
that is broad, high, smooth and somewhat bending inward, fleshy and of a good
length, bristly and curled, the length being not only a beauty, but very
necessary for him to defend himself with against Wasps, Hornets, and Flies,
though many desire to have him cut-tailed.

But in general, the whole body must be framed according to the most expert
Horsemens Opinions, thus to have the head and legs of a Stag, the ears and tail
of a Fox, the neck of a Swan, the breast of a Lion, the Buttocks of a Woman,
and the feet of an Ass. The perfect good horse thus Virgil in his Georgicks
describes, the which to insert may not be amiss.

With head advanced high at first the Kingly Colt does pace,
His tender Limbs aloft he lifts, as well becomes his race.
And foremost still he goes, and through the stream he makes his way,
And ventures first the Bridge, no sudden sound does him affray.
High crested is his neck, and eke his neck is framed small,
His belly gaunt, his back is broad, and breasted big withal.
The Bay is always counted good, so likewise is the Gray,
The White and Yellow worst of all: Besides if far away
There haps a noise, he stamps and quiet cannot rest,
But praunces here and there, as if some spirit him possessed.
His ears be set upright, and from his Nose the fiery flame,
Does seem to come, while as he snuffs and snorteth at the same*
Thick is his Mane, and on his right side down does hanging fall,
And double Chin'd, upon his Loins a gutter runs withal.
He scraping stands, and making of deep holes he paws the ground,
Whilst that aloud his horned hoof all hollow seems to sound.
Thus have you all the particular and general descriptions both of a good and
bad horse, and may therefore know what to choose and what to forbear, and note
that amongst all the Creatures irrational, there is not one more generous nor
more serviceable to man than is the horse; for as we read of Bucephalas, the
horse of Alexander the Great, that although he was wounded in the Battle
against the Persians, so that his Life was much despaired of, yet would not he
suffer his Master to mount any other horse till he had brought him safe out of
the Battle. The like has been reported of others, whose Loves have been so
great to their Masters, that when they have been enclosed with Enemies, the
Horses have fought in their defense courageously; and Eumenius relates that a
certain Traveller being set upon by four Thieves was killed, which his horse
perceiving, fell upon them with such fury, that in revenge of his Masters
death, he killed two of them, and made the other two get up into a Tree to save
themselves, where he watched them till such time as several Passengers came by
and understood what had passed, the Thieves being constrained to confess what
they had done. And indeed it behooves all that frequently travel the Roads to
have a good horse, that they may save them in necessity, either by courage or
swiftness in flight.

CHAP. XI.
How to cure the Autocoe, a violent pain so called.
THis happens most commonly, when horses are first put into fresh Pasture, by
their too eagerness in feeding, which causes ill digesture, and leaves vicious
humors in the stomach, or if he be at Stable or dry meat, the like may happen
by his rank feedings; this Disease often takes the Horse very violently, makes
his Legs fail him and to hang down his Head, shaking all over as if an Ague
possessed him; the speediest way to remedy it, is to let him blood, and two
mornings successively to give him about an ounce of Diapente brewed in a quart
of strong Ale; it being a sovereign Medicine or Drink to expel the Vapors,
Pains, and Infections that do oppress the heart; if he be not cured in twice
giving, you may give him thrice, the which will infallibly remove and take away
the Distemper.

CHAP. XII.
How to cure a Horse that has been burnt by any Mare, etc.
WHether he be so or no, you may discern by his Yard, for if that be foul,
corrupt, and swells, so that he cannot stale without much pain, they are
infallible symptoms that he has been burnt. To cure which, take a pint of
French-wine, boil it with a quarter of a pound of Roch-Alum beaten into fine
powder; after which, take it lukewarm, and with a Sirringe or Squirt, squirt
it into his Yard, and so do till his Yard leave mattering, and it will
perfectly cure him.

CHAP. XIII.
Rules to be observed in the Sweating of Horses.
FIrst, let the keeper take great care, when he airs his Horse, that it be done
by degrees, and not all on a sudden, and then let him observe in that as well
as in all his other actions, what temper of Body he is of, that is, whether
with little or much motion he used to sweat; for many Horses will sweat though
they stand still in their Stalls, which commonly denotes the Horse faint,
ill-dieted, and as bad looked after, then must you exercise him to work out the
sweat, and bring down his foul feeding; but if he be not apt to sweat, unless
upon strong heats and large breathings, then observe if his sweat be white or
frothy, then take notice that your Horse is foul within and must be exercised
yet more; but if it be like water yet thick and black, then you need not fear
any danger.

CHAP. XIV.
How to prevent a Horse from Stumbling, etc.
TAke your Horse so used to stumble, and with his Halter fasten him close to a
Post, then with your Launcet or a sharp penknife slit the skin from his Nose to
the upper Lip, that is, downright just between his Nostrils about two inches,
which when you have done, part it as wide as you can, and under it you will
find a red film or second skin, that likewise cut and part, beneath which you
may discern a flat, smooth, white Sinew, the which take up with your Cornets
Horn point, and twist it round about, after a little space twist it again quite
round, so another time, then have regard to his Legs, and you shall see him
draw by degrees his hinder legs almost to his forelegs, the which as soon as
he has done, with your Launcet divide the Sinew at the part which grows to the
Lip, the which as soon as you have effected, untwist it and it will shrink up
into the head, and then his legs will withdraw back again; for note that his
Sinew is the cause of this stumbling, and that it goes quite through his body,
and spreads it self into his two hinder Legs; after which you must close up the
slit and put into it fresh Butter, and a little Salt beat fine, then take a
Cerecloth made of Burgundian Pitch, or Stock-Pitch, and lay upon it, and
afterward you may trust your Horse for Stumbling; this is a rare secret known
but by few, but worthy to be observed in any the like occasions.

CHAP. XV.
How to take the best advantage of ground in any Race.
IT IS to be observed, that when you know the ground you are to run, you must
acquaint your Horse with it, and give him his Heats there always, making him
take the worst part of it, that so upon any straight he may not boggle, but
that if he in the Race get the best part he may run the more cheerfully, yet
let it not be in such rough ground where he may be apt to slip, or get any
sprains in his Joints, for if he does it will disable him for the future and
make him timorous; but at any time when you heat your Horse thereon, let him
run out the full Course, and never beyond the weighing Post; or if you do not
ride him outright, ride him half way and back again, but never let him exceed
the bounds he is to run, that is, not beyond the Mark or Post, but you may run
him quite through, and then back again if he be of ability to bear it, so that
in a little time he will be so well acquainted with the ground, that when he
comes to the Race it will be easy for him to perform; one thing more is to be
observed, that is, what ground the Horse most delights to run upon, that you
must choose as near as opportunity will give you leave, but you must not always
heat him upon the same ground, sometimes in spacious Fields, green Meadows and
Rivers sides, as has been beforementioned.

CHAP. XVI.
How to know by the hair of your Horses Neck in what estate he is.
FIrst observe the horses hair in every part; but the main regard is to be had
to that of his Neck; for if it be sleek, close, bright, and shining, it denotes
that he is in good order; but if the contrary, as rough, shagged, and standing
upright, and as it were changed color; take it for a Rule that he is not well,
but that some inward grief has seized him, as chilness of heart, want of warmth
in the external parts, or some Ague hovering about him, but not yet perfect; to
prevent which, and to restore him you must rub him and keep him very warm, with
double cloths, and give him in a quart of warm Ale, one of the beforementioned
Cordial Balls, the which will expel the cold humors, and make him lively and
cheerful again, the which you shall know by the sudden falling off his hair,
the which before stood staring.

CHAP. XVII.
How to make the brittlest Hoof imaginable become soft, and bear well any Shoe
without the least injury to the Horse.
TAke about eight pound of fresh hogs grease, and about half a bushel of Damask
Roses well picked and clean from seeds; melt the hogs grease in a Kettle, and
when it boils put in the Roses, and dip them all over till they swell; then
take them off, and putting them into a close Earthen Vessel with the grease and
all, let them stand and cool; or if you have an Oven, when you have drawn, let
it stand in it and cool by degrees, after which, when your horse has newly
dunged, put about three pound of the same into them, let it stand for the space
of three Weeks, then melt it again, and strain out the liquid part, and cover
it up close in the earthen vessel by it self, throwing the other away.

The manner to use it is as follows, the one Spoonful of Tar, and a handful
of Horse-dung, heat them together in a pint of Olive Oil, then taking off his
shoes, wrap up his feet with stiff Leather so that you may pour the Liquor in,
and it will not run out, which being in, let it continue there about a week,
and then the old being wasted supply its place with fresh, the which after
thrice doing you may put on his shoes again, then stop his feet well with the
Tar, Horse-dung and Oil, putting over it Tow, or Flax, and in a short time his
hoofs will be soft and tough, so that you may use them without fear, and they
will bear any shoe exceeding well, and so for a long time, if not as long as
the Horse lives.

CHAP. XVIII.
An Account of the things to be observed for the preservation of a Horses
Health, and to make him live long.
THE First of which is mature and good digestion of whatsoever he eats or
drinks, so that it turn to pure blood and nourishment.

2. The Second to be considered, is spare and moderate feeding in which he must
neither eat too fast, nor too much.

3. The Third must be taken from moderate Labor and seasonable Exercise.

4. The Fourth is to observe fit times and seasons for sleeping and waking,
both which must be moderately taken.

5. The Fifth, He must not be too much acquainted with Mares, nor ride them
often, for nothing sooner shortens life in any Creature.

6. The Sixth, not to be over-heat, nor his Spirits to be wasted by long and
tedious Journeys.

7. The Seventh is, continually to be in smooth, serene and wholesome Air, and
not to feed in foggy Fens, Marshes, or damp Meadows.

8. The Eighth, Observe that you neither exercise, nor any ways make him labor
hard when he is newly taken from Grass.

9. The Ninth, To keep him from greedily eating young Grass, either Clover or
other, but especially from Surfeiting on the blades of Corn.

10. The Tenth, You must observe that he drink not when he has been hard ridden
or labored, so that he is very hot.

11. The Eleventh thing to be taken notice of is, that you must neither wash
nor walk him when you are come to your Journeys end, ride him about a moderate
pace till he begins to cool, and then bring him into the Stable, rub him well
down and clap on his Cloths, and wisp him round, being well stored with Litter.

12. The Twelfth and last is to give him Meat in due time, observe his
Scourings, Diets, and other Physical Medicines as occasion shall require, the
which in this Book you will find good store, with large directions how to use
them.

CHAP. XIX.
St. Anthony's most Admirable Remedy for any Sprain, Swelling, or stretching of
Sinews or Nerves. A better not to be found.
OF bruised Cummin seeds take three ounces, and boil them in a pint of Oil of
Camomil, then add to them half a pound of yellow Beeswax, and let them boil to
the thickness of a Cerecloth, then spread it on Sheeps-Leather very hot, and
apply it to the place so grieved, and in twice doing it will perfect the Cure
if it be not too far gone, if it be, you must apply it till it is well.

CHAP. XX.
The speediest and safest way to cure the swift Cut, or the Knee-Cut.
TAke one pint of White wine, then add to it two ounces of Virgin-Honey, brew
them together, and boil them till the Honey is melted amongst the Wine, and
then add more of Turpentine the like quantity, then let them boil to the
thickness of a Salve, and as hot as the Horse can endure it, wash the cuts with
it once or twice a day, and it will quickly heal them, but be sure you wash the
dirt out of them if there be any in, wash it with hot water before you apply
the Ointment.

CHAP. XXI.
A speedy Remedy for Horse or a Cow that have any way licked up red Poison,
Worms, Spiders, or any other venomous Insect, or that is ready to burst by
eating of too much Clover, Turnips or young eared Barley, and drinking after it.
THis is to be known by their speedy swelling and slavering at the Mouth, and
working at the Fundament, the which when you perceive that they are ready to
burst (which is a common thing about Harvest time) be sure to have recess to
this Medicine, take four ounces of Spanish Soap, or if that be not to be
gotten, our English Cake-Sope, and scrape it into a Mortar, then put to it two
ounces of Dialphera, then beat them small as you can together, and make it into
Balls as big as Pigeons Eggs, and take one of them and dissolve it in hot Beer,
and if it will not quickly dissolve, crumble it in, then with a drenching horn
or any such necessary implement, pour it down the throat of the Beast so
swelled, be it either a Horse, Ox, or Cow, and it will immediately abate the
swelling by urine and scouring, which it will force in abundance.

CHAP. XXII.
An approved Remedy for the mad Staggers or Lunacy.
THE Symptoms whereby you shall know whether your Horse be troubled with this
Disease, are his dullness and heaviness, foaming at mouth, dimness of sight,
often staring, and having a blue skin over his sight; restless and often
reeling and the like, the which, or any of them being observed, you must
instantly take care to have your Horse let blood in the Neck, in the great
Blood-veins on the left side, or if you think convenient on both sides, and in
the third Bar of the Palate of his mouth, and prick him in the Nose, just upon
the Gristles above the Nostrils, which bleeding will instantly abate the
grievous pain of his Head, then take a handful of Rue or Herb of Grace, three
or four cloves of Garlic, an ounce of fine Salt, Aqua vitae two spoonfuls, of
White Wind Vinegar one; after they are bruised together, strain them and pour
the Liquid substance equally divided into his ears, then with black Wool stop
them close, so that no Air can get in, or tie them that he may not shake out
the wool, then fume his Nostrils through the little end of a Funnel, with the
peelings of Garlic and Mastick well dried and beaten, and rolled up in little
Balls or sprink led upon a chafing dish of Charcoals, and so do three times a
day at least, and it will expel the infectious vapors that disturbed the
Brain, then give him a dram of single Poppy-Seeds beaten into Powder, the which
you must blow up his Nostrils, and about two ounces of Poppy-water to drink,
which will cast him into a sound sleep, after, let his diet be mashed Oats and
ground, and give him cold water to drink, and after twenty four hours you may
unbind or unsere his ears and take out the wool, and in a short time he will
cheer up and look lively again: Probatum est.

CHAP. XXIII.
How to stop the Glaunders for a day or two, whilst you have Sold or Swapped
away your Horse, who is troubled with the same.
FIrst, of Verjuice take four ounces, three spoonfuls of Olive Oil, two of Aqua
vitae, and put half into one Nostril, and the rest into the other with a
Siringe when it is Lukewarm, then ride your Horse full speed for half a mile
or more, only when you observe him begin to cough, ride gently, and put him
into a warm Stable, cover him with Cloths, and give him a Mash, but if he be
ill disposed upon the turning of the Glaunders, give him new Milk as warm as
possible, and they will infallibly stop.

CHAP. XXIV.
How to order your Stallion as to his Diet when he is to cover your Mare.
AT any time when you design him to Cover your Mare, you must about a week
before take him out of the Stable, and let him run in the freshest and
tenderest grass you have, the which will not only increase, but make his seed
of the aptest and quickest temper for to generate a lively Colt, and he will be
the willinger to cover the Mare by reason of his Airy temperament of Body, when
feeding on Hay or other dry Meat, would render him dull and short-winded, as
likewise his being acquainted with the Mare will be a great incitement to him.

CHAP. XXV.
For the molting of Grease after a Race or other Excessive Riding.
THE means to know the certainty of his grease being molten, is to observe as
soon as he is in the Stable, whether his Breast* beats or pants more than usual
after any Journey or Race, as likewise his sides under his gi^^s, and his Flank
heaving quick and fa^^ing softly; all which if you perceive, then is his grease
melted, and will turn to crudy humors if not brought away in time; the
speediest way for which, is to take one pint of Spanish Wine, and an ounce of
Diascordium brewed in the same, and give it to him presently to drink, and so
continue doing four or five Mornings after, before he has eaten either Hay or
Provender, then you must diet him with Mashes of Oats and Barley boiled, and a
considerable quantity of ground Malt, and let him drink water indifferent warm;
but if he refuse his Meat you must give him half a pint of White Wind, into
which you must put two ounces of Honey, and let them boil till the Honey is
melted, and let him take it pretty warm, the which will cause him to void much
Urine, and by that means give him ease. Upon his taking of this you must ride
him a Mile or more, but it must not be above a hand gallop, then returning home
you must rub him down and keep him as warm as possible; when in this manner you
have spent three days, give him another the like quantity of Honey and
White Wind, then take especial notice of his Dung; if it be small, and he seem
to dung with pain, then he is bound in his Belly, and the Grease is not
removed, to effect which, you must give him three pints or two quarts of Beer
the stalest you can get, and a slice of Houshold-bread, both being boiled and
mingled together, to which you must add four ounces of Honey, and the like
quantity of fresh Butter, then in the Morning before he has eaten any thing,
give it him lukewarm, then ride him about a Mile, then give him the same again
at night, and ride him as before; but you must observe to give it him but every
other day, the which will loosen his Belly, and by degrees waste the grease;
about four hours after he has taken his dose, boil him three quarts of Oats
and give them to him, and mingling that water the Oats were boiled in with some
other to cool it, let him drink of it; you may with his Oats boil Fenugreek
seeds about three quarters of a pound, and let him eat them mingled; but if he
refuse to eat them, you may mingle them with a little fine Bran; then last of
all give him an ounce of Aloes boiled, till they are dissolved in a quart of
Ale, or a pint of White Wind, and so it will purge away the ill humors, and in
three Weeks or less restore him to his former health and soundness of Body.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to make a Horse Vomit, and by so doing, to void the foulness of his
Stomach, or any Infection he has taken in.
TAke Polypodium Roots the greater, pare them and wash them very clean, and
then steep them in Oil of Spike, and fasten them to the bit of his Bridle,
after which put it on and ride him abroad with the same in his mouth, for the
space of half an hour, or somewhat more, but it must be softly, not above a
trot at the most, and then if any ill humor or phlegmatic substance lodge in
his Stomach, this will draw it up by causing him to vomit extremely, as
likewise to Cough and Sneeze, the which will much cleanse his Head from Rheums
that lodge there, and expel the vapors that offend the Brain, so that though
it make him sick for the present, yet when that is over, he will find himself
more brisk and lively than before, having voided all the filth and slime that
are the originals of all Diseases that happen at any time to any Horse; after
you have taken off the Bridle and removed the Roots, give him a pint of the
best French Wine mingled with three ounces of Honey, let it be indifferent
warm, and then keep him as much from cold as is possible, two hours after you
may give him a warm Mash of Oats and Barley.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Discovery of several Tricks and Cheats used by Jockeys.
1. FIrst then, to make a dull Jade both kick, wince and fling, without either
Whip or Spur, they use this device; in the fore part of a Saddle made for that
purpose, they have an Iron Plate, through which is drilled three holes, through
which with a spring come three sharp wyers, the which as long as the Rider sits
upright do not prick the Horse, but when he leans forward and presses the Bow
of the Saddle* they torment him so that he capers and dances though never so
dull, which the ignorant Buyer often supposes to proceed from the height of his
Mettle, which the Jockey spares not to avouch with Oaths.

2. The Second is, if any Gentleman have set up a Horse in a Stable at Livery,
the Jockey either by bribing the Hostler, or privately by taking an opportunity
in his absence, will with a hair take up the vein on the inside of the Horses
Leg, or by cramping him in the Fet-lock with a small Wire (neither of which can
be observed without a curious search) either of which, will cause the Horse
after a quarter of an hours Riding to halt downright Lame, then is the owner
sent for, whose coming the Jockey having notice of, pretends some Business in
the Stable, and whilst the Gentleman is admiring the sudden mischance befallen
his Horse, he puts in his verdict, saying, it was a great deal of pity that so
good a Beast should be disabled, and by degrees insinuates into the Gentleman's
acquaintance, desiring him to send for a Farrier, who comes and searches his
foot, but finds no cause of Lameness there, whereupon the Gentleman dispairing
of his recovery is often pressed by the Jockey to sell him at half the worth,
or swap him for some dull Jade, that he or some of his Comrades have near at
hand, who having got the Gentleman's Horse, by uncramping or letting loose the
vein render him as at first.

3. The Third Cheat they put upon Travelers is this, coming into a Country
Inn, their first walk is into the Stable, where taking a view of the Horses,
they single out the best for their purpose, demanding of the Hostler, who that
fine Horse belongs to, who ignorant of any design freely tells them; then they
place their Horses next him, and seem only to feed, or rub them down, and order
the Hostler to fetch a peck of Oats, the which whilst he is gone to do, they
thrust a stone about the bigness of a Tennis-Ball into his Fundament, one of
which they have always ready, it not having been in a quarter of an hour before
the Horse begins to sweat mightily, and fall a trembling and staring as if his
eyes were ready to start out of his head, so that a white foam soon after
covers many places about him, which the Hostler observing, runs to the
Gentleman that owns him, and tells him his Horse is a dying, at which starting
up, he runs to the Stable and finds him in a bad plight, not knowing what to
think, or if he do, conjectures he is poisoned, and in a confused hurry
enquires for a Farrier or Horse Doctor, when as Mr. Jockey steps in, and asks
what is the matter, as if he poor lifeless fellow knew nothing of it, but
quickly understanding the business, begins both to pity the Horse and
Gentleman, the former for his miserable condition, and the latter for the
danger he ^^in of losing his Horse, when thus he applies himself: Sir, I am
sorry to see your Horse in so bad a plight, then puts in to buy him at a
venture, live or die, the which if he cannot do handsomely, he undertakes to
cure him, telling the Gentleman that though it is not his usual custom to
meddle with, yet he will undertake for (...) shillings to warrant his Life: The
Gentleman consents rather than to lose a Horse worth twenty pounds; then for a
show he gives him a Drench, and then takes opportunity to withdraw the stone,
and within half an hours space the Horse will be perfectly well, and so they
fob the Ignorant.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
These are to give the Reader notice, that we thought not fit to put the
several Cures mentioned in this Addition into the Title Page, by reason the
whole Book contains the best for Practice in the World; as also these may be
accounted most infallible.

THE INDEX, OR, TABLE OF THE Complete Jockey.
SHOWING The Directions to find any Paragraph contained therein.
CHAP. I.
page 3. THE best Method, and speediest way for Ordering Race-Horses, to fit
them for any Match in what estate soever. The way and manner of Dieting or
feeding a Horse for a Race being fat or gross immediately after his being taken
from Pasture or Soil as to the first two weeks. c. 2. p ^. Orders most
carefully to be observed in the Coursing or Heating your Horse. c. 3. p. 10.
The manner of his second Fortnights feeding, and the care to be observed
therein. c. 4. p. 11. The first Diet to be given in ordering your Race-Horse
and the way to make it. c. 5. p. 12. The Dose or Scouring. c. 6. p. 17. The way
and method of looking to, and keeping your Horse after he has taken the
Scouring. c. 7. ibid. The manner of making Cordial Balls and their virtue, with
an account of what Diseases they are most powerful to cure. c. 8. p. 19. The
manner of making his last Diet. c. 9. p. 20. The third Fortnights Dieting and
Ordering your Horse. c. 10. p. 21. In buying a Horse, what Horse to choose, and
how to avoid being Cheated, Page the 25. Break the second, for here note the
Printer forgot to put in the Contents of the following Instructions. Sect. 2.
p. 25. How to cure the Autocoe, a violent pain so called. c. 11. p. 37. How to
cure a Horse that has been burnt by a Mare. c. 12. ib. Rules to be observed in
Sweating of Horses. c. 13. p. 38. How to prevent a Horse from stumbling. c. 14.
ibid. How to take the best advantage of ground in any Race. c. 15. p. 39. How
to know by the hair of your Horses neck in what estate he is. c. 16. p. 40. How
to make the brittlest Hoof imaginable become soft and bear well any shoe
without the least injury to the Horse. c. 17. ibid. An account of things to be
observed for the preservation of a Horses health, and to make him live long. c.
18. p. 41. St. Anthony's most admirable Remedy for auy Sprain, Swelling, or
stretching of Sinews or Nerves. A better not to be (...) The speediest and
safest way to cure the swift-cut or knee-cut. c. 20. p. 43. A speedy Remedy for
a Horse or Cow, that have any ways licked up red Poison, Worms, Spiders, or any
other venomous Insect, or that is ready to burst by eating of two much Clover,
Turnips, or eared Barley and drinking soon after it. c. 21. ibid. An approved
Remedy for the mad Staggers or Lunacy. c. 22. p. 44. How to stop the Glaunders
for a day or two, whilst you have sold or swapped away your Horse that is
troubled with the same. c. 23. p. 45. How to order your Stallion as to his
Diet, when he is to cover your Mare. c. 24. ibid. For the melting of Grease
after a Race or other excessive Ridings. c. 25. p. 46. How to make a Horse
vomit, and by so doing, to avoid the foulness of his Stomach or any Infection
he has taken in. c. 26. p. 47. The discovery of several Tricks and Cheats used
by the Jockeys. c. 26. p. 48.
FINIS

