C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas upon Tuesday, the Sixth of this instant December, between the hours of
Six and seven in the Evening, A Barbarous and Inhumane Attempt was made upon
the Person and Life of Our Right Trusty, and Right Entirely Beloved Cousin, and
Counselor James Duke of Ormond, who was set upon in the Street, as he was
going in his Coach, between S. James's and Clarendon House, by Six persons
armed and mounted on Horses, who forced him out of his Coach, and then caused
him to be set on Horsback, behind one of their Company, with intent to have
car^ied him to some obscure place out of Town, where they might with more
privacy have executed their Villainous and Bloody Conspiracy, until, at last,
the said Duke endeavoring to rescue himself, by disarming and dismounting him
that rode before him, was very much wounded in that conflict, and now lies
languishing under those Wounds, at his Lodgings in Clarendon House; the bold
Assassinates having made shift to escape all pursuit by reason of the darkness
of the night: We have thought fit by this Our Royal Proclamation, to publish
and declare, That whosoever shall discover unto Us, or any of Our Privy
Council, or any other of Our Magistrates or Officers, any one of these Six
Persons, or any of their Aidors, or Abettors, and shall cause him to be
Arrested and Siezed upon, He shall, for such his pains and diligence in this
Affair, receive from Us a Reward of One thousand pounds Sterling; and moreover,
shall be further esteemed and considered by Us, as one who has done Us, a most
eminent and most acceptable Service.

And if any one of these Conspirators, shall after due consideration of the
horror of this Fact, be so far touched with remorse of Conscience, as to
discover himself to one of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or to any one of
Our Privy Council, and declare his whole knowledge of this Conspiracy, and of
the Authors or Abettors thereof, The ssaid Offender shall for such his
discovery, receive Our Full and Gracious Pardon; and also shall immediately
receive from Us, as a further Reward, the full Sum of One thousand pounds
Sterling.

And because it may be some good Means to promote the Discovery of these
Malefactors, if it could be known, to whom a Brown Bay Horse, with a white
Stripe or Blaze all along his face, or a small Pocket Screwed Pistol, garnished
with Silver, and marked with these Letters T. H. Did or does belong, both which
are now to be seen at Clarendon House. Therefore, whoever shall discover the
true Owner or Proprietor of the said Horse or Pistol, shall for such his
Discovery, receive from Us the Reward of One hundred pounds.

And We do farther require all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, and all Officers, Civil, and Military, and all other Our Loving
Subjects whatsoever, That they be Aiding and Assisting in the Arresting,
Seizing, and Discovering of the said Malefactors, whom We resolve to pursue,
and bring to Justice, as the Enemies of Our Crown and Dignity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, this Seventh day of December, 1670. In the Two
and twentieth Year of Our Reign.
In the SAVOYE: Printed by the Assigns of Jo: Bill, and Chris. Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1670.


