AN ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF THE United Netherlands, And of the most
considerable Parts of Germany, Sweden, and Denmark.

CONTAINING A succinct Account of what is most Remarkable in these Countries:
And Necessary Instructions for Travelers.

Together with an Exact RELATION Of the ENTERTAINMENT of His Most Sacred
Majesty King WILLIAM At the HAGUE.

Written by an English Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Child at the White-Hart in St. Paul's Churchyard
1691.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING often Observed, that Relations of Travels, Voyages, etc. are generally
very Acceptable to the Genius of the English Nation, I judged that it might not
be altogether Impertinent to give a brief Account of some remarkable
Observations made during my Abode in Foreign Countries, especially having
Traveled for the space of Sixteen Years through Holland, Germany, Sweden,
Denmark, and other considerable Parts of Europe.

I easily foresee, that it will be soon Objected, that after so great a Man as
Sir William Temple, who has already Published a full and incomparable
Description of the Policy and Government of the States of the United Provinces,
it would be a vain Presumption to attempt any farther on that Subject. However,
without derogating from his Honor, I have here inserted diverse particular
Remarks, not mentioned by him, but such as Travelers may make Use of to very
good purpose, for whose Information this small Essay is chiefly designed. And
it will be the more eminently Useful at this time, in respect of the great
number of English Gentlemen, that now Travel that way. Wherefore I doubt not,
but this will be a sufficient Plea to cover me from the Imputation of Vanity,
and to make it appear, that what I have here performed, is only intended for
the public Service in general, and the particular Assistance of those
Gentlemen, who shall hereafter Travel through these Countries. The Lists of the
Passage Boats and Wagons in Holland, with the Hours of their going off, which I
have inserted, the Traveller will find extremely Useful.

As for the Relation of the Kings Voyage to Holland, annexed at the end. I
Confess indeed, That it deserves to be Written by an abler Hand; but being at
that time at the Hague, I was induced by Curiosity, to take an exact Account of
this so extraordinary a Solemnity, which I did at first for my own private Use,
but have now Published it through the importunity of some Friends. The
Prospects of the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, etc. are exactly Copied from the
Original Draughts taken at the Hague, and are the true Representations of them.

A DESCRIPTION OF HOLLAND: With some Necessary DIRECTIONS FOR Such as intend to
Travel through the Province of HOLLAND, GERMANY, etc.
AS they that confine themselves to their own Country, have not the opportunity
to see and observe Rarities in other Parts of the World; so, such as go into
Foreign Places, rather Wander at Random, than Travel, who have not the
Curiosity to commit to Memory or Writing such Things they meet with, both for
their own and others Satisfaction, as may demonstrate the Fruits of their
Travels.

I confess, all Travelers are not of alike Temper; some delight themselves in
Contemplation of the Curiosities of Arts; some are taken with the Varieties of
the Works of Nature; others speculate, with a kind of Reverence, the Decays and
Ruins of Antiquity; others studiously inform themselves with the Transactions
of Modern Times; others with the Government and Polity; others speculate the
strange Cust^^^ and Fashions of the Places they pass through; to be short,
every one labors to entertain the Reader with those Objects and Rarities of
Foreign Parts his Genius and Inclination is most affected with.

As to my self, although during the space of 16 Years Travel, I might have
enlarged, according to the Curiosity and Opportunity I have had in the
rehearsal of many rare and exquisite Things very observable; yet my chief Aim
was, to make such Remarks as might most contribute to the common Good of Human
Society and Civil Life, in taking notice of the Government and Polity of the
several States and Dominions where I have been, viz. The United Provinces,
Germany, Denmark, Sweden, and other Countries, whose natural Temper and
Disposition seemed to me most to sympathize with our English Nation, and
thereby have an occasion to do some good to my own Country. Expect not, Reader,
a like punctualness, as to all the forementioned places, because very many
things, which I might have observed, are much agreeing, and so may be referred
to what shall be spoken of the Polity and Government of Holland, which, for
Reasons I shall by and by hint at, is the chief End I aimed at in this Treatise.

We will begin then in the first place with the Commonwealth of Holland, and
Dominions of the States General, which tho for some years were in a declining
condition, and their Forces exceedingly weakened, by reason of that fatal War
it managed against England, France, and the Bishop of Munster, unto which, if
we add the intestine Divisions of those two Factions, the Prince of Orange and
Lovestein, that Politic Body, was so tottered and torn, as did threaten its
utter and total Ruin.

But as Bodies, whether Natural or Politic, after that a violent Fit has ^ore
shaken, dissipated, and exhausted their Spirits, may recover vigor, and look
lively again, if so be the Radical Constitution and Natural Temper be not
wholly changed and depraved; even so this Commonwealth of Holland has visibly
recovered Strength again, and attained its former Force and Luster.

We will therefore make some Remarks, as to the Defects and Failings (observed
not only by me, but also by others) which that famous Commonwealth has of late
years been guilty of; which I shall do not out of any Malice, or design of
Reflection, the intention of writing this Treatise being simply to insert those
Defaults which the wisest of Authors have always judged necessary, not only for
the Reformation of this, but of all States whatsoever.

This Commonwealth of Holland has worthily been the Wonder of all Europe
during this last Age, and perhaps not to be paralleled in the Records of
former Times; for if we consider how many years it was assaulted by the then
most Potent Prince of Europe, who aspired to no less than the Universal Empire;
and that how formidable soever he were, yet they not only maintained their
Pretensions, but with uninterrupted Prosperity and Succefsfulness adva^^ed
their Trade, and spread their Conquests in all the four Parts of the World.

Rome it self, though most famous and victorious, yet could not, as is
be^ieved, in so short a time do what by this Commonwealth has been effected.
In India and Africa they soon forced the Spaniard and Portugueses to yield to
them most of their Trade and Possessions: And tho England put in for a share,
yet they were a long while vigorously opposed by the Dutch, and to this hour
have enough to do to keep what they have gotten; so that in less than 100 years
this Commonwealth by their Industry, and Art in Trading, are become so
excessive Rich and Potent, that they began to Insult, and would needs be
Arbitrators to their Neighboring Princes and States, and encroach upon their
Territories and Dominions.

This drew upon them that fatal War beforementioned, by which they were sorely
weakened and brought so low, that except GOD by a more than ordinary Providence
had protected and appeared for them, they had certainly been ruinated, and
never able to recover themselves again; however, their Pride hereby was much
abated: And as Luxury and Lasciviousness are the sad Effects of Prosperity, as
well as Pride; so such Vices in a Body Politic and Commonwealth as do corrupt
the Radical Humors, by abating the Vigor of the Vital Parts, do insensibly
tend to the Consumption and Decay of the whole.

That this Commonwealth has much recovered its Strength, may clearly appear,
if we consider what great Things they have effected since the little time they
have enjoyed Peace: They have in less than 7 Years built about 40 gallant Ships
of War; They have laid out vast Sums of Treasure in refortifying Narden,
Maestricht, Breda, the Grave, and many other Places; They have paid vast Sums
of Money to their Allies for their Auxiliary Troops, as also 200000 l. Sterling
to the King of England to Enjoy their Peace with him. And besides all this,
their Increase in Riches and Power may be guessed at, by the many stately
Houses built within these 5 Years in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and other Places; to
all which we may add, to what excessive height the Actions of the East and
West India Company are risen, and the Obligations from the States are so
esteemed as to Security, that they can get as much Money as they please at 2 per
Cent. Not to speak of the exceeding Increase of their Subjects, occasioned by
the French King's Tyranny against the distressed Protestants in France, Alsace,
and other parts of his Conquests; neither will we speak of other Signs of the
Increase of this Commonwealth, as not judging it convenient to commit them to
Paper, but will now proceed to show the Method of Living and Traveling in the
Dominions and Places of the States, which, if you do well consider, you may see
how happy and easy the Government of England is, above that of other Nations.

The Briell in Holland is the usual place where the Packet and King's
Pleasure-boats bring on such as come to see the United Provinces; but of late
Helvoet-Sluys is the place the Packet comes to, as being the more convenient
Port: Here be sure to furnish your self well with Money. From hence you take a
Boat to Maesland-Sluys or Rotterdam, which, if you go in Company with others,
will only cost you 5 Stivers; but if you take one for your self, will cost 25
Stivers for Maeseland-Sluce, and a Ducatoon to Rotterdam: The fifth part of
which goes to the States for a Tax, they call Passagie Gelt; and the other four
parts are for the Boat-Men or Schippers, who also out of their Gains must pay a
Tax to the States, so that by Computation you pay a fifth Penny to the States
for your Traveling either in Boats by Water, or in Wagons by Land.

As you pass by Maseland-Sluce you will see a very fair Fishing Village, to
which belong near Two hundred Herring Busses, but if you go by the way of
Rotterdam you Sail by two old Towns, called Flardin and Schiedam: Yet let me
advise you before you depart from the Briell, to take a serious view of it, as
being the City which in Queen Elizabeth's time was one of the Cautionary Towns
Pawned to England. The Briell had a Voice among the States, but by reason
Rotterdam has got away their Trade, by which having lost its former Luster, is
now become a Fishing Town only.

Rotterdam is the Second City for Trade in Holland, and by some is called,
Little London, as having vast Traffic with England, insomuch, that many of the
Citizens Speak good English. There are in this City two considerable Churches
of English and Scotch: And how great a Trade they drive with the King of
England's Subjects is evident, for in the year 1674, at the opening of the
Waters, after a great Frost, there departed out of Rotterdam 300. Sail of
English, Scotch, and Irish Ships at once with an Easterly Wind: And if a Reason
should be demanded, how it comes to pass that so many English Ships should
frequently come to that Haven, It is easily answered, because they can
ordinarily Load and Unload, and make returns to England from Rotterdam before a
Ship can get clear from Amsterdam and the Texel: And therefore your English
Merchants find it Cheaper, and more Commodious for Trade, that after their
Goods are arrived at Rotterdam, to send their Goods in Boats Landward into
Amsterdam.

This City is Famous, as being the place where great Erasmus was Born, whose
Statue of Brass stands erected in the Marketplace: And although the Buildings
here are not so superb as those of Amsterdam, Leyden, or Haerlem, yet the
places worth the seeing, are, first, the great Church, where several Admirals
lie stately Entombed; here you see their Admiralty, East India, and
Stadt-Houses, together with that called, Het Gemeen Lands Huis.

From Rotterdam you may for five Stivers have a Boat to bring you to Delft, but
before you come thither you pass through a fair Village called Overschie, where
the French and English Youths are trained up in Litterature, as to the Latin
and Dutch Tongue, Book-keeping, etc. From thence in the same Boat you come to
Delft which is Famous for making of Porceline to that degree, that it much
resembles the China, but only it is not Transparent.

In Delft is the great Magazin of Arms for the whole Province of Holland: Their
Churches are very large, in one of which are Tombs of the Princes of Orange,
Admiral Tromp, and General Morgans Lady, and in the Cloister over against the
Church, you have an Inscription in a Pillar of Brass, showing after what manner
William the First, that Famous Prince of Orange, was shot to Death by a
Miscreant Jesuit, with his deserved Punishment.

Delft has the third Voice in the States of Holland, and sends its Deputies
unto the College of the States General, and to all other Colleges of the
Commonwealth. They have also a Chamber in the East India Company, as shall be
more largely spoken to, when we shall come to Treat of the State of the said
Company.

From Delft you may by Boat be brought to the Hague for two Stivers and an
half; which is accounted the fairest Village in the World, both for pompous
Buildings, and the largeness thereof; here the Princes of Orange hold their
Residence, as also the States General, and the Council of State; here you have
the Courts of Justice, Chancery, and other Courts of Law. Here you see that
great Hall, in which many Hundreds of Colors are hung up in Trophy, taken from
the Emperor, Spaniard, and other Potentates with whom they have waged War.
Their Council Chambers are admired by all that see them. Many fair Libraries
they have belonging to particular Men. The Princes Palace is a most superb
Building, and there are many costly Gardens adjoining to the Hague, together
with that to the Princes House in the Wood, in which House are in a large Hall
the most rare and costly Pictures of Europe; there also are those Magnificent
and Unparalleled Gardens of the ^^eer Bentham of Amesland and others. I might
here speak of the splendour of His Majesty's Court in Holland, of his Noble
Virtues and Valor, of the most Virtuous and Beautiful Princess his Royal
Consort, but I dare not, least I should infinitely fall short of what ought to
be, and which others have already done before me: And therefore leaving the
Hague, I shall only tell you that from thence you may for seven Stivers have a
Boat to bring you to Leyden. Leyden is a fair and great City, and the
University is very Famous, there being continually in it 1000 Students from all
parts, as Hungary, Poland, Germany, yea from the Ottomans Empire it self, who
pretend to be Grecians, besides the English, Scots, and Irish, who this year
were numbered to be above 80.

The most remarkable Things here to be seen, I shall summarily set down: As the
place called the Bergh, formerly a Castle belonging to the Prince of Liege in
Flanders: The Stadt-house, the University Schools, especially that of the
Anatomy, which excels all the Anatomy Schools in the World, a Book of the
Rarities whereof you may have for six Stivers; their Physic Garden, and the
Professors Closet are all Ravishing in rare Curiosities. But as to their
Colleges, they are but two, and very small, not to be compared with the
smallest Halls in Oxford, neither have they any Endowments, their maintenance
being only from the Charitable Collections of the Ministers of Holland; neither
are any Students to remain longer there than till they attain the Degree of
Batchelors of Art: One of the Curators being demanded by me, Why so Rich a
Commonwealth as Holland is, did not Build and Endow Colleges after the manner
of Oxford and Cambridge; answered, They had not so many able and public
spirited Men as are in England, and to deal plainly with you, said he, had we
such Colleges, our Burghermasters and Magistrates would fill them with their
own and their Friends Sons, who by leading a lazy and idle Life, would never
become capable to serve the Commonwealth, and therefore he judged it much
better to put them to Pension in Burghers-Houses, leaving them to the care of
the Professors, who are very diligent in keeping the Students at their
Exercises, both at public Lectures, and in their private Houses also, where
they cause them punctually at their appointed Hours to come to their
Examinations and Lectures, besides those they have in public. Their Churches
are rare, so are their Walks round the City, and the Fortifications very
pleasing to behold. Here you have the River Rhine running through the City, and
falling into it from Catwyck op Zee. Leyden is very Famous in History for the
long Siege it held out against the Spaniard. From hence for 12 Stivers and an
half you are brought to Haerlem by Water, being 12 English Miles.

Harlem is Famous, in that Costor one of their Burghers, first Invented the Art
of Printing. This Costor being suspected to be a Conjurer, was fain to flee
from Haerlem to Cologne in Germany, and there perfected his Invention, having
in Haerlem only found out the way of Printing on one side of the Paper. The
first Book he ever Printed is kept in the Stadt-house, for those that are
curious to see it. Here is one of the fairest and largest Churches of the
Seventeen Provinces, in the Walls whereof there remain to this day sticking,
Cannon Bullets, shot by the Spaniards during the Siege thereof. In this Church
are three Organs, as also the model of the three Ships that Sailed from Haerlem
to Damiater, seizing the Castle in which the Earl of Holland was kept a
Prisoner, and brought him away to Holland: In the Tower of this Church hang two
Silver Bells, which they also brought from thence, and now Ring them every
Night at nine a Clock.

Haerlem is Renowned for making the finest Linen Cloth, Tyffinies, Damasks,
and Silk Stuffs; also Ribands and Tapes: They have Mills by which they can
Weave 40 or 50 pieces at a time; they make the finest white Thread and Tapes
for Lace in the whole World; their Bleacheries surpass all other whatsoever,
their Waters whitening Cloth better than any in the Seventeen Provinces: They
have a most pleasant Grove like a little Wood, divided into Walks, where on
Sundays and Holy Days the Citizens of Amsterdam and other places come to take
their pleasure. Haerlem is the Second City of Holland, and sends in Deputies
unto all the Colleges of the Government. From hence you have a passage by Boat
to Amsterdam for six Stivers, but when you are come half way, you must step out
of one Boat to go into another, where you see a stately Palace, where the
Lords, called Dykgraves sit; every one of these Lords has his Apartment when
he comes for the Concerns of the Sea-dykes and Banks: Here are also two large
Sluices, having Gates to let in or out Water from the Haerlemmer Mere. Near this
place about Anno 1672, a part of the Sea-Bank was broken by a strong North-West
Wind, drowning all the Land betwixt Amsterdam and Haerlem, which cost an
incredible vast Sum to have it repaired. They sunk in this Breach 400 small
Vessels filled with Earth and Stones, for a Foundation to rebuild the Wall upon,
and by unspeakable Industry and Charges at last repaired the Bank.

I come now to speak of Amsterdam, which having been the place of my abode for
several years, I shall give a more large and punctual account thereof then I do
of other Places: It is esteemed by Intelligent Men, the Second City in the
World for Trade, and not inferior to any in Wealth. Certainly Amsterdam is one
of the Beautifullest Cities in the World, their Buildings are large, their
Streets for the most part pleasantly Planted with Trees, and Paved so neatly,
as is to be found no where else in any Country, save in some of the Seventeen
Provinces. And although, as I have already said, Amsterdam may justly be taken
for the Second or Third City after London and Paris, yet it has neither Court
nor University as they have. And now in treating of all the Excellences and
Virtues of Amsterdam, I shall not hyperbolize or flatter; for before I have
done, you shall see, I shall also faithfully declaim against the Evils,
Mistakes, and Vices in it.

Amsterdam stands upon 1000 Morgans of Land, encompassed with a very strong
Wall and Bastions most pleasant to behold, with a very large Gracht or Ditch
for the defense of three parts of the City, the fourth being secured by an Arm
of the Sea called the River Y, or (as the English Men corruptly call it) the
Ty. There are 13 Churches in this City for those of the Reformed Religion
(called Dutch Presbyterians) to meet and worship in, with two French, one
High Dutch, and one English, all Presbyterian Churches, who only are allowed
Bells, and whose Ministers are maintained by the Magistrate. All these Churches
or Congregations make up only a third part of the Inhabitants of the City. The
Papists, who have 85 Houses or Chapels to meet in for their Worship, make
another third part, and have a long Square of Houses for their Nuns to live in,
who are not shut up in Cloisters, as in Papist Countries they are wont to do,
but may go in and out at their pleasure, yea and Marry also, if they grow weary
of a Nunnish Life. These Churches of the Papists have no Bells allowed them,
being looked upon as Conventicles, and are many times shut up, and again opened
at the Scout's pleasure. The other third part of the City is made up by Jews,
Lutherans, Armenians, Brownists or English Independants, Anabaptists, and the
Quakers: None of which, as was also said of the Papists, have Bells allowed
them, but are accounted Conventicles; and all that Marry amongst them must
first be married by the Magistrate, and then (if they please) among themselves
in their own Assemblies; neither are any of them admitted unto any Office in
the Government, but such only as are of the Reformed or Presbiterian Profession.

The Jews, who are very considerable in the Trade of this City, have two
Synagogues, one whereof is the largest in Christendom, and as some say, in the
World; sure I am, it far exceeds those in Rome, Venice, and all other places
where I have been. Within the Courtyard where their Synagogue stands, they
have several Rooms or Schools, where their Children are taught Hebrew, and very
carefully (to the shame of Christians negligence) brought up and instructed in
the Jewish Principles.

Amsterdam, for the wise Statesmen it has produced, is said to be a second
Athens; others make it the Storehouse or Magazine of Europe, for that it has
such great store of Corn, wherewith it furnishes many other Nations. And
secondly, for the exceeding great Magazine of Spices, which in ancient times
the Venetians brought by Land, furnishing all Parts of Europe, but now is done
by the East India Company, which not only supplies Europe therewith, but many
places in the Indies also. Thirdly, It has inconceivable Store of all manner
of Provisions for War, insomuch, that England and diverse other Nations send to
Amsterdam to buy Arms, Buff-Coats, Belts, Match, etc. Yea, here are several
Shopkeepers who can deliver Arms for four or five Thousand Men, and at a
cheaper rate than can be got any where else; and this they can do by reason of
their great Industry in the Engrossing most of the Iron Works on the Rhine, and
other Rivers, which run into Holland. Fourthly, Amsterdam has more store of
sawed and prepared Timber for Shipping than can be found in any one Nation in
the World; and this is the Reason why her Neighbor Town Sardam is made capable
of Building Ships 20 per Cent. cheaper than they can do in England or France:
So that both France, and Spain do many times buy them in Holland: As lately the
King of Spain bought Ten Capital Ships of the two Brothers the Melts Merchants
in this City. Fifthly, Amsterdam is the Staple where the Emperor sells his
Quicksilver, not only to the Spaniard, to use in his Mines in the Indies, but
for the making of Cinoprium or Vermillion, with which Amsterdam furnishes not
only Europe, but many places in the Indies.

Sixthly, Amsterdam is the Market where the French King bought his Marble for
Versailles* THE STADT HOUSE OF AMSTERDAM

Chorus of Voices, it has 52 whole Stops besides half Stops, and has two rows
of Keys for the Feet, and three rows of Keys for the Hands; I have had People
of Quality to hear it Play, who could not believe but that there were Men or
Women above, Singing in the Organ, until they were convinced by going up into
the Organ Room: The Second, Is such a large Carved Pulpet and Canopy as cannot
be found elsewhere in the World: The Third, Is a Screen of Brass.

The Stadthouse, or Guild Hall of Amsterdam, is deservedly admired and talked
of by all the World, it is in Truth a most neat and splendid Pile of Building,
and the Reader will not be displeased, I believe, if I enlarge (...) little in
its Description. This Noble Townhouse then, is Built all of Freestone,
according to the Modern Architecture of the Corinthian Order, Adorned with
Statues in Brass, and Carving in Marble by the best Masters of the Age. A
Prospect whereof see in the following Figure. It is 282 Foot wide, 232 Foot
deep, and 116 Foot high, besides the Tower. The Foundation is laid upon 13659
Piles of Wood driven into the Ground; the first Stone of it was laid October
28. 1648. In the middle over the Cornish, and just before the Tower, is a very
handsome piece of Carving in Marble of 82 Foot long, and 18 Foot high, wherein
the City of Amsterdam is represented by a Woman, on whose Right Hand sits the
God Neptune, with his Trident, and two Sea-Goddesses bring her the Fruits of
the Earth. On her Left, two Naides present her with Laurels and Palms; and
before her two Tritons Dance and Sound their Horns. On the top of this stands
an Image of Brass, representing Peace, and one on each side representing
Providence and Justice, each Figure being 12 Foot high. And on the back part of
the Building to answer, is such another piece of Carving, in Marble also,
showing the Grandeur and Commerce of the City; in the middle sits a Woman,
having on her Head the Hat with Wings of Mercury; behind her is seen the Masts
and Sails of a Ship, and round about her lies all sorts of Mathematical
Instruments used in Sailing; at her Feet lie the two Rivers Y and Amstel, and
on each side, the Inhabitants of the Four Parts of the World bring her their
Fruits. Here likewise are placed three Images of Brass of the same bigness with
the other; that on the top is an Atlas, bearing a very large Globe of Copper,
on the right Hand, one representing Temperance, and on the left Justice. On
each of the four Corners of the Building, over the Cornish, stand four Eagles
of Brass supporting an Imperial Crown, all finely Gilt. In the middle is
erected a very handsome round Tower, advanced about 50 Foot above the rest of
the Building, the Roof supported by Pillars, and adorned with Images; in it
hang a very curious Chime of Bells, which at certain times being played on by a
Person maintained for that purpose, afford a very agreeable Music. So much for
the out side. And now let us enter, which you may by Seven little Arched Doors,
which let you into the Porch, from whence you enter the House by two large
Gates, between which opening by Windows, (with Bars of Cast-Brass) to the
Street, stands the Justice-Hall for Trial of Criminals, which is Adorned with
many curious Carvings in Marble of Ingenious Devices, which would be too long
to describe particularly. Below Stairs, within side, is kept the Office of the
Bank, where the Merchants write off their Money, the Prisons both for Debtors
and Criminals, the Guard Chamber where the Citizens keep the Head-Watch, and
where the Keys of the City Gates are kept locked up in a Chest every Night, and
some other Offices. From hence you ascend by a handsome broad pair of Stairs,
though not very light, into the Burghers-Hall, which is 120 Foot long, 57 Foot
broad, and 98 Foot high, in the Floor whereof are inlaid in Marble the two
Faces of the Terrestrial Globe, and that of the Celestial, which ingeniously
shows, as in a Map, the Situation of the Countries of the Earth, and the
Constellations in the Heavens: Each of which Maps is 22 Foot Diameter. At the
end of this Hall is the Scheepens Chamber, where are Tried all Civil Causes
between Man and Man, and in the Galleries (which go round two square Courts on
each side the Hall, for convenience of Light) are the several Chambers, or
Offices, belonging to the Government; as the Council Chamber, where (...) the
Common Council of the City, who make Laws, choose the Burghermasters, and
Scheepens, Deputies for the States, etc. The Burghermasters Chamber, who sit
there daily to Administer the Government: The Burghermasters withdrawing Room:
The Scheepens Extraordinary Chamber: The Treasury Chambers, Ordinary and
Extraordinary: The Chamber of Accounts: That of the Commissioners for
Bankrupts: Another for the Commissioners for Trial of small Causes, like our
Court of Conscience: And one for the Commissioners of the Hospitals; with two
or three more belonging to the several Secretaries, all which are beautified
with fine Paintings, and ingenious Devices carved in Marble over the Door of
each Chamber; to give a particular Description of which would take up a Volume,
which is not agreeable to what I here pretend, these being only short Remarks
to put young Travallers in mind of what is most worthy their Observation. I
shall only therefore say in general, that it is already a very noble,
beautiful, and costly Building, and is a sufficient intimation of the Richness
of the City, but should they finish it within side as they pretend, by Painting
the Ceilings, and Facing the Walls with Marble, etc. it would make it
incomparably the finest and costliest in the World. Over these Chambers, in the
second Story, is kept a large Magazine of Arms, which takes up one Angle of the
Building, and is very completely Furnished; the Arms are all kept in Presses
shut up, to avoid the injury of the Weather; the rest of the House above is not
used, or Furnished at all. One thing I must not omit, and that is, That there
are Eight Cisterns of Water kept always full at the top of the House, which by
Pipes may be let down into every Room, to quench any accidental Fire; and the
Chimneys are all lined with Copper, the former Stadthouse having been Burnt
down by Accident.

I shall now proceed, and speak of their Almshouses, and of the Government of
the Poor, of their Prisons, and Houses of Correction. This City is said to have
20000 Poor every day at Bed and Board. The Almshouses are many, and look more
like Princes Palaces than Lodgings for Poor People: First, there are Houses for
Poor old Men and Women, then a large square Palace for 300 Widows, then there
are Hospitals for Boys and Girls, for Burghers Children, and for Strangers
Children, or those called Foundlings; all these Boys and Girls have every
Sunday, and other days of Worship, two Doites given them by the Fathers of
these Houses, the which the Children put into the Deacons Bag when they gather
for the Poor in the Churches: Then there is an Hospital for Fools, and a
Bedlam: There are Houses where common Beggars, and Gamesters, and frequenters
of Tap-houses are kept hard at Work: There is also a House called, the
Rasp-house, where petty Thieves, and such as flash one another with Knives,
such as beg with cheating Devices, Women with fained great Bellies, Men
pretending to have been taken by the Turks, others that pretend Wreck at Sea,
and such as Beg with a Clapper, or a Bell, as if they could not Speak or Hear,
such as these are kept hard at Work, Rasping every day 50 pounds between two of
them, or else are beaten with a Bulls Pissel, and if yet they Rebel, and wont
Work, they are set in a Tub, where if they do not Pump, the Water will swell
over their Heads: Then there is a House where Whores are kept to Work, as also
dis-Obedient Children, who live Idle, and take no Course to maintain
themselves; likewise Women commonly drinking themselves Drunk, and Scolds; all
these sorts of Hospitals, and Almshouses are stately Buildings, richly Adorned
with Pictures, and their Lodgings very neat and clean. In some, of the Boys and
Girls Hospitals there are 1500, in some 800, and in some 500 in a House; then
they have Houses where a Man or a Woman may have their Diet, Washing, and
Lodging for his Life, giving a small Sum of Money; these are called Brouders
Houses. The Alms Children of this City are held in such Veneration and Respect,
that a Man had as good strike a Burghermasters Child as one of them. These
Children are permitted to Travel in any of the Treckscuts, or Passage-Boats,
freely without Money: These Hospitals are Governed by Men and Women, as are of
an unspotted Life, and reputed to be Rich, Devout, and Pious: It is very
observable, that the Women govern their Women Hospitals, better than the Men do
theirs; yea, it is a general Observation in this Country, that where the Women
have the direction of the Purse and Trade, the Husband seldom prove Bankrupts,
it being the property of a true Born Holland-Wife presently after Marriage, to
apply her self wholly to her Business; but I forbear to say any more of the
Dutch-housewives, for fear of displeasing our English Dames, not so much
addicted, at least not so generally bred up to Industry; But to return to the
Acts of Charity of Amsterdam, the which is so extraordinary, that they surpass
all other Cities in the World, for they are daily and hourly giving to the
Poor, every House in Amsterdam has a Box hanging in a Chain, on which is
Written, Think on the Poor, so that when any Merchant sells Goods, they
commonly conclude no Bargain, but more or less is put in the Poors Box; these
Boxes are locked up by the Deacons, who once a quarter go round the City, and
take the Money out of the Boxes. Then twice a Week there are Men belonging to
the Hospitals that go round the City, and ring a Bell at every House, to know
what the Master or Mistress of the House will give to the Box, who generally
give not less than two Stivers. Then every first Wednesday of the Month, the
Deacons in their turn, go round the City, from House to House, to receive what
every Housekeeper will give to the Poor, then on the Week before the Sacrament
is given, a Minister, with an Elder, goes round the City to every House where
any Members of the Presbiterian Religion live, and there ask if any differences
be in the Family, offering their Service to reconcile them; also to instruct
and prepare such as are to receive the Sacrament: At this time a Minister may
be seen to go into a Tap-house or Tavern, for which at another time he would be
counted a Wine-Bibber, and the worst of Reprobates: At this time while these
Ministers and Elders go about the City on their Visitations, the People take an
occasion to give to the Poor. And here I ought not to omit telling you of their
great Charity to the distressed French Protestants, who are here in great
Numbers. They maintain no less than 60 French Ministers, and unto many
Handicraft Tradesmen, and makers of Stuffs, and Cloth, they lend Sums of Money,
without Interest, to buy Working Tools, and Materials for their Work; but this
is no other then they formerly did to the Poor distressed Protestants of
Ireland and Piemont; and their Charity was not a little that they gave to
Geneva toward the Building their Fortifications; and here give me leave to
tell you, what King Charles II. said of the Charity of Amsterdam, when the Duke
of Lotherdal, hearing that the Prince of Orange's Army was not able to oppose
the French from advancing so near to Amsterdam, the Duke jearingly said, That
Oranges would be very scarce in Holland, after Amsterdam should fall into the
French Hands to plunder. To which His Majesty said, That he was of Opinion,
that God would preserve Amsterdam from being destroyed, if it were only for the
great Charity they have for the Poor, the which put the Duke out of
Countenance; I will say no more of their Charity, only this, that they leave no
Stone unturned to bring Moneys into the Poors Stock; they make the
Stage Players pay 80000 Gilders a year to the Poor; there is not a Rope-Dancer,
Poppet-Player, or any of that sort of unnecessary Vermin which frequent Fairs,
but pay the third Penny to the Poor, which is carefully looked after, by
placing an Alms-man at the Door of the Booths, to see that they cheat not the
Poor of their share. I shall now in the next place say something of the Clergy,
I mean those called, The States Clergy, for the States are absolutely Head of
their Church; and when any Synod of Divines meet, two of the States are always
present to hear that they debate nothing relating, or reflecting on the
Government, or Governors; if they do, presently the States cry, Ho la mij^
Heeren Predicanten, and if their Ministers meddle with any thing relating to
the Government in their Pulpits, they send them a Brief, (which some call a
pair of Shoes) to quit the City, and sometimes Imprison them to Boot; but if
they behave themselves quietly and well, as they ought to do, they then are
respected by the People as Gods upon Earth: They have a Form of Prayer sent
them how they shall Pray for the States, and Stadholder, nor must they meddle
with any other Religion in the Country, because all sorts are Tolerated, at
least Connived at by the Magistrates. All those called the Presbiterian
Ministers, or States Clergy, are obliged under a Forfeiture to have done
Preaching and Praying by Eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon on Sundays,
because then the Scheepens go to the Stadthouse, to Marry the Jews, Papists,
and Lutherans, and others that may not marry after the Calvinistical Form; and
the reason why the States thus marry them first according to Law, is to render
their Children Legitimate, but they may marry again afterward as they please
themselves: None may marry until they have made their appearance at the
Stadthouse before the Lords; where, if the Parties be agreed, the Preachers
marry the Calvinists, and the Scheepens marry all the rest, who differ from the
Religion established by Law.

When one dies, the Friends dare not bury the Corpse until it has lain three
days open in the Coffin, that the Friends and Relations of the deceased may be
satisfied that the Party has not been murdered, or reported to be dead when
alive; after three days, the Corpse must be brought to the Church before the
Bell cease tolling, which is at two, for if you keep the Body until half
three, then the Church Doors are locked, and for the first half hour must be
paid 25 Gilders, and for the second 50, and so until six, then they may amerse
you as much as they please.

There are many rich people who make that default on purpose, that they may
have solemn occasion of giving to the Poor, as I knew once an English Merchant
did.

The next thing I shall speak of, is the method which the States observe in
ordering their Maritime Affairs, one of the greatest Mysteries in their
Government: The States General divide their Admiralty into Five Courts, which
they call Chambers. The First is Rotterdam, (which is the Chamber called the
Maese,) and has the Admirals Flag.

Then Amsterdam, which has the Vice-Admiral's Flag; and Zealand has the
Rear-Admiral's Flag; the other Two Chambers are those in North-Holland and
Fricsland. Each of these Five Chambers have their Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and
Rear-Admirals, apart from the States-Generals Flags; so that when the States
have occasion to set out a Fleet of an Hundred Ships, more or less, every
Chamber knows the number they must provide for their proportion, though in
regard of its Opulency, Amsterdam frequently helps her Neighbors, and adds
two, or more, Ships than their share comes to. These Chambers have lately built
36 Men of War, and now are building of 7 more; and all this is done without
noise, every one building their proportion: And they have admirable methods in
preserving their Ships when built, and their Magazines are in good order, every
Ship having an Apartment to lay up all its Equipage in; and at the top of their
Magazines are vast Cisterns, which are kept constantly full of Water, having
Pipes into every Apartment to let it down upon any accident of Fire. And there
is in their Magazines a Nursery Room, where a Woman keeps an Office, to feed at
certain hours of the day a great number of Cats, which afterward hunt among the
Stores for Mice and Rats. This great Magazine in Amsterdam was built in the
time of Cromwell, in the space of 9 months and 14 days, in which time the Lords
of the Admiralty gave the Workmen drinkgelt as they call it, to encourage them
to work more than at an ordinary rate. At this time, the biggest Man of War the
States had was the Amelia, in which the famous Admiral Trump was killed; she
was a Ship of no more than 56 Guns, afterward made a Fire-ship. But the States
quickly discovered their want of great Ships, and therefore built, the same
year 20 Men of War, from 50 to 80 Guns: But the great Ships built at Amsterdam,
had like to have proved of no use, had not the ingenious Pensionary de Wit
found out a device to carry them over the Pampus, betwixt those they call Water
Ships.

The Admiralty have an excellent method in setting out their Fleets, they
neither press Soldiers nor Seamen, all go voluntary at the beating of a Drum,
each Captain providing Men and Provisions for his Ship, who, after they have
received Orders from the Lords to the Equipage-Master to equip out their Ships,
and receive the Provisions of War, then the States send aboard each Ship a
Chaplain, and Check-master, who take care of the provision of War, and see that
the Seamen have the States Allowance, and wholesome Food: And great care is
taken by the Lords, that both Captains and Seamen receive their Pay punctually
for the time they are in the States Service: And for the encouraging their
Seamen, there is plaistred on a Board, hanging by the Foremast, the several
Rewards to such as either take or fire a Flag-ship, or take or sink any other
Ship of the Enemies: Also what Pensions a wounded Seaman shall have, if maimed
or disabled in the States Service, etc.

The Lords of the Admiralty follow the same methods which the States General
observe, as to their Land Obligations, and go through this great Charge by the
good Management of their Credit; for though it be true, that they are indebted
great Sums of Money, yet they never want a Supply, nay, Moneys are often forced
upon them by rich Merchants, who send in their Moneys, and only take the
Admiralties Obligations, with which they afterward pay their Customs, when
their Ships arrive, at which time the Admiralty allows them Interest for the
time they have had their Money: And this is it that makes the Admiralties
Obligations more valued than ready Money, for it saves the trouble of telling:
And such is the Credit of the Admiralty, that when they have occasion for any
Goods, the People strive to furnish them, and rather take their Obligations
than Money, because they get Interest; and all other Assignments upon the
Admiralty are very punctually paid, and without Exchequer Fees; no they are
Sworn Officers, who are forbid to receive any Moneys for Fees, being contented
with the Sallery they have of the States. And their methods used at the
Custom-house for loading or unloading Ships are very easy, insomuch, that the
Women generally have the charging and discharging the Ships at the
Custom-house, which is a great Policy in the States to make Trade easy for the
Encouragement of the Merchants: And the Admiralty are very grateful and
generous unto their Commanders; if any of their Admirals, or Captains are
killed at Sea, and have done any considerable Service, they then Eternize their
Memories with lasting Trophies of Honor, as you may see by those Stately
Monuments of Trump, Updam, de Ruiter, the Eversons, and others; nor are they
sparing in bestowing large Gifts and Pensions on the Widows, and Children of
those as have served them Faithfully and Valiantly in the Wars, whilst the
Treacherous and Cowards meet with the severity they deserve; I might here in
the next place, enlarge and tell you of the excellent methods they have in
Building, and preserving their Ships when Built, but I shall refer you to that
excellent Piece written by the Here Witsen on that Subject. And shall now in
the next place say something of their Famous Company, called the East India
Company of the Netherlands; this Company is said to be a Commonwealth within a
Commonwealth, and it is true, if you consider the Sovereign Power and
Privileges they have granted them by the States General, and likewise consider
their Riches, and vast number of Subjects, and the many Territories and
Colonies they possess in the East Indies, they are said to have 30000 Men in
constant Pay, and above 200 Capital Ships, besides Sloops, Ketches, and Yachts.
This Company has by their Politic Contrivances, and Sedulous Industry
possessed themselves of many Colonies formerly belonging unto the Spaniards,
Portuguises, and diverse Indian Princes, and as good Christians have been at
great Charge in Planting the Gospel of Christ in many parts there, Printing in
the Indian Language Bibles, and Prayer Books, and Catechisms, for the
Instruction of the Indians, maintaining Ministers and Schoolmasters, to inform
those that are Converted to the Christian Faith: And now, because I have said
that this Company is so considerable, and as it were a Commonwealth apart, I
will demonstrate it to be so; first by their Power, Riches, and Strength in the
Indies, secondly, what Figure they make in Europe, and this very briefly, for
if I should speak of every particular, as to their Possessions in the Indies,
it would swell into many Volumes, but I will only begin with them at the Cape
de bonne Esperance, where they have built a Royal Fort, in which they maintain
a Garrison of Soldiers to defend their Ships which come there to take in fresh
Water: From thence let us take a view of them in the Island of Java; where they
have built a fair City called Battavia, and Fortified it with Bastions, after
the mode of Amsterdam. This City is the place of Residence of their grand
Minister of State, called the General of the Indies, he has allowed him Six
Privy Counselors in Ordinary, and Two Extraordinary, these govern the Concerns
of the Company throughout the Indies, and they make Peace and War, send their
Ambassadors to all parts thereof, as occasion requires. This General has his
Guards of Horse and Foot, and all sorts of Officers and Servants, as if he were
a Sovereign Prince, the whole Expense whereof is defrayed out of the Companies
Stock. This General has much of the direction of Bantam, and other parts of
the Island of Java: From whence let us take a view of them in their great
Possessions in the Molucca Islands, and those of Banda, where they are become
so formidable, that they look as if they aimed at the Sovereignty of the South
Seas: They have also a great Trade in China, and Japan, from whence let us
return to the Islands of Sumatra, and on the Coast of Bengale, where they have
several Lodges: In Persia they have likewise great Commerce, and are so
considerable, that they wage War with that mighty Monarch if he wrongs them in
their Trade. They also have several Colonies and Lodges on the Coast of Malabar
and Cormandel, and in the Country of the Great Mogul, and King of Galcanda, but
principally let us behold them in the rich Island of Zeylon, where they are
Masters of the plain Country, so that the Emperor, or King of that Island, is
forced to live in the Mountains, whilst this Company possess the City of
Colomba, and other the most considerable Garrisons of that Island: It is said,
that the Company has there in their pay 3600 Soldiers, and at least 300 Guns
Planted in their Forts and Garrisons; in a word, they are not only Masters of
the Cinnamon, but of all other Spices except Pepper, and that they would also
have, had it been for their Interest to Ingross, but they wisely foresaw that
the English would be a block in their way, therefore they contented themselves
to be Masters of the Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmegs, with which they not
only serve Europe, but many places in the Indies; I will say no more of them in
the Indies, but let us see what Figure they make in Europe. And first to begin
with them in Amsterdam, where they have two large stately Palaces, one being in
the old part of the City, and the other in the new; in that of the old part of
the City they keep their Court, and there sits the Resident Committee of the
Company, where also they make the Sales of the Companies Goods. There for six
years the grand Council, or Assembly of the Seventeen, do meet, and after six
years are expired, the grand Council of the Seventeen do assemble at Middelburg
in Zealand for two years, and then again return to Amsterdam; the other lesser
Chambers of Delft, Rotterdam, Horn, and E^chuysen never having the Assembly of
the Seventeen in their Chambers, so that only Amsterdam and Zealand have the
Honor of that grand Council. I will therefore crave leave to describe unto you
the Chamber of Amsterdam, it being the most considerable of the Chambers
belonging to this Famous Company: In their House or Palace, within the old
City, are many large Offices or Apartments; as first, on the lower Floor is
their Parliament Chamber, where the Seventeen do sit; next to this Chamber are
several fair Chambers for the Committees to sit in. They have also a Chamber of
Audience, where they do receive Princes or Ambassadors, or other great Men as
have occasion to speak with them. In one of these Chambers are the Arms of
several Indian Princes they have Conquered. On the same Floor is their Treasury
Office, where their Receivers sit and receive Money, and Pay out the Orders or
Assignments of the Company; near to that Chamber sits their grand Minister, the
Here Peter van Dam, who is said to be a second John de Wit for Parts, though not
so in Principle: This great Minister is a Man of indefatagable Industry, and
labors Night and Day in the Companies Service; he Reads over twice the great
Journal Books which come from the Indies, and out of them makes Minutes to
prepare matters of Concern necessary to be considered by the grand Council of
Seventeen, and by the inferior Committees of the Company, and prepares
Instructions and Orders to be sent to their Chief Ministers in the Indies; I
could say many more things of his great Worth and Virtues, but shall forbear
lest I should be judged a Flatterer: Over Against this great Ministers Office
sit in a Chamber many Clarks, or under Secretaries, who receive from this
Minister their Orders of Dispatches in the Affairs of the Company; and next to
this Chamber is a Register Office, where are kept the Journal Books of the
Indies, where you may see the Names of all the Men and Women that have ever
served the Company in the Indies, with the time of their Death, or departing
the Companies Service: Then next to that is a Council Chamber, where the
Residing Chamber, or Committee of the Company always sits; then assending up
Stairs, there sit their Book-holders, who keep the Accounts of all the
Transactions of those that buy or sell Actions of the Company, and over against
this Office sits the Here Gerbrand Elias, who is the second Advocate of the
Company: On this Floor are several large Rooms, in which are great Stores of
Packed Goods, and also a Room with all sorts of Drugs, Tea, Wax, Ambergreace,
and Musk; and on the same Floor is a Chamber where the Commissioners sit, who
govern the Pack-houses; and next to them sit their Clerks, who keep the
Registers of the Sales of the Companies Goods: And on the same Gallery or
Floor, is a Chamber where are kept the several Books of Divinity, Printed in
the Indian Language, that are sent to the several Colonies of the Company: And
at the end of this Gallery is a Magazine full of Medicaments and Instruments
for Barber Surgeons Chests, to furnish the Companies Ships and Garrisons in
the Indies: Then assending up another pair of Stairs, there are several large
Magazines of Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon; and in a long Gallery are
many Men at Work sorting of Spices fit for Sale: Then ascending up another pair
of Stairs there are many Rooms full of Spices; then descending into the
Courtyard, there is Guard Chamber, where every Night the Housekeeper has a
Watch, and on the other side of the Gate there is a Chemist* who with his Men
prepares Medicaments for the Indies; adjoining to this Courtyard is their
Warehouse and Pack-house for Pepper and Gross Goods; but before I leave this
House in the old part of the City, I must say something of the manner or method
used in the Transactions of the Jews and others, who make a Trade of Buying and
Selling the Actions of the Company, the which is a great Mystory of Iniquity,
and where it inricheth one Man, it ruins an hundred. The Jews are the chief in
that Trade, and are said to Negotiate 17 parts of 20 in the Company; These
Actions are bought and sold four times a day, at 8 in the Morning in the
Jews-street, at a 11 on the Dam, at 12 and at one a Clock upon the Exchange,
and at six in the Evening on the Dam, and in the Colleges or Clubs of the Jews
until 12 at midnight, where many times the crafty Jews, and others have
contrived to coin bad News to make the Actions fall, and good News to raise
them, the which Craft of doing at Amsterdam is not taken notice of, which is
much to be wondered at, in such a Wise Government as Amsterdam is; for it is a
certain Truth, they many times spread Scandalous Reports touching the Affairs
of State, which pass amongst the Ignorant for Truth.

I shall now in the next place say something of their Palace, or Magazine, in
the new part of the City, the which may more properly be called an Arsenal: It
is a Building so superb, that it looks more like a Kings Palace, than a
Magazine for Merchants: I have measured the Ground on which this Arsenal
stands, which I find to be 2000 Foot, and square every way, reckoning the
Motes, or Burgals, about it. I remember the Ingenious Sir Joseph Williamson
measured the two Rope-Alleys, by telling the Stone-Figures in the Wall, and
found them to be 1800 Foot long, the like whereof is not to be seen in the
World. On the backside of this Rope-Alley lies a store of Five Hundred large
Anchors, besides small ones; in this Arsenal they build the Ships belonging to
this Chamber: And here are all sorts of Workhouses for the Artificers that
serve the Company. And in a Chamber next to the Joyners Office, is a model of a
Ship, they now build their Ships by, which cost 6000 Gilders. When a Man
beholds the great Stores of Timber, Cordage, and the Provisions of War in their
Magazine, a Man would think there were enough to furnish a whole Nation: In
this Arsenal the Ships unload their Goods, laid up in several Apartments in the
grand Magazine, and afterward is removed to the House in the old part of the
City, as there is occasion for Sale. In the upper part of this large Palace sit
the Sail-makers at work; but on the lower part of this House is an Apartment
where the Committee assemble upon occasion of Business: This Arsenal is not to
be seen by Strangers without a Ticket from the Bewinthebbers. Now all what I
have spoken of these two Houses, or Magazines, does only belong unto the
Chamber of Amsterdam. There are yet other Chambers of the Company, who,
according to their Quota, or stock in the Company, have the like Houses and
Magazines, as the Chambers of Zealand, Delft, Rotterdam, Horn, and Enkusen.
And now I have named the Six Chambers, of which the Company is composed, I
shall say something of their Constitution, which is from an Octroy, or Act of
the States General; by which they have Sovereign Power over their Servants in
the Indies, yea, their Authority reaches their Servants in all Territories of
the States-Generals Dominions: It is Death for any of the States Subjects to be
Interlopers against this Company; nor may any, of what Nation soever, that
lives in any of the Companies Territories, as Burghers or Servants, return into
Europe without leave from the Company, only those called Freemen may depart
without asking leave to remove: The Grand Council of this Company is the
Assembly of the Seventeen, which are elected out of the several Chambers before
named, that is, Eight from Amsterdam, and four from Zealand; Delft, Rotterdam,
Horn, and Enkusen, send one a piece, which makes Sixteen, and the five lesser
Chambers by turns chose the Seventeenth. In the Chamber of Amsterdam there are
20 Bewinthebbers, or Committee for Management of the Stock, in ordinary, who
are for Life, and have 1000 Ducatoons a Year, and Spices at Christmas, and
their Traveling Charges, when they go upon the Companies Service. The next
Chamber is Zealand, which has twelve Bewinthebbers, who have about 250 l. a
Year, and traveling Charges, and Spices at Christmas. The next is Delft, which
has Seven Bewinthebbers, who have only 120 l. a Year, and Traveling Charges
and Spices at Christmas. The other Chambers of Rotterdam, Horn and Enkusen,
have seven Bewinthebbers a piece, and the like Salary, with Traveling Charges
and Spices at Christmas, as the Chamber of Delft has. These Bewinthebbers are
elected or chosen out of those Adventurers called the High Participanten of the
Company: They generally choose such as are Rich, and Men of Parts and Wisdom,
most of them being of the Magistracy of the Country. No Man is capable of being
Elected a Bewinthebber who has not 1000 l. Stock in the Company. In a word,
this Grand Council of the Seventeen make Laws for the Governing the Company,
both in India and Europe. It is they that appoint the Days of Sale, and what
Number of Ships each Chamber must send to the Indies; and likewise order the
Building of Ships, and all other grand Concerns. This Company is worthily
esteemed a Wise, Politic, Deserving Company, sparing no cost to get good
Intelligence of Affairs, sending Messengers and Expresses over-Land to the
East Indies. They have their Spies and Correspondents in all the considerable
Trading Parts of the World: They have been so industrious as to gain the Spice
Trade, not only from the Venetians, Spaniards, Portuguises, French, Danes, and
other European Nations, but have also Engrossed all the Spices; so that, as I
told you before, they sel^ Spices to the Indians themselves: But this I must
say for them, that they are a Generous Company, and gratefully paying Respects
where it is due, as lately they have Complemented his Royal Highness the Prince
of Orange, His present Majesty of Great Britain, with an Annual Sum out of the
Profits of their Company, to make him their Friend and Protector. Neither are
they backward in bestowing Presents upon Strangers that have obliged them, as I
could instance in some of our own Nation. They are also very charitable to the
Poor, giving them the Thousandth Gilder of all the Goods they sell. And to all
the Reformed Ministers in Amsterdam they send Spices at Christmas, to pray
every Sunday for the Welfare and Prosperity of the Company. To conclude, this
Company is a Buckler and Defense for the Commonwealth upon all urgent
Occasions: And truly our English East-India-Company might be the same to our
King, if the Differences between the Two Companies were composed; especially
now they have such a great King to protect them, and that the Interlopers are
destroyed.

And now it is high time I should tell you the Methods a Stranger must take if
he has occasion to keep House in Amsterdam: If a Man will hire an House, he
must take a Lease upon Sealed Paper, for which you must pay a Tax to the
States, and pay the Broaker that makes the Bargain: But before you can buy a
House, you must be in a capacity to be made a Burgher. To this purpose it is
usual to take with you to the Stadthouse your Broaker, or any two Securities,
and there before the Burghermasters take the Oath of Burgherschap, which is to
be faithful to the City, to the Magistrates and Government, etc. But if you buy
either Land or Houses, and lodge* privately, you will find your case much
worse; then you must pay a Legion of Taxes to the Mills that drain your Lands,
and for maintaining the Banks and Sluices; and if the States have occasion to
build a Fortification on your Lands, or to drown them in time of War, you must
be contented with the States Terms: And if your House or Houses stand empty
without Tenants, yet you must pay the States Taxes on that House or Houses.
Thus much for the Method how you are to be advanced to be a Burgher of
Amsterdam, and to give you a taste what you are to pay for Houses or Land, if
you settle there; and if you have either purchased or hired an House, then
comes an Officer from the Stadthouse, with a Printed Sealed Paper, who tells
you, you must pay as follows.

First, A Pole-Tax for every Male and Female Servant in the House above eight
Years old, six Gilders a Year.

For a Coach, if you keep one, 75 Gilders a Year.

For a Coach without Wheels, 50 Gilders a Year.

For Soap, as the Number of the Family is.

The like for Salt.

For Wine, as your Quality is.

To the Watch, as your House is in Greatness.

To the Lanthorns, as the largeness of the House is.

For Butter, every 20 Pound seven Stivers.

For Beans, half as much as you pay for the Beans.

For Turff, every Tun five Stivers.

For every 20 Gilders in Wood, six Gilders.

For Flesh the Tax often changes.

There is also a Tax on the Bread.

Then there is a Tax called the 200th Penny, and a Tax called the 8th: Then
there are many Taxes in Trade, as that no Man can weigh or measure out his own
Goods if sold in gross, but the States Officers must do it. Then the States
have a Tax called the Verpounding on all Lands and Houses in their Dominions.
Then they have a Tax on Sealed Paper, and a Tax for Registering Land (...)
Houses; likewise a Tax on Cows, Horse^ Calves, and on all sort of Fruit. There
are many other Taxes I could name, as a Stiver for every Man that goes out or
into any City after the Hour of shutting the Gates. Also you pay for going over
some Bridges, and passing through Gates called Tolhek, a Stiver for every
Person; but Coaches, Wagons or Horses pay more. These I have already named, you
will say, are too many; yet I may not forget to tell you, that Milk first pays
as Milk; and again if it be made Butter; yea, the Buttermilk and Whay pays a
Tax likewise, for all which a Man would think that a People that stand so much
upon maintaining of their Liberty should Mutiny, and refuse payment: But this
seldom happens; and if it does, the States punish them very severely. I
remember that in my time there was a Mutiny at Sardam about paying a new Tax,
whereupon the States sent a Regiment of their Soldiers, and seized the Heads
of the Mutineers, and hanged up five or six of them at the Towns end, and
severely whipped eight under the Gallows. And in the rich City of Amsterdam, if
any refuse to pay their Tax, the Magistrates send their Officer to pull off
their Doors; and if they remain long obstinate, they send and fetch away the
lower Windows of their House, and they dare not put up others, until they have
^^id the Taxes. However, this is observable (...) if any Man will swear he is
not worth (...) he is taxed at, then he is free: But there are many so proud,
that they will not let the World know their Condition. I knew a Merchant named
Ornia, who paid during the War for his 200th Penny, and other Taxes for his and
his Wives Children, (having had two Rich Wives) 14000 Pounds Sterling. I also
knew an English Anabaptist Merchant, who told the English Envoy in my presence,
That he had paid near 4000 l. Sterling to the War, and yet the same Man did
Grumble to pay his Majesty's Consul a pityful Fee or Consulat-Money on his
Ships: The reason whereof I once asked him, who answered me, That the King
could not raise a Penny in England without his Parliament, and therefore much
less could he do it in the States Country. Thus these Phanaticks had rather
make Bricks without Straw, than pay the least Tribute to their Natural Prince's
Officer. Should we in England be obliged to pay the Taxes that are here
imposed, there would be Rebellion upon Rebellion: And yet after all that is
here paid, no Man may bake his own Bread, or grind his own Corn, or brew his
Beer, nor dare any Man keep in his House a Hand-Mill, although it be but to
grind Mustard or Coffee. I remember one Mrs. Guyn a Coffee-Woman at Rotterdam,
had like to have been ruined for grinding her own Coffee, had not Sir Lyonel
Jenkins employed his Secretary Doctor Wyn to entreat the States on her behalf;
and it was reckoned a grand favor that she was only fined, and not banished
the City, and forfeiture made of all her Goods. I remember also a Landlord of
mine in Leyden bought a live Pig in the Market, and innocently brought it home,
and killed it, for which he had like to have been ruined, because he did not
first send to the Excisemen to excise it, and also let the Visitors see that
the Pig was free from Diseases. At another time a Wine-Merchant coming to give
me a Visit, told me that he had the rarest Rhenish in the City, and that if I
would send my Maid to his Cellar with six Bottles, they should be filled:
Whereupon I sent the Maid only with two Bottles, and charged her to hide them
under her Apron* but such was her misfortune, that the Scouts Dienaers met her,
and seized her and her Bottles, and carried her to Prison, which cost the
Wine-Merchant 1500 Gilders; and had it not been for the strongest
Solicitations made by us, he had been ruined: So sacred are Taxes here, and
must so exactly be paid. And were they not here so precise, it were impossible
for so small a Country to subsist: And therefore you may hear the Inhabitants
generally say, that what they suffer is for their Vaderland: Hence the meanest
among them are content to pay what is laid on them, for they say all what is
the Vaderlands is ours, the Men of War are theirs, the sumptuous Magazins,
Bridges, and every thing what is the Vaderlands. And indeed in a sense it is
so, for they have this to comfort them, that if it please God to visit them
with Poverty, they and their Children have the Public Purse to maintain them;
and this is one main Reason why they so willingly pay their Taxes as they do;
for there is not a Soul born in the States Dominions that wants warm Clothes and
Diet, and good Lodging, if they make their case known to the Magistrates. And
for the Vagabonds that rove up and down the Streets, they are either Walloons,
or other Strangers as pretend to have been ruined by the late Wars.

I shall now in the next place let you know how excellently the Laws are here
executed against Fraud and Perjury, and the Intention of Murders; which Laws
were once much used in England, as you shall hear hereafter when I speak of the
Duke of Brandenburgh's Court.

I shall here instance a few particulars that happened in my time: There was a
Spark that made false Assignments on the Admiralty, who though related to many of
the Magistrates of Amsterdam, had his Head cut off; and another who was a Clerk
in the Merchants Bank, who made false Posts in their Books, and had his Head
also cut off; and all the Portions he had given with his Daughters, the
Husbands were forced to pay back, and all his Houses and Goods were sold at his
Door in the open Streets: I knew a French Marquis, who swore his Regiment was
complete, and when the States knew that he had not half his Regiment, he
likewise had his Head cut off in the Prison in the Hague: I also knew a French
Pedagogue, a Runagado Monk, who designed to have Murdered his Master Major
Cavellio, and his two Pupils, young Children of the Majors, and afterward to
set the House a Fire to color the Murder, he had his Head cut off and set upon
a Post, with his Body on a Wheel near the Hague. I could Name you two other
Cheaters, who were severely whipped under the Gallows; and two under Farmers who
designed to run away with the States Money.

The Cheat of breaking with a full Hand is not so frequent in Holland as in
England, (where some use it as a way to slip out of Business, and then to live
conveniently afterward upon the Estates of other Men) because in Holland they
are more severely punished when discovered than in England: As on the contrary,
those that fall to decay through Losses, and unavoidable Accidents which they
could not prevent, find a more speedy and easy way of Compounding and
Finishing Matters with their Creditors if they be over-strict, than the Custom
or Law of England does afford, for the suing out of Statutes of Bankrupts in
England does prove many times so pernicious both to Creditor and Debtor through
the tediousness of the Proceedings, and the expensiveness of Executing the
Commissions, that what by Commissioners Fees, Treats, and other incident
Charges, the Creditors are put to such Expenses as to be utterly disappointed
of their Debt, and the Poor Debtors for ever ruined and undone; I shall
therefore in this place give a short Relation of the method used in Amsterdam
in the case of Bankrupts, which perhaps may be taken notice of by our King and
Parliament, for the preventing Disorders and sad Abuses that daily happen in
Executing the Statutes of Bankrupts: The Magistrates of Amsterdam every year
Name Commissioners for Bankrupts, out of those that make up a Judicature, like
to our Courts of Aldermen in London; These meet certain days in the Week in a
distinct Chamber in the Stadthouse, over whose Door is cut in Marble the Emblem
of Fortune flying away with Wings, and round Chests turned upside down, with
Mice and Rats Eating the Money-Bags, Pens, Inkhorns, and Paper-Books. There
they receive Petitions from Debtors and Creditors, and as occasion requires,
summon the Parties to appear before them, and to lay open the true State of the
matter; this done, they either by Authority seize the Bankrupts Books and
Effects, or else without any stir and noise leave all remaining in the Debtors
Houses, and send thither two Committees to examine the Books, and make an
Inventory of the Estate, with power to compose the matter, without giving much
trouble to the Parties. If the Commissioners find that the Debtor is come to
decay by unexpected Losses, and unavoidable Accidents, to which he did not at
all contribute, it is their usual way to propose to the Creditor such amicable
and easy Terms, as the Poor Man may be able to perform, alotting sometimes the
half of the Estate left to the Debtor, sometimes a third part, and sometimes
persuading the Creditors to advance to the Poor Man a Sum of Money to help him
up again in Trade, upon Condition that he do oblige himself to pay the
Creditors all he owes them, when God shall be pleased to make him able; but on
the contrary, if the Commissioners find that a Trader has dealt Knavishly, and
broken with a design to Defraud and Cheat his Creditors, as if it appear that a
Bankrupt has kept false Books, and counterfeited Bills of Exchange, Bills of
Loading, or pretended Commissions from Foreign Parts; in such a case they are
very severe, and not only seize all the Books and Effects of the Bankrupt, but
also Imprison him, and also punish him Corporally; and if the cheat be of an
heinous Nature, Sentence him sometime to Death; whereas, if the Debtor be only
Unfortunate, and no ways Knavish, then the Commissaries use all the Power they
have to force the Creditors to accept the Poor Man's Terms, the which is better
for the Creditors than to use the rigor of the Law, in committing the Poor Man
to Prison, seeing in that case the Creditors must maintain him in Prison
according to his Quality, where if he lies a certain time, and the Creditors be
not able to prove the Prisoner has an Estate, then the Debtor is admitted to
his Oath to Swear he is not worth 40 Gilders, besides his wearing Cloths and
working Tools, and then he is set at liberty; but in the mean time let the
Prisoner have a care not to make a false Oath, for then he is punished without
Mercy, an instance of which happened in my time.

The States having admitted a certain Jew to come and make such an Oath before
them, were at the same time informed by the Jailer, that this Jew had been seen
through the chinks of the Door, quilting Ducats of Gold, and some Diamonds in
his Clothes, to the value of 5000 Gilders. The States hereupon admonished the
Jew to take heed to what he was about to Swear, because the Law was very strict
against such as made false Oaths before them, and at the same time caused the
Oath, and the Law to be Read unto him; nevertheless the Jew offered to take the
Oath, but the Lords not suffering him to Swear, because then he must die by
Law, caused him to be taken out into another Room and searched, where they
found about him the Ducats and Diamonds: This being told the Lords, they sent
for him in, and then Sentenced him to have 60 Lashes under the Gallows, and to
be Banished the Country; yet, because the Jew had many Children, they gave the
third part of what was taken about him to his Wife and Children, and a third to
the Poor, and the other third to the Creditors, which was enough to pay them
their Debt: These Commissioners are paid by the States, and have not a Doit
from Debtors or Creditors, for all what they do: These Commissioners are also
much to be commended for their readiness to do good Offices to those Poor
Merchants, who having lived honestly, are brought to decay by Losses and
Crosses in their Trade; who when they find any such so Poor that they can
neither pay their Creditors, nor maintain the charge of their Families, it is
their constant Custom, to take their Children from them, and maintain and bring
them up in their Hospitals; yea, often also soliciting the Burghermasters on
their behalf, to bestow some small Office upon them for their Relief and
Subsistence. And here I must not omit to acquaint you, that as the Compounding
of Matters in Holland betwixt Debtor and Creditor, so as has been said, is
very easy and equitable, so is also their way or method of suing for Debts
very favorable, which is after this manner; In the first place, a Note or
Summons is left at the Debtors House, and if he neglect to appear, a second
Summons is sent, but then if he neither appear himself, or send his Proctor,
the Sheriffs order an Arrest against him; and at last, when he is brought
before them, if the matter be difficult, it is referred to two or three good
Men of the City, and time given him; but if the Plaintiff make Oath, that he
apprehends the Debtor has a design to run away, then must the Prisoner either
give Bail, or return to Prison. It is a Remark that I have made in my Travels,
that excepting France and Flanders, I never saw in any Prison above forty
Prisoners for Debt at one time, and in some great Towns, as in Haerlem and
others, sometimes not one; and the Reason hereof is plain, for you cannot lay a
Man in Prison for an Action or Debt, small or great, but you must maintain the
Prisoner, so that many times the Charges exceed the principal Debt, and after
all, the Prisoner can free himself; whereas the Custom in England, encouraged
by those Varlets the Pettyfoggers and Catchpoles, of turning a Man into a
Prison for a Crown, or it may be for nothing at all, if he cannot find Bail, he
may lie and Starve there, is an abominable abuse; as also that of Suborning
false Witnesses, which is extremely cried out against beyond Sea.

And now because I am Speaking of Pettyfoggers, give me leave to tell you a
Story I met with when I lived in Rome, going with a Roman to see some
Antiquities, he showed me a Chapel, Dedicated to one St. Evona, a Lawyer of
Britain, who he said came to Rome to entreat the Pope to give the Lawyers of
Britain a Patron, to which the Pope replied, That he knew of no Saint but what
was disposed of to other Professions; at which Evona was very sad, and
earnestly begged of the Pope to think of one for them: At last, the Pope
proposed to St. Evona, that he should go round the Church of St. John de Latera
Blindfold, and after he had said so many Ave Maria's, that the first Saint he
laid hold of should be his Patron, which the good old Lawyer willingly
undertook; and at the end of his Ave Maria's, he stopped at St. Michael's Altar,
where he laid hold of the Devil under St. Michael's Feet, and cried out, This
is our Saint, let him be our Patron; so being unblindfolded, and seeing what a
Patron he had chosen, he went to his Lodgings so dejected, that in few Months
after he Died, and coming to Heavens Gates, knocked hard; whereupon St. Peter
asked, Who it was that knocked so boldly, he replied, That he was St. Evona the
Advocate: Away, away, said St. Peter, here is but one Advocate in Heaven, here
is no room for you Lawyers. O but, said St. Evona, I am that honest Lawyer who
never took Fees on both sides, or ever pleaded in a bad Cause; nor did I ever
set my Neighbors together by the Ears, or lived by the Sins of the People.
Well then, said St. Peter, come in: This news coming down to Rome, a witty Poet
writ upon St. Evona's Tomb these words; St. Evona un Briton, Advocat non
Larron, Hallelujah. This Story put me in mind of Ben. Johnson's going through a
Chruch in Surrey, seeing Poor People weeping over a Grave, asked one of the
Women, Why they wept? O said she, we have lost our precious Lawyer, Justice
Randal, he kept us all in Peace, and always was so good as to keep us from
going to Law, the best Man that ever lived, Well, said Ben. Johnson, I will
send you an Epitaph to write upon his Tomb, which was,

God works Wonders now and than,
Here lies a Lawyer an honest Men.
And truly old Ben. was in the right, for in my time I have observed some
Gentlemen of that Profession, that have not acted like St. Evona, or Justice
Randal, I will say no more of them, but wish them as great Fees, and as much
encouragement as the Lawyers have in Switzerland.

I now come to Speak something of the three Taxes I mentioned in the former
part of my Remarks on Taxes, of which the first ought rather to be called an
useful and public Invention, like to that of the Insurance Office in London,
then a public Tax, seeing no Man needs contribute to it unless they please,
and find his profit by it; but the other may be called Taxes, because the
Subjects are obliged to submit to them, but then they are so easy, that what
the public gets thereby, not only lessons extraordinary Subsidies, which many
times occasions clamor, when because of their Rarity, and the urgency of
Occasions, they must needs be great.

Yet it is sufficiently Compensated by the advantage and security in the
Estates, which private Persons, who are obliged to pay it, reap thereby daily:
I am confident, that if the King and Parliament thought fit to introduce some,
or all three of these Taxes into England, the public charge of Government
might be defrayed with more ease, and with less repining and clamor, than when
it must be done by new and high Impositions; however, our Governors are the
proper Judges of that.

The first then is an House called the Merchants Bank, which is governed by
diverse Commissioners, Clerks, and Bookkeepers, likewise an Essay-Master, who
judges of the Gold and Silver, that at any time is brought into the Bank
uncoined: The security given for preservation thereof, are the States and
Magistrates of Amsterdam. Now if you have a mind to put Money into the Bank,
suppose 1000 l. less or more, you must go to the Clerks, and ask a Folio for
your Name, and then pay in your Money at three or four per Cent. according as
the rate of the Bank-Money is high or low, or you may buy it of those called
Cashiers or Brokers; then get the Clerks to set down in the Folio what you
bring in; having done so, you may draw this Sum, or sell it in what parcels you
please; but then if you let your Money lie seven years in the Bank, you receive
no Interest for the same. If you ask, Where then is the Advantage for the
Merchants? I answer, first, you have your Money ready at all times for
answering Bills of Exchange, and making other Payments: You are at no charge
for Bags or Portage, at no loss by false tale, or bad Money, in no danger of
Thieves, or unfaithful Servants, or Fire; and above all, you have the Accounts
of your Cash most punctually and justly kept without any trouble, or running
the risk of Goldsmith or Cashierers breaking in your Debt; for such is their
care; that twice a Year, or sometimes oftener, they shut up the Bank for 14
Days, and then all that have Concerns therein, must bring in their Accounts to
the Clerks, who a few Days after, having viewed the Books, acquaint such as
have brought in wrong Accounts with their Mistakes, desiring them to return to
their Books, and rectify their Error, not telling them wherein the mistake
lies: So that I have known Merchants, in my time, sent back three or four times
with their wrong Accounts: But if they begin to grow impatient, and say that
they will stand to their Accounts, then they pay a Mulct to the Clerks upon
their convincing them of their Mistakes, either by charging too much upon the
Bank, or forgetting or omitting what was their due. I knew two Merchants, who
having forgot, the one 750 l. and the other 220 l. in their Accounts, were
honestly rectified by the Clerks, so that they sustained no Loss. Besides this
care of the Clerks in keeping and stating the Accounts, the Bank is obliged for
5 l. a Year to send to every Merchant that desires it, their Accounts every
Morning before Exchangetime, of the Moneys written of by them in in the Bank
the Day before upon any Merchants Account, and what Sums are written of by
others upon their Accounts: So that the Merchants may compare the Banks. Notes
with their Books, and so save much of the Charges of Book-keeping.

Now if it be objected, That though this be an Advantage to the Merchants, yet
what can the Public gain thereby, seeing the Charges of paying Officers,
Clerks, etc. must needs be very considerable?

I answer, That indeed it is a Mystery to those who understand not the thing;
but if it were once known and practiced, the Advantage of it would appear: For
among other things which might be said, the Magistrates of the City take out of
the Merchants Bank a sufficient Stock of Money to supply the Lumbert, a Bank
that lends out Money, and is Governed by four Commissioners chosen out of the
Magistrates, who sit in Court every Day in the Lumbert, which is a large Pile
of Building 300 Foot long, containing several Chambers and Magazines under one
Roof; in these several Chambers the Commissioners have Officers sitting to lend
Money upon all sorts of Goods, even from a pair of Shoes to the richest Jewel,
etc. This is a great convenience for Poor People; yea, for Merchants also, who
some times may want Money to pay a Bill of Exchange, and prevents the Cheating,
and extraordinary Extortion used by the Pawn-brokers in England, France, and
other Countries. And besides, the Poor have their Pawns safely and well
preserved, neither are they punctually sold when the Year is out, or denied
under the pretext of being mislaid, as the Poor are often times served by the
wicked Pawn-brokers.

There is also another convenience in this Lumbert, viz. an excellent way they
have of discovering Thieves, and the stolen Goods; they publish two general
open Sales of Goods pawned, twice a year, that such as will may redeem their
Goods, and paying the Interest may have them, although the time be relapsed.
Thus much as to the Lumbert. I was once, according to my Duty, to wait upon the
D. of York, at the Bank of Merchants, where showing his Highness the way of
keeping the Journal Book of the Bank, which is of a prodigious bigness, his
Highness was extremely pleased with the contrivance of preserving it from Fire;
saying, that the course they took might be of great use for the preserving
Patents, and the Deeds of Noblemens Estates: This contrivance, which perhaps
may be thought useful or imitable, I shall therefore describe it: It is a large
Firestone shaped like a Chest, and set upright in a Stone-Wall, having a large
Brass Door of a vast thickness, with Flaps to fall over and cover the Lock and
Hinges; into this Chest the Book is drawn upon Rolls, it being of such a bulk
and weight as cannot be handed in by a Man, and there it is so securely
preserved, that although the House should be burnt, the Book in all probability
would be safe. Should I here give an account of the vast Sums of Money that
daily are written of in this Bank, I might probably be thought to speak at
random, but this I may boldly affirm, that it far exceeds all the Banks in
Europe, both for Riches and Business, and their Credit is such, that the
Italians, French, Germans, and English have great Sums in the same; neither was
ever any Man refused his Money in the worst of times.

A second Tax is what arises from the just and laudable Establishment of a
Register, a Tax which I think most Men will be willing to submit to, except
such as design to cheat and defraud their Neighbors, and live by such like
Sins and Confusion, and for the most part die with the Curse of the People:
This Register in Holland begets such assurance and safety in Dealing, that in
purchasing of Houses or Land, a Child, though overreached in the Value, yet
cannot be cheated as to the Title.

The Third and last Tax is that of Sealed Paper, as it is practiced in Holland.
There are many other things might be spoken, as to the Government of Amsterdam,
but I must not tire your patience. However, one considerable thing I would not
pass by, touching the Militia: There are in Amsterdam Sixty Companies of Foot,
the least of them having 200 Men, some 300, which in a modest account, amounts
at least to 15000 Men, in which number neither Jews nor Anabaptists who carry
no Arms are reckoned, only they are obliged to contribute to the maintenance of
the 1400 Soldiers, who are kept in constant pay, as a Guard for the City, and
toward the Night-Watch or Rattel-Watch, who walk the Streets the whole Night
to keep good Orders, and tell us every half hour what a Clock it is. There are
also upon every Church Tower, Trumpeters, who Sound every half hour; and if any
Fire breaks out in the City, they give a Signal on which side of the City the
Fire is, and Ring the Fire-Bell; and they have excellent ways on a sudden in
such sad Accidents to quench Fire: But I may not enlarge any longer, but hasten
out of Holland. Though before I leave it it will not be amiss if I give the
Reader a List of the Passage-Boats, which for the convenience of those that
Travel that way, I have here Collected, with the times of their going off,
which they are punctual in observing.

Beginning at Helvoet-Sluys, where the Pacquet-Boat from England lies. From
whence to the Briell there goes a Wagon every Day at 8 in the Morning; the
Passage costs 7 Stivers; and the same from the Briell to Helvoet.

From the Briell to Rotterdam, and from Rotterdam to the Briell, there Sails a
Boat every Day as the Tide serves.

From Rotterdam to Delft, and from Delft to Rotterdam, there goes a
Trecht-Scuyt, or Passage-Boat, every Hour, from 6 in the Morning to 8 in the
Evening.

From Delft to the Hague, and from the Hague to Delft, the Boat goes every half
Hour.

From Delft, and from the Hague to Leyden; In the Morning at 5, 7, 9, and half
an Hour after 10. In the Afternoon at half an Hour after 12, at 21 1/2, at 4
1/2, and at 6 1/2 daily, as you are to understand all along.

From Leyden to Delft, or to the Hague at the same Hours; In the Morning at 4,
6, 8, and 10 1/2. Afternoon, 12 1/2, 2 1/2, 4 1/2, and 6 1/2; and a Night-Boat
at 11.

From Leyden to Haerlem; In the Morning at 3 1/2, 6 1/2, 9 and 11. Afternoon,
12 1/2, 1 1/2, 2, 4, and 6. Also a Market-Boat every Day before Noon.

From Haerlem to Leyden; In the Morning at 6, 8, 10 and 12. Afternoon at 1, 2,
4 and 6; and the Night-Boat at 11.

From Amsterdam to Haerlem, and from Haerlem to Amsterdam, there goes a Boat
every Hour, from the opening of the Gates, to 8 of the Clock at Night.

From Amsterdam to Leyden, at 8 at Night; and from Leyden to Amsterdam, 9 at
Night, every Night; and a Market-Boat at 3 in the Afternoon.

From Amsterdam to Utrecht, from the 15 of March to the 15 of September, at 7
in the Morning, at 1 in the Afternoon, and at 8 in the Evening. From the 15 of
September, to the 11 of March, at 8 in the Morning, at 1 in the Afternoon, and
at 7 in the Evening. And*

From Utrecht to Amsterdam at the same Hours.

From Amsterdam to Gouda, or Tergoes, as it is corruptly called; From the first
of April to the last of September; in the Morning at 7, and in the Evening at
8. In October, November, and March, Morning and Evening* at 8.

From Gouda to Amsterdam; In the Morning at 11, and in the Evening at 8. In
December, January and February, no Boat goes in the Morning from either place,
and only one at 8 in the Evening.

From Tergoes you may go by Wagon to Rotterdam, or from Rotterdam to Tergoes,
for about 12 or 14 Stivers, which is a convenient Passage for Strangers, there
being the least shifting of Boats.

From Amsterdam to Rotterdam, and from Rotterdam to Amsterdam; The Market-Boat
for carrying Goods goes off at 12 at Noon every Day.

From Amsterdam to the Hague, and from the Hague to Amsterdam, the same at 12
at Noon.

From Amsterdam through Muyden to Naerden; In the Summer, from the first of
April, to the last of September, Morning, at 6, 8 and 10; Afternoon, at 2, 4
and 6. In the Winter, Mornings at 7, 9 and 11; Afternoon, 1, 3 and 5. This is a
Fortification very well worth seeing.

From Naerden through Muyden to Amsterdam; In the Summer at 5, 7 and 9,
Mornings; and at 2, 4 and 6, Afternoons. In the Winter, Mornings, 7, 8 and 10;
Afternoons, 1, 3 and 5.

From Leyden to Gouda; Every Day a Boat goes at 11 in the Fornenoon, and on
Saturdays at 2 in the Afternoon.

From Gouda to Leyden; Every Day at 11 in the Forenoon, and on Thursdays at 12.

From Leyden through Woerden to Utrccht; In the Morning at 9, Afternoon at 12
1/2, and Evening at 9.

From Utrecht through Woerden to Leyden; Mornings at 8 and 12, Evenings at 8.

From Rotterdam to Dort, and from Dort to Rotterdam; Every Day a Boat as the
Tide serves; as also to Antwerp the same.

It will be unnecessary to particularize any more, these being all that
Englishmen have occasion for, for whom these Remarks are made, though it will
not be improper if I insert the Order for the Post-Wagons, which some for
Expedition make use of.

The Order of the Post-Wagons which go between Amsterdam and the Hague. Every
Day except Sundays, from the 26 of February to the 29 of September, there goes
a Post-Wagon at 6 in the Morning.

From the first of October to the sixth of November, at 7 in the Morning.

From the 8 of November to the 19 of January, at half an Hour past 7 in the
Morning.

From the 21 of January to the 24 of February, at 7 in the Morning.

In the great Vacation of the Courts of Holland, which is all the Month of
August, there goes no Wagon in the Morning.

At 12 at Noon there goes a Wagon every Day, Sundays and all, throughout the
Year.

The Passage in the Post-Wagon for each Person is 4 G. 3 St. besides
Passage-Gelt. And if any hire a whole Wagon, they may go at what Hour they
please, and pay 24 G. 18 St. and Passage-Gelt, provided there be no more than 6
Persons.

And if you are set down by the way you shall be abated proportionably of the
Passage, but then you must give notice of it before Hand, and be content to
take your place after those that go quite out.

And now having said so much of the States Government, and of Amsterdam in
particular, it will not be amiss to take notice of some bad Customs and
Practices now in vogue in Holland, and leave it to the Reader to judge what
they may portend: There are Tolerated in the City of Amsterdam, amongst other
abuses, at least 50 Musick-houses, where lewd Persons of both Sexes meet and
practice their Villainies: There is also a place called the Long-Seller, a
Tolerated Exchange, or public Meeting House for Whores and Rogues to
Rendezvous in, and make their filthy Bargains. This Exchange is open from six a
Clock in the Evening until nine at Night; every Whore must pay three Stivers at
the Door for her Entrance or Admission. I confess the Ministers Preach and
exclaim from the Pulpit against this horrible Abuse, but who they be that
protect them I know not; yet, I have heard some plead for the Tolleration of
these wicked Meetings, upon pretext, that when the East India Fleets come home,
the Seamen are so mad for Women, that if they had not such Houses to bait in,
they would force the very Citizens Wives and Daughters; but it is well known,
that as Money does countenance, so Discipline might suppress that abuse. The
old severe, and frugal way of living is now almost quite out of date in
Holland, there is very little to be seen of that sober Modesty in Apparel,
Diet, and Habitations as formerly: In stead of convenient Dwellings, the
Hollanders now build stately Palaces, have their delightful Gardens, and Houses
of Pleasure, keep Coaches, Wagons and Sleas, have very rich Furniture for their
Horses, with Trappings adorned with Silver Bells. I have seen the Vanity of a
Vintners Son, who had the Bosses of the Bit, and Trapping of his Horse of pure
Silver; his Toot-Man and Coachman having Silver Fringed Gloves; yea, so much
is the humor of the Women altered, and of their Children also, that no Apparel
can now serve them but the best and richest that France and other Countries
affords; and their Sons are so much addicted to Play, that many Families in
Amsterdam are ruined by it; not that England is less extravagant then the
Dutch; who as I said before, got such great Estates by their Frugality, whilst
they were not addicted to such Prodigality and Wantonness as the English are,
whose excess I cannot excuse; nevertheless, the grave and sober People of
Holland are very sensible of the great alteration that now is in their Country,
and as they say, Paracelsus used to Cure his Patients of their Disease with a
full Belly; so a good Burghermaster desirous to convince his Amsterdammers of
their dissolute kind of Life, invited the 36 Magistrates and their Wives to a
Feast; who being come, and the Ladies big with Expectation of some rare and
extraordinary Entertainment, sat down at Table, where the first Course was
Buttermilk boiled with Apples, Stock Fish, Buttered Turnips and Carrots,
Lettice, Sallat, and Red Herrings, and only small Bear, without any Wine; at
this the Ladies startled, and began to whisper to their Husbands, that they
expected no such Entertainment, but upon removing of the Dishes and Plates,
they found underneath Printed Verses, importing, That after that manner of
living they began to thrive, and had enlarged their City.

The Second Course consisted of Bocke de kooks, Quarters of Lamb, Roasted
Rabbits, and a sort of Pudding they call a Brother; here they had Dort and
English Beer, with French Wine, yet all this did not please the Dainty Dames:
But upon removing away the Plates another Dish of Poetry appeared, which
acquainted them, That after that modest and sober way of living they might keep
what they had got, and lay up something for their Children.

Then comes in the Third Course made up of all the Rarities of the Season, as
Partridges, Pheasants, and all sorts of Fowl, and English Pasties, with plenty
of Rhenish, and other sorts of Wine, to moisten them; this put the Ladies in a
Frolic, and jolly Humor, but under their Plates was found the Use and
Application in Verses, telling them, That to feed after that manner was
Voluptuous and Luxurious, and would impair their Health, and waste their
Estates, make them neglect their Trade, and so in time reduce their stately and
new built flourishing City to their old Fishing Town again. After this was
brought in a Banquet of all sorts of Sweat Meats piled up in Pyramids, and
delicate Fruit, with plenty of delicious Wines; and to conclude all, a set of
Music and Maskers, who Danced with the young Ladies; but at parting, like the
hand writing to Belteshazzar upon the Wall, every one had a Printed Paper of
Moralities put into their Hand, showing them the Causes of the Ruin of the
Roman Commonwealth, according to that of the Poet, Nullum crimen abest,
facinusque libidinis ex quo,
Paupertas Romana perit.
with an excellent Advice to them, That if they did not quit the Buffoonries,
and Apish Modes of the French, and return to the Simplicity, Plainness and
Modesty of their Ancestors and Founders, their Commonwealth could not long
last; but all the Thanks the good old Burghermaster had for his kind and
chargeable Entertainment in thus Feasting his Countrymen, was to be Floutted
at, and Pasquild, the Sparks of Amsterdam saying in all places, That the old
Man being now past the years of Pleasure himself, would have none others to
take theirs: And here I shall put a period to what I thought fit to observe of
the States of the United Provinces, only I will beg leave to say something to
the Hollander by way of Advice, viz. That now they are in a prosperous
Condition, Rich, and at Ease, they would look back and remember what God in his
infinite Goodness and Mercy did for them in the days of their greatest
Calamities: For my own part I cannot but admire the great Providence of God in
preserving them from being devoured by their many Enemies they had in the last
War, besides their Enemies at home, some of which particulars as they then
happened give me leave to relate. At the time when the French came to Invade
the Territories of the States General, it then looked as if God had marked out
the way for the French to March, by sending such a wonderful dry Season, that
the Rivers of the Rhine, Beta, Wall, and other Rivers were Fordable, so that
the French only waded throw, and became so Victorious, that in a little space
of time (what by the Treasons of some, and the Ignorance and Cowardice of
others entrusted with the Militia and Garrisons) the French became Masters of
above Forty Cities and Garrisons, at which time there was nothing to be heard of
in the States Dominions but Confusion and Misery, even in the strong and rich
City of Amsterdam it self, who at this time beheld the French Army like a
mighty Torrent coming within sight of the City, and at the same time wanting
Water in their Canals, and Burghwalls to ply their Sluices, and such was the
scarcity of Rain, that a Pail of fresh Water was worth Six Pence: Thus Heaven
seemed to frown on them, as well as the French Army, by the shutting up as it
were the Conduits of Heaven, and yet a worse thing had like to have fallen out,
for at the same time the Divisions grew so high amongst the Magistrates in the
Stadthouse, that it was putting to the Question, Whether or no they should not
go and meet the French King with the Keys of their City, to save it from Fire
and Plunder; now nothing, in all probability, could save this rich City from
falling into the hands of the French, but an immediate hand from Heaven, and it
had undoubtedly come to pass, had not Providence caused the French to make a
stand at Muyden, two hours from Amsterdam, at what time the valiant Roman of
Amsterdam, Scout Hasselaer, like a true Father of his Country, opposed the
French Party in the Counsel, calling out to the Burghers from the Stadthouse,
to take Courage, and rather choose to die, like old Battavians, with their
Swords in their hands, than tamely and treacherously to yield up their City to
the Mercy of the French, as some of the Magistrates were about to do; this so
encouraged the Burghers, that with great Courage they manned the Walls, and
Heaven then assisting them with a sudden and plentiful Rain, that they plied
their Sluices, and dround the Lands round the City three or four Foot high, in
some places, which caused the victorious French Army to make a quick retreat,
as far as Utrecht, else they had paid dear for seeing of Amsterdam; thus was
Amsterdam delivered by the hand of Heaven.

A Second was, when that bloody Duke of Luxemburg, who gloried and thanked GOD
that he was born without pity or remorse of Conscience, took the opportunity of
an exceeding hard Frost, to march his Army over the Ice as it had been dry
ground, burning in his way the three fair Villages of Bodygrave, Swammerdam,
and Goudse-sluys; acting there a more cruel Tragedy, and worse, than ever did
Turk, for they generally save the Country People for Ransom, but this cruel
Prince caused strong Guards to surround the Villages, and burnt Men, Women, and
Children together: Thus he began his march, with a design to burn Leyden,
Hague, Rotterdam, Delft, and all the rich Country of Rhineland: And this he
might have done in all probability, for, first, the Governor of New-sluce, who
commanded the Post that should have stopped the French, treacherously delivered
up the Fort without firing a Gun; and the handful of Troops then under General
Koningsmark were so inconsiderable, that they, joined to the Soldiers under
Pain and Vin, the Governor of New-sluce, were not able to make head as could
oppose Laxemburg's Army; and at the same time the Prince of Orange was with the
States Army at Charleroy: Now was Leyden ready to meet the French with the Keys
of their City, and other Cities too, for they had neither Fortifications nor
Soldiers to man their Walls: Thus the whole Country and Cities of Rhineland
were like to fall under the Cruelties and Tyrany of the French, but GOD a
second time sent these People Relief from Heaven, first by giving such
undaunted Courage to that Great Statesman Pensionary Fagel, that he forced
Coningsmark to rally his Troops together, and to make a stand near Leyden,
offering himself to die at the head of them if there were occasion, but GOD
reserved him for a further Good to the Commonwealth, by sending such a sudden
Thaw as was never seen before, for in less than ten hours, the Ice so sunk, and
such Floods of Snow came down from the Highlands, that the French were fain to
make a very disorderly retreat, marching up to the middle for haste, because on
the Banks there could not march above four Men abreast, so they were
constrained to leave behind them the greatest part of the Plunder they had
robbed from the Innocent Country People, and the nimble Dutchmen, on their
Scates, so long as the Ice would bear them, did shoot down the French like
Ducks diving under Water, so that it cost Luxemburg's Army dear, though they
had the pleasure to burn the poor People, of which the French afterward
wickedly made their boast.

The third was as wonderful as the two others; and although I do not believe
Miracles, as do the Papists, yet I say nothing I ever observed looked more like
a Miracle than this; to wit, when the English and French Fleet lay before
Scheveling with a design to land, and the French ready on their March to join
with the English and other French as soon as they should land, at the same time
the Bishop of Munster lying before Groeningen, and the French before Gorcom, so
that now all things looked with a dreadful face for the States, yet at this
very time God sent a third relief, by sending such Mists, and wonderful sorts
of Tides, as so separated the two Fleets, that the English were forced to quit
Scheveling Shore, and were driven on the side of the Texel Road; from whence
they were constrained by the season of the Year to retire home: And such were
the sudden and great Showers of Rain, that the Bishop of Munster was forced in
disorder to raise his Siege at Groeningen, and the French to quit Gorcom. I
could add many more Observations of the Providence of God to these People, as
the preserving the Prince of Orange, His present Majesty of Great Britain, from
the many treacherous Designs contrived against him from his Cradle; but Moses
must be preserved, to go in and out before his* People. Certainly never young
Prince endured so many Fatigues as did his Highness in his tender Years, of
which I was an Eyewitness; and had his Highness had the Years and Experience,
and such a good Disciplined Army (as now he has) in the Year 1671. when the
French entered the Country, his Highness had given them as good a Welcome as he
did at Bergen. I will say no more of this Subject, only this, That the Peace at
Nimeguen was also a very wonderful thing, for that not above eight Days before
the Peace was signed, most of the Plenipotentiaries did believe the War would
have continued another Year; first, because the King of Denmark and Duke of
Brandenburg prospered exceedingly against Sweedland, and totally refused the
Propositions of France; and secondly, because the French King writ such bitter
Letters against the States General: Yet eight Days after dressed a Letter unto
the States, in which he calls them his Good Friends, and Old Alleys, offering
them not only Maestricht, but every Foot of Ground they could lay claim to in
the World; also giving them new Terms and Conditions as to their Privileges in
France, by way of Trade. Neither can I forget how speedily and as strangely the
French King did quit his Conquered Towns after the Valiant Prince of Orange
took Naerden, which was the first step to the French's Ruin in the States
Dominions. I come now, according to promise in the beginning of this Book, to
give the Reader some Remarks I made in other Countries where I have been,
during my Sixteen Years Travels. To give a full account of all that might be
observed in so many Countries, is not a Task for one Man, nor a Subject for so
small a Book; I shall only therefore briefly take notice of some remarkable
Matters which may in some measure satisfy the Curiosity of my Countrymen, who
have not been in the said places, and convince, if possible, all of them, that
no Country that ever I was in, affords so great Conveniences for the
generality of People to live in, as the Kingdom of England does. Though I have
twice made the grand tour of Germany, Hungary, Italy and France, and after my
return back to England, traveling a third time through Holland as far as
Strasbourg, and so back by Francfort to Denmark and Sueden; yet the Reader is
not to expect I should follow a Geographical Method and Order in speaking of
the Places I have been in; that is to be looked for in the Map, and not in
Travels; but only that I mention Places as I found them on my Road, according
as Business or Curiosity led me to Travel.

THE first considerable Place I then met with, after I was out of the Dominions
of the States General, was Cleave, the Capital City of the Province so called;
a fair and lovely City standing upon the Rhine, and the Rivers Wall and Leck.
This Province much resembles England in rich Soil, and pleasantness of its
Rivers. The Inhabitants of the Country would have me believe that they were
Originally descended of those Saxons who made a descent into England, and
conquered it; and to convince the truth of this, they showed me a Cloister
standing on a Hill, called Eltham, from which they say our Eltham in Kent had
its Name. I was made to observe also two places standing upon the Rhine near
Emmerick, called Doadford, and Gronewich, which according to them, gave the
Names to Dedford and Greenwich in England: But many such Analogies and
Similitudes of Names are to be found in other places of Germany, but especially
in upper Saxony and Denmark. The greatest part of this Province of Cleave, and
part of the Dutchies of Juliers and Berg, and of the Provinces of Mark and
Ravensbourg, belongs to the Elector of Brandenbourg, the rest belonging to the
Duke of Newbourg now Elector Palatine, and the Elector of Cologne. The
Inhabitants are partly Roman Catholics, partly Lutherans, and partly
Calvinists, who all live promiscuously and peaceably together both in City and
Country. The City of Cleave is the utmost Limit of the Territories of the
Elector of Brandenbourg on this side of Germany; from whence his Electoral
Highness can Travel Two Hundred Dutch Miles outright in his own Dominions, and
never sleep out of his own Country but one Night in the Territories of the
Bishop of Osnabrug.

FRom Cleave I went to a small Town called Rhinberg, but a very strong
Fortification belonging to the Elector of Cologne; which lies at two Miles
distance from the City of Wesel, that belongs to the Elector of Brandenbourg.
Through Dusseldorpe, situated on the Rhine, and the Residence of the Duke of
Newbourg, I went next to Cologne, a very large City, called by the Romans
Colonia Agrippina, and the French Rome d'Allemagne.

Cologne is an Imperial City, and a Republic, though for some things it does
Homage to the Elector of that Name, and receives an Oath from him. It is much
decayed within these Hundred Years, having been much Priest-ridden; a
Misfortune that has undone many other great Cities. The Jesuits have had so
great Influence upon the Magistrates, that they prevailed with them to banish
all Protestants, who removed to Hambourg and Amsterdam; so that Cologne is
become so dispeopled, that the Houses daily fall to ruin for want of
Inhabitants, and a great deal of Corn and Wine now grows within the Walls, upon
Ground where Houses formerly stood. I dare be bold to affirm, that there is
twice the Number of Inhabitants in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, as
there is in Cologne; and yet it contains as many Parish-Churches, Monasteries
and Chapels, as there are days in the Year. The Streets are very large, and so
are the Houses also, in many of which one may drive a Coach or Wagon into the
first Room from the Streets: But the Streets are so thin of People, that one
may pass some of them and not meet Ten Men or Women, unless it be Churchmen,
or Religious Sisters. The most considerable Inhabitants of the City are
Protestant Merchants, though but few in Number, and they not allowed a Church
neither, but at a place called Woullin, a Mile without the City; the rest of
the Inhabitants, who are Laymen, are miserably poor. There are no less than
3000 Students in Cologne taught by the Jesuits gratis, who have the privilege
to beg in Musical Notes in the Daytime, and take to themselves the liberty of
borrowing Hats and Cloaks in the Night. But if in the Jesuits Schools there be
any Rich Burghermasters Sons who have Parts, they are sure to be snapt up, and
adopted into the Society. Formerly, before the Matter was otherwise adjusted in
the Diet of Ratubonne, there have been Designs of Voting Protestant Magistrates
into the Government again; but so soon as the Jesuits came to discover who of
the Magistrates were for that, they immediately preferred their Sons or
Daughters, and made them Canons, Abbots, or Canonesses, and so diverted them by
Interest. It Is pity to see a City so famous for Traffic in former times, now
brought to so great a decay, that were it not for the Trade of Rhenish-Wine, it
would be utterly forsaken, and left wholly to the Churchmen. The continual
Alarms the Magistrates have had by Foreign Designs upon their Liberty, and the
Jealousies fomented among themselves, as it is thought, by the Agents and
Favorers of France, and especially the Bishop of Strasbourg, have, for several
years, kept them in continual disquiet, and necessitated them to raise great
Taxes, which has not a little contributed to the impoverishing of the People,
especially the Boars round about; who, though the Country they live in be one of
the most pleasant and fertile Plains of Germany, yet are so wretchedly poor,
that Canvas Clothes, Wooden Shoes, and Straw to sleep on in the same room with
their Beasts, is the greatest worldly Happiness that most of them can attain
unto. The Elector of Cologne is Bishop of four great Bishoprics, viz. Cologne,
Prince of Liege, Munster, and Heldershime. To speak of all the Miracles of the
three Kings of Cologne, and the vast number of Saints, who were removed out of
England and interred there, would be but tedious, and perhaps incredible, to
the Reader, as well as wide of my design: I shall therefore proceed.

FRom Cologne I took Water on the Rhine, and advanced to the City of Bon, and
so forward to Coblentz, the Residence of the Elector of Trier: Over Against
this City, on the other side of the Rhine, stands that impregnable Fort called
Herminshine, built on a high rocky Hill, as high again as Windsor-Castle; and
on the North-side of it, the River Moselle falls into the Rhine, over which
there is a stately Stone Bridge. This Prince governs his Subjects as the other
Spiritual Electors do, that is, both by Temporal and Spiritual Authority, which
in that Country is pretty absolute. The chief Trade of this Country is in Wine,
Corn, Wood and Iron.

THE next Country I came to was that of the Elector of Mayence or Mentz, who is
likewise both a Secular and Ecclesiastical Prince, and governs his Subjects
accordingly. He is reckoned to be wholly for the Interests of the French King;
who, notwithstanding of that, pretends a Title to the Citadel of Mayence. As I
was upon my Journey to Mayence by Land, I made a turn down the Rhine to visit
the famous little City of Backrack, and some Towns belonging to the Landtgrave
of Hesse, but especially Backrack, because Travelers say, it much resembles
Jerusalem in its Situation and manner of Buildings. The Burghermaster of this
City told me, that the whole Country about Backrack does not yield above 200
Fouders of Wine a year; and yet the Merchants of Dort, by an Art of
Multiplication, which they have used some years, furnish England with several
thousand of Fouders. Here I shall take the Liberty to relate a strange Story,
which, I found recorded in this Country, though I know it to be mentioned in
History: There was a certain cruel and inhuman Bishop of Mayence, who, in a
year of great scarcity and Famine, when a great number of poor People came to
his Gates begging for Bread, caused the poor Wretches, Men, Women, and
Children, to be put into a Barn, under pretext of relieving their Necessities,
but so soon as they were got in, caused the Barn Doors to be shut, Fire set to
it, and so burnt them all alive: And whilst the poor Wretches cried and
shrieked out for Horror and Pain, the barbarous Miscreant said to those that
were about him, Hark, how the Rats and Mice do cry. But the just Judgment of
GOD suffered not the Fact to pass unpunished; for not long after the cruel
Bishop was so haunted with Rats and Mice, that all the Guards he kept about him
could not secure him from them, neither at Table nor in Bed; at length he
resolved to flee for Safety into a Tower that stood in the middle of the Rhine;
but the Rats pursued him* got into his Chamber, and devoured him alive; so that
the Justice of the Almighty made him a Prey to Vermin, who had inhumanly
reckoned his Fellow Christians to be such. The Tower, which I saw, to this day
is called the Rats-Tower, and the Story is upon Record in the City of Mayence.

On my Journey from thence I came to the little Village of Hockom, not far
distant, famous for our Hockomore-Wine, of which, though the place does not
produce above 150 Fouders a year, yet the ingenious Hollanders of Dort make
some thousand Fouders of it go off in England and the Indies.

FRom Hockom I proceeded to Francfort, a pleasant City upon the River of Maine,
called formerly Teutoburgum and Helenop^lis, and since Francfort, because here
the Franconians, who came out of the Province of Franconia, foarded over, when
they went upon their Expedition into Gallia, which they conquered, and named it
France: And I thought it might very well deserve the Name of Petty-London,
because of its Privileges, and the Humor of the Citizens. It is a Hansiatick
and Imperial Town, and Commonwealth, the Magistrates being Lutherans, which is
the public established Religion; though the Cathedral Church belongs to the
Roman Catholics, who also have several Monasteries there. The City is
populous, and frequented by all sorts of Merchants, from most parts of Europe,
and part of Asia also, because of the two great Fairs that are yearly kept
there: Many Jews live in this City, and the richest Merchants are Calvinists,
who are not suffered to have a Church in the Town, but half an hours Journey
out of it, at a place called Bucknam, where I have told Seventy four Coaches at
a time, all belonging to Merchants of the City. It was in ancient times much
enriched by Charlemain, and has been since by the Constitution of the
Golden-Bull: Amongst other Honors and Privileges, it is appointed to be the
place of the Emperor's Election, where many of the Ornaments, belonging to that
August Ceremony, are to be seen. It is strongly fortified, having a stately
Stone Bridge over the Main, that joins it to Saxe-housen, the Quarter of the
Great Master of the Teutonick-Order. The Government is easy to the People,
they not being taxed as other Cities are; and had it not been for the Alarms
the French gave them, during the last War, they had not been much troubled, but
being forced to keep 3 or 4000 Men in constant Pay to defend their
Fortifications, the Magistrates were constrained to raise Money by a Tax.
Besides that of the Emperor, they are under the Protection of some Neighboring
Princes, as of the Landtgrave of Hesse-Cassel, Landtgrave of Armstadt, the
Count of Solmes, and the Count of Hanau, who are either Lutherans or
Calvinists, amongst whom the late Elector Palatine was also one; but whether
the present, who is a Roman Catholic, be so or not, I cannot tell. This City
takes great care of their Poor, and in their Charity to poor Travelers exceed
Holland: I have seen a List of Seven thousand whom they relieved in one year.
Their great Hospital is a large Court or Palace, where the English Merchants
formerly lived, in the time of Queen Mary's Persecution of the Protestants,
who, when they were recalled by Queen Elizabeth, were so generous as to give
the whole Court, with all their Pack-houses and Lands to the Poor of the City.
It was my fortune to be there in that cold Winter in the year 1683, and saw a
Ceremony performed by the Wine-Coopers of the City, who are obliged by Law,
that when ever the Maine lies fast frozen over for 8 days together, to make a
great Fouder Fat, Hoops and Staves, and set it up complete upon the Ice. It was
very good diversion to see so many Hands at Work, and to observe the jollity
and mirth of the many Thousands of Spectators, who wanted not plenty of Rhenish
Wine to Carouse in.

I had the curiosity afterward to go to the Court of the Landtgrave of
Armestadt, a Lutheran Prince, who lives in part of the richest Soil in Germany.
His Highness is a very courteous and obliging Prince to Strangers, and his
Subjects are in a pretty good Condition again, though they have been great
Sufferers by the last War between the Landtgrave of Hesse and this Family.

FRom thence I went to Heidleberg, a City I had been formerly in, in the Life
time of that Wise, though unfortunate Prince Elector, Elder Brother to Prince
Rupert. Here I had the Honor to pay my Dutiful Respects to the Elector, the
Son of that great Prince, whose Commissary I had the Honor to be for two years
together in Amsterdam. This Prince, since my being there, is Dead, and left
behind him the Reputation of having been a zealous thorough paced Calvinist,
and so constant a frequenter of the Church, that some Sundays he went thrice a
day to Sermon; but never failed, if in Health, to be once a day at least at the
Garrison Church, where he took particular notice of such Officers as were
absent. He was Married to a most Virtuous Lady, the Royal Sister of the King of
Denmark, and his Brother Prince George. During his Life time the University of
Heidleberg flourished exceedingly, so that the number of Students was so great,
that Chambers and Lodgings in the City were scarce, and Spanhemius was about
quitting Leyden to return to his Professors place in Heidleberg; but how
matters stand since his Death, I am as yet ignorant. This Country is called,
the Paradise of Germany, for its fruitfulness in Wine, Corn, and all sorts of
Fruit. I my self have seen growing in one Plain, at the same time, Vines, Corn,
Chestnuts, Almonds, Dates, Figs, Cherries, besides several other sorts of
Fruit. And as the Country is fertile in yielding the Fruits of the Earth, so
the People are careful in providing Store Room for them. This I take notice of,
because of the prodigious Rhenish Wine Fats which are to be seen there, amongst
which there are Seven, the least whereof holds the quantity of 250 Barils of
Beer, as I calculated; but the large and most celebrated Fat is that which goes
by the name of the great Tun of Heidleberg, and holds 204 A Fouder contains 4
Hogsheads.
Fouders of Wine, and cost 705 l. Sterling in Building, for which one may have a
very good House built. This Fat I have seen twice, and the first time was, when
the Elector Treated the French Ambassadors that came to conclude the Match
betwixt his Daughter, and Monsieur the French Kings Brother, who Married her
after the Death of Henrietta his first Wife; at which Treat there happened an
adventure, that I shall here please the Reader with. In a Gallery that is over
this Fat, the Elector caused a Table to be placed in the middle, exactly above
the Bunghole of this Monstrous Vessel, and to be covered with a costly Banquet
of all sorts of Sweat-Meats: The day before, all the Wine being emptied out of
this Tun into other Fats, a little before the Ambassadors, with other Foreign
Ministers and Persons of Quality mounted the Stairs to come to the place of
Entertainment, the Elector caused twelve Drummers, with as many Trumpeters,
some Kettle-Drums, and other Music, to be lodged in the Belly of the Tun, with
orders to strike up, upon a signal given, when the Elector drank the French
Kings Health. All being sat down at Table, and merrily Feeding, the Elector
drank the Health, and the Signal was given; whereupon the Music began to play
its part, with such a roaring and uncouth Noise out of that vast Cavity below,
that the French and other Persons of Quality who were unacquainted with the
design, looking upon it to be an infernal and ominous Sound, in great
astonishment began to cry out, Jesu Maria, The Worlds at an end, and to shift
every one for himself in so great Disorder and Confusion, that for haste to be
gone they tumbled down Stairs one over another. All that the Elector could say
to compose them, was either not heard, or not valued, nor could any thing
satisfy and reassure them, till they saw the Actors come marching out of their
Den. Had not many Persons of Quality and Travelers seen this Fat as well as my
self, who know that what I say of its incredible bigness to be true, I should
be afraid the Reader might think I imposed upon his Credulity.

From Heidleberg I went to see that impregnable Fort or Citadel of Manheim
allas Fredericksberg, built by the Elector Frederick, Brother to Prince Rupert,
a Prince of as good a Head as any Germany afforded; who though some have too
partially judged of him by his Misfortunes, yet by the wisest of the Age was
accounted the Cato of Germany. The Wisest and best Men of the World have been
unfortunate, which makes some to be of the Opinion, That God in his Wisdom
thinks fit it should be so, lest otherwise they might attribute their
Prosperity rather to the wise direction of their own Conduct, than his
All-seeing Providence: And indeed, daily Experience seems to evince the Truth
of this, since we see Knaves and Fools advanced to Preferment and Riches, when
Men of Virtue and Parts die neglected, and poor in the Eyes of the World,
though rich in the enjoyment of a contented Mind. But this is a digression
which the Honor I have for the memory of that great Man has led me into, and
therefore I hope will be pardoned by the Reader. In the Citadel of Manheim I
saw some of the Records of that Illustrious Family, which without dispute is
the most ancient of all the Secular Electors, being Elder to that of Bavaria,
which sprung from one and the same Stock; to wit, two Emperors of Germany. Many
Writers derive them originally from Charlemain, by the Line of Pepin King of
France. There have been several Emperors of that Race, one King of Denmark, and
four Kings of Sueden, one of which was King of Norway also, besides many great
Generals of Armies in Germany, Hungary, France, and other Countries. Since I can
remember there were five Protestant Princes Heirs to that Electoral Dignity
alive; which now by their Death is fallen to the Duke of Newbourg, the present
Prince Elector Palatine, a Roman Catholic, whose Daughter is Empress of
Germany, and another of his Daughters Married to the King of Portugal, a third
to the King of Spain, and a fourth to Prince James of Poland.

BEing so near Strasbourg, I had the curiosity to go see what figure that
Famous City now made, since it had changed its Master; for I had been thrice
there before, when it flourished under the Emperors Protection, with the
liberty of a Hansiatick Town: And indeed, I found it so disfigured, that had it
not been for the stately Cathedral Church, and fair Streets, and Buildings, I
could scarcely have known it. In the Streets and Exchange, which formerly were
thronged with sober, rich, and peaceable Merchants, you meet with none hardly
now but Men in Buff-Coats and Scarffs, with rabbles of Soldiers their
Attendants. The Churches I confess are gayer, but not so much frequented by the
Inhabitants as heretofore, seeing the Lutherans are thrust into the meanest
Churches, and most of the chief Merchants, both Lutherans and Calvinists,
removed to Holland and Hambourg. Within a few years, I believe it will be just
such another City for Trade and Riches as Brisac is. It was formerly a rich
City, and well stockt with Merchants and wealthy Inhabitants, who lived under a
gentle and easy Government; but now the Magistrates have little else to do in
the Government, but only to take their Rules and Measures from a Citadel and
great Guns, which are Edicts that Merchants least understand. I confess,
Strasbourg is the less to be pitied that it so tamely became a Slave, and put
on its Chains without any struggling. Those Magistrates who were Instruments in
it, are now sensible of their own Folly, and bite their Nails for Anger,
finding themselves no better, but rather worse hated than the other
Magistrates, who did what they could to hinder the Reception of their new
Masters the French. I quickly grew weary of being here, meeting with nothing
but complaints of Poverty, and paying exorbitant Taxes.

I therefore soon returned to my Petty-London, Francfort, and from thence went
to Cassel, the chief Residence of the Landtgrave of Hesse. This Prince is a
Calvinist, as most of his Subjects are, very grave and zealous in his Religion:
He Married a Princess of Courland, by whom he has an hopeful Issue; to wit,
three Sons, and two Daughters. King Charles II. was Godfather to one of his
Sons, (...) was Christened by the Name of Charles; Captain William Leg,
Brother to the Lord Dartmouth, representing his Majesty as his Envoy. The Court
of this Prince does indeed resemble a well-governed College, or Religious
Cloister, in regard of its Modesty and Regularity in all Things, and especially
in the Hours of Devotion. He is Rich in Money, and entertains about Nine
Thousand Men in constant Pay, under the Command of Count Vanderlip, a brave and
expert Soldier, his Lieutenant General, but can bring many more upon occasion
into Field. This Family has been very happy both in its Progeny and Alliances,
many Wise Princes of both Sexes having sprung from it; and the Mother of this
present Landtgrave may be reckoned amongst the Illustrious Women of the present
and past Ages. After the Death of William V. Landtgrave of Hesse her Husband,
she not only supported, but advanced the War wherein he was engaged, did many
signal Actions, enlarged her Territories, and at the conclusion of the Peace,
kept under her Pay 56 Cornets of Horse in five Regiments, 166 Companies of
Foot, besides 13 Companies of Dragoons, and 14 Independent Companies, in all
249 Companies of Horse and Foot: She was a Princess extremely obliging to
Strangers, especially virtuous and learned Divines. I had the Honor a good
many years ago to kiss her Highnesses Hand, at which time she was mighty
Zealous in promoting an Accommodation amongst different Religions, as the Roman
Catholic, Lutheran and Calvinist, but especially betwixt the two latter; and
therefore entertained Doctor Duris, at her Court in Cassels, who wrote several
pieces upon that Subject of Reconciliation, and with some of his Friends had a
Conference with a Learned Priest, that came from Rome to forward the Project;
whereupon the Doctor Published his Book of the Harmony of Consent, which is
highly esteemed in Germany.

FRom this Princes Court I directed my Journey to Hanouer, taking Lambspring in
my way, a place where there is a Convent of English Monks; and there I met with
a very aged, worthy, and harmless Gentleman, Sir Thomas Gascoigne, a Person of
seeming great Integrity and Piety; the Lord Abbot and several of the Monks I
had seen there formerly. This Monastery is very obliging to all Strangers that
Travel that way, as well as to their own Countrymen, and is highly respected
by the Neighboring Princes of all Persuasions, as the Princes of the House of
Lunenburg, the Landtgrave of Hesse, and Elector of Cologne, who as Bishop of
Hildersheim is their Ordinary. The Town of Lambspring is Lutheran, though under
the Government of the Lord Abbot and his Chapter, who constantly choose Lutheran
Magistrates and Officers for the Civil Administration, and live together in
that Love and Unity, that as yet there has never the least debate happened
amongst them; and indeed, this Harmony is now to be observed in most parts of
Germany, where different Religions are professed. When I considered so many
goodly Faces, both of Monks and Students in that Abbey, I could not forbear to
make a serious Reflection on the number of the English whom I had seen in the
Colleges and Cloisters abroad, as at Rome, Ratisbonne, Wirtzburg in Lorrain, at
Liege, Louvain, Brussels, Dunkirk, Ghent, Paris, and other places, besides the
Nunneries; and withal, on the loss that both King and Kingdom suffered
thereby, when so many of our Natives, both Men and Women should be constrained
to spend their own Estates, and the Benevolence of others in a strange Land,
which amounts to more Money than at first one may imagine; and this thought, I
confess, made me wish it were otherwise. I would not have the Reader to mistake
me here, as if I Espoused, or Pleaded for any particular Party; no, I plead
only for the Sentiments of Humanity, without which our Nature degenerates into
that of Brutes, and for the love that every honest Man ought to have for his
Country. I am as much a Friend to the Spanish Inquisition, as to the
persecuting of tender Conscienced Protestants, provided there be no more but
Conscience in the Case: And I could heartily wish that Papists and Protestants
could live as lovingly together in England, as they do in Holland, Germany, and
other Countries; for give me leave to say it, I love not that Religion, which
in stead of Exalting, destroys the Principles of Morality and human Society. I
have met with honest Men of all Persuasions, even Turks and Jews, who in their
Lives and Manners have far exceeded many of our Enthusiastic Professors at
home; and when ever this happened, I could not forbear to love the Men without
embracing their Religion, for which they themselves are to account to their
great Master and Judge.

In my progress toward Hanouer I touched at Hildersheim, a City whose
Magistrates are Lutheran, though Roman Catholics have the Cathedral Church,
and several Monasteries there. The Court of Hanouer makes another kind of
Figure than that of Cassels, it being the Court of a great Prince, who is
Bishop of Osnaburg, Duke of Brunswick, Lunenburg, Hanouer, etc. Here I had the
Honor to Kiss the Hands of the Princess Royal Sophia, youngest Sister to the
late Prince Rupert. Her Highness has the Character of the Merry Debonnaire
Princess of Germany, a Lady of Extraordinary Virtue and Accomplishments, and
Mistress of the Italian, French, High and Low Dutch, and English Languages,
which she speaks to Perfection. Her Husband has the Title of the Gentleman of
Germany, a graceful and comely Prince both a Foot, and on Horseback, Civil to
Strangers beyond compare, infinitely Kind and Beneficent to People in Distress,
and known in the World for a Valiant and Experienced Soldier. I had the Honor
to (...) his Troops, which, without Controv^^^^^ are as good Men, and Commanded
by as expert Officers as any are in Europe: Amongst his Officers I found brave
Steel-Hand Gordon, Colonel of an excellent Regiment of Horse, Grimes, Hamilton,
Talbot, and others of our Kings Subjects. God has blessed the Prince with a
numerous Offspring, having six Sons, all gallant Princes; of whom the two
Eldest signalized themselves so bravely at the raising of the Siege of Vienna,
that as undoubted proof of their Valor, they brought three Turks home to this
Court Prisoners. His eldest Son is Married to a most beautiful Princess, sole
Heiress of the Duke of Lunenburg and Zell's Elder Brother; as the lovely
Princess his Daughter is Married to the Duke of Brandenburg. He is a gracious
Prince to his People, and keeps a very splendid Court, having in his Stables
for the use of himself and Children, no less than Fifty two sets of
Coach-Horses: He himself is a Lutheran, but as his Subjects are Christians of
different Persuasions, and some of them Jews too, so both in his Court and Army
he entertains Gentlemen of various Opinions and Countries, as Italian Abbots,
and Gentlemen that serve him, and many Calvinist French Officers: Neither is he
so Bigoted in his Religion, but that he and his Children go many times to
Church with the Princess, who is a Calvinist, and join with her in her
Devotion. His Country is good, having Gold and Silver Mines in it, and his
Subjects live well under him; as do those also of his Brother the Duke of
Lunenburg, and their Cozen the Duke of Wolfembuttel, which are the three
Princes of the House of Lunenbourg; of whom it may be said, that they have
always stuck honestly to the right side, and befriended the Interests of the
Empire; so that no by-Respect, neither Honor nor Profit, could ever prevail
with them, as it has with others, to make them abandon the public Concern.

FRom this Princes Court I went to Zell, the Residence of the Duke the elder
Brother of the Family. This Prince is called the Mighty Nimrod, because of the
great delight he takes in Horses, Dogs, and Hunting. He did me the honor to
let me see his Stables, wherein he keeps 370 Horses, most of them English, or
of English Breed. His Dogs, which are also English, are so many, that with
great care they are quartered in several Apartments according to their Kind and
Qualities, there being a large Office like a Brewhouse employed for boiling of
Malt and Corn for them. It is this valiant Prince who took Trieves from the
French, and made the Marshall de Crequi Prisoner: He is extremely obliging to
Strangers, and has several brave Scottish Officers under his Pay, as
Major General Erskin, Graham, Coleman, Hamilton, Melvin, and others. His
Lieutenant General is one Chavot a Protestant of Alsatia, an excellent and
experienced Commander. I shall add no more concerning this Prince, his
Officers, or Country; but that he, with the other two Princes of the House of
Lunenbourg, Hanouer, and Wolfembuttel, can upon occasion bring into the Field
36000 Soldiers, whom they keep in constant Pay, and such Men as I never saw
better in my life.

AFter some stay at the Court of the Duke of Zell, I went to Hambourg, a famous
Hansiatick Town. It is a Republic, and City of great Trade, occasioned partly
by the English Company of Merchant Adventurers, but much more by the Dutch
Protestants, who in the time of the Duke of Alba forsook the Low Countries and
settled here, and the Protestants also who were turned out of Cologne, and
other Places in Germany; who nevertheless are not now allowed Public Churches
within the City, but at a place called Altena, a Village belonging to the King
of Denmark, a quarter of an hours walk distant from Hambourg. This Commonwealth
is Lutheran, and governed by 4 Burghermasters, 24 Radts-heers, and a
Common Council of all the Burghers who have above 40 Shillings per Annum
Freehold. The Symbol or Motto under their Arms, is, Da Pacem Domine in Diebus
nostris; and in their Standards are these Letters S. P. Q. H. The People here
groan under heavy Taxes and Impositions; The State, because of continual Alarms
they have from the King of Denmark, or other Neighbors; and the Intestine
Broils that frequently happen here, as well as at Col^gne, where the
Burghermasters are often in danger of their Lives from the mutinous Mobile;
being forced to maintain 6 or 7000 Men in Pay, besides 2 or 3 Men of War to
guard their Havens from Pirates. I shall not name all the ways of imposing Taxes
which this Commonwealth uses, because in most they imitate the Methods of the
States General as to that, which have been mentioned before: I shall only take
notice of some peculiar Customs they have, wherein they differ from Holland.
When a Barber, Shoemaker, or any other Artizan dies, leaving a Widow and
Children, another of the same Trade is not admitted to set up for himself as a
Master, unless he compound with the Widow for a piece of Money, or else marry
her, or a Daughter of hers with her consent.

If any Man cause another to be Arrested for Debt, or upon any other Suit, the
Plaintiff must go along with the Officer who Arrests the Party, and stay by him
until the Prisoner be examined by the Sheriff; so that if the Sheriff be not to
be spoken with that night, the Plaintiff must tarry with the Prisoner all
night, until the Sheriff examine the matter, and see cause of discharging or
committing the Party; but this a Plaintiff may do by a Procuration Notarial.

If a Prisoner be committed for Debt, the Plaintiff must maintain him in Prison
according to his Quality; and if the Party lie in Prison during the space of 6
Years, at the expiration of that time the Prisoner is discharged; and if during
the time of his Imprisonment the Plaintiff do not punctually pay the Prisoner's
Allowance at the Months end, the Prisoner is set at liberty, and nevertheless
the Plaintiff must pay the Jailer the last Month's Allowance.

This State is severe in the execution of Justice against Thieves, Murderers,
and Cheats. There is no Pardon to be expected for Murder, and a Burghermaster
himself, if Guilty, cannot escape. The Punishment for Murder is here as in
Sweden, breaking Malefactors on the Wheel, pinching their Breasts and Arms with
hot Pincers, spitting them in at the Fundament, and out at the Shoulder: They
have also cruel ways of Torturing to make Prisoners confess; and are very
careful not to be cheated in their Public Revenue, their Excise-men and
Collectors being Punished as in Holland. They take a very good course not to be
cheated in their Excise, for all the Mills of the Country are in the hands of
the State; so that no Baker nor Brewer can grind his own Corn, but must have it
ground at the States Mills, where they pay the Excise. There is a General Tax
upon all Houses, and that is the Eighth Penny, which nevertheless does not
excuse them from Chimney-money. The States here, as at Genoua in Italy, are the
Public Vintners, of whom all People must buy their Wine, which they buy from
the Merchant, or otherwise import it in their own Ships. In their Ceremonies of
Burying and Christening, they are ridiculously Prodigal; as for Instance: If
one invite a Burghermaster, he must give him a Ducat in Gold; if a Radts-heer,
that is, an Alderman, a Rixdollar; to every Preacher, Doctor of Physic,
Advocate or Secretary, half a Rixdollar; and to every Schoolmaster, the third
part of a Rixdollar. The Women are the Inviters to Burials, Weddings, and
Christenings, who wear an Antic kind of a Dress, having Mitred Caps as high
again as the Mitre of a Bishop. The Churches here are rich in Revenues and
Ornaments, as Images and stately Organs, wherein they much delight. They are
great Lovers of Music, insomuch that I have told 75 Masters of several sorts
of Music in one Church, besides those who were in the Organ-Gallery. Their
Organs are extraordinary large: I measured the great Pipes in the Organs of St.
Catherine's and St. James's Churches, and found them to be 3 Foot and 3
quarters in circumference, and 32 Foot long; in each of which Organs there are
two Pipes 5 Foot and 8 Inches round. The Wealth and Trade of this City
increases daily; they send one Year with another 70 Ships to Greenland, and
have wonderfully Engrossed that Trade from England and Holland, and it is
believed, that small and great there are belonging to this Commonwealth five
thousand Sail of Ships. After Amsterdam, Genoua and Venice, their Bank is
reckoned the chief in Credit; but in Trade they are accounted the third in
Europe, and come next to London and Amsterdam. Hambourg is now become the
Magazine of Germany, and of the Baltic and Northern Seas. They give great
Privileges to the Jews, and to all Strangers whatsoever, especially the English
Company of Merchant Adventurers, whom they allow a large Building, where they
have a Church, and where the Deputy Governor, Secretary, Minister, and the
other Officers of the Company live, to whom they yearly make Presents of Wine,
Beer, Sheep, Salmond and Sturgeon in their seasons. And so much of Hambourg.

FRom Hambourg I went to Lubeck, which is also a Commonwealth and Imperial
Town. It is a large well built City, containing ten Parish-Churches; the
Cathedral dedicated to St. Peter being in length 500 Foot, with two high Spires
all covered with Brass, as the rest of the Churches of that City are. In former
times this City was the place where the Deputies of all the Hansiatick Towns
assembled, and was once so powerful as to make War against Denmark and Sweden,
and to conquer several places and Islands belonging to those two Crowns, nay
and to lend Ships to England and other Potentates, without any prejudice to
their own Trade, wherein they vyed in all parts with their Neighbors; but it
is now exceedingly run into decay, not only in Territories, but in Wealth and
Trade also. And the reason of that was chiefly the Inconsiderate Zeal of their
Lutheran Ministers, who persuaded the Magistrates to banish all Roman
Catholics, Calvinists, Jews, and all that dissented from them in matter of
Religion, even the English Company too, who all went and settled in Hambourg, to
the great Advantage of that City, and almost ruin of Lubeck, which has not
now above 200 Ships belonging to it, nor more Territories to the State than the
City it self, and a small part called Termond, about eight Miles distant from
it. The rest of their Territories are now in the possession of the Danes and
Swedes, by whom the Burghers are so continually alarmed, that they are quite
tired out with keeping Guard, and paying of Taxes. The City is indeed well
fortified; but the Government not being able to maintain above 1500 Soldiers in
pay, 400 Burghers in two Companies are obliged to watch every Day. They have a
large well built Stadthouse, and an Exchange covered, on the top whereof the
Globes of the World are painted. This Exchange is about 50 Yards in the length,
and but 15 in breadth: Over it there is a Room where the Skins of five Lions
which the Burghers killed at the City-Gates in the Year 1252. are kept stuffed.
The great Marketplace is very large, where a Monumental-Stone is to be seen,
on which one of their Burghermasters was beheaded for running away without
fighting in a Sea-Engagement. The People here spend much time in their Churches
at Devotion, which consists chiefly in Singing. The Women are beautiful, but
disfigured with a kind of Antic Dress, they wearing Cloaks like Men. It is
cheap living in this Town: For one may hire a Palace for a matter of 20 l. a
Year, and have Provisions at very reasonable Rates; besides the Air and Water
is very good, the City being supplied with Fountains of Excellent Fresh Water,
which Hambourg wants; and good Ground for Celleridge, there being Cellars here
40 or 50 Foot deep.

I Had the Curiosity to go from Lubeck to see the Ancient City of Magdeburg,
but found it so ruined and decayed by the Swedish War, that I had no
Encouragement to stay there. I therefore hastened to Berlin, the chief
Residence of the Elector of Brandenburg; at whose Court I met with a very
Ingenuous French Merchant, who told me, that he, and diverse other Merchants,
were designed to have lived in England, but were discouraged by a Letter sent
from London, by a Frenchman that was removing from thence to Amsterdam, for
these following Reasons, which I Copied out of his Letter.

First, Because the Reformed Religion is persecuted in England as it is France;
the which I told him was a great Untruth, for it is apparent that they have
been all along graciously admitted, and received into his Majesty's Dominions,
without interruption, and allowed the free Exercise of their own Form of
Worship, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Churches of France.
Nor can they who converse with the French Ministers either in France or Holland
be ignorant, that the chiefest part, if not all those Ministers, are willing to
comply with the Church of England; and it is evident that most of the Dutch and
French Protestants (so called) in Holland make use of Organs in their Churches.

A second thing was, that both the Bank at London and the Bankers Goldsmiths
were all broak; the which I told this Frenchman was not true altogether, for
there are many able Bankers whom I named: Neither was the Bank (as he called
the Chamber of London) broak, only it had been under the management of a bad
Person, whose design was to bring it into disgrace. Besides, there is the
East-India-Company an unquestionable Security for those as have Money to
dispose of, together with another undeniable Security which is Land.

Thirdly, he says, That in England there is no Register, and therefore many
Frauds in Purchases and Morgages, which beget tedious Suits, and renders both
dangerous to trust.

Fourthly, That if a Man would purchase Land he cannot, being an Alien, until
Naturalized.

Fifthly, That in England there are so many Plots and Confusions in Government,
that the Kingdom is hardly quiet 20 Years together.

Sixthly, that false Witnesses were so common in England, and the Crime of
Perjury so slightly punished, that no Man could be safe in Life or Estate, if
he chanced to be in Trouble.

Lastly he said, that the English are so restless and quarelsom, that they not
only foment and cherish Animosities amongst one another, but are every foot
contriving and plotting against their Lawful Sovereign, and the Government. By
such Surmises and Insinuations as these, the French and Germans are scared from
trusting themselves and Fortunes in England, and therefore settle in Amsterdam,
Hamburgh, and other Cities, where there are Banks and Registers: This I say is
one cause, why there are now to be seen at Amsterdam such vast numbers of
French and Germans, who have much enriched that City, and raised the Rents of
the Houses 20 per Cent. And the Silk-weavers grow also very rich, keeping so
many Alms-Children to do their Work, and having all their Labor without any
Charge, only for the teaching them their Trades; which has lessened the
Revenues of the French Crown, and will, in time, greatly increase the number of
the States Subjects, and advance their public Incomes.

Having made this Digression, I return to Berlin; It is a City enlarged with
fair Streets and Palaces: The Magistrates of the place are Lutherans, which is
the public established Religion in all the Electors Dominions; though he
himself and his Children be Calvinists: He is looked upon to be so true to that
Persuasion, that he is reckoned the Protector of the Calvinists; and indeed he
solicited the Emperor very hard for a Toleration of the Protestants in
Hungary. His Chaplains, as most of the Lutheran Ministers also, endeavor to
imitate the English in their way of Preaching: And his Highness is so much
taken with English Divinity, that he entertains Divines for translating English
Books into the German Tongue, as The Whole Duty of Man, and several others. He
has a large and stately Palace at Berlin, and therein a copious Library,
enriched with many Manuscripts, Medals, and Rarities of Antiquity. He may
compare with most Princes for handsome Guards, being all of them proper
well-bodied Men, and most part Officers who ride in his Guards of Horse. As he
is known in the World to be a Valiant and Warlike Prince, so he maintains in
Pay an Army of 36000 Men; besides five or six thousand Horsemen, who in time of
War are modelled into Troops; with which Body during the late War with Sweden,
his Highness's Father in Person beat the Swedes out of his Country. He keeps
his Forces in strict Discipline, obliging all the Officers, if Protestants, on
Sundays and Holy Days to march their several Companies in order to Church; but
if a Superior Officer be of a contrary Persuasion, then the next in Commission
supplies his place. This custom is Religiously observed by all his Highnesses
Garrisons, whilst he himself goes constantly to the Calvinist Church adjoining
to the Court, with his Children, being five Sons, two Daughters, and two
Daughters-in-Law.

Amongst other Acts of Public Piety and Charity, this Prince has established
and endowed some Religious Houses or Nunneries for Protestant young Ladies,
where they may live virtuously, and spend their time in Devotion as long as
they please, or otherwise Marry, if they think fit, but then they lose the
benefit of the Monastery. There is one of these at Hertford in Westphalia,
where I was, and had the Honor to wait upon the Lady Abbess the Princess
Elizabeth, eldest Sister of the late Elector Palatine and Prince Rupert.
Notwithstanding the late (...) with Sweden, and that by the prevalency (...)
France in that hasty Treaty of Peace co^^^^ded at Nim^guen, his late Electoral
(...) was obliged to give back what he had (...) taken from that Crown; yet his
(...) flourished in Wealth and Trade, his (...) having encouraged Manufactures
of (...) by inviting Artizans into his Domin^^^ (...) established a Company of
Trading (...) to the West Indies, which will (...) advance Navigation amongst
his Sub^^^^^* And in all humane probability they are (...) to continue in a
happy condition, seeing by the Alliances his Highness has made with the
Protestant Princes of the Empire, and especially the House of Lunenbourg, they
are in no danger of being disturbed by their Neighbors.

I told you before that the Elector of Brandenbourg was Married to the Daughter
of the Duke of Hanouer, so that as long as that Alliance holds, the Families of
Brandenbourg and Lunenbourg will be in a condition to cast the Balance of the
Empire; they both together being able to bring into the Field 80000 as good Men
as any are in Europe.

WHen I parted from Berlin, I made a turn back to Lunenbourg in my way to
Swedeland, where I found several of my Countrymen Officers in the Garrison, who
showed me what was most remarkable in the City, as the Saltworks, (which bring
in considerable Sums of Money to the Duke of Lunenbourg) the Stadthouse, and
Churches, in one of which I saw a Communion Table of pure Ducat-Gold. From
thence I went into the Province of Holstein and at a small Seaport called
Termond, of which I spoke before, I embarked for Sweden.

HE that has read in the Histories of this last Age the great Exploits of
Gustavus Adolphus and his Swedes, perhaps may have a fancy that it must be an
excellent Country which has bred such Warriors; but if he approach it, he will
soon find himself undeceived. Entering into Swedeland, at a place called
Landsort, we sailed forward amongst high Rocks, having no other prospect from
Land but Mountains till we came to Dollers, which is about four Swedish, that
is, twenty four English Miles from Stockholm, the Capital City of the Kingdom.
Upon my coming ashore, I confess I was a little surprised to see the Poverty of
the People; and the little Wooden Houses they lived in, not unlike Soldiers
Huts in a Leaguer; but much more, when I discovered little else in the Country
but Mountainous Rocks, and standing Lakes of Water. The Reader will excuse me,
I hope, if I remark not all that I may have taken notice of in this Country,
seeing by what I have already written, he may perceive that my Design is rather
to observe the Manner of the Inhabitants living, than to give a full
Description of every thing that may be seen in the Country they live in.
However, I shall say somewhat of that too, having premised once for all, that
the ordinary People are wretchedly poor; yet not so much occasioned by the
Public Taxes, as the Barronness of their Country, and the Oppression of the
Nobles their Landlord^, and immediate Superiors, who till the pre^^^t King put
a stop to their Violences, ty^^^nically domineered over the Lives and (...) of
the poor Peasants.

(...) D^llers I took Wagon to Stockholm, (...) Horses three times by the way,
(...) of the badness of the Rode, on all (...) with Rocks, that hardly (...) as
here and there to leave a (...) Ground. At two Miles distance upon that Road
the City of Stockholm looks great, because of the King's Palace, the Houses of
Noblemen, and some Churches which are seated upon Rocks: And indeed, the whole
City and Suburbs stand upon Rocks, unless it be some few Houses built upon
Ground gained from the Rivers that run through the Town. Stockholm has its Name
from a Stock or Log of Wood, which three Brothers threw into the Water five
Miles above the City, making a Vow, that wherever that Stock should stop,
they would build a Castle to dwell in. The Stock stopped at the Holm, or Rock
where the Palace of the King now stands: And the Brothers, to be as good as
their word, there built their Castle, which invited others to do the like; so
that in process of time the other Rocks or Holms were covered with Buildings,
which at length became the Capital City of the Kingdom. It is now embelished
with a great many stately Houses, and much improved from what it was 400 Years
ago, as indeed most Cities are; for the Stadthouse then built, is so
contemptible and low, that in Holland or England it would not be suffered to
stand to disgrace the Nation. The Council Chamger where the Burghmasters and
Raedt sit, is two Rooms cast into one, not above nine Foot high; and the two
Rooms where the Sheriffs and the Erve College (which is a Judicature like to
the Doctors Commons in England) sit, are not above eight Foot and a half high.
The King's Palace is a large Square of Stone-building, in some places very
high, but an old and irregular Fabric, without a sufficient quantity of Ground
about it for Gardens and Walks. It was anciently surrounded with Water; but
some Years since part of it was filled up to make a Way from the Castle-Gate
down into the old Town. In this Palace there are large Rooms; but the Lodgings
of the King, Queen, and Royal Family, are three Pair of Stairs high, the Rooms
in the first and second Stories being destined for the Senate-Chamber, and
other Courts of Judicature. The King's Library is four Pair of Stairs high,
being a Room about forty six Foot square, with a Closet adjoining to it not
half the Dimensions. When I considered the Apartments and Furniture of this
Court, I began to think that the French Author wrote Truth, who in his Remarks
upon Swedeland says, That when Queen Christina resigned the Crown to Carolus
Gustavus, the Father of this present King, she disposed of the best of the
Furniture of the Court, and gave away a large share of the Crown Lands to her
Favorites; in so much that the King, considering the poor Condition she had
left the Kingdom in, and seeing the Court so meanly furnished, said, That had
he known before he accepted the Crown, what then he did, he would have taken
other Measures.

There are many other stately Palaces in Stockholm belonging to the Nobility;
but many of them for want of Repairs, and not being inhabited, run to ruin;
several of the Nobles who lived in them formerly, having lost the Estates that
maintained their ancient Splendour, as we shall see hereafter, being retired
unto a Country Life. There are also some other Magnificent Structures begun,
but not finished, as that stately Building intended for a Parliament House for
the Nobles, and two or three Churches: But what I most wonder at, is the Vault
wherein the late King lies buried, is not as yet covered but with Boards, for
it is to be observed that the Kings of Sweden have no Tombs and Monuments as in
England and other Countries; but are put into Copper Coffins, with Inscriptions
on them, and placed one by another in Vaults, adjoining to the Gray-Friers
Church. These Vaults are about eight in Number, having Turrets over them, with
Veins of Copper gilt, carved into the Ciphers of the several Kings who give
them their Names by being the first that are interred in them. The Vault of the
late King is not yet finished, no more than the Fabrics abovementioned, which
perhaps may be imputed to the late Troubles of Swedeland. The Number of the
Inhabitants of Stockholm are also much decreased within these few Years, partly
by reason of the removal of the Court of Admiralty and the Kings Ships from
that City to Charles-Crown, a new Haven lately made about 200 English Miles
from thence, which has drawn many Families belonging to the Fleet and
Admiralty from Stockholm to live there: And partly, because many of the
Nobility, Gentry, and those that depended on them, are, as I said before,
withdrawn from Stockholm to a retired Life in the Country. Nevertheless the
ordinary sort of Burghers, who still remain, are extremely poor; seeing the
Women are fain to work like Horses, drawing Carts, and as Laborers in England,
serving Masons and Bricklayers with Stone, Bricks and Mortar, and unloading
Vessels that bring those Materials; some of the poor Creatures in the
Summertime toiling in their Smocks without either Shoes or Stockings. They
perform also the part of Watermen, and for a small matter will Row Passengers
40 Miles or more if they please.

The Court here is very thin and silent, the King living frugally, and seldom
Dining in public. He Eats commonly with the two Queens, his Mother and
Consort, who is a Virtuous Princess, Sister to the King of Denmark. She is the
Mother of five Children, three Sons and two Daughters, with whom she spends
most of her time in Retirement. The King is a goodly Prince, whom God has
Blessed and Endowed with Accomplishments far beyond what might have been
expected from his Education, wherein he was extremely abused, being Taught
little more than his Mother Tongue. He is Gracious, Just and Valiant, constant
at his Devotion, and utterly averse from all kind of Debauchery, and the
unfashionable Vanities of other Courts, in Plays and Dancing.

His sports are Hunting and Exercising of his Guards, and he rarely appears
publicly, or gives Audience to Strangers, which is imputed to his Sense of the
neglect of his Education. He is a Prince that has had a very hard beginning in
the World, which has many times proved fortunate to great Men; and indeed, if
we consider all the circumstances of his early Misfortunes, how he was slighted
and neglected by his Nobles, who would hardly vouchsafe to pay him a visit when
he was among them in the Country, or to do him Homage for the Lands they held
of the Crown; and how by the pernicious Counsels of the French, and the
weakness or treachery of his Governors, he was misled into a War that almost
cost him his Crown, having lost the best of his Territories in Germany and
Schonen, and most of his Forces both by Sea and Land: If, I say, these things
be considered, it will probably appear, that hardly any Prince before him has
in a shorter time, or more fully settled the Authority and Prerogative of the
Crown, than he has done in Sweden; for which he stands no ways obliged to
France, as he was for the Restoration of what he lost during the War. He is
now as absolute as the French King, and makes Edicts, which have the Force of
Laws, without the concurrence of the Estates of the Kingdom. He has erected
two Judicatures, the one called the College of Reduction, and the other of
Inspections; the first of which has put his Majesty in Possession again of all
Lands alienated from the Crown, and the other called to account all Persons,
even the Heirs and Executors of those who had cheated the Crown, and made them
refund what they or their Predecessors had appropriated to their own use of the
public Revenue. These two necessary Constitutions, as they have reduced many
great Families to a pinch, who formerly lived splendidly upon the Crown Lands
and Revenues, and obliged them to live at home upon their ancient and private
Patrimony in the Country, which is one great cause that the Court of Sweden is
at present so unfrequented; so have they enabled his Majesty; without burdening
of his Subjects, to support the Charges of the Government, and to maintain
64000 Men in pay. The Truth is, his other Revenues are but small, what arises
from the Copper and Iron Mines, one Silver Mine, the Pitch and Tar, the Customs
and Excise amounts to no extraordinary Sum of Money, and the Land Tax in so
barren a Country scarcely deserving to be named. The Customs and Excise, I
confess, are very high, and the rigorous manner of exacting them pernicious to
Trade: As for instance; If a Ship come to Stockholme from London, with a
hundred several sorts of Goods, and those Goods assigned to fifty several Men
more or less, if any of those fifty do not pay the Custom of what belongs to
him, though it be for a Barrel of Beer, the Ship shall not be unladen, nor no
Man have his Goods out, though he has fully paid the Customs for them, till
this last Man has paid his. There are several other silly Customs in
Swedeland that discourages Men from Trading there; as if any Stranger Die
there, a third of his Estate must go to the City or Town where he Traded. No
Foreign Merchant in Stockholme can Travel into any Country where there is a
Fair without a Passport: And at present, seeing there is no Treaty of Trade
betwixt England and Sweden, though the English bring as considerable a Trade to
that Kingdom as any other Country whatsoever, yet they are very unkindly used
by the Officers of the Custom-House; whereas the Dutch in Lubeck, and other
Cities, have new and greater Privileges allowed them. Nor would I Counsel an
Englishman to go to Law with a Swedish Burgher in Sweden, especially if he be
a Whiggish Scot, who has got his Freedom in Stockholme, for those are a kind
of Scrapers, whom I have observed to be more inveterate against the English
than the Native Swedes.

Of all the Swedish Army of 64000 Men, the King keeps but 12 Companies of 200
Men a-peice, with some few Horse Guards in Stockholme, who are not upon Duty as
Sentinels at the Court Gates, as at the Courts of other Princes. The rest are
dispersed into Quarters and Garrisons upon the Frontiers, which are so far
distant in that large compass of Land which his Territories take up, that it
would require a hard and tedious work to bring them together to a general
Muster. They are however kept under very strict Discipline, and those that lie
near, often viewed by the King. They have odd sort, of Punishments for the
Soldiers and Officers of all Degrees: For Example, if a Sergeant or Corporal be
Drunk, or negligent on Duty, they are put into Armor, and with three Muskets
tied under each Arm, made to walk two Hours before the Court of Guard; yet, for
all the severity of Discipline used against the Soldiers, they commit many
Abuses in the Night time, Robbing, and sometimes killing Men upon the Streets
in Stockholme, where they have no Lights nor Guards as in Copenhagen. In former
times there have been at one time 35 Colonels, besides General Officers in the
Swedish Army, all the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, but at present
there are few or none, unless it be the Sons of some Scottish Officers Deceased;
nor did I ever see an Englishman in the Kings Guards, Horse or Foot, but one,
and the Son of Sir Edward Wood, who has since quitted the Service. The King
has exceedingly won the Hearts of the common People, not only by exempting
them from the Tyrannical jurisdiction of the Nobility and Gentry, who formerly
would by their own private Authority, punish and put to Death the Peasants at
their pleasure, which makes the Countries very willing to Quarter the Kings
Soldiers, but by his exactness in punishing Duels, Murder, and Robberies.
Perjury is Death here also, as in Holland, which makes the Magistrates in some
parts of this Kings Territories, enjoin strange kinds of Oaths to deter Men
from being forsworn: As for instance, in some places the Witness is set with a
Staff in his Hand upon some Peeble Stones and Charcoal, where he is to
imprecate and pray, that if what he Swears be not true, his Land may become
as barren as those Stones, and his Substance be Consumed to Ashes like the
Coals he stands on, which as soon as he steps down are set on Fire. This manner
of Swearing so terrifies the People, that they commonly tremble when they come
to take their Oath.

The Religion of the Dominions of the King of Sweden, as of those of the King
of Denmark, and of other Princes and States whom we have named, is Lutheran,
who are more rigid to Roman Catholics and Calvinists than the Protestants of
Germany. There is no Toleration allowed here to Calvinist Ministers; and they
take an effectual course to keep the Country clear of Priests and Jesuits, by
Guelding them, whether they be young or old. In Commemoration of the great
Losses and Desolation sustained in the late War, the Suedes strictly keep four
Fasting Days in the Months of April, May, June, and July; on which days all Men
are prohibited by Authority to kindle Fire in their Houses, or to Eat till
after Evening Service is done, which in the Winter time could not be endured.
They delight much in Singing in their Churches, which they constantly perform
twice every day, Morning and Evening. In their Marryings, Christenings, and
Buryings they are so prodigally extravagant, that if all three happen in one
year to a Man of a competent Estate, it is enough to break him. The Clergy of
Sweden are neither so Rich nor Learned as those of Germany, wanting both the
opportunities of Study, and of conversing with Learned Men, that those of other
Countries enjoy, though there be some Learned Men amongst them. A Bishopric in
Sweden is no great Benefice, if compared with some Parsonages in England; for
the Archbishop, and Metropolitan has not above 400 l. per Annum, and some of
the rest are not worth above 150 or 200 l. a year. The inferior Clergy are not
so regular in their Lives and Conversation in the Countries distant from
Stockholme, as they are near the Court; and the Reason is, partly because they
entertain Travelers that pass the Country, there being no Inns in most places
for the Accommodation of Persons of any Quality, and so are obliged to drink
with their Guests; and partly, because at Buryings and Christenings, where
there is commonly high Drinking, the Pape or Parson is Master of the
Ceremonies: And here give me leave to tell a short Story of one of them. A Pape
coming to Christen a Child in a Church, and finding a Scotch Man to be
Godfather, was so transported either with Zeal, or his Cups, that when he came
to exorcise the Child, which is a Rite used in their Office of Administering
this Sacrament; he neglected the Form prescribed by the Liturgy, and in an
extemporary Prayer begged, that the Devil might depart out of the Child, and
enter into that Scottish Heretic, for so they call the Presbyterians of that
Nation. The Prayer of the Pape so incensed the Scot, that he vowed Revenge, and
watched the Pape with a good Cudgel next day as he crossed the Churchyard,
where he beat him, and left him all in Blood lying on the Ground, and crying
out Murder. For this Fact the Scot was had before the Justice, who asking him,
How he durst be so bold as to lay his profane Hands upon the Man of God? He,
who knew very well what use to make of the Devil he had got, Foaming at the
Mouth, and cunningly acting the Demoniack, made answer, That the Pape might
thank himself for what he had met with; for since he had Conjured the Devil
into him he spared no Body, neither Wife nor Children, nor would he spare the
Justice himself, and with that fell a mangling and tearing the Magistrate, that
he was fain to (...) take himself to his Heels, crying out O! the Devil, save
me; and so the Scot marched home, no Man daring to lay hold on him, for fear of
being torn to pieces by the Devil. But the Justice recollecting himself, sent
for the Pape, told him, That the Scot was a cunning Rogue, and bid him go home,
get a Plaster for his Head, and be silent, lest if the matter came to the
Bishops Ears he might be Censured for going against the Rubric of the Liturgy.

The Famous University where their Clergy are bred, is Upsal, 8 Swedish Miles
from Stockholme. There are commonly 150, or 200 Students there, but no Endowed
Colleges, as in other Countries. The Library is so mean and contemptible, that
the Libraries of many Grammar Schools, and of private Men in England or Holland
are far better stored with Books than it is. Upon viewing of it, and that of
the Kings Palace, I called to mind the saying of a French Man, upon the like
occasion; That Swedeland came behind France and England in the knowledge of Men
and Things at least 800 years; yet some Swedes have been so conceited of the
Antiquity of their Country, as to brag, that Paradise was seated in Sweden;
that the Country was turned into such heaps of Rocks for the Rebellion of our
first Parents, and that Adam and Eve had Cain and Abel in a Country three
Swedish Miles distant from Upsall. A French Man standing by, and hearing this
Romantic Story, as I was told, fitted him with the like, telling him, that
when the World was made in six days, at the end of the Creation all the Rubbish
that remained was thrown together into a Corner, which made up Sweden and
Norway. And indeed, the French seem to have no great liking to the Country,
whatever kindness they may have for the People; for a French Ambassador, as an
Author of that Country relates, being by order of Queen Christina, Treated in a
Country House four Swedish Miles from Stockholme, and upon the rode going and
coming, with all the Varieties and Pleasures that the Country could afford, on
purpose to make him have a good Opinion of the same; made answer to the Queen,
(who asked him upon his return, What he thought of Sweden) That were he Master
of the whole Country, he would presently Sell it, and Buy a Farm in France or
England; which, under Favor, I think was a little Tart and Saucy.

Having stayed a considerable time in Swedeland, and most part at Stockholme, I
set out from thence to go to Elsenbourg by Land, and went a little out of my
way to see a small City called Eubrone, Famous for a Coat of Arms which it got
in this manner. A certain Masculine Queen of Denmark, who had Conquered a great
part of Sweden, coming to this City, asked the Magistrates, What was the Arms
of their City? Who having her, that they had none, she plucked up her Coats,
and squatting upon the Snow, bid them take the mark she left there for their
Arms; its pity she did not give them a suitable Motto to it also: What that
Figure is called in Blazonery I know not, but to this Day the City uses it in
their Arms, and for marking their Commodities. This Queen came purposely into
Sweden, to pay a visit to a brave Woman, that opposed a King of Swedeland, who
in a time of Famine would have put to Death all the Men and Women in his
Country above 60 years of Age. The Country all the way I traveled in Swedeland
is much of the same quality of the Land about Stockholme, until I came near the
Province of Schonen, which is called the Storehouse, and Kitchen of Sweden,
where the Country is far better. It was formerly very dangerous to Travel in
this Province of Schonen, because of the Snaphances, who were a kind of Bloody
Robbers, now utterly destroyed by the King; so that it is safe enough
Traveling there. Entering into Schonen I saw 29 of these Rogues upon Wheels,
and elsewhere in the Country, ten and twenty at several places. The King used
great severity in destroying of them; some he caused to be broken upon the
Wheel, others Spitted in at the Fundament, and out at the Shoulders, many had
the Flesh pinched off of their Breasts, and so were fastened to Stakes till
they Died; and others again had their Noses and both Hands cut off, and being
seared with a hot Iron, were let go to acquaint their Comrades how they had
been served. The King is very severe against Highway-Men and Duellers. In above
a 100 Miles Traveling, we found not a House where there was either French Wine
or Brandy, which made me tell a Swede of our Company, who was Traveling to
Denmark, that I would undertake to show any Man 500 Houses, wherein a Traveller
might have Wine, and other good Accommodation in the space of an Hundred Miles
upon any rode from London. There are several small Towns and fertile Land in
this Country of Schonen, lying upon the S^undt; at the narrowest part whereof
lies Elsenbourg burnt down by the Danes in the last War: Here I crossed over to
Elsenore, the passage being but a League broad.

The King of Denmark has a Castle at Elsenore, which commands the narrow
passage of the Soundt, where all Ships that enter into, or come out of the
Baltic Sea must pay Toll. Having visited this Castle, and staid about a
Fortnight with the English Consul, and Sir John Paul, late Resident at the
Court of Swedeland, I went to the Danish Court at Copenhagen.

COpenhagen is the Capital City of Zecland, Jutland, or Denmark, and place of
Residence of the King: It stands on a Flat, encompassed with a pleasant and
delightful Country, much resembling England. The Streets of the City are kept
very neat and clean, with Lights in the Night time for the convenience and
safety of those who are then abroad; a Custom not as yet introduced into
Stockholme, where it is dangerous to be abroad when it is dark. The Kings Men
of War lie hear very conveniently, being orderly ranged betwixt Booms, after
the manner of Amsterdam, and near the Admiralty House, which is a large pile of
Building, well furnished with Stores and Magazins, secured by a Citadel, that
not only commands the City, but also the Haven, and entry into it. The Court of
Denmark is splendid, and makes a far greater figure in the World than that of
Sweden, though not many years ago, in the time of Carolus Gustavus the Father
of the present King of Swedeland, it was almost reduced to its last, when the
Walls of Copenhagen saved that Crown and Kingdom. That Siege was Famous,
carried on with great vigor by the Swede, and as bravely maintained by the
Danes: The Monuments whereof are to be seen in the Cannon Bullets gilt that
still remain in the Walls of some Houses, and in the Steeple of the great
Church of the Town. The Royal Palace in Copenhagen is but small, and a very
ancient Building; but his Majesty's House Fredenburg is a stately Fabric of
Modern Architecture, and very richly Furnished. Denmark is at present a
flourishing Kingdom, and the King, who has now made it Hereditary, surpasses
most of his Predecessors in Power and Wealth: He has much enlarged his
Dominions, as well as Authority; and by his Personal and Royal Virtues, no less
than the eminent qualities of a great many able Ministers of State, he has
gained the Universal Love of his Subjects, and the esteem of all Foreign
Princes and States. The Court is much frequented every day, but especially on
Sundays, where about Eleven of the Clock in the Morning, the Nobility, Foreign
Ministers, and Officers of the Army assemble, and make a glorious Appearance.
There one may see many Knights of the Order of the Elephant of Malto; but I
never saw any Order of the like Nature as that of Sweden, that King rarely
appearing in his George and Garter; but on days of public Audience I have
observed at one time above 150 Coaches attending at the Court of Denmark, which
are ten times more than ever I saw together at that of Sweden. The King is
affable, and of easy access to Strangers, seen often abroad by his Subjects in
his Gardens and Stables, which are very large, and well furnished with all
sorts of Horses. He is a great lover of English Horses and Dogs, and delights
much in Hunting, as his Eldest Son the Prince, with his Brothers do in
Cock-^ighting; insomuch much, that the English Merchants cannot make a more
acceptable present to those Princes, than of English Game-Cocks. The standing
Forces of Denmark are well disciplined Men, and Commanded by good Officers,
both Natives and Strangers, both French and Scots, as Major General Duncan, and
Major General Veldun, both Scottish-Men, whom I saw at Copenhagen. The Soldiers
as well as Courtiers are quartered upon the Citizens, a Custom which is
likewise practiced in Sweden, and though somewhat uneasy, yet not repined at by
the People, who by the care and good Government of the King, find Trade much
advanced. For his Majesty by encouraging Strangers of all Religions to live in
his Dominions, and allowing the French and Dutch Calvinists, to have public
Churches, has brought many Trading Families to Copenhagen, and by the measure
he has taken for settling Trade in prohibiting the Importation of Foreign
Manufactures, and Reforming and new Modelling the East and West India
Companies, has much increased Commerce, and thereby the Wealth of his
Subjects; so that notwithstanding the new Taxes imposed upon all Coaches,
Wagons, Ploughs, and all real and personal Estates, which amount to
considerable Sums of Money; the People live very well and contented. There are
commonly about 8000 Men in Garrison in Copenhagen, and his Majesty's Regiment of
Foot Guards, who are all Clothed in Red, with Cloaks to keep them warm in the
Winter time, is a very handsome Body of Men; and with the Horse Guards, who are
bravely mounted, and have their Granadeers and Hautboys, make a very fine show.
His Majesty has caused several new Fortifications to be built upon the Elb,
and other Rivers, and has now in his Possession, that strong Castle called
Hilgueland, at present commanded by a Scottish-man. The Queen of Denmark is a
most virtuous Princess, Sister to the present Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel, and
in Persuasion a Calvinist, having a Chapel allowed her within the Court, though
the public Religion of the King and Kingdom be Lutheran. The Clergy here are
Learned, many of them having studied at Oxford and Cambridge, where they learnt
the English Language; and amongst the Bishops there is one Doctor King the Son
of a Scottish-man. But seeing it is my design rather to observe the condition
of the People, than to be punctual in describing all the Rarities that are
remarkable in the Countries I have been in, I shall conclude what I have to say
of Denmark, by acquainted the Reader that the People of that Country live far
better than the Swedes, and as well as most of their adjoining Neighbors; and
that there are several places, both there, and in Norway, which have the Names
of English Towns, as Arundale, Totness, London, etc.

When I first began to write this Treatise, I had some thoughts of making
Observations upon the several Governments of other States and Dominions, where
I had traveled some years before I was in the Countries I have been speaking
of, as of the rest of Germany, Hungary, Switzerland, Italy, and France; but
that was a Subject so large, and the usefulness of it to my present Design so
inconsiderable, that by doing so, I found I could neither satisfy the Curious,
by adding any thing material to those many who have already obliged the Public
by the Remarks of their Travels in those Places; or make my discontented
Countrymen more averse than they are already from removing into those
Countries, where I think few of them will choose to transport themselves for the
sake of Liberty and Property, though England were even worse than they
themselves fancy it can be. All that remains to be done then, is to conclude
this Treatise with an obvious and popular Remark, that those Countries, where
Cities are greatest and most frequented by voluntary Inhabitants, are always
the best to live in; and by comparing the City of London with all other Cities
of Europe, and demonstrating by the Surveys I have made, (which I think will
hardly be contradicted or confuted) that of all the Capital Cities of Europe it
is the biggest and most populous, and so prove consequentially that England,
for the generality of People, is the best Country in the World, especially for
its Natives, to live in. Now this being an Observation (for what I know) not
hitherto made good by Induction and Instance, (as I intend to do it) I hope it
will please the Reader as much, as if I gave him a particular account of other
Countries and Governments, and leave it to his own Reflection to state the
Comparison.

Though London within the Walls cannot vye for bigness with many Cities of
Europe; yet take the City and Suburbs together, according as it has been
surveyed by Mr. Morgan, in breadth from St. George's Church in Southwark to
Shoreditch, and in length from Limehouse to Petty-France in Westminster, and it
is in a vast proportion larger in compass of Ground, and number of Houses, than
any City in Europe whatsoever. This I shall demonstrate first, by comparing it
with some Cities of Holland, and then with the most considerable Cities of the
other Countries of Europe, which I shall set down in an Alphabetical Order,
with the number of the Houses they severally contain.

When London and Suburbs was surveyed some years ago by Mr. Morgan, there were
reckoned to be in it 84000 Houses, besides Hospitals, Almshouses, and other
Buildings, that paid no Chimney-money to the King: Now if those were added, and
the vast number of new Houses that have been built since that Survey, upon
modest computation London may be reckoned to contain 100000 Houses; nay, it is
believed 120000, which truly considering the extraordinary Additions that have
been made lately, is not improbable; I know the French vapor, and would
persuade the World, that Paris is much bigger than London. And the Hollanders
will scarce believe, that London has more Houses than the 18 Cities in Holland
that have Voices in the States, for (say they) Amsterdam stands upon 1000
Morgans of Land, and London stands but upon 1800. To both which I answer, That
it is very true that Paris takes up a great spot of Ground, but then you must
consider, that in Paris there are several hundreds of Monasteries, Churches,
Colleges, and Cloisters, some of them having large Gardens, and that in Paris
there are 7500 Palaces and Ports for Coaches, which have likewise great
Gardens; whereas London is very thick built, and in the City the Houses have
scarce a Yard big enough to set a Pump or House of Convenience in; but the
Weekly Bills of Mortality will decide this Question, and plainly give it to
London, and so does Monsieur la Cour, and Sir William Petty in his last Essays
dedicated to the King, making it appear, that London is bigger than Paris,
Roan, and Rochel altogether; and as for Amsterdam, I do appeal to all knowing
Men that have seen it, that although it be true, that it stands upon 1000
Morgans of Land, yet there is not above 400 Morgans built; and this I prove
thus, that the large Gardens, on the Heeregraft, Kysersgraft, and Princegraft,
and the Burghwalls of Amsterdam, take up more than a third part of the City;
then reckon the Bastions, and the space of Ground between the Wall and the
Houses, and all the Ground unbuilt from the Utricks-Port to the Wesoper-Port,
Muyer-Port, and (...) the Seaside, and you will find it to be near (...)
Morgans of Land: There are two Parishes in the Suburbs of London, viz. Stepney,
and St. Martins in the Fields, (the latter being so big, that the Parliament
divided it into four Parishes) either of them have more Houses than Rotterdam
or Haerlem; and there are several other great Parishes, as St. Margarets
Westminster, St. Giles in the Fields, St. Olaves, and St. Mary Saviors, the
which if they stood apart in the Country would make great Cities; we reckon in
London, and the Suburbs thereof to be at least 130 Parishes, which contains
100000 Houses; now if you reckon 8 Persons to every House, then there are near
800000 Souls in London, but there are some that say, there is a Million of
Souls in it: I shall now set down the Cities Alphabetically, and their number
of Houses, as they were given to me not only from the Surveyors and City
Carpenters, but from the Books of the Hearth-Money, and Collectors of the
several Taxes in the respective Cities: And first I shall begin with the 18
Cities that have Voices in the States of Holland.

Cities in HOLLAND.
Cities. Houses. 1. DOrt 5500 2. Haerlem 7250 3. Delft 2300 4. Leyden 13800 5.
Amsterdam 25460 6. Rotterdam 8400 7. Gouda 3540 8. Gorcom 2460 9. Schiedam 1550
10. Briell 1250 11. Schonehoven 2200 12. Alckmaar 1540 13. Horn 3400 14.
Enckhuysen 5200 15. Edam 2000 16. Monekendam 1500 17. Medenblick 850 18.
Purmerent 709 Total 88909
Cities in GERMANY, and in the Seventeen Provinces.
Cities. Houses. 1. ANtwerp 18550 2. Aix la Chapelle 2250 3. Arford 8440 4.
Berlin 5200 5. Bon 410 6. Brisack 1200 7. Breme 9200 8. Breda 3420 9. Bolduke
6240 10. Bergen op Zome 2120 11. Brussels 19200 12. Cologne 12000 13. Cleave
640 14. Coblentz 420 15. Castles 1520 16. Dresden 6420 17. Disseldorpe 620 18.
Dunkirk 2440 19. Emden 2400 20. Francfort 10200 21. Groningen 8400 22. Guant
18200 23. Harford 1420 24. Hanouer 1850 25. Heidelberg 7520 26. Hambourg 12500
27. Lubeck 6500 28. Lovain 8420 29. Lypsick 3242 30. Lunenburg 3100 31.
Lewardin 5860 32. Mayence 2420 33. Malin 8000 34. Middelburg 6200 35. Madelburg
1120 36. Mastricht 5600 37. Munster 1240 38. Nurenburg 18240 39. Osenburg 2200
40. Osburg 8420 41. Oldenburg 620 42. Praag 18640 43. Passaw 560 44. Ratisbonne
6540 45. Strasbourg 8560 46. Spire 540 47. Stockholm 6480 48. Salsburg 12460
49. Uytrick 8240 50. Vienna 4520 51. Vean 340 52. Worms 1200 53. Westburg 2420
Total 314460
Cities in FRANCE.
Cities. Houses. 1. AVignion 12400 2. Amiens 5200 3. Bullion 1400 4. Bomont 800
5. Bordeaux 8420 6. Callis 1324 7. Caine 2147 8. Chalons 1850 9. Diepe 1920 10.
Lions 16840 11. Montrevil 820 12. Montpeiller 5240 13. Marselles 9100 14.
Nantes 4420 15. Nismes 3120 16. Orleans 10200 17. Orange 354 18. Paris 72400
19. Rochel 4200 20. Roan 11200 21. Tolouze 13200 22. Valence 458 Total 187013
Cities in ITALY.
Cities. Houses. 1. BOlonia 12400 2. Florence 8520 3. Genoua 17200 4. Luca 1650
5. Legorne 3560 6. Milan 18500 7. Naples 17840 8. Pisa 2290 9. Padua 8550 10.
Rome 31200 11. Sena 1820 12. Venice 24870 13. Veterba 620 14. Valentia 1520
Total 155040
Cities in SAVOY.
Cities. Houses. 1. CHambray 852 2. Sale 320 3. Turin 8540 4. Nice 500 5. St.
John de Lateran 420 6. Remes 340 7. Moloy 270 Total 11242
Cities in SWITZERLAND.
Cities. Houses. 1. BErne 4270 2. Bale 5120 3. Geneva 4540 4. Losana 2100 5.
Solure 500 6. Zurick 6200 7. Morge 210 8. Vina 320 9. St. Morris 300 Total
23560
Cities in DENMARK.
Cities. Houses. 1. COpenhagen 8220 2. Elsenore Total
Cities in SWEEDLAND.
Cities. Houses. 1. NOrthoanen 600 2. Stockholme 7500 3. Upsal 8200 Total 16300
AN EXACT RELATION OF THE ENTERTAINMENT Of His Most Sacred Majesty WILLIAM III.
KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; Hereditary Stadtholder of the
United Netherlands, etc. At the HAGVE.

Giving a particular Description of His MAJESTY's Entry there, Jan. 26. 169^-^.
And of the several Triumphant Arches, Pyramids, Pictures, etc. with the
Inscriptions and Devices.

Illustrated with Copper Plates of the whole Solemnity, exactly drawn from the
Original.

By an English Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed in the Year M. DC. XCL

AN Exact Relation Of the ENTERTAINMENT of His Most Sacred Majesty, WILLIAM III.
At the HAGVE.
HIS Majesty being earnestly Entreated by the States of Holland, and the
Confederate Princes in Germany, etc. to meet at a General Congress, to be held
at the Hague, in order to Concert matters for the next Campaign, was pleased to
Condescend to their Request, and hazard His Royal Person by Sea, (though in the
depth of Winter) His Noble Zeal for the Good of us in particular, and Europe in
general, surmounting all those Difficulties: Whereupon he accordingly took
Shipping on the Sixteenth of January 1690-91. in a Yacht, then lying at
Gravesend, and set Sail that Afternoon, being attended by diverse Yatchts and
Men of War, and a Noble Retinue of Persons of the best Quality; but by Reason
of the very thick Mists, and consequently little Wind, was four days before he
could make the Coast of Holland; yet, at last, when he arrived within two or
three Leagues of Goree, His Majesty ventured to go a Shore in the Boat,
attended by the Duke of Ormond, the Earl of Portland, and my Lord Overkirke,
etc. and another Boat, but most unfortunately there fell so thick a Fog, and
the Ice surrounded them so closely, that neither could they make the Shore, nor
get back to the Ship, but were forced to lie still for two and twenty Hours,
enduring the most bitter Cold, and without (almost) hopes of ever getting alive
on Shore: All which, His Majesty bore with His wanted Magnanimity and Courage,
and when one of the Boat-men too freely expressed his Fear of Death, he
reproved him with this Noble saying, What are you afraid to Die in my Company.
But it pleased the Almighty Providence, at length to dissipate the Mist, and
Conduct His Royal Majesty safely to the Shore, and on the 21st of January,
about half an hour after Ten, landed at the Orange Polder, at the Mouth of the
Maese, a little below Maseland-Sluyce, but by the long continuance Kings Voyage
to Holland page:2

in the Cold, was so Benumbed, that he could hardly either stand or Speak. From
hence His Majesty went immediately to the House of the Here Van Rynenbergh,
where having refreshed Himself, and Dined, He hasted to Hounslaerdyke, where He
was met, and Congratulated with all Demonstrations of Respects and Joy, by the
Deputies of the States; as also by Prince Casimir of Nassau, Stadtholder of
Friezeland, whom His Majesty received with all the Marks of the most tender
Affection imaginable, Embracing and Kissing them with great Ardency. Prince
Nassau Sarbruggen, the Count Van Hoorn, and diverse other Persons of Quatity,
here likewise Congratulated His Majesty's happy arrival, who were all most
kindly received by His Majesty.

'Twas expected that the King would have lain here this Night, and so have
entered the Hague by day light; but on the contrary, His extraordinary Desire of
entering immediately upon Business, would not let Him give Himself so much as
one Nights ease; And His Majesty, after a very short Refreshment here, departed
for the Hague, attended with five or six Coaches with six Horses: In His own
Coach accompanied Him the Earl of Portland, and the Lord Overkirk, arriving at
the Hague about half an hour after five in the Evening; where (though he was
not that Night expected) there wanted not the general Acclamations of the
People of all sorts, who run by His Coach, crying out, Long Live King William,
Welcome, Welcome, etc. His Majesty Rode through the Triumphant Arches, Erected by
the Lords of the Hague, and the Honorable the Lords Committee of the Council
of Holland, (of which we shall give an exact Description in their proper
Places) directly to the Court, where being arrived, and the Gates shut to keep
out the extraordinary press of People, thirty pieces of Cannon, which were
planted upon the Vyverberg, were thrice discharged, Public Thanksgivings were
made in all the Churches, and the Bells rung with great Joy; and throughout the
Town almost all the Houses were Illuminated with great numbers of Candles in
their Windows, whilst all the People, Rich and Poor, Old and Young, made all
Demonstrations of their inexpressible Joy for His Majesty's most happy Arrival.

That Evening the Earl of Berka, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor, waited
upon His Majesty, and was a long time in private with Him; and the next day
several Members of the States, and diverse Persons of Quality came to Compliment
His Majesty, and Congratulate His Arrival.

The Ministers of the several Confederate Princes, who upon the Kings arrival
had sent Expresses to their respective Masters, assembling themselves in
Congress; immediately after their breaking up, the Imperial, Spanish, and
Brandenburgh Envoys, came to wait upon His Majesty; as also the Council of
State, and the Lords of the General Accounts, with all their Members, to
Congratulate and Complement Him.

The King immediately applied Himself to the Affairs of State, and taking first
into His Consideration the Sea Affairs, gave the Command of the Dutch Fleet to
the Here Cornelius Van Tromp, with the Title of Vice Admiral of Holland, who
gratefully accepted the same, and immediately beat up his Drums for Seamen, who
flocked to him in great abundance. His Majesty gave also out Commissions for
two Regiments of Mariners to be raised.

The Elector of Brandenburgh, who had waited some time at Cleave, as soon as he
received advice of His Majesty's arrival, set forward for the Hague.

In the mean time it was Desired, and Agreed to by His Majesty, That His
Majesty would Please to Honor the Hague with a Public Entry, on Monday,
January the 26th: Whereupon the Trained Bands, and the Guards were ordered to
be ready; And accordingly on Monday, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, His
Majesty went out of the Town by the way of the Vyverberg, to the North-end, and
from thence round the Wall to the West End, and so to the Hounslaerdyke, or
Loosduyn's-bridge, where began the Triumph. Over this Bridge was Erected, by
the Burghermasters of the Hague, a Triumphant Arch, the Figure whereof we have
here Represented. Over the Arch in the Front, is a Man and a Woman standing at
an Altar Sacrificing, with the Words, Io Triumph. On the top of all stands the
Statue of His Majesty, with a Staff in His right Hand, at the top of which is a
Cipher of His Name, with a Crown. On the two Columns of the Arch, on one side
are these Words, Ob Cives Servatos: For having preserved his Countrymen.

Ob Hosts Fugatos: For having destroyed his Enemies.

and on the other side, Restitutis Provinciis: The Provinces being Restored.

Libertatis Regnis: The Kingdoms being Delivered.



Behind each Column is a small Oval, in one a Laurel with this Word, Victoria,
Victory, on the other a Palm, with the Word, Clementia, Mercy.

Here His Majesty was received by the Magistrates of the Hague, who
Complimented Kings Entertainment Page:6

Him, and Congratulated His Arrival, the Pensionary Vander Hoeck being their
Speaker, who humbly Thanked the King in the Name of the Magistrates and
Burghers, for the Honor His Majesty was pleased to do them by His Presence, in
a most Eloquent Oration.

From hence was a Lane made on each side by the Burghers in Arms, who appeared
in very great Splendor, being most of them very richly clad, many having been
at great Expense for their Equipage.

These Trained Bands consist of six Companies, of about two and three Hundred
Men in each Company; they make in all about Fifteen Hundred Men: These standing
in their Order, reached all along the West End, the great Market, the High
Street, and so to the Courtyard.

All along this way, quite up to the Court, before the Houses and Stalls, were
built Scaffolds, which were filled by a vast multitude of Spectators, who
scrupled not to give an 100 Guilders in some places for the use of a Chamber
during the Show. The number of Spectators being the greatest that has ever been
seen in the Hague; insomuch, that one would have judged all the Inhabitants of
Holland to have been in this Town.

After the Pensionary had ended his Speech, and His Majesty kindly Thanked
them, the Cavalcade proceeded. First went two very rich Coaches with six
Horses, in which were diverse Persons of Quality, next the Kings Life Guard, the
Officers in extraordinary rich Equipage: After them a great number of Lacquees
and Footmen all in the Kings Livery, and black Velvet Caps; after them came the
Kings Pages, Gentlemen, and Servants on Horseback, in extraordinary rich
Liveries. Then came His Majesty riding in a large, and very richly Gilt Coach,
drawn by Six White Stone Horses, accompanied by the Lord Overkirk on the left
Hand, and the Earls of Monmouth and Scarborough over against him. On each side
of the Coach the Switzers with their Halbards, in rich Livery Coats also,
walked on Foot. The Provost General Urck, and the Here Roulas Captain of the
Switzers rid on Horseback immediately before the Kings Coach, and after it came
about Twelve Coaches with Six Horses, wherein Rid the Duke of Norfolk, the
Earls of Devonshire and Portland, the Bishop of London, and several other
English Noblemen; as also the chief Ministers of the Government, and the
Magistrates of the Hague, besides these, were many Coaches with Four Horses.

The King as he passed along, was Saluted, and Complimented by diverse Persons
of Quality, which His Majesty returned with great Kindness, often looking out
of the Coach, with great Satisfaction upon the People, who shouted with
extraordinary Cheerfulness, crying out, Long Live the King our Stadtholder, etc.

The Stadthouse, by which the King was to Ride, was Beautified with Seven very
Noble Transparent Pictures; behind which they put Lights in the Evening, which
were set off with Garlands of made Flowers: Above in the middle, was the King
and Queen, and on each side of them another Picture; One of a Lion with this
Motto, Placidum venerantur, and horrent infestum:
They Worship him when he is Calm, and Dread him when he is Angry;
the other of an Unicorn, with this Motto, Nihil passa Veneni: She can endure
no Poison.
Underneath there are three other Pictures,
one of a Crane sitting upon his Nest, clapping his Wings upon break of a Day,
and Sun Rising, with this Motto, Recreatur ab Ortu: He is refreshed by the
Rising. the other of an Atlas bearing the World upon his bending Shoulders,
resting with his Breast upon a small Hill, with this Motto, In te Domus
inclinata recumbit: The leaning House rests on Thee. The Third, a Crane
standing on his Nest, and chattering upon the Rising of the Sun, with this
Motto, Vidit and Exaltavit: He saw it and was glad.

In the Court of Justice by the side of the Stadthouse, a Pillar was Erected
four Rows high, garnished with Coats of Arms; upon which toward Night they set
great numbers of Flambeaux.

The Lords of the Hague raised also a Rich and a Glorious Triumphal Arch in
Honor of this great Monarch, in the Market Place: This was done upon the
Account of his having been Born there; which as they look upon to be one of the
greatest Glories of the Place, and whereof hereafter they will have the
greatest Reason to Boast, so they were desirous to show what Sense they had of
it, upon so very Glorious an occasion.

This is much the highest Arch of them all; without any Pillars, and on both
sides are many Pictures done in light Color; and just over the passage there
are two others done upon Silk, and Transparent, so as that by Lights, which
were set behind them in the Evening, they appeared very Gloriously.

At the top of all was placed a Sphere, and above that, Fame Sounding a Trumpet
in a flying posture, and leading a Pegasus; with Trophies at each Corner.

Behind this Arch, toward the High Street, the Arms of the Emperor Adolphus,
(who was Descended of the House of Nassau) were set up; and over them the
Sixteen Quarters of His Majesty's Arms: But those that managed Kings
Entertainment Page:10

this matter, not understanding it so well as they ought to have done, they
have committed several Mistakes, which in the Graving I have altered: It is to
no purpose to set down the particulars, which lie chiefly in the stating of the
several S^utcheons, according to the precedence of the Kingdoms over which His
Majesty's Ancestors had the Governments, which though they are not generally
taken notice of by ordinary Observers; yet, since upon such Solemnities, the
curiousest and most inquisitive Men are always present, it was much to be
Wished, that those Things had been more exactly regulated.

There were several Inscriptions round the Arch: On the Front above the Gate,
and under the Arms of the Hague, was this, Hic Incunabula Divum: Here was the
Cradle of the Gods.

[Incunabula are properly the Swadling-Cloths in which new Born Infants are
wrapped up.]

Above, beneath, and on both sides was Writ, Nobilium primo, Ducum Maximo,
Posthumo Gulielmo III. Coelitus dat. To the chiefest of Noblemen, the greatest
of Dukes, [or Generals, the word being ambiguous, coming after Noblemen] the
Posthumous William III. given from Heaven.

And behind above the Pictures, Victoriis, Trophoeis, Fortissimo Imperateri,
Destinato, Cautissimo Gubernatori,

and underneath at the bottom of the Arch, Quatuor Regnorum Regi, Foederati
Belgii Gubernatori, Gulielmo III. Virtute and Triumphis fulgenti, Grati Animi
and Letitiae publicae Signum hoc erexit Haga Comitis. i.e. The Hague Erected
this as a Testimony of her Gratitude, and of the public Joy for the Victories
and Trophies of William III. King of Four Kingdoms, Stadtholder of the United
Provinces, equally Glorious for his Virtue and his Success.

On each side of the Arch there are two Wings, which make a Semicircle; within
each of which are Seven Pictures representing the Battles and Victories of the
former Princes of Orange by Sea and Land; every Picture having an Inscription
under it.

On the First, on the Right Hand, Patientia laesa fit furor: Injured Patience
turns to Rage: Intimating, that they had endured the Insolences of the
Spaniards as long as was possible, and that at last they were forced to Rise.

On the Second, Res poscit Opem, and Conspirat Amice: The Matter needs help,
and Prospers by Friendly Conference.

On the Third, Per Tela, per Undas: Through Weapons and Waves.

On the Fourth, Audentes Deus ipse juvat: God himself helps the daring.

On the Fifth, Tantas dedit Unio vires (...) Such Strength has Union given.

On the Sixth, Aquilas and Moenia cepit: He took Standards and Cities.

On the Seventh, Celsas superat virtute Carinas: He Conquers tall Ships by his
Valor.

On the first Picture of the left Hand, Repetenda quiescunt Arma virum: The
Arms of the brave are at rest, hereafter to be resumed again.

On the Second, Non uno Virtus contenta Triumpho: Virtue not content with one
Triumph.

On the Third, Crescunt numero crescente Trophoea: As the number increases so
do their Trophies too.

On the Fourth, Caesorum replebant Funera Campos: The Funerals of the Slain
filled all the Fields.

On the Fifth, Ultra Garamantas and Indos: Beyond the furthermost parts of the
Earth.

On the Sixth, Fortis Promissa Juventae: The promises of valiant Youth.

On the Seventh, Deos in praelia confert: He brings the Gods to Combat for him.

Between these Wings there are two Pyramids fixed upon Pedestals, each having a
Picture in the Front: In that on the Right side, there is a Circle made up of
Hearts, with this Inscription, Hanc accipe Magne Coronam: Great Hero accept
this Crown.

In that on the Left side, there is an Altar with Incense, and this
Inscription, Th^re tuo redolent Arae: The Altars yield a fragrant Smell with
thy Frankincense.

These Pyramids have each of them before them three Transparent Pictures,
containing Hieroglyphics and Trophies of Victory; The Pyramids being covered
on the sides with Green: On one of these Pyramids was set the Kings Picture; on
the other the Queens, at full length: On that of the Kings was this
Inscription, Quis gratior appalit Oris: What more acceptable Person ever
touched our Coasts. Upon the Queens, Reprimit and Refigit: She Represses and
Re-establishes.

Over the Wings, the Figures of the Four late Princes of Orange are set up; and
under each some marks of Victory. Under William the First, Patriae Liberatori:
To the Deliverer of his Country. Under Prince Maurice, Gloriae Vindici: The
Vindicator of our Glory: Under Frederick-Henry, Libertatis Assertori: The
Assertor of our Liberty. And under Prince William the Second, Publicae
Felicitatis Statori: To the Establisher of the public Happiness.

The Triumphal Arch in the Court.
PAssing from hence to the High Street they met another Triumphal Arch, which
represents a pleasant Building, Beautified on both sides with Pillars of red
and white Marble, the Body of the Work being of black and white Marble; the
Bases and Chapiters are gilt: It has two large Pictures before, and as many
behind, Painted in lively Colors; those before, representing a Roman Field
Battle and Sea Fight; those behind, one War, the other Peace: That of War has
the World in a Flame, with several Figures, some Dead; others Living, make
Justice lie down in Distress: That of Peace has a Globe, upon which stand
Justice and Peace embracing one another, whilst Pan and his Companions make
themselves Merry with the Fruits of the Earth. Over all in the middle of the
Arch, on a Pedestal, stands the Statue of the King on Horseback, as big as the
Life, and painted like Brass; on both sides of the Pedestal there is this
Inscription, Regi Triumphanti: To the Triumphing King. Over his Head, which is
adorned with Green, there are two Wreaths placed cross ways, and over them a
Royal Crown and Scepter, and underneath a Cross.

On both sides of the Arch there are two Squares, wherein are set, both behind
and before, transparent Pictures for the convenience of setting Lights behind
in the Evening. On the outside of these Squares there was Painted a Cloudy
Pillar, and a Pillar of Fire, with the Corners adorned with Green.

On the gilded Frize of the Arch there is this Inscription, Soloque, Saloque,
in reprimenda Tyrannide, and Restituenda Seculi Felicitate: By Land and by Sea,
for repressing Tyranny, Kings Entertainment Page:17



Over the Passage, is this Inscription, Haga posuit Consulum Decreto: The Hague
Erected it by the Burghermasters Order.

The Triumphal Arch in the outward Court, at the Entrance of the Court Gate.
THis Triumphal Arch was Erected by the Order of their High and Mighty
Lordships, the Committee of the Council of Holland: It is of the Dorick Order,
after the Italian manner, with three Passages, and the middle higher than the
rest of the Building. It stands upon Eight Pillars of each side, supported by
broad Pedestals, each whereof bears two Pillars: Over the middle Passage there
is a Cupola of an Octogenal Figure, whereon upon a Pedestal stands the Statue
of His Majesty on Horseback, as big as the Life, all richly gilt; two Prisoners
lie by the Pedestal Chained with their Backs to it, done over with Copper: The
whole Arch is Painted of a Freestone Color; the whole intercolumniation of
both sides, is beautified with Pictures drawn in white and black, with
Histories of the Heroic and Illustrious Actions of this great Monarch. Over
these Eight Pillars are placed Eight Figures of both Sexes, as big as the Life,
of a Copper Color. On that side which faces the Viver, is the Representation
of a Victory at Sea, and a Neptune lying down with his Trident, with this
Inscription, Triumphet in Undis: Let him Triumph in the Waves. Toward the
Lane, Trophies of Victory by Land, with this Motto, Attingat Solium Jovis: Let
him reach to Jupiter' s Throne.

These Words are Written round the Cupola of this Building, Pio, Felici,
Inclyto, Triumphanti, Patriae Patri Gulielmo III. Gubernatori P. C. J. P.
Restauratori Belgii Foederati, Liberatori Angliae, Servatori Scotiae,
Pacificatori Hiberniae, Reduci: To the Picus, Happy, Renowned William III.
Triumphant, Father of his Country, Stadtholder and Restorer of the United
Netherlands, Redeemer of England, Preserver of Scotland, Quieter of Ireland,
now returned home.

On the Front, under the Images, toward the outer Court, there are Four
Spaces, upon which are these Inscriptions.

In the First, Post Maximas res Domi forisque Gestas, Arctissimo ^um
Principibus icto Foedere, Suorum Vindex, Defensor Oppressorum: After having
done Glorious Things, at home and abroad, having made a most firm Alliance with
other Princes, He is become the Avenger of His own Peoples Wrongs, and a
Defender of the Oppressed. Under this there is a Panel, on which is a great
Picture, in which several brave Men are described Fighting against a Dragon,
with this Motto, Uniti Fortius obstant: They make the firmer Resistance being
United.

In the Second Space, Mare Transvectus liberat Britanniam, and late
Dominantibus Ornatus Sceptris, in Patriam publica cum Laetitia receptus est:
Crossing the Seas he delivered Britain, where being Honored with Scepters of
large extended Power, He is received again into his own Country with public
Joy. Underneath in the small Panel, there is a Balance, and in one Scale
several Crowns, in the other a Sword, which outweighs the Crowns, with this
Motto, Praemia non Aequant: The Rewards do not equal the Merit.

In the Third Space, Lugente Patria, Maerente Europa Afflicta Antiquissima
Nassaviorum Stirpe, Heroum, Imperatorum, Principum Faecunda: His Country
Mourning, Europe Grieving, the most autient Family of Nassau, which was
fruitful of Heroes, Emperors and Princes, Lamenting. And in the Panel, there
is described a burning Phoenix, with a young one arising out of her Ashes, and
this Motto, Praelucet Posthuma Proles: His Posthumous Issue shines the
brighter. This is designed for William the Second, who died without Issue,
leaving the Princess Royal with Child of His Majesty.

In the Fourth Space, Gulielmum, Posthumum, Britannorum, Arausionensium
Tertium, Patriae Spem, Reipublicae Palladium: William the Posthumous, the Third
of Britain and Orange, His Countries Hope, the Palladium of the Commonwealth.
His Birth is described upon the Picture, and three Crowns with a Scepter upon
the Panel, with this Motto, Tenues ornant Diademate Cunae: His tender Cradle
adorns the Diadem.

On that side toward the inner Court, there are on the Fronts four other
Spaces.

In the First Space, there is this Inscription, Fatum Europae favens de Caelo
dedit, futuram portendens, Majestatem, admodum Puerum, exemplar constituit. A
favorable Fate to Europe gave him from Heaven, and portending future Majesty,
set Him for a pattern when he was yet very Young. Underneath His Education is
described, with a young Eagle Soaring against the Sun Beams upon the Panel,
with this Motto, Tener adversis enititur alis: Though Young he bears up against
it with His Wings.

In the Second Space, Qui Juventute Strenue Transacta, Funestis jactata bellis
ac dissidiis in tanto rerum discrimine: Who spent his Youth bravely, whilst it
was tossed about by Bloody Wars and Discords, the public being in such
dangerous Circumstances. Upon the Panel there is a Castle standing upon a
Hill, with a Pike by it, and two Laurels springing out of it, with this Motto,
Contorta Triumphos portendit: When wreathed together it portends Triumphs.

In the Third Space, Nutantis Belgii, qua Mari, qua Terra, admotus in Pristinum
Decus Gubernaculi, Gloriam, Aras and Focos asseruit: He being Restored to His
Ancient Dignity and Government, Defended the Religion and Properties of the
tottering Low Countries both by Sea Land: On the Panel there is a Ship rowed
by Men in Armor, with this Motto, Alter erit Typhis: There shall be another
Typhis.

In the Fourth Space, Meritis Famam Superantibus Tropaeis, Principi Atavis
Regibus Editae Felicibus junctus Hymenaeis: His deserved Trophies out doing
even Fame, He was happily joined in Wedlock to a Princess descended from an
Ancient Race of Kings. The Picture represents Their Majesty's Marriage; and
there are also in the Panel an Unicorn and a Lion moving together; and the
Unicorn Goaring of Serpents and Vipers, with this Motto, Virusque Fugant,
Viresque Repellunt: They both drive away the Poison, and repel the Strength.

At the top, upon the Pedestal of the Kings Statue before, there are these
Words, Populi Salus: The Peoples Happiness. And behind, Procerum Decus: The
Honor of the Nobility.

Upon the great Cupola there are four distinct Histories Painted in four
Pannels.

The First has this Motto, Refert Saturnia Regna: He brings back the Saturnian
Reign.

The Second this, Novos Orbs, nova Sceptra paramus: We prepare new Worlds, and
new Scepters.

The Third this, Superare and parcere vestrum est: It is your part to Conquer
and to Spare.

The Fourth this, Caetera Transibunt: Other Things shall pass away.

Over the small Arch on both sides, the Arms of England were placed, with their
Supporters: Over the great Arch the Arms of Holland were placed, with two
flying Images of Fame blowing of Trumpets.

A Description of the Fireworks, with their Representations.
IN the Canal behind the Court, upon a large Scaffold, there were very fine
Fireworks prepared, which were Lighted the Evening after His Majesty entered the
Hague.

In the middle was the Kings Cipher, with a Crown over it: On the sides stood
two high Pyramids, a Lion, a Hercules, and a Sun: On each Corner of the
Scaffold there were four Cases of Rockets, four of which were much larger then
the rest, which represented the four Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, with the Arms of those Kingdoms: Round about there was Pallissado
stuck with Rockets, some Orange color, some white, some blew, placed
alternately to the number of Three Hundred and Fifty.

They placed Fifteen Bulwarks round the Scaffold, on which they had mounted
Cannon and Mortar pieces: Between which they had large Mortars made like
Beehives and Pumps, which were charged with several sorts of Fireworks.

About half an hour after Six in the Evenning, the Fireworks were Lighted: Just
before Thirty pieces of Cannon that were planted upon the Wall of the Viver
were discharged; then followed Twenty five Mortar shot on both sides of the
Scaffold, and afterward the Crown and Cipher, WR. which appeared like 350
Pearls shining in the Air.

About the Pallissadoes they had planted several Devices: Toward the States
Chamber was one with these Words, Triumphat semper Augustus: He Triumphs always
August. On each side of this there was one planted; One was, Offensum metuunt
Hosts: His Enemies Dread him when he is Offended. The other, Carum venerantur
Amici: His Friends Worship Him who is so dear to them. These shining very
bright in the Air, made a very pleasant show.

Over the Cipher and Crown was a Ship tossed about as in a Storm, with this
Motto, Ne metuas, Caesarem vebis: Fear not, thou carriest Caesar. This also was
visible in the Air.

When the Pyramids were Fired, they gave a loud buzzing Noise, which was now
and then Answered by the Mortars.

Then the Belgic Lion, and the Hercules, played very wonderfully. Hercules' s
Arms were Expanded, firing with Eight several Pauses, to denote his Labors,
which were. 1. The Establishment of Religion and Liberty. 2. The securing the
Tranquillity of Europe. 3. The Settlement of the Government upon a right
Bottom. 4. The Preservation of the Common Interests of the People. 5. The
Preservation of Unity amongst the Neighboring Princes. 6. The clearing of the
Sea, and the increasing of Trade. 7. The Advancement of the Glory of this
State. 8. The concluding of a firm and lasting Peace.

While the Fire played so finely, the Air was full of the crackling Noise, and
the Buzzes of the several sorts of Fireworks, and they continued so very thick,
that it did in a good measure dispel the Fog, which was then very thick. At
times they lighted Water-Balls, Water-Candles, Water-Bullets, Water-Boats,
Water-Morters, Rats and Dolphins in a Vessel upon the Canal, which sputtering
and crackling upon the Water, gave an Entertainment so great, that several
Ingenious Men, who understood these Matters, owned, that they had never seen
any Thing like it.

They kindled also some Hundreds of pitch Barrels set round the Scaffold, which
increased the light, whereby the other Works which played all the while, were
discerned the better. It lasted till about Eight, and was ended with Twenty
five Mortar-shot; after which the Cannon were several times discharged: The
whole was done without any Mischance, save only the loss of one Gunner, who
sweeping a Cannon, lost both his Hands, and died of his Wounds. When His
Majesty came to Court, the Militia. stood in order in the outer Court, before
the Triumphal Arch, viz. Baron Friesem's Regiment of Foot, Baron Heyde's
Regiment of Horse, who having discharged all together, went to the Viverbergh
to give way to the Train Bands in Arms. Several of the Lords of the States were
in the Council Chamber, to Countenance this public Joy.

The Count de Berka, and the Here Colomma, the Imperial and Spanish Ministers
testified their Satisfaction by Illuminations before their Lodgings: Mijn Here
Schuylenbergh did the same at his own House upon the Viverbergh with Noble
Illuminations, beautified with several Devices: As, Regi Gulielmo Reduci: To
King William returned again. Transitque feritque: He passes by and strikes.
Imperat Augustus: Augustus Governs. Superat Coelestibus alis: He mounts with
Heavenly Wings. Generosus ab Ortu: Noble from his Birth. These were to be seen
some time after. Others also gave other instances of their Satisfaction, every
Man after his own Fancy.

This was also graced with so vast a resort of People, as had never before been
seen at the Hague: Some coming to see the Solemnity, others to see the King
once more returned again, and Crowned with so much Honor.

The King well satisfied with all these their Demonstrations of Esteem and
Reverence, immediately applied himself to Business; having first given
Audiences of Congratulation to all the Colleges and Deputies of the Cities, and
to some great Lords and public Ministers.

The Elector of Brandenburgh, and two Princes of the House of Anspach, (who
came two days before the public Entry) were often with the King, and sometimes
the Ministers of the other Allies joined with them: It was said, That three
Ruffians were sent from the French Court to cut off the King, and that there
were particular Informations given in of their Persons.

February the 7th in the Afternoon the King went into the Assembly of the
States General, and took his place as Stadtholder and Captain General; and made
an Oration to them, to this purpose.

That when His Majesty was last in Council, he acquainted their High and
Mightynesses with His Intention to go over into England with the Assistance
which they were pleased to give Him, to deliver that Nation from their
Impending Dangers, and which in part had befallen them: And that God Almighty
had so far Blessed Him, as that He had brought His Affairs to a Happier Issue
then at first He could possibly Wish for; for which Reason they offered Him the
Crowns of Great Britain and Ireland, which He accepted of, not out of any
Ambition, (for He was not to be Corrupted with that, or Money) but only to
preserve Religion and Liberty in those Kingdoms; and to be able to give the
Allies a vigorous Assistance against the Power of France, which he had given
before in a more particular manner, if the Affairs of Ireland had not diverted
Him; which being now better settled than they were before, He was now come
over, not only to take such Measures with their High and Mighty Lordships, as
should be most for the advantage of the Confederates, but also to perform the
Duty of Captain General; And that from His tenderest Years He had always a High
Regard for that State, and should always be ready to give greater Proofs, if it
were possible, how ready He should be to promote their Welfare, for which he
would joyfully hazard His Life, if it might be a means to preserve the Liberty
of Europe, and to increase the Felicity of the United Provinces: And finally,
He Recommended Himself to the good Wishes of their High and Mighty Lordships.

Hereupon the Lord President Thanked His Majesty in their Lordships Name, for
the Honor which was done unto them by his appearing once more in Person
amongst them: And he assured him, that they were highly sensible of those
Obligations which he had Conferred upon them from time to time, by engaging in
so great dangers so readily for their Sakes: And further, that they should
always Thankfully Acknowledge how much He had done for them; wishing Him all
Happiness in all His Undertakings, promising their Concurrence with His Majesty
to the utmost, and that they should contribute whatever they were able, to
advance the common Interest, and His Majesty's Satisfaction.

He afterward made a Speech to the State of Holland, and was answered much to
the same purpose.

The Evening before the King visited the Princess of Nassaw, Lady to the
Hereditary Stadtholder of Friezeland; as also the Princess Radzevile, and the
Princess of Saxe-Eysenach. The next day the King Treated the Elector of
Brandenburgh, the Duke of Norfolk, and several other Lords at the House in the
Wood, and returned in the Evening again to the Hague.

The Ninth in the Morning the Here Prielmeyer, the Envoy of the Elector of
Bavaria, had Audience of His Majesty; he was Conducted from his Lodgings about
Ten a Clock, by the Master of the Ceremonies, with some Coaches and Six Horses,
and was received at the Stair-foot by the Swiss Guards placed in Order, and
received by their Officer at the end of the Guard Room, and thence conducted
through the Antichamber into the Presence; where after he had paid the
accoustomed Reverences; he made a Harangue in French to this purpose.

That he was sent by the Elector his Master to Congratulate His Majesty's happy
Successes, and that his Master had begun his Journey as soon as ever he had
heard that His Majesty had begun His; so that he expected him every Hour; to be
ready upon the spot to assure His Majesty of his Readiness to serve the common
Cause, and particularly to second those Glorious Undertakings* which His
Majesty had so happily begun: And for his part, he only farther begged, That
his Person might not be unacceptable.

To this the King replied, That he Thanked his Electoral Highness. That he
should always endeavor to promote the common Interest; and therefore would
join with the Elector, and that He was Obliged to his Highness for this
Trouble; and lastly, that his Person was very acceptable.

Then the Envoy presented his Gentlemen to the King, who kissed his Hand; and
afterward the Envoy was carried back in the same manner to his Lodgings as he
was brought up.

Then the Envoys of Mentz, Cologne, Munster and Hambourg, had their public
Audiences, after whom came the Elector of Brandenburgh, who had a private
Audience of near two Hours.

The Duke Administrator of Wirtenbergh, with his Brother, who were there
incognito, were admitted without Ceremonies.

Also the Deputies of the Cities and Countries, who were obliged to go home to
give an account of their Affairs, had their Audience of Conge of His Majesty:
And afterward the Pensionary, Secretaries, and Deputies of the States of
Zealand, had their Audiences, and Complemented the King.

The Count of Erbagh came from Prince Waldeck, and several Foreign Ministers
from the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke of Savoy had their Audiences.

The 12th in the Evening Count Winditsgratz, Ambassador Extraordinary from his
Imperial Majesty arrived, and had his Audience at Ten a Clock.

The 14th at Noon the King went into the Council of the States, and after some
Affairs were dispatched, he went with the Lords Commissioners into the Assembly
of their High and Mightynesses, where the State of the War for the Year 1691.
was presented, which the Deputies were to send down to their respective
Provinces; afterward the King went to Court, and gave Audience to several
Foreign Ministers and General Officers, and among the rest to General Delwich.

The 15th the King, with the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Portland and
Devonshire, with several other Noblemen, Dined with the Elector of
Brandenburgh: The Elector received the King without, and Conducted him to the
Dining Room. The King went away at Four a Clock, and gave Audience afterward
to the Elector Palatine's Minister. Mr. Berensdorff came hither also from the
Duke of Zell; and Mr. Klenck from the Duke of Hanouer, to Complement His
Majesty in their Masters Names. Prince Waldeck came also to Court, and had
Audience of the King immediately: And Mr. Cha^gagne came from the Elector of
Treves.

The 16th the Elector of Bavaria arrived, who acquainted the King of his
arrival at Ten a Clock, by one of his Gentlemen; he Lodged in his Envoys House:
Next Morning my Lord Portland, and the Elector of Brandenburgh went to
Complement him. The Elector was met at the Entrance of the House. About five in
the Evening he went privately to the King, and staid about an Hour and half;
and the next day the King returned his Visit.

The 18th in the Evening, the Marquis de Gastanaga, Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands arrived with a very splendid Equipage: As soon as he arrived he
went to Court, and was Received with the Honor due to his Character, the Swiss
Guards being placed in Ranks, with their Officer posted at the Head of them. He
had a particular Audience of the King an Hour long, the Elector of Bavaria
being by; the Swiss Guards appeared then in Arms, it being the first time that
the Elector of Bavaria had appeared at Court publicly: The same day also the
Elector of Brandenburgh had his Audience: Next Morning the Marquis de Gastanaga
was at the Kings Rising, and then paid a Visit to the Elector of Brandenburgh;
the King was that day above two Hours in the Committee of the Council of State,
and Dined with the Elector of Brandenburgh at my Lord Portlands.

Mr. Arnauld, Preacher and Head of the Vaudois, who Commanded them so bravely
against the French last Summer, came also to the Hague, and had an Audience of
the King concerning their Affairs.

The 19th in the Afternoon the King went a Hawking near Sorgvliet, with the
Elector of Brandenburgh, and several other Persons of great Quality: Next
Morning he went a Hunting with the Elector of Bavaria, and the Marquis of
Gastanaga near Houns^^erdyke, where they Dined, and came back again in the
Evening to the Hague.

The 20th, the Prince of Courland, with another Prince of the House of Holstein
arrived here.

The 21st, the Landtgrave of H^sse came hither with his Envoy, and several
other Lords: He immediately went to Court, and staid some time with the King;
and the next day he paid a Visit to the Electors of Brandenburgh and Bavaria.
The Duke of Zal^sbach came also with General Dautel, as it is believed, to
Complement the King in the Elector Palatine's Name.

The Congress was now often kept: Colomna the Spanish Envoy had a Conference on
the 23d in the Morning with the Deputies of the States General, and afterward
assisted in the Congress; where was also the Count Winditsgratz, the Emperors
Plenipotentiary; and the Count de Berka, and the Chevalier Crampricht the other
Imperial Ministers were by, when he showed his Credentials, and the States
assured him, that he should have Audience with the usual Ceremonies in two or
three days. The Counselor Mean, who was sent by the Prince and Chapter of
Liege, assisted also in the Congress, and the Emperors Minister, with most of
the other Ministers waited upon his Majesty.

This extraordinary Concourse has made the Court at the Hague so very Splendid,
that it has outdone any thing else in any other Court of Christendom. Above 30
Sovereign Princes were there, besides Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen
without Number. The Elector of Bavaria, and the Marquis de Gastanaga kept
public Tables.

The 24th, about Ten in the Morning, the Count de Winditsgratz had public
Audience of the King, Conducted by the Master of the Ceremonies, with all the
usual Solemnities: He Congratulated His Majesty's happy Successes, and assured
him that the Emperor his Master esteemed himself very much obliged to His
Majesty, for that Care and Concern which he showed for the common Cause; and he
further added, that his Master looked upon His Britannick Majesty, as the
principal moving Cause upon whom every thing else depended, that might be for
the advantage of the Confederacy.

The Elector of Saxony's Envoy had Audience of the King the same day.

The 25th in the Morning the King, with the Elector of Brandenburgh, and the
Landtgrave of Hesse, went to the great Church, where they heard a Sermon
Preached by Mr. Ulier; who toward the latter end, said several moving Things
to His Majesty. In the Afternoon, the King with the Electors of Bavaria and
Brandenburgh, and the Landtgrave of Hesse, all four in a Coach, took three or
four turns round the Voorhout, with the Glasses down upon the Kings side, who
was received by the thronging Multitudes with all imaginable Demonstrations of
Affection and Joy.

The 26th, the Count de Prela Doria, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of
Savoy; Count d' Autel, with the same Character from the Elector Palatine, had
Audience of His Majesty, as had on the 27th the Sieur Haxhuysen from the
Elector of Saxony.

March the 5th, the Earl of Devonshire Treated the Elector of Brandenburgh, the
Landtgrave of Hesse, the Prince Commercy, and diverse other Persons of Quality
with great Magnificence, where His Majesty was pleased to Honor his Lordship
with His Presence.

On the 11th the Duke of Zell arrived at the Hague, and the Duke of
Wolfembuttel on the 14th.

During all this time the Congresses had been held almost every day, with great
Secrecy, His Majesty always Honoring them with His Presence, when at last, the
matters being fully Concerted, and all Things agreed upon to the mutual
Satisfaction of all the Princes, this great Council broke up, and the Princes
returned to their respective Homes, to put in execution the Designs here agreed
upon, the good Effects whereof we doubt not but to see this Campaign,
notwithstanding the unhappy accident of the loss of Mons.

His Majesty having given Orders to all the Troops to be in a readiness to take
the Field by the first of April, was pleased on the 16th to depart for Loo,
being accompanied with the Duke of Zell, who Rid in the same Coach with Him,
and lay that Night at the House of Monsieur Zullestein; where he was met by the
Elector of Bavaria, who likewise accompanied His Majesty to Loo, where they
arrived the next Evening, having been Complemented as they passed along with
all Demonstrations of Respect and Affection, by the City of Utrecht, and the
several Towns he passed through, and accompanied every where with the loud
Acclamations of the People, who were almost overwhelmed with Joy, at the
extraordinary Honor they received by the Presence of this most illustrious
Monarch.

But His Majesty had not been long there before he received the unwelcome
Tidings of the Siege of Mons, an Express arriving at the Hague on the 16th in
the Evening, that the French Troops had suddenly invested the Town of Mons,
their Horse having taken Possession of all the Avenues on the 15th of March,
and that the Foot were marching up with all Diligence.

The Prince of Stee^huysen, and the Marquis Bedmar, being sent from the
Governor of Flanders, arrived at the Hague the 17th, and after a short
Conference with Prince Waldeck, went Post to Loo, to give His Majesty an
account of the State of the Affair. Who being resolved Himself to Head the
Army, in order to raise the Siege, returned to the Hague; from whence having
dispatched Prince Waldeck with necessary Orders for Flanders, set forward
Himself the 26th for Brussels; the Army in the mean time preparing with all
imaginable diligence to Muster at Hall, whither His Majesty went on the 6th of
April, intending to have marched the next day at the Head of the Army, which
consisted of 30000 Foot and 16000 Horse, with a Train of Artillery of 71 pieces
of Cannon and 14 Mortars. But the Carriages not being all come up, was obliged
to defer His March for two or three days.

The French had all this time very vigourously attacked the Outworks of the
Town, but were as vigourously repulsed by the Besieged, to the great loss of
the Enemy, who paid dearly for what he gained; insomuch, that it was not
doubted, but the Town would have been able to have held out till the Army came
up to its Relief, but the French King (who was himself all the while at St.
Gislain, near the Camp, the Dauphin Commanding in Chief) according to his old
Methods, had found means of gaining a Party among the Burghers and Clergy in
the Town, who prevailing upon the rest, by the terrifying Destruction the Bombs
and Cannon made in their Houses, and persuading them that by a timely Surrender
of the Town they might obtain Honorable Conditions, made them basely desert
the public Good, and altogether unexpectedly, even to the French themselves,
on the 8th of April, beat a Parley, and sent out three Officers, as Hostages
for three French Offices, who immediately entered the Town, to Treat upon
Articles of Surrender; the Governor the Prince de Bergue opposed the Surrender,
and refused to deliver the Gate to the French as the Burghers had agreed,
endeavoring to dissuade them from this their Resolution, alleging he could
still hold out till the Relief came; but all would not do, the Burghers wre
resolved, and they being stronger than the Garrison, who were all employed in
the Outworks, the Honorable Governor was forced to submit, and about Midnight
the Capitulation was Signed on both sides; and the next day April the 9th, a
Gate of the Town was delivered up to the French Guards; and on the 10th, the
Garrison marched out, being about 4000, Foot and 400 Horse, with Arms, Baggage,
Drums beating, Colors flying, six pieces of Cannon, two Mortars, etc. and were
conducted to Tubiese* a few Miles from Mons toward Brussels.

The King having received this surprising News just as he was ready to march to
their Relief, was forced to alter his Measures; and understanding that the
French King had separated his Troops, and disposed 'em into Garrisons; and that
he with the Dauphin, etc. were returned to Versailles, broke up the Camp, and
having sent Reinforcements to Charleroy, Aeth, Namur, and the other Frontier
Garrisons, went to Brussels; and from thence to the Hague, where he was pleased
to Honor the Duke of Zell (who was likewise returned thither from the Camp)
with the Noble Order of the Garter, who was invested with the Garter and George
by the King Himself, assisted by the Dukes of Norfolk and Ormond, and the Earl
of Devonshire: This was performed privately in the Kings Bedchamber the 18th
of April: And the next day, Garter King at Arms presented to his Highness the
rest of the Ensigns, with the whole Habit and Ornaments of the Order, which his
Highness having Received, was pleased to make a very Noble Present to the King
at Arms, and to all the Retinue he had brought with him upon this Occasion.

April the 22d, His Majesty having taken leave of the States General, and been
Complimented by them, with all the Expressions of sincere Affection, took
Shiping in the Maese in order to his Return for England, and the Wind being
fair, the next Morning made the English Shore; and that Evening, viz. April the
13th, 1691. O. S. about Eight of the Clock landed at Whitehall, having been
Saluted by the Fleet, as he passed along with all their Guns, and the repeated
Huzza's of the Seamen, who Demonstrated the most extraordinary Joy imaginable;
and by the Guns of the Forts of Tilbury, Gravesend, and the Tower; also by the
Ships that lay in the River; and the Joyful Acclamations of the People, who
crowded in great Numbers upon the Shore, and in Boats, to see His Majesty, and
express their Joy upon his happy Return, continually Repeating, God Save King
William and Queen Mary, and Prosper their Arms by Sea and Land.

Thus have we finished our short Journal of His Majesty's Voyage into Holland,
wherein we have been as particular as was convenient, and as brief as possible;
we have all along carefully avoided all manner of Reflections and
Animadversions of our own, and given only a true Relation of the matter of Fact
as it occurred; wherein if we have the good Fortune to please the Reader, we
have our End.

FINIS.

