Frederic Augustus the Present King of POLAND



The History of POLAND; IN Several LETTERS to Persons of Quality.

Giving an Account of the Present State of that Kingdom,

VIZ.
Historical, Political, Physical and Ecclesiastical;
The Form of Government; The King's Power, Court and Revenues; The Senate,
Senators, and other Officers; The Religion, Diet, and little Diets, with other
Assemblies and Courts of Justice; The Inter-regnum; Election and Coronation of
a King and Queen, with all the Ceremonies; The present Condition of the Gentry
and Commonalty; as likewise, The Genius, Characters, Languages, Customs,
Manners, Military Affairs, Trade and Riches of the Poles. Together with an
Account of the City of Dantzic: The Origin, Progress, and Present State of the
Teutonic Order; and the Successions of all its Great Masters: Likewise, The
Present State of Learning, Natural Knowledge, Practice of Physic, and Diseales
in Poland: And lastly, A Succinct Description of the Duchy of Curland, and the
Livonian Order; with a Series of the several Dukes, and Provincial Masters.

To this is also added, A Table for each Volume; And a Sculpture of the Diet in
Session: With some Memoirs from Baron Blomberg.

VOL. II.

By BERNARD CONNOR, M. D.

Fellow of the Royal Society, and Member of the College of Physicians; who, in
his Travels in that Country* Collected these Memoirs from the best Authors, and
his own Observations.

Composed and Published by ^ir. SAVAGE

LONDON, Printed for Da^. Brown, without Templ-Bar' and A. Roper and T. Leigh,
both in Il et-street, School.

DR. CONNOR'S PREFACE.
IN my PREFACE to the First Volume of this Historical Relation of POLAND, I
have mentioned my Incapacity for Matters of this Nature; both because I was
only Twelve Months in that Kingdom, and because I have no Talent, or Genius,
for History. I thought, Writing it by way of LETTERS, in Imitation of some of
our Neighbors, would be more easy to my self, and more acceptable to the
Public. I am proud to have this happy Occasion of giving the Honorable
Persons I write to so public a Testimony of my Respects. I am sorry in the
same time, I cannot have Leisure to honor my self in writing to the Noble
Persons mentioned in the Second Volume, as I have had in the First. I follow a
Profession so remote from HISTORY, particularly a Polish one, that it neither
allows me Time, nor leaves me any Inclination to attend any other Business. I
hope notwithstanding, the Persons I promised to write to, will be pleased to
excuse me for not being able to keep my Word to them, as I flattered my self I
could, since the ingenious Gentleman I desired to undertake this Work will give
them the same Satisfaction, he having already assisted me in my First Volume,
and having had all my Memoirs for this Second.

THE Ancient and Present STATE OF POLAND.
PART II.
The Present State.
LETTER I.
To His Grace, THOMAS, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Of the Form of the Government in Poland, and of the King's Power, Court, and
Revenues.

My LORD,
THAT high Station wherewith the King has Recompensed Your Merits, and the
great Trust His Majesty has reposed in Your GRACE during his Absence, shows his
Confidence in Your Ability, as well to Govern the State as the Church. Since
therefore being lately Invested with a share of the Regal Authority, you had
occasion to know more intimately Our King's Power and Prerogatives, I thought
my self obliged to give Your GRACE an Account of those of the King of Poland;
to the end, that comparing both together, you might more sensibly perceive the
Excellency of our Own Constitution, which makes the Greatness of the King
inseparable from the Interest of the People: For when the Executive Power is as
vigilant to see our Laws obeyed, as the Legislative has been provident in
making them, England can justly boast of a much greater Happiness, than either
Poland or any other Kingdom of Europe.

From the Year 550, to the Year School.
Having, My LORD, not been a full Twelve Month at the late King of Poland's
Court, I cannot pretend to be thoroughly acquainted with that Kingdom; yet I
find that, like most other Countries, it has undergone several Changes in its
Constitution since the middle of the VIth Century (at which time it began to be
a distinct Nation) during the Reigns of the two great Houses of Piastus and
Jagello.

Former Power of the Kings of Poland.
Ever since the time of Lechus its Founder, the Kings thereof have been Elected
to the Crown after an Hereditary manner, though not by an Hereditary Title: They
have really been Absolute, and their Will went for a Law; for then they made
Peace and War when they pleased, Levied as many Troops as they thought fit,
Punished or Pardoned at Pleasure, and Rewarded where they saw Convenient: And
all the Administration, either of Public or Private Affairs was so wholly
lodged in the King's Hands, that I have heard the Poles themselves say, That
Sigismund II. A. D. 1574.
the last King of the Jagellonic Family, was to the full as Absolute as either
the King of France or Denmark is now.

Whilst the Kings of Poland thus maintained Advantage thereby.
a Supreme Power over their Subjects, they exceedingly enlarged their Dominions,
were both feared Abroad, and beloved at Home, Commanded Potent and Numerous
Armies into the Field, Executed most Enterprises speedily, and were almost
always sure of Success; and this because they did not then, as now, depend upon
the lingering Determination, and tedious Conclusions of a Turbulent Diet. But
the Family of Jagello being once Extinct, by the Death of Sigismund II. who had
resigned his Kingdom to the Senate and Polish Gentry, and given them full Power
and Authority to dispose thereof as they thought fit, the Crown of Poland was
anew declared Elective, to the end that all the Princes of Christendom, who had
due Merits and Qualifications, might have a Right to Aspire thereunto.

Why European Princes Court the Polish Gentry.
This gave occasion to most of the Princes of Europe ever since, to Court the
Polish Nobility after their King's Death: And that either to get the succeeding
Election determined in their own Favor, or else to have some of their Friends
Advanced to that great Dignity; but this most commonly rather with regard to
their own private Interests, than out of any Respect to the Person they desired
to Promote; as the Houses of Austria and Bourbon have always practiced.

Nobilities Resolves thereupon,
The Gentry of Poland therefore observing that several Princes at a time always
Aspired to their Crown, and considering that not one of them had more Right
than the rest; as likewise that it lay altogether in their Power to choose whom
they pleased, resolved Unanimously to Elect none but such as should Condescend,
nay Swear, to observe the Terms and Conditions they proposed.

Abridge the Ancient Power of their Princes,
Hereby the Poles by degrees have clipped and limited the Ancient Power of their
Kings, and have reduced them to the Bounds we now find them to have, that is,
barely to a third Part of the Grand Diet: For the Poles knew very well, that no
Prince would be so Imprudent as to scruple Submitting to any Conditions, to
become Master of so considerable a Kingdom, to which he had no Right either by
Birth or other Claim; and more especially since these Conditions are neither
Rigorous nor Dishonorable, but such as are decently consistent with the Regal
Character he is to be Invested with.

And Constitute a Republic.
Thus the Polish Gentry, of a kind of Monarchical Government, have in time made
a perfect Republic, consisting of three Orders; The King, Senate, and Gentry;
which they call the Nobility.

Division of the People of Poland.
Here, My Lord, I must take notice to Your GRACE, that the Polish Nation is
divided into two sorts of People, the Gentry or Freeborn Subjects, who are
hardly a Tenth Part of the Kingdom, and the Vassals, who are no better than
Slaves to the Gentry, for they have no Benefit of the Laws, can Buy no Estates,
nor Enjoy any Property no more than our Negroes in the West Indies can and this
because some Ages since the Common People Revolting against their Lords, and
having driven them out of the Nation, the Gentry came with a Foreign Power, and
reduced them to a greater Subjection than before, in which they have been kept
ever since. So that the Government of Poland at present comprehends only the
King and Gentry. By a Gentleman or Nobleman of Poland, is understood a Person
who either himself, or his Family, has a Possession in Land: For they never
Intermarry with the Common People. All the Gentry from the King's Sons to those
that are but only Masters of an Acre of Land, are equally Noble, both by their
Birth and the Constitution of the Kingdom; for no Body is Born either a
Palatine, Senator, or Lord, but those Titles are always annexed to certain
Employments, which the King only gives to Persons advanced in Age, and
recommended by their Merits.

The Diet.
The Diet of Poland (in some respects) resembles our Parliament, being made up
of two Houses; the House of Senators, answerable to our House of Lords; and the
House of Nuncio's, not unlike our House of Commons. The Senators are the
Bishops, Palatines, Castellans, and the Ten Great Officers of the Crown, in all
about 142. In the Upper-House the Senators sit not by any Writ of Summons or
Letters Patents as in England, but only by Virtue of the Great Preferments in
the King's Gift, which they Enjoy for Life. So that the King wholly Constitutes
the Upper House; but the Lower are the Representatives of the Gentry, Elected
by them alone in their respective Provinces, without the Concurrence of the
Common People, who have no Privilege to Vote in their Election. Insomuch, that
at least Nine Parts in Ten of the People of Poland are excluded from having any
Share in the Government.

Its Power.
The Grand Diet of Poland is nothing else but the King, Senators, and Deputies
assembled together in any Part of the Kingdom that his Majesty Commands.
Without this great Assembly of the States, the King can neither Make nor Repeal
Laws, Declare War nor Conclude a Peace, make no Alliance with any Foreign
Princes, raise neither Troops nor Taxes, Coin no Money; and, in a word, can
Determine no Matter of State of any Importance, without the Universal Consent
and Concurrence of this Parliament, which they term the Free States of Poland.

Motives for a mixed Government.
Several powerful Motives have inclined the Poles to Establish this kind of
mixed Government, which they take to be a just Temperament of whatever is to be
found most Excellent in the several Monarchies, Aristocracies, and Democracies,
that have been in the World. The most considerable of which Motives, as I have
met with them in their Histories, or learned them from the most knowing among
their Natives, are as follows.

A Motive.
First, They think by this Judicious Choice of a Government, to preserve their
Kingdom from those Disorders which most commonly attend Absolute Monarchies:
Agreeing herein with that Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle, who though he
preferred this kind of Government to all Others, yet was he nevertheless
obliged to own, that when ever it degenerated, it was the most pernicious of
all.

Thus the Poles have tempered the Exorbitant Power of their Kings, with the
mixture of two other Governments, whereby they thought to secure their Liberty,
a Thing always most Dear to them, from the Arbitrary Will of a Prince, who by
Imagining himself above the Laws, might Fancy whatever his Passions prompted
him to, allowable, and his truest Interest to be the Entire Subjection of his
People. The miserable Examples of their Neighbors, the Turks and Moscovites,
have sufficiently convinced them of this Truth; wherefore the Polish Nation
thought it but convenient to limit the excessive Power of their Kings, and
confine them to Rule with more Moderation and Justice.

II. Motive.
Secondly, The Poles have observed as well from their own Government, as from
that of their Neighbors, that no small disadvantage has flowed from an
Aristocracy. They could not be persuaded but that the Authority of one Person
was infinitely more easy to be Tolerated than that of many; for that either
the Ambition or Jealousy of such would often disturb the Repose and Tranquillity
of the Public. Poland also began to Reflect upon its former Miseries under its
Woievods, when it was deplorably rent and torn by the Factions among those
Palatines: Insomuch that even while it became a Conqueror from without, it was
vanquished within, and that by its own Force. This gave the Poles no small
dislike to an Aristocracy, which they have resolved never more to admit among
them.

III. Motive.
The Third Reason of State, which has obliged the Poles to reject a Democracy,
is, that they look upon that sort of Government to be the most dangerous of
all, being the easiest enflamed, and the greatest Enemy to true Nobility. Its
first Maxim is, To procure a Universal Levelling, or making all alike; whereby,
under the Notion of a common Liberty, they weaken and enervate those great
Genius's which were designed to Govern and Protect them. How then could it be
expected that the Descendents of those mighty Warriers who Founded the Polish
Nation, and have so long maintained the Honor of it by their Valor, should
submit to have their Blood debased, by mixing it with the Ignoble Vulgar?

The Tyranny of Laws, which the Nobles are subjected to in an Absolute
Commonwealth, would be too rude a Check to this Ambition which the Poles have
always had to Command over their Vassals, and therefore they have always
entertained a secret Odium for those Grecian Republics, that Banished their
greatest Statesmen, merely because they would not have them gain too fast upon
the Affections of the People.

If any should perhaps doubt of the pernicious Consequences of a popular
Government, where Reason does not so much reign as an Unruly violence of a
People, who know no other Laws than those of their Passions; let them cast
their Eyes on the Heats of the Roman Empire, who were often ready to Overturn
the State, had not the Senate speedily applied a prudent Remedy. But there are
other Examples more Modern, as the Revolt of the Cosacks, and the last Troubles
in Bohemia. To these also may be added the Revolutions of our own Nation in the
Time of Charles I. when the Fury of the People extended their Rage, even to the
dipping their Hands in this Prince's Blood.

Politicians do generally own, that the People are a wild Beast, which ought
rather to be led than left at Liberty, and by consequence have pronounced it
most Perilous to acquiesce under their Subjection. An Anarchy would undoubtedly
do more harm in a day, than a Tyrant could in all his Reign. If he Punishes,
it is with some pretense of Justice, when nothing can abate the Peoples Rage,
but an utter Extinction of whatever is placed over their He^ds.

A mixed Government therefore made out of all these Three, is that which has
proved most Advantage of a mixed Government.
Agreeable to the Polish Nation, being a just Medium between the dangerous
Extremities of an Absolute Monarchy, and those of Aristocracy and Democracy. It
is this the Poles have pitched upon as most proper to preserve the public
Liberty, and to perpetuate the Happiness of their State; being, it seems,
persuaded that a Body Politic resembles a Humane in this, that as the one
borrows all its Vigor and Health from a Just Temperament of the different
Humors that compose it; so the other depends absolutely on that of the Three
beforementioned Forms of Government. And moreover, as the former subsists by
the mutual Opposition of contrary Qualities, so the King, Senate and Gentry of
Poland having in some measure different Interests and Inclinations, are not
only hindered from deviating into vicious Extremities, but also through a Noble
Emulation are excited to labor carefully for the Good of the Public.

Division of the Republic.
The Republic is divided into Two States, the Kingdom of Poland, and the Great
Duchy of Lithuania; yet both which are but as one Body, having the same King,
the same Parliament, the same Laws, the same Privileges, the same Religion,
and, as the natural result of all these, the same Interest. These Two States
are so very well United, that a King cannot be Elected, a Law made, nor any
State-Business done, without the mutual Consent of both. But, My Lord, as the
King is the Prime and Chief Member of this Republic, I will give Your GRACE an
Account of his present Power and Prerogatives.

Kings present Power and Prerogatives.
The Poles are too proud a Nation to agree with those Politicians that measure
the Grandeur of a Prince, and Happiness of a State, by the Despotic Power of
him that Governs it; and therefore those pernicious Maxims of Tyrants, Si
Lubet, Licet; Oderint dum Metuant, and the like, would be but ill received
among a People that have all along secured their Liberties by their Prudence
and Valor. This Vassalage would suit well enough with the Slaves of Asia and
Africa, or with the Moscovites and Turks, who all suffer themselves to be
governed like Beasts, and led by the Nose according to the different Caprice or
Pleasure of their Prince.

His Happiness.
As for the Kings of Poland, they may rest in security in the Bosom of their
Country, even amidst the Noise of Arms, either without or within their
Dominions, since they have always their Subjects to crowd about them for their
Guards, through indispensable Inclinations. For what contributes chiefly to the
Happiness of these Princes, is, the Loyal Observance and voluntary Obedience
paid them even by those that are at Liberty to do the contrary. I have often
heard Monsieur de Polignac, the French Ambassador, say at Warsaw, That he
thought a King of Poland more Happy in his Person and Condition, than a King of
France. Nevertheless this Authority of the King of Poland is so alloy'd by the
Laws of the Land, that it does not exact more Veneration from the Nobles or
Gentry, than they think he deserves: For though their Behavior be generally
extraordinary Observant, yet do they tacitly seem to call in question the Power
they have limited, and often refuse that Duty which they have deemed him worthy
of by his Election.

Unhappiness.
The Polish Nobility make no Difference between their King's Right, and those
of the Senate and Deputies, affirming, That since these three Members compose
but one Body, they ought equally to share in the same Benefits and Injuries,
and consequently ought all either to Reward the one, or Revenge the other.

A great Inconvenience to the State.
The small Authority therefore of their Kings, and the Impossibility of their
Acting by themselves, has at all times exposed Poland to the Insults of their
Neighbors, and the Rage of their own People, as may be seen in the Civil Wars
of the Cosacks, and the Treachery and Sedition of the Confederates which could
never have arrived at so great height, if the King had had but sufficient Power
to have suppressed them. Also the Great Marshal of the Crown Lubomirski, would
never have had the Boldness to have opposed King Casimir's Designs openly, and
to have formed so many Factions against the Court, had he not had some
Assurances of remaining Unpunished. This makes the King of Poland to be styled
a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, since he has no better than Companions and
Equals for his Subjects.

Instances of Poles Affections to their Kings.
We have diverse Instances of the Poles love for their Kings, and particularly
by their once enforcing the Right of Sigismund III. to the Kingdom of Sweden,
in an obstinate War which they began several times, as likewise in supporting
afterward the Pretenses of Vladislaus VII. to Moscovy: To omit diverse others
of a more ancient Date. This Respect of their obliges them frequently to come
and spend their Estates at Court, thinking to augment their Princes Grandeur by
their Prodigality and Magnificence. This appears by the mistake made by Gregory
King of Bohemia, at the Interview between him and Casimir the Great, at Glogan,
(which Place the former had demanded to bound the Limits of Silesia) when he
saluted a Private Gentleman, splendidly Clothed, for the King of Poland.

Modern Kings Power.
The Custom and Inclination of the Poles runs so strong toward Honoring their
Prince, that all they have, or are able to do, even to the Destruction of their
Lives and Fortunes, they are willing to lavish in his Service, without
expecting any greater Recompense than the Glory of Waiting on His Majesty's
Person. Insomuch, that a King of Poland who is Courageous and Prudent, Just and
Sober, Liberal and Religious; one that observes the Laws and Constitutions of
his Kingdom, and in a word, who has no other Interest but the Common Good and
Safety of his Subjects, is as much Respected and Honored, and as faithfully
Obeyed both in time of Peace and War; nay, as formidable to all his Enemies as
most Princes in Europe.

As to what relates to War, no Monarch has greater Advantages than himself; for
he is neither at the trouble of raising Forces nor Expense in Maintaining them;
his Business being only to convene the Diet, and they do all these things to
his Hand. After War is once declared, he can continue the same, either by
himself or his Generals, can Regulate his Troops, and see his Army duly paid
out of the Treasury of the Republic. He has a great deal of reason to hope for
Success in his Expeditions, because that not having undertaken them on his own
account, those that engaged him to them will infallibly support him in them,
and the rather, by reason that what was done was altogether with their Consent.
This has proved the Cause of almost neverfailing Success to the Polish Arms
till of late Days, the King and his Subjects not having been in so good
Intelligence with each other as formerly.

Abroad and at Home.
When the King is in the Army in Person, he has the Supreme Authority there,
gives Battle when he pleases, and Besieges Towns as often as he thinks fit: And
likewise Commands absolutely all the Gentry to follow him into the Field on
Horseback at ever so little warning. At Home he has the free Nomination of all
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and of all Secular Employments, as well Military as
Civil throughout the whole Extent of his Dominions; without speaking of a great
number of Royal Demesnes, which together with the State-Dignities he confers on
those that have deserved them. He can bestow as considerable Preferments as any
Prince in Europe, and oblige and raise the Fortune of whom he pleases. He has
his Vote in Naming Cardinals, as well as other Roman Catholic Kings have. He
can send and receive Ambassadors privately in Matters relating only to himself,
but as to what concerns the Republic the Senate must have their Share in it. He
can Call, Prorogue, and Dissolve the Diet at Pleasure. In a word, the Poles
term him, The Protector of their Laws and Privileges; The Distributor of
Honors; The Supreme Head of their Republic; and Supreme General of their
Forces.

The great Respect paid him.
The Poles attend his Person Uncovered: The Chief Senators generally Serve him
at Table, first tasting of the Cup before they present him with it. His
Subjects never sit before him, nor cover their Heads any where but in the Diet,
and there too the Senators are only allowed that Liberty, for the Deputies
stand behind with their Furred Caps in their Hands. The late King John Sobieski
dined always in Public, and I never saw any sit down with him at Table when he
eat at Court, except the Queen, his Children and foreign Ministers: Yet when he
either Hunted or Traveled, I have known some private Gentlemen to have had
that Honor: Nay even his own Servants that waited on him were then admitted to
eat with him. This his Majesty knew was absolutely necessary for him to allow
of, since by refusing any this Favor, he might incur the Displeasure and
Hatred of the whole Noblesse. This was verified in the Case of Sigismund of
Luxembourg, who for having refused the Polish Gentry to eat with him, was
utterly excluded from the Crown that had been designed him by Lewis King of
Hungary and Poland, his Father in Law.

His Titles and other Prerogatives.
The Poles when they speak to their King, call him, Mosci Krullo, or Milociwy
Krullo, which is as much as to say, Great or Merciful King. The Titles
Ambassadors give him, or which are commonly made use of in Acts of Parliament,
or other Instruments signed by him and made in his Name, are these; Frederic
Augustus II. King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania, Duke of Russia, Prussia,
Masovia, Samogitia, Kiovia, Volhynia, Podolia, Podlachia, Livonia, Smolensko,
Severia, and Czernikovia. All sorts of Gold, Silver, or Brass Coins are Stamped
with his Image and Name. All Justice is Administered in his Name, and at Church
they always Pray for the King and Royal Family.

His Pension, Houshold-Officers and Guards.
When he is Crowned the Diet allows him a Pension of about 140000 l. per Annum;
which together with his Patrimonial Estate, maintains him a very splendid
Court. He has his Polish, German, and Hungarian Guards, and has the same
Officers of his Household as other Queen Consorts Court, how maintained.
Kings have. While the Queen-Dowager lives, the Queen-Consort maintains her
Court at the King's Charge, but after either the Queen-Dowagers Death or
Marriage, or the King's Death, she has a Revenue Assigned for that purpose, as
will appear hereafter.

Kings Patrimonial Estate and Perquisites.
Over and above the Pension which the Diet settles upon the King and Queen,
which in that cheap Country serves to maintain them as high as our Kings live
here; The King of Poland has great Incomes of his own, for the Poles never care
to Elect a Poor Prince, for fear his Children may come to be a Charge to them
after his Death. He gets besides vast Sums of Money for Nominations
Employments, of which the late King did not scruple to sell, though 'twas
directly contrary to the Constitutions of the Kingdom. Nay, the Ecclesiastical
Benefices which are so very considerable, have been put under Contribution by
some cunning Artifice or other, as happened some Years since about the Naming
of a Bishop of Cracow, whose Bishopric is worth Eight Thousand Pounds Sterling
per Annum, which will go further than Twenty Thousand Pounds in England. There
were several that Aspired a long while to this Vacant Dignity, and every one
solicited what Friends he had at Court for the obtaining of it, but most
applied themselves to the Queen, and begged of her (though she has no Authority
of her own) to Intercede to the King in their Behalf. After a long Debate the
Queen called the Abbot Malakowski aside (who was one of the Competitors, and a
rich Man) and told him, That though there were several that aimed at that
Bishopric, yet she would Wager Fifty Thousand Crowns that he was preferred to
them all. Whereupon the good Abbot thinking to venture nothing, being sure that
either he should be Bishop, or should gain a considerable Sum, readily lays
down the Money, and by way of an accidental Bargain, bought very dear his
Bishopric.

Late King's great Riches.
It has been Calculated, that the late King, what by his Own Incomes, Pensions
allowed him from the Crown, and other Casualties, was worth about Three hundred
thousand Pounds Sterling a Year, of which he did not spend much above one
Hundred thousand, having had no Soldiers nor Army to Pay, or Maintain, but only
his Guards and his Court. He hoarded up the greatest part of the Money in the
Kingdom, and was reputed to have had as much ready Cash by him, as any Prince
in Europe; all which nevertheless the Poles Vowed they would have back again,
when his Sons bought their Votes to be King.

The Crown Revenues.
The Kings Crown-Revenues are Imposts upon Merchandises, and upon the Jews,
part of the Customs of Dantzick, and the Revenues of the Salt Mines of Cracow
and other Places.

Queens Revenues.
The Queen's Revenue consists either in a Gift from the King her Husband, out
of the Royal Revenues, with Consent of the States; or in an Annual Pension
allowed her by the Republic. The Gift from her Husband serves also for her
Dower, and is called by the Poles what amounts to the Sense of the word
Reformation, being the Reversion only of a certain number of Starostaships
after the Death of those that Enjoy them. If the King chance to die before the
Queen has this Reformation assigned her, then the Republic gives her a Yearly
Pension out of the Crown-Revenues, but this no longer than she continues
unmarried, or stays in the Realm, for otherwise in both those Cases the Queen
Regent gets it, or else it reverts to the State. It may be observed, that the
Queen Regent never comes by it without the Consent of the Diet, and that is no
ordinary Expense to her to procure, by Purchasing almost all the Votes of that
Mercenary Assembly. This may be seen in the Case of the present Queen-Dowager;
for when the Queen her Predecessor Married the Duke of Lorrain, she, observing
that the Settlement of her Pension was like to be put off to the succeeding
Diet, which is convened only once in three Years, thought it better to be at
the Charge of gaining their Votes at that Session, than to lose three Years
Income. This Revenue is generally computed at half a Million Polish, which
amounts to about Thirty Thousand English Pounds. As long as the Queen-Dowager
enjoys this Pension, the Queen-Regent can have none; for the Poles say, that it
would be too much to Pension two Queens at once.

The King's Power limited in several respects.
Though the King of Poland has many important Employments to distribute, yet his
Power is always limited in the Distribution of them; for he cannot Name any of
his Children, no nor so much as the Queen, to any Charge either Ecclesiastical
or Temporal. Sigismund III. having a mind to give his Queen Constantia two
Starostaships, vacant by the Death of Queen Anne, who died in the Year 1625.
all the Gentry opposed it by a great Uproar in the Diet, and maintained
vigorously, That a King of Poland ought not to part with any Office without
their Consent. Neither can he Purchase any Lands for them in any part of the
Kingdom, without Consent of the Diet; Although the late King bought several
vast Territories in other Peoples Names, both in Russia, Prussia, and almost
all over the Kingdom; and besides purchased a Principality of the Emperor in
Silesia, for Prince James his Eldest Son. But the Poles having long since
discovered the Secret, pretended, when I was at Warsaw, that all those Lands
must come to the Crown after the King's Death. Some of the Kings of Poland also
have been so kind as to part with their Prerogatives in Ecclesiastical Matters,
so that now they retain only the Collation of Benefices. As for the Foundation
of Monasteries whatever Power the King may have left to Erect them, they must
always be confirmed by the Three Orders of the States. The King of Poland is
likewise limited in diverse other respects, for he can neither increase nor
diminish the Number of Officers either of his Court or the Kingdom, nor Name
any Stranger, that is not Naturalized, to any Charge or Government; only in the
Foot Army, and there too such a Person can pretend to no more than to be a
Captain, or at most a Colonel. This may appear by the Example of Stephen
Batori, who having had considerable Services done him by the Hungarians in the
War against the Moscovites, he thought it but reasonable to Prefer some of them
for Recompense, which extremely incensed the Poles, and particularly the Grand
General so much, that he immediately thereupon resigned his Staff. It Is also
out of the Kings Power to advance some Natives; for all Citizens, Merchants,
Tradesmen and their Sons, Countrymen, Laborers, and generally all Artificers,
are not only by the Constitutions of the Kingdom excluded from Preferments,
which the King has the Nomination of, but also have not Liberty either of
Buying or Enjoying Lands or Estates.

Nobility only capable of Preferment.
It Is then the Nobility alone, or Freeborn of the Kingdom of Poland, the Great
Duchy of Lithuania, or of the other Provinces Incorporated into that Monarchy,
that can pretend to any Preferment in the Republic: Wherefore the aforesaid
King Batori thinking to Advance his Nephews, by reason he had no Children,
designed to get them Naturalized in the Diet held the Thirteenth of December
1586* but was prevented by Death. It must withal be understood, that it is not
every one of these that can Aspire or lay Claim to every Preferment, but only
such as have Lands or Estates in the Kingdom, the Great Duchy, or any other
Incorporated Province where the Preferment lies. For a Freeborn Native of the
Kingdom, though he has an Estate in it, yet cannot be a Governor of a City in
Lithuania, nor have any kind of Employment there, without a settled Estate in
that Country. But the Advantage that all Freeborn Natives have, is, that they
can Buy an Estate throughout the whole Extent of the Dominions of Poland.

Other Limitations of the Kings Power.
There is another Inconvenience which very much Prejudices and Limits the
King's Power, and the public Interest of the whole Commonwealth; for wherever
a Noble Pole is once named to a Preferment, and is in actual possession of it,
let him commit never so many Crimes against the Crown or State, he can never be
deprived of his Employ, or turned out of it without the Unanimous Consent of
the Diet, but shall continue in* the same for Life, even against a the Will of
the Diet, if he has but one Member on his Side, who will protest against the
Proceedings. For the Negative Voice of a Member of the Diet of Poland, has the
same Force with a Negative of a King of England in Parliament.

Inconveniences thereby.
This pernicious Constitution occasions many Troubles and Animosities, for it
encourages Unruly and Mutinous People to disturb the Commonwealth. Officers
never serve the Republic faithfully; Treasurers are thereby emboldened to give
no Account of the Public Revenues; the Generals of the Army, and Governors of
Provinces and Towns, do as they think fit, and most commonly mind their own
private Affairs more than the Interest of the Republic. In a word, though the
Poles term this Constitution the greatest Mark of their Liberty, it inevitably
Ruins the Foundation of the whole State, and every one sees what bad
Consequences must and do necessarily follow from this excessive Liberty, or
rather Libertinism of every Private Officer of the Kingdom.

Why he is paid so great Respect.
My Lord, This great Privilege of the Ofcers, makes them pay more than ordinary
Respect to the King, before they are Dignified, and court him to give them a
Charge which he can never afterward take away. Moreover, this Power of the
King's to Name such of the qualified Nobility, as best pleases him, to these
important Employments, keeps all the Gentry in a great Dependence on him; for
the design of the Republic in lodging the Nomination of Officers in the King's
Hands, was, that he should take care to confer them on those that had best
deserved them by their Services, either in Peace or War, and exclude such from
them as had been Stubborn, Mutinous, and Unserviceable to the State. Another
Reason that makes the King respected, is the natural Ambition the Poles have to
Aspire to the Honors of the Kingdom; for by their Constitutions all the Nobles
(as they call them) or Freeborn of the Land, are equal as to their Birth, and
none, though never so Poor, ows precedence, unless through a Compliment, to any
ever so Rich: Insomuch, that Preferments and Honors are the only Means by
which they attain to Precedence, which is annexed thereto, and ascertained by
the Statutes and Laws.

Now one would think that this mighty Power which the King of Poland has to
dispose of so many Places of Profit and Trust, so many Lands by Royal Tenure,
and so many Benefices, must needs gain him the Love and Affection of those on
whom they are conferred. But on the contrary, the Poles being none of the most
grateful, and knowing too well that the King cannot dispose of those
Preferments but to themselves; they believe that when he Grants them, he only
gives back what of Right belongs to them; and that it is not so much an Act of
Grace in him, as a piece of Justice.

Cities present their Keys upon his Approach.
When a King of Poland comes to any City, the Inhabitants are obliged
immediately to present him with the Keys, and he can send his Regiment of
Guards to take possession of the Gates. The Citizens of Dantzick only have a
Privilege to keep their own Keys, and to hinder all but a few Troops from
following the King into the City. It is certain, that Dantzick has more
Immunities and Privileges than any other City of Poland, insomuch that it may
be rather looked upon to be a small Republic of it self under Protection of
that Kingdom, than a City subject to it. Nay, it has in a manner all the Marks
of a Sovereign Power, for it can Condemn to Death without Appeal even the
Polish Gentry, if they commit any Crime within its Territories and Jurisdiction.

Why he can raise no Forces without Consent of the Diet.
The King can raise no Troops at his own Charges without Consent of the Diet,
and this for fear that he should strengthen himself, and Entrench upon their
Liberties. Nevertheless Vladislaus VII. Levied some with the Portion of his
Queen Mary Ludovica, but the Senate so Murmured, that he was soon obliged to
Disband them. The King cannot on any Account whatever go out of the Kingdom,
without Consent of the Diet; for, Your GRACE may observe that King Henry of
Valois was fain to steal out of the Kingdom when he went into France; Sigismund
III. after the Death of his Father John King of Sueden, was forced to call a
Diet at Warsaw in the Month of May 1592. to obtain Consent to return into
Sueden to take Possession of his Hereditary Kingdom; and that Lewis King of
Hungary, who was chosen King of Poland in the Year 1370, having a mind to
return to his Native Kingdom, desired leave of the Senate, and was obliged to
Augment their Privileges to obtain it.

His Legitimate Issue greatly Respected.
The King's Children are more than ordinarily respected, though at the same
time every private Gentleman thinks himself as great as they by the Law, and to
have as lawful a Right to the Crown, yet are they nevertheless always treated
as Princes of the Blood Royal. His Eldest Son has the Title of Prince of
Poland, and the others barely that of Princes, adding withal their Christian
Names, as Prince Alexander, and Prince Constantin of Poland. The Kings Eldest
Daughter is called the Princess of Poland, and the others only Princesses,
adding thereto their Names, as Princess Mary of Poland. But it must be
understood, that when the King their Father dies, and a new King of another or
the same Family succeeds, and has Children, then do they lose the Titles of
Princes and Princesses of Poland, and take only the Names of their Families or
Estates, such as Prince Sobieski, Princess Czartoriski; yet however the Senate
always look upon themselves obliged to provide for them, to give them Pensions,
and to Match them equal to their Dignity and Birth, which has ever hitherto
been duly observed* Nay, the Poles have all along showed such Esteem and
Affection to the Royal Family, that although they have not allowed them any
Hereditary Right to the Crown by Law, yet have they always Elected one of them
King, where there was any surviving: For I find from the time of their Prince
Piastus, even down to that of the Election of the late King John Sobieski,
which is from the Year 830. to the Year 1674, the Crown has always continued in
the same Family in a direct Line, as your GRACE may observe in the First Volume
of my Account of Poland. They have also not confined this Affection of theirs
to the Kings Sons only, but have likewise extended it toward their Daughters,
and even their Widows, as may be seen at large in their Histories, where Your
GRACE will find what strict Regard the Poles had to the Royal Race, in the
Election of the Princess Hedwigis, whom they waited for with great Patience,
though all the while they suffered extremely by the Insults of the Duke of
Masovia, who pretended a Right to the Crown, as being a Relation to Casimir the
Great.

His Illegitimate as much slighted.
The King's Natural Sons are extremely undervalu'd, and are hardly looked upon
to be Common Gentlemen; for none of the Gentry care to keep Company with them:
Nay, one of the Late King's is a Clerk in the Salt Custom-House at Thorn, a
City in Prussia, where his Place is not worth him above Thirty Pounds per
Annum. All over the Kingdom they usually have a very mean Opinion of
Illegitimate Children, though Nature endows them generally with as many
Perfections, and with as good Qualities, as she does the Lawfully Begotten.

Means to continue the Crown in one Family.
The only way for a King of Poland to continue the Crown in his Family, is to
be Warlike; to enlarge his Dominions; to gain the Love and Affections of his
People by his own Merits, and by the Favor of the Clergy; to send his Children
early to the Wars to get Credit and Reputation in the Army; to spend Liberally
all his Revenues, and to die in Debt, to the end that the Poles may be inclined
to Elect his Son, to enable him to pay what his Father owed. But all this while
he must never think to encroach on the Privileges of the Nation, nor endeavor
by any means to render the Crown Hereditary; for whenever the Poles begin to
smell out any such private Design, they are presently apt to stir up Seditious
Tumults, which would prove very Pernicious to all the Posterity of that King,
as the ill Success the Late King's Sons have had sufficiently demonstrates.

Why the K. of Poland cannot imitate him of Denmark.
It is altogether impossible for a King of Poland, in Imitation of the King of
Denmark, to reduce his Subjects under an Arbitrary Power; for the State of
Denmark was quite different then from what that of Poland is now. In Denmark
the King, Clergy, and Commonalty were under the Rule and Government of the
Gentry, so that it was the Interest of the Clergy and Commonalty to side with
the King, to abate and depress the excessive Power and Privileges of the
Nobility; which they soon effected, by being Resolute and more in Number. But
in Poland it is quite otherwise; for there the Clergy and Gentry have a common
Interest, to keep the King and People in Subjection. The Clergy have great
Privileges, and are very Rich. The Bishops for the most part are Princes or
Dukes; they are all Senators, and sit in the Diet before all the Temporal
Lords; so that by the great Authority and Veneration which they have procured
to themselves from the slavish People, they can hinder them from making any
Insurrection; and by the Arbitrary and Free Power which they and the Gentry
have hitherto maintained, to Elect whom they pleased for King, they will always
keep him in such a Dependence for the sake of his Children, that he shall
hardly ever be able to effect any Design upon their Prerogatives. Nay,
providing he had found any Opportunity to compass such a dangerous Enterprise,
yet would it not consist with Prudence either to declare or Attempt it, for
fear of Incurring the Hatred and Displeasure of the People, which would not
only tend to his own Ruin; but likewise Obstruct the Election of any of his
Family to the Throne after his Death; so that the surest way for a King of
Poland to continue the Crown in his Family, is never to attempt any Innovation.

Not Unhappy because he cannot secure the Succession to his Family.
I would not however think the Kings of Poland Unfortunate, in not being able
to assure the Succession of the Throne to their Children, since they are
thereby compelled, as it were, by a lucky Necessity, to breed them up to all
Royal Virtues, and this to the end that it may render them more Accomplished,
and Worthy to be Elected: For where they are satisfied that the Crown is not
due to their Blood, but to their Merits, what will either the Father or Sons
omit, to obtain it by the most Glorious Means?

My LORD,

Crown and Court. Officers.
I have hitherto presented Your GRACE with what relates to the Form of
Government in Poland, and to the King's Power and Revenues, I would now give a
particular Account of the King's Court, were it not like to that of other
Princes, as to Splendour and Number of Officers: For, besides the Great
Crown-Officers, as the two Great and Little Marshals; as many Chancellors, and
Vice-Chancellors; two Generals, and two Great and Little Treasurers: The King
has his Lord-Chamberlain; his Court-Marshal, or Lord Steward; his Master of the
Horse; his Secretaries of State; his Standard Bearer; Chief Huntsman; his
Gentlemen of the Body, answerable to our Lords of the Bedchamber; his
Physicians, Chaplains, Pensioners, Cup-Bearers, Sewers, Carvers, Musicians, and
Guards.

Gentlemen. Pensioners.
The Gentlemen Pensioners always attend the King on Horseback; this Body of
Gentry consists of the Noblest Youth of the Kingdom, whereof many have Court
and State-Employments, and are all subject to the Jurisdiction of the
Court-Marshal. There are some of these that attend his Majesty on Foot, but in
long Journeys they are always carried in Wagons. A set number of these keep
Guard Day and Night about the King. Whenever the King goes in Public, these
last March every way about him with long Battle-Axes on their Shoulders, and
Sabres by their Sides, but still admitting the Senators and Chief Courtiers to
March next him; yet when the Queen goes with the King, the Senators and other
Persons of Quality are to walk before.

Horse-Guards.
The King's Horse-Guards ought by the Constitutions to be either Poles,
Lithuanians, or Natives of some of the Incorporated Provinces; but however this
Law has been dispensed with, for the late King admitted both Germans and
Hungarians amongst them. Their Number by the Law is not to exceed 1200, and
their Chief Commander is to be subject to all the Four Marshals.

Court*Officers in Lithuania,
The King has the same Number of Court Officers in Lithuania as he has in
Poland, the Lithuanians being as Ambitious to keep up the ancient Grandeur of
their Great Duke, as the Poles are for that of their King.

And in several Provinces.
The King has likewise the Nomination of some Court-Officers in several
Provinces, as in Prussia, Masovia, and Russia, which had formerly distinct
Princes of their own, and were afterward United to the Kingdom of Poland, so
that the King has the Nomination of as many Court-Officers as any Prince in
Europe, but most of them are rather Honorary than Beneficial; yet the Gentry
always make great Interest to get into them; Precedence, of which they are
Ambitious, being Regulated according to the Nature and Dignity of the
Employment.

Chief Officers of Queen's Court.
As for the Queen's Court, it consists of about Thirty Officers, the Chief
whereof are her Marshal and Chancellor. Their Business is to Preside over
Domestic Affairs in the Queen's Court. Her Marshal or Steward, is to carry the
Staff before her; and her Chancellor or Secretary, to Write, Sign, Receive, and
Answer all her Letters. There is her Treasurer, who Manages her Revenue; her
Master of the Horse, Cup-Bearers, Carvers, Sewers, Clerk of the Kitchen, etc.
For Women Servants, she has her Ladies, Maids of Honor, Dressers, etc. When
she goes in Public, she is always attended by a great number of her own Sex.

Principal Officers of Primate's Court.
It may not be here amiss to add something of the Court of the Inter-Rex, or
Primate, and so I will conclude. While the Archbishop of Gnesna has the
Administration of the Government, he has much the same Officers with the King;
but when he has laid down that Authority, his Officers are his Marshal, spoken
of before; his Chancellor, who Presides in his Courts of Justice; his Almoner,
Master of Requests, Cross-Bearer, Steward, Treasurer, Chaplains,
Library Keeper, Clerk of the Kitchen, etc.

What peculiar to him.
This Archbishop alone, as he is the Chief Senator of Poland, has Drums
beating, and Trumpets sounding, both within and without Doors, before he sits
down to Table. He also, by his Prerogative, is not to wait for the King's
Commands when he should Visit him, but may go when and as often as he pleases.

Before, My Lord, I put an end to this Letter, permit me to take notice to Your
GRACE, that the King of Poland does not Name his Privy-Counsellors, but all
Senators are Counselors of Course; for all of that Dignity that are about the
Place where the King Resides, have a Right to sit at the Council Board. For
fear notwithstanding that there should not be always Senators sufficient for
that purpose at Court, the Senate always depute four of their Members to attend
the King's Person by turns, and that not only to give him Advice, but likewise
to Inspect into his Conduct, and to prevent him from Acting contrary to the
Laws: For the King and Council are accountable to the Diet for any
Mismanagement in the Government. In short, the Genius of the Polish Nation, and
the whole Frame of their Constitution, is entirely bent to Curb the King's
Power, and to secure their Laws, and Prerogatives, against the Incroaching
Factions of Foreign Princes, or of their own Court-Party.

I might here, My Lord, add a great many more Particulars relating to the King
of Poland; but this is what I thought most material to be mentioned; and what I
could only learn in so small a Time as I have lived in that Country.

I beg your GRACE's Pardon for tiring your Patience with so long and imperfect
an Account, and desire, my Lord, you would receive this, at least, as a
Testimony of my good Will of satisfying your Curiosity, and of owning your many
Favors to,

My LORD, Your GRACE's Most Obedient Servant, BERNARD CONNOR.

The following Letters, intended at first to be Written by Dr. Connor, were
Compiled by Mr. Savage; the Doctor not having Leisure to attend them from his
Practice.
LETTER II.
To His Grace, HENRY, Duke of Norfolk, Earl- Marshal of England.
Of the Senate and Senators of Poland, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal; With
an Account of the Present Religion in Poland and Lithuania: As also of the
State-Officers and Officers of Districts belonging as well to the Kingdom, as
the Great Duchy.

My LORD,
YOUR Grace's High Birth and Station in our Government, together with Your
Primary Right of Suffrage in our House of Lords, entitle you in a Superlative
manner to the Patronage of this Letter. Wherefore I was glad, to meet with an
occasion so favorable to pay my Duty to Your GRACE; and I could heartily wish
it had been on a Subject that I were more Master of, than in an Account of a
Country which I never saw; yet that you may give some Credit to the Truth of my
Relation, I dare humbly assure you that I have mentioned nothing therein but
what I either had out of Dr. Connor's Memoirs, learned from his own Mouth, or
drew from such Books as both the Doctor and Other Persons of Credit have owned
to be Authentic, and most Correct.

My LORD,

The Senate and its Office.
The Senate of Poland is an Order of Nobles between the King and common Gentry,
established to rule and govern according to Law, and to observe the Conduct of
the King: And moreover, they are to apply themselves to study the public Good,
and the Preservation of the Privileges of the People. It consists at present of
a far greater Number of Persons than formerly.

Senators, by whom made; and their Oath.
It is the King that makes every Senator; but who being once so made, is to
continue his Office for Life. At the Time of his Creation, he is obliged to
take a solemn Oath, to conserve inviolable, the Rights and Liberties of the
Republic; so that if the King himself had a mind to extend his Power and
Authority, beyond the Limits prescribed him by the Laws, every Senator's Oath
alone would oblige him to acquaint his Majesty with due Respect of his Duty and
Obligation. Nay, every Nuncio in the grand Diet, assumes this Liberty: For, in
that Place, dicunt quae sentiunt, and sentiunt quae velint; as may appear by an
insolent Affront put upon the late King John Sobieski, who having been called
Tyrant, Nero, and many other opprobrious Names, by some of the Deputies, and
not being able to bear it, he started up and threatened them, laying his Hand on
his Sword, That had he been the great General still, he would have done
something; whereat one of them rising likewise, and clapping his Hand to his
Sword, replied, and that Sword would have done something too. Another Passage I
have read, of Lewis King of Hungary and Poland; who having been basely abused
in the Diet, stood up and cried, Si non essem Rex -- whereto the Orator briskly
replied, Si non fuisses Rex. --

Four to attend the King, and wherefore.
These Senators are likewise bound to see that nothing be done against their
Privileges; and therefore four of them are always deputed to attend the King
with their Advice: Besides these four, who are ever actually the King's
Counsel; any of the others in like manner, have a Right to assist at the
Council Board if they think fit.

Senators not suffered to travel,
The Presence of these Senators is looked upon to be so absolutely necessary
for the Good of the Kingdom, that not one of 'em can travel upon whatsoever
Account, without Leave of the Republic. Vide Sueton. Cap. 42. in vita* Jul.
Caesar. and Tacit* lib 12. Annal. cap. 23.
This Custom is taken from the Romans who not only forbid the Senators, but also
their Sons to go beyond the Verge of Italy.

This Title not bestowed by its self.
This Title of Senator the King cannot bestow by it self, but it is always
annexed to one of the four Dignitys of Bishops, Castellans, or Palatins, The
Ten Crown-Officers;
all which the King names; whereof Palatins are Lord-Lieutenants of Provinces;
Castellans are Governors, who have not their Names from Castles, as the Word
might reasonably import, but from commanding a Portion of a Province in Time of
War.

The ten Crown-Officers are the Marshals, Chancellors, and Treasurers of the
Kingdom; and Bishops preside over their several Diocesses with an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

When any one is named a Bishop, Palatin, Castellan, or any of the ten Officers
of the Crown, he is immediately a Senator without more ado.

Senator's Office.
Their Business is to serve faithfully the King and Republic in the Senate; at
home to administer Justice by Commission or otherwise, and abroad, with Consent
of the Diet, to exercise foreign Ministrys, etc.

Extremely prize their Dignities.
These Senators of Poland value their Dignities so highly, that they despise
almost all other Titles of Honor whatever, and therefore when Sigismund I.
went to Vienna, and the Emperor offered the Title of Princes of the Empire to
the several Senators that came along with him, they absolutely refused 'em;
giving for Reason, That being born Gentlemen of Poland, and thereby having a
Right to treat either of Peace or War with their King; they believed it an
Injury to their Dignity to have a Prince of the Empire thought superior.

Their Division and Subdivision.
This Senate consists either of Ecclesiastical or Secular Members. The
Ecclesiastical are either Archbishops or Bishops; and are the chief Members of
the Senate. Their Number at present is but sixteen. Three of these Bishoprics
are now in the Enemies Hands, though they nevertheless have titular Bishops,
viz. Smolensko and Kiovia possessed by the Moscovites, and Caminiec enjoyed by
the Turks: So that there remain but thirteen Bishoprics actually in the King's
Dominions, of which but two are Archbishopricks, viz. those of Gnesna and
Leopol. When any of the aforesaid three Bishoprics are vacant, there are
always those ready that will beg their Titles merely to have the Honor to sit
as Senators.

The several Diocesses belonging to all Diocesses of Poland.
these Bishoprics, are, Archiepiscopal of
Gnesna and Leopol.
Episcopal of
Cracow, Cujavia and Pomerania, Vilna, Posnan, Plocksko or Plosko, Varmia
Luceoria or Lucko, Premislia or Premislaw, Samegitia, Culm, Chelm, Kiovia,
Caminiec, and Smolensko.
Subject to the two Archbishops are the other Bishops, and first to the
Archbishop of Gnesna, are the several Bishops of
Cracow, Vladislaw, Peculiar Jurisdictions of the two Archbishops.
Posnan, Plosko, Vilna, Varmia, Samogitia, and Culm.
And next to the Archbishop of Leopol, are the Bishops of
Chelm, Caminiec, Luceoria, Premislia, and Kiovia.


Gnesna is not only Ecclesiastical Senator, his Power and State.
Chief of the Bishops, but also of all the other Senators of Poland. He is
Primate of the Kingdom; a Title given him by the Council of Constance; and
moreover, styles himself the Pope's Legate Born, by a Grant of the Council of
Lateran. All Ecclesiastical Affairs that have been determined in the Archbishop
of Leopol's, or any of the other Bishops Courts, may be reversed, or confirmed
in an Appeal to him. His Power and Authority is exceeding great, and even next
to the King's: It is Death to draw a Sword in his Presence, or to quarrel in
any manner whatsoever before him: When he goes to the King, or the Diet, there
is always a golden Cross carried before him; and when he sits, his Chaplain
holds it behind his Chair. He has his Marshal, who is a Castellan and Senator
of the Kingdom. This Person on Horseback, carries a Staff before his Coach,
but salutes none with it except the King, when the Archbishop and he happen to
meet. This Marshal has likewise the Honor to carry the like Staff before the
King, where the other Marshals are absent. When the Archbishop comes to wait on
the King, the great Chamberlain, or some other great Officer, always receives
him at the Stair-Foot, and the King afterward comes out of his Chamber to meet
him in the Antichamber. He never pays any Visits out of Duty, but to the
Pope's Nuncio, and to him only but once. He visits no King's Ambassadors, though
they visit him first.

His Power as Inter. Rex.
After the King's Death he is the supreme Regent of the Kingdom till a new one
be chosen; during which Time, he may coin Money in his own Name, a Privilege
granted him by Boleslaus the Chaste; but which nevertheless has not been
practiced, no Money having ever been seen of his coining. The Revenues also of
the Crown belong to him in the Inter-Regnum; he convokes the Diet, and
dissolves it at Pleasure; and in case there happens any thing extraordinary,
the Government assigns him several Senators for his Assistants. In short, he is
Tantum non Rex. He only can proclaim the King when elected, and crown him
afterward (except where he dies, as in the following Case) which is so very
considerable, that he is looked upon, by the Ambassadors and Envoys of the
Candidates, as the only Person upon whom the Success of their Negotiation
depends* and therefore all of them do their utmost to make him their Friend.

Hereupon I must acquaint your Grace with a Passage in the Election of the late
King of Poland, John III. in the Year 1674. when one Czartoreski was Archbishop
of Gnesna; who being entirely in the Austrian Interest, and a great Friend to
the Chancellor Patz, and by consequence, both an Enemy to the French and John
Sobieski's Party, could by no means be brought to proclaim him; but as it
happened, he died three Days before the Election, and that Power devolved to
Trzebicki, Bishop of Cracow, who being altogether for the Grand Marshal,
forthwith proclaimed him with Joy.

Why entrusted so much.
The Reason why the Republic entrusts this great Authority to a Clergyman, is
for Fear, that if it were bestowed on a secular Senator, he might make use of
it to advance himself to the Throne.

His See.
This Archbishop's See is at Lowitz, a City in the Palatinate of Rava, in Lower
Poland. He is born a Canon of the Church of Plosko.

senator is the Archbishop of Leopol, the capital City of Red-Russia, so named
from a sovereign Duke of that Province, called Leo, who was subdued by a
Castellan of Cracow, in the Year 1279, and under the Reign of Lescus VI.

Two other Bishops in Leopol.
This City is the Seat of three Bishops, viz. the Roman Catholic Archbishop,
the Armenian-Catholick Archbishop, and a Russian Greek Schismatic Bishop. These
two Archbishops have the same Belief and Religion, only the Armenian have some
particular Ceremonies wherein they differ, and the Women are separated from the
Men in the Church.

Those of the Greek Persuasion.
The Russian or Greek-Schismatic Bishops cannot Marry, because they must of
necessity be chosen out of the Order of Friars of St. Basil, who all make a Vow
of Chastity. Nevertheless the Parish Priests are not obliged to live in
Coelibacy, that is, if they were admitted into Orders after their Marriage, for
they cannot be constrained to leave their Wives; but however, when their Wives
dye, they cannot Marry again, unless they have a mind to relinquish their
Priesthood.

Their Tenets, Ceremonies, and Ornoments.
Their Liturgy is in the Russian Language, being as the Polish, a Dialect of
the Sclavovian. Their Tenets are, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
by the Son, and that the Pope is not Head of all the Church, but only the first
of the two Patriarchs, whereof theirs of Constantinople is the second, and
independent of the first. In other Articles of Belief they agree with the Roman
Church: Their Ceremonies and Ornaments differ from the Roman and Armenian. They
pray standing, though they make frequent Genuflexions: They receive the Communion
in both Kinds after this manner: The Priest consecrates several little Pieces
of Bread made with Leaven; after which he receives himself, and then breaks the
Bread in diverse little Pieces; which done, he puts 'em into the Chalice with
the consecrated Wine, and then with a little Silver Spoon, made for that
purpose, he communicates to the People, who all stand, with their Arms across
upon their Breasts, when they receive. This done, the Communicants follow the
Priest thrice about the Altar with folded Arms, who all the while advises and
charges them to make good Cheer for seven Days together, and to fast the next
seven Days after that. The Russians likewise make their Children communicate,
though never so young. When they have all taken the Sacramen^^, the Priest
consumes the rest at his Pleasure.

This Digression being curious, I thought it not amiss to insert it, but now I
must proceed to

Senator, who is the Bishop of Cracow, the capital City of the Kingdom, lying
in High or Little Poland.

His Bishopric and Power.
This was first an Archbishopric, established by Miecislaus I. in the Year
964. immediately after he had embraced the Christian Faith, but was afterward
lost by means of one Lampert, who being made Archbishop, and valuing himself
too much on his Birth, neglected to send to Rome for Consecration, whereupon
the Pope ordered it for the future to remain only a Bishopric. What is
remarkable in this Bishopric is, that the Archbishopric and that have
frequently been held by the same Person. This Bishop styles himself Duke of
Severia, in which all the People are subject both to his Ecclesiastical and
Temporal Jurisdiction.

His Residence,
His usual Residence is either at Bozentium, a small Town at the Bottom of the
Bald Mountain, or else at Kielsk in the same Palatinate of Sendomir. He has in
his Diocese 1018. Churches, of which thirteen are Collegiate.

and Precedence.
His Seat in the Senate is on the left Hand of the King, and next to the
Archbishop of Leopol, tho it ought to be on the right, he being the first
Bishop in the Kingdom.

This Bishopric was formerly joined to Gnesna. An Address to this Bishop is
commonly Admodum Reverendo, when others have only Reverendo.

The fourth Ecclesiastical Senator is the His See.
Bishop Cujavia and Pomerania; the Sea of whose Bishopric is at Vladislaw, upon
the Vistula, four Leagues below Thorn in Low Poland.

Precedence and Authority.
His Seat in the Senate is on the right hand of the Archbishop of Gnesna, whose
Place he officiates in an Inter-regnum, as your GRACE may have observed before.
His Bishopric was formerly called the Bishopric of Cruswick, because he had a
Cathedral Church there; but that being translated to Vladislaw, at this Day it
has sometimes the Name of the Bishopric of Vladislaw.

Several Places of Residence.
His usual Residence, when in Poland, is either at Wolboria, in the Palatinate
of Lanschet, or Lagovia, in the Palatinate of Sendomir; and when in Prussia, is
chiefly at Sobkovia.

The fifth Ecclesiastial Senator is the Bishop Vilna, the capital City of the
great Duchy of Lithuania, on the River Vilia, which discharges it self into
the River Niemen, below Cowno.

His Diocese.
His Diocese extends it self through Lithuania, and White-Russia, even to the
Borders of Moscovy.

The sixth Ecclesiastical Senator is the Bishop Posnan, a City in Low or Great-
Poland, situate on the River Varta: There are the Tombs of several Kings of
Poland in the Cathedral Church of this City, all which are very Magnificent.

His Diocese.
His Diocese not only extends through the Province of Posnania, but also through
some part of the Palatinate of Masovia, as Warsaw, etc.

Senator is the Bishop of Plosko, a small City in Masovia, on the River
Vistula, five Leagues above Vladislaw.

His Jurisdiction,
He has the same Jurisdiction over the Territory of Pultausk, as the Bishop of
Cracow has over the Duchy of Severia, and wherein there lies no Appeal to the
King.

and See.
His Episcopal See is at Pultausk in Masovia, upon the River Narew, which runs
into the Bug, two Leagues below.

Senator is the Bishop of Varmia, in Royal Prussia, which Bishopric is so
divided, that the Bishop has two Parts, and the Chapter the third, and in which
they have His Jurisdiction,
a free Jurisdiction over the Gentry, exempt from the Regal Power.

and See.
His Episcopal See is at Frawenberg, a little Town near Frisc-haff.

Senator is the Bishop of Luceoria or Lucko, which is the capital City of High-
Volhynia.

His Diocese.
His Diocese contains part of the Palatinate of Masovia, Podlachia, and
Briescia or Polesia, in the great Duchy of Lithuania.

Senator is the Bishop of Premislia or Premislaw, a City of Red-Russia, on the
River San, six Leagues above Jeroslaw, and twelve from Leopol.

Here is a Greek Bishop.
In this City there is a Greek-schismatic Bishop* It was here that a Canon of
the Cathedral Church, named Orikowski, in the Beginning of Lutheranism,
maintained the first, that Priests might Marry, and who Married afterward
himself, in the Year 1549. under the Reign of Sigismund II.

The eleventh Ecclesiastical Senator is the Samogitia, who obtained from Pope
Likewise Bishop of Curland.
Urban VIII. that he might likewise be Bishop of Curland.

yet has no See.
This Bishop has no particular See appointed, but sometimes resides at Midnich,
one of the chief Towns in that Province.

The twelfth Ecclesiastical Senator is the Culm, a City of Royal Prussia, on
the River Vistula, six Leagues above the City of Thorn.

His Precedence,
This Bishop formerly preceded the Bishop of Varmia.

and See.
His Episcopal See is at Lubavia, as likewise at Stargardie, which the Germans
call Althousen.

The thirteenth Ecclesiastical Senator is the Chelm in Red-Russia: There is
besides in this City, a Greek-Schismatick Bishop.

His See translated, and wherefore.
The Bishop of Chelm has for some time translated his See to Kranostaw, a Town
in the same Palatinate of Chelm, built upon a great Lake, through which runs the
River Nieper: This Translation was occasioned by the frequent Irruptions of the
Tartars and Cosaks, and who have altogether destroyed the City of Chelm.

The fourteenth Ecclesiastical Senator is the Kiovia, capital City of Low-
Volhynia, Honorary.
and of all Vkraina.

A Greek Bishop formerly Primate of Moscovy.
Here is moreover, a Greek-Schismatick Bishop, formerly Primate of all Russia
or Moscovy: The Inhabitants of this City are all of the Greek Persuasion, and
at present are subject to the Great Czar.

Senator is the Honorary.
Bishop of Caminiec, Capital of Podolia, which is now under the Turk.

Senator is the Honorary.
Bishop of Smolensko, upon the River Vistula, Capital of the Duchy of the same
Name. This Duchy was formerly subject to Lithuania, but now is also subdued by
the Moscovite.

Each Bishop has a Kind of little Court.
Every one of these Bishops has a great Retinue, and a kind of little Court,
having several Ecclesiastical and Secular Officers about him. The greatest Part
of them also have Suffragans, because they believe themselves chiefly made
Bishops to have a Right to sit in the Senate, and not to be troubled with the
Duties of their Office, and therefore allow these a small Pension to perform
all Episcopal Functions for them.

Guagnini says, that in the Year 1506. there was a great Contest in the Diet
held at Lublin, between the Ecclesiastical and Lay- Senators; for the latter
pretended to have a Right to sit next the King on his left Hand; but which at
length the Bishops overpowered them in, and thereby retained their ancient
Privilege.

Their Precedence in the Diet, and large Revenues.
Krzistanowic, in his State of Poland says, that such was the Piety of the
Poles, that immediately after they became Christians, they preferred their
Clergy to their Laity, and allowed them many Noble Immunities and Privileges
which they enjoy to this Day.

Most of the Bishops have very large Revenues, wherewith they may not only live
splendidly and comfortably themselves, but also be assistant to the inferior
Clergy, and charitable to the Poor.

Religion in Poland and Lithuania.
Here I must beg leave to give Your GRACE, by way of Digression, some Account
of the present State of Religion, both in Poland and Lithnania; together with a
few historical Circumstances relating as well to modern, as more remote Times,
and wherein I shall all along endeavor to be as concise and comprehensive as
the several Particulars I have to go through will admit.

Conversion and several Persuasions of the Poles.
Your GRACE may first be informed, that the Poles became Christians under the
Reign of Miecislaus I. in the Year 964. as may be observed in the Life of that
King. The first Tenets they embraced, were those of the Church of Rome: But
however, the Russians entertained the Greek Persuasion, which they continue in
many Places of that Province to this Day: They are utterly averse to the Roman
Catholic Religion, and term its Professors, by way of Contempt, Latins, their
Service being in that Language.

There are two Sorts of Greek Churches in this Kingdom; the Schismatics and
the Vniats; whereof the latter differ only from the Roman Catholics, in that
their Devotion is all in the Greek Language. The Priests of both these Churches
are called Popi, the Word Pop in Polish signifying a Priest.

Formerly Poland was overrun with Hussites, Picards, Anabaptists, Arrians,
Tritheists, Photians, Ebionites, Nestorians, and Socinians: But the former of
these have been Socinians expelled, 1658.
some time since extirpated, and the Socinians were first ejected by John
Casimir, obliging them, by his Edict, to quit the Kingdom immediately, and
allowing them three Years to dispose of their Effects. These three Years were
afterward reduced to two by a following Edict: But notwithstanding these
positive Laws, several of this Sect lurking about in the Kingdom, from time to
time, and some being protected by the Favor of the Gentry, the late King John
Sobieski published a new 1673.
Edict more severe than either of the former, whereby the Socinians were
forthwith driven out of the Kingdom.

Lutherans, and Calvinists.
I must not omit to acquaint Your GRACE, that there are abundance of Lutherans
and Calvinists in this Kingdom, and that chiefly in the Province of Regal-
Prussia, who have all Liberty of Conscience allowed them, and whom the King is
obliged to tolerate and protect by his Coronation Oath. The Lutherans are
called by the Poles, Sassowiez (Saxons) because Luther lived and taught in
Saxony* and the Calvinists, Zborocoi (Conventiclers) from the Polish Word Zbor,
signifying an Unlawful Meeting. I should have observed, that the Prussians
became Christians after the Poles. The reason of the Prussians so readily
embracing the Lutheran Doctrine, Cromerus attributes to their being chiefly
Germans, or to their reading the Books of that Nation. The first Polish
Nobleman converted to Calvinism, was Nicholas Radzivil, under the Reign of
Sigismundus Augustus, who received all that Sect into his Protection at his
House at Viena, where they had their Service in the Polish Language; but this
Family is at present extinct, the last Person of it being a Daughter, and
Married to the Elector of Brandenburgh's Son; yet nevertheless, many of this
Sect still remain in Poland.

and other Religions in Poland.
There are Besides, Armenians, Jews, and Tartars in this Kingdom, who all enjoy
their different Persuasions and Ceremonies. As for the Armenians, they inhabit
chiefly in certain Towns of Russia and Podolia, and have their peculiar
Prelates, Abbots, and Priests: Their Service is always exercised in their own
Language: These, as in other Countries, acknowledge the Supremacy of the Sea of
Rome. The Jews are every where to be found in Poland, and enjoy their Religion,
and other Privileges, without Interruption; only they are restrained from
trading within twelve Leagues of Warsaw, by the Constitutions. Their Number is
so great, that Mr. Patric Ogleby, who has traveled all over these Countries,
affirms, that there are above two Millions of them in this Kingdom, and that
they are so privileged, that all this vast Body pays not above a hundred and
twenty thousand Tinfes or Florens a Year to the States; which amounts to no
more than twenty thousand Dollars. In the great Duchy of Listhuania, there are
moreover about thirty thousand Tartars, with Liberty of the Turkish Religion.
They have been there near six hundred Years, and for the continuance of their
Privileges, they are obliged to send twelve hundred Men Yearly to the Wars
against the Turks and Tartars. There are likewise a great many Idolaters on the
Frontiers of this Kingdom, who still retain their ancient Superstitions,
whereof one is, that whenever any one dies, and tho it be a Year or more
afterward, that another dies likewise; they presently go and dig up the first
Body, and cut off its Head, thereby to prevent, as they say, the Death of any
more of their Family.

The Roman Catholic prevails,
Notwithstanding Poland admits of all these Religions, yet that which prevails
most, is the Roman Catholic, which the Poles have continued steadfast in for
above 700. Years. They are so zealous in the maintaining of this Faith, that
they have a Custom to draw their Swords at the reading of the Gospel at Mass,
and this to testify their Readiness to defend it: Also they are so bigoted to
their Persuasion, that they formerly would not inter-marry with Heretics, as
they call them; contract any Alliance with them, accept of their Assistance in
War, nor receive any of their Scepters offered them: An Example of which last,
we have in the Person of Jugello or Vladislaus V. who rejected the Crown of
Bohemia, merely because the Hussites had then overrun that Kingdom. Also in
John Casimir's Reign, the Swedes were altogether ejected Poland, on Account of
their being Lutherans.

and always preferred.
The Poles being thus Zealous for the Roman Catholic Religion, they will admit
none into their Senate, Diet, or Courts of Judicature (except in those of
Prussia) but of that Persuasion. Also Bishops always preside in the Assembly of
the States, to the end that nothing may be transacted there in Prejudice of
that Faith. The lesser Clergy likewise, selected out of the several Colleges
and Chapters of the Kingdom, are appointed to have Seats in the Tribunals and
other Courts of Justice for the same Reason. In like manner, the great Officers
of the Crown are oftentimes Bishops, and the great Secretary of the whole
Kingdom has always been an Ecclesiastic.

Privileges of Regular Clergy.
The Regular Clergy in Poland, are generally more esteemed than the Secular;
for they can perform all the Offices of Parish Priests, without having
Permission from the Bishops: And Friar- Mendicants are allowed to enter the
most private Part of any House without so much as knocking at the Door. There
are all Sorts of Religious Orders in Poland, except those of Carthusians and
Minims.

Their dissolute Lives.
These Regular Clergy are generally very rich, but not less dissolute and
immodest; for they frequently go into the Cellars to drink, being the Tippling
Places of this Country, and sometimes you shall see many of them so drunk in
the Streets, that they are scarce able to go upon their Legs, and this without
either their Superiors or the Peoples taking any Notice of them.

Fasts, how observed in Poland.
On Fast-Days these Religious Persons, and all others of the Poles, abstain
from Milk-Meats, Eggs, Flesh, and Boiled Fish, a-Nights only: For providing
they keep to these Rules at that time, they may Eat and Drink what they please
all the rest of the Day, only Frydays and Saturdays they forbear Butter,
Cheese, Milk, and Eggs, all the Day long. They cannot be inclined to eat Butter
or Cheese on Fast-Days, tho they have Permission from the Church; for when
Cardinal Radziouski once obtained them that Liberty, from the Sea of Rome; they
absolutely refused it, saying, that his Holiness was a Heretic. This rigid
Custom they have observed ever since the Pope made them once fast for a hundred
Years together for some enormous Crime; and which it may be, they do not think
yet sufficiently expiated. They also are so obstinate in their abstaining from
Flesh, that they will not eat any, tho they be sick and advised thereto by
their Doctors, and permitted by their Priests.

Manners of the Secular Clergy.
As for the Secular Inferior Clergy, they are either Collegiate or Parochial,
and both are much after the same Nature as with us. The Canons are never almost
present at the Office, for they give the poor Scholars two Pence a Day to say
their Hours for them in the Quoir. The Parsons generally neglect their Cures,
by leaving most of their Duty to the Monks or Vicars and Curates. They always
sing Part of the Service in the Polish Language, and that especially in the
Parish-Churches at High- Mass.

The Rosary is also daily repeated in the Dominicans Chapels, in which the Men
are seated, and join in the Repetition, on one Side, and the Women on the
other; the former alone singing the Ave Maria, and the latter the Sancta Maria.

Plurality of Benefices is here tolerated; for there are some of these secular
Clergy who have not only two Canonships, but also two Parsonages: But there are
none that take any Care to perform the Duties of their Function. The Bishops
themselves are so careless of their Episcopal Functions, that they care not to
correct the inferior Clergy when they do amiss.

The Poles Behavior at Church.
At Divine Service the Poles always seem very devout, and bestow considerable
Gifts upon their Churches; but they are neither liberal to the Poor, nor
careful of their sick Servants. They pray always aloud in the Church, and at
the Elevation of the Host at Mass, they cuff themselves, and knock their Heads
against the Pavement, or the Bench whereon they sit, with so great Violence,
that it commonly makes a great deal of Noise, and may be heard at a
considerable Distance. The Women commonly have their Prayer-Books, with a
Chaplet of Beads in the Middle of them. In Winter the Ladies of Quality, and
even some Men, have furred Bags brought to Church for them, to preserve their
Feet from the excessive Cold: They also wear little furred Mantles on their
Shoulders for the same purpose.

Their Churches.
I shall now only further observe to Your GRACE, as to this Subject of
Religion, that the Churches in Poland are extremely fine, and well adorned; as
also that the Jesuits of Leopol have a Chasuble or Cope, which the Priests
wear at Mass, covered so thick with Pearls, that, by reason of its Heaviness,
it is of little or no Use.

To return to the Senate, from whence I have made this long, but I hope,
pardonable Digression, I must acquaint Your GRACE, that excepting those already
mentioned, and some of the ten Crown-Officers, who are often Ecclesiastic; the
other Members thereof are all temporal, and

Division and Subdivision of Lay* Senators.
Amount to the Number of 128. when they are all Laymen, and may be subdivided
into, 32 Palatins 85 Castellans, 10 Crown Officers 1 Starosta.

They are again to be divided into Senators:
Great and Little


The Great are only,

32 Palatins,

3 Castellans of
Cracow, Vilna and Troki,
1 Starosta.

The Little or Inferior are in all 92. viz.

10 Crown-Officers, and

82 Castellans.

These remaining Castellans may be divided into,

The
Greater and Lesser.
The Greater are in Number 33.

The Lesser lying only in High- Poland, Masovia, and Russia; amount to 49. But
of all these in their Order. And

Palatins, etc. with their Precedence.
First, Of the Palatins, whose Precedence, together with the intermixed
Castellans, and one Starosta, is as follows.

1. Lay-Senator.
The first of all the Lay- Senators is,

The Castellan of Cracovia in High- Poland.

Preferred, and wherefore.
He takes Place of the Palatin* for having formerly withstood the Fury of the
Enemy, where the Palatin run away, in a Battle 1130.
fought by Boleslaus III. Or as Duglossus lib. 4. Annal. Polon. p. 369.
others say, because the then Palatin Scar bimir us rebelled against Boleslaus;
in Detestation of which Action, he was ordered for ever after to give Place to
the Castellan.

The second Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Cracovia.

The third Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Posnania in Low- Poland.

The fourth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Vilna in Lithuania.

The fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Pabatin of Sendomir in High- Poland.

The sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Vilna.

Preferred, for what Reasons.
He is preferred before several Palatins, because of some considerable Services
he had done the Commonwealth; or rather, as Lib. 2 Cap. 3. p. 504.
Hartknoch says, from the Antiquity of his Creation; for when Jagello united
Lithuania to Poland, he instituted the Palatins and Castellans of Vilna and
Troki, and ordered them to sit in Council, whereupon they have ever since taken
Place of those that were created afterward.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Kalisch in Low- Poland.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Troki in Lithuania.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Siradia in Low- Poland.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Troki in Lithuania.

Preferred, and why.
He is preferred to several Palatins for the same Reason with the Castellan of
Vilna.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Lencici or Lanschet in Low- Poland.

Senator is,

The Starosta or Governor of Samogitia.

Wherefore preferred, and how chosen.
He has Preference also over some Palatins: This Senator is chosen by the
Nobility of his Province, and confirmed by the King, and holds his Command for
Life, unless he commit any very great Offense, in which Case he may be deprived
of it, and degraded by the Diet.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Bresty, in the Territory of Cujavia in Low- Poland.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Kiovia in Low- Volhynia.

Honorary Palatinate.
This Palatinate is only Honorary, the Moscovites having had Possession of it
ever since the Cosacks surrendered it to them.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Inowlocz in Low- Poland*

Senator is,

The Palatin of Russia.

Why he has the Title of the Province.
He has the Title of all the Country, tho there be several other Palatins in
this great Province, his Jurisdiction being wholly confind'd to that
Palatinate, which formerly had the Name of Leopol.

The seventeenth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of High Volhynia, or Luceoria.

The eighteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of High- Podolia (formerly of Caminiec.)

Honorary Palatinate.
This Palatinate at present is only honorary, being wholly in Possession of the
Turks.

The nineteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Smolensko.

Honorary Palatinate.
This Palatinate is also Honorary, and in the Hands of the Moscovites, since
the Year 1654.

The twentieth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Lublin in High- Poland.

The twenty first Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Losk or Polockz in Lithuania.

The twenty second Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Belez or Belsko in Red- Russia.

The twenty third Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Novogrodeck in Lithuania.

The twenty fourth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Plosko or Plockzko in Low- Poland.

The twenty fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Witebsko or Vitepsko in Lithuania.

The twenty sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Masovia (formerly of Czirna, a Town in the same Province.)

Senator is,

The Palatin of Podlachia or Bielsko, a District of that Province.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Rava in Low- Poland.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Briescia or Polesia in Lithuania.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Culm in Regal- Prussia.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Mscislaw or Msceislaw in Lithuania.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Marienbourg in Regal- Prussia.

Formerly Seat of Teutonic Knights.
The City of Marienbourg was formerly the Seat of the Teutonic Order, as
appears by the Stalls or Seats yet to be seen in great Numbers in the Chapel
of the Castle.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Braclaw in Low- Podolia.

Honorary Palatinate.
This Palatinate at present is only Honorary, being altogether ravaged and
dispeopled by the frequent Incursions of the Turks and Tartars.

Senator is,

The Palatin of Pomerania in Regal- Prussia.

Greatest Part Honorary.
This Palatinate lies altogether in Royal Prussia, the greatest Part of it now
being a Province belonging to Sueden and Brandenbourg, though a small Portion of
it yet remains to Poland.

The thirty fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Minski or Minsch in Lithuania.

The thirty sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Palatin of Czernichovia or Czernikow, a Duchy which formerly belonged to
Lithuania.

Honorary Palatinate.
This Palatinate at present is only Honorary, having been for some time under
the Czar of Moscovy.

Duty and Office of Palatins.
Having thus described the Order and Precedence of the chief Senators, it would
not be amiss to give Your GRACE some Account of the Duty of a Palatin, which is
to lead the Troops of his Palatinate into the Field in a general Expedition,
called by the Poles, Pospolite Ruszenie: Hartknoch lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 506. etc.
But in time of Peace, the Power of all is not the same, for there are some
Palatins in the great Duchy of Lithuania, who even then govern by Martial Law.
In Prussia also they proceed by the same Law, which they call Judicia
Palatinalia; their general Office is to preside in the little Diet or Assembly
of the Gentry of their Province; to regulate the Prizes of Merchandises, and to
take Care of Weights and Measures; as also to punish or protect the Jews, who
cannot be judged in the common Courts: But this is otherwise in Prussia and
Volhinia, as may hereafter appear more at large. These Palatins are all Princes
by their Office.

Vice- Palatins, and how qualified.
The Palatins have every one a Vice- Palatin under them, and in some Places
more than one, whom they name themselves, and take their Oaths to be true and
faithful to them only: These Vice- Palatins must have a Competency in Land to
qualify'em for that Employment.

Duty of Castellans.
Immediately after the Palatins and the other four priviledg'd Persons, come
the several Castellans, who are all Senators, and Lieutenants to the Palatins
in time of War, leading the Gentry of their Jurisdiction into the Field, under
the Command of the Palatins.

Their Division.
Of these Castellans there are several in every Palatinate which are
distinguished by the greater and lesser; the greater are so called, because,
excepting very few, they derive the Names of their Castellanies from
Palatinates; whereas the lesser do take theirs only from Districts, which makes
them sometimes called Castellani Districtuum. Also another Reason why they are
so divided is, because the lesser Castellans sit only on Benches behind the
other Senators: Also they may be termed the lesser, in regard that it is not
long since they were first admitted of the Senate, and that they are sometimes
excluded. But however, in all other Respects they are equal.

Qualifications.
The necessary Qualifications of a Castellan are to be a Nobleman of Poland,
and to have Lands and Tenements in the Territory whereof he is Castellan.

Office and Titles.
In times of Peace, except their Office in the Senate, the Castellans have no
Jurisdiction, except in criminal Cases; the Titles of Magnifici or Wielmozni
are given by the Chancery to the greater Sort of them, and of Generosi or
Vrodzeni to the lesser, but commonly all the Castellans are saluted by the
Titles of Illustrissimi or Jasnie Wielmozni.

Greater Castellans and their Precedence.
The Names and Precedence in the Senate, of all these Castellans, and first of
the greater Sort.

The thirty seventh Lay- Senator is,

Lay-Senator.
The Castellan of Posnania.

The thirty eighth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Sendomir.

The thirty ninth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Kalisch.

The fortieth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Wounitz, a Town in the Palatinate of Cracovia.

The forty first Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Gnesna, a City in the Palatinate of Posnania.

The forty second Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Siradia.

The forty third Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Lanschet or Lencici.

The forty fourth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Samogitia.

The forty fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Bresty or Bressici.

The forty sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Kiovia.

The forty seventh Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Inowlocz.

The forty eighth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Leopol, a City in the Palatinate of Russia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Volhynia.

Senator is,

Honorary.
The Castellan of Caminiec, a strong City in the Palatinate of Podolia.

Senator is,

Honorary.
The Castellan of Smolensko.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Lublin.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Losk or Polocz.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Belez or Belsko.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Novogrodec.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Plocksko.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Witebsko.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Czirna, a District in the Province of Masovia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Podlachia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Rava.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Briescia or Polesia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Culm.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Mscislaw or Msceislaw.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Elbing, a considerable City in the Palatinate of Pomerania.

The sixty fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Braclaw.

The sixty sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Dantzic, a famous City in the Palatinate of Marienburg.

The sixty seventh Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Minsch or Minski.

The sixty eighth Lay- Senator is,

Honorary.
The Castellan of Livonia.

The sixty ninth Lay- Senator is,

Honorary.
The Castellan of Czernicovia.

Lesser Castellans.
The lesser Sort of Castellans are as follows.

The seventieth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Sandecz, a Town and District in the Palatinate of Cracovia.

The seventy first Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Mezaritz, a Town in the Palatinate of Posnania.

The seventy second Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Visticz, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Sendomir.

The seventy third Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Biecz, a City and District in the Palatinate of Cracovia.

The seventy fourth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Ragosno, a Town in the Palatinate of Posnania.

The seventy fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Radomsko, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Sendomir.

The seventy sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Zawichost, a City in the same Palatinate.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Land or Landaw, a

Town in the Palatinate of Kalisch.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Srzdo or Sremsk, a

Town in the Palatinate of Posnania.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Zarnow, a Town in the Palatinate of Sendomir.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Malagost or Malogsch, a Town in the same.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Vielunia, a Territory in the Palatinate of Siradia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Praemislaw, a District in the Palatinate of Russia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Halicz, a District in the same Palatinate.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Sanoch, a District in the same Palatinate.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Chelm.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Drohiczin, a District of the Province of Podlachia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Poloviec, a Town in the Palatinate of Sendomir.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Premecz or Primen, a Town in the Palatinate of Posnania.

The eighty ninth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Kriven, a Town in the same Palatinate.

The ninetieth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Czekow, a Town in the Palatinate of Sendomir.

The ninety first Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Nakel or Naklo, a

Town in the Palatinate of Kalisch.

The ninety second Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Rosprza, a Town in the Palatinate of Siradia.

The ninety third Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Biechovia, a Town in the Palatinate of Lanschet.

The ninety fourth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Bidgotz, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Inowlocz.

The ninety fifth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Brezini, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Lanschet.

The ninety sixth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Kruswick, a District and City in the Palatinate of Bresty.

The ninety seventh Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Oswieczin, a Duchy and City in the Palatinate of Cracovia.

The ninety eighth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Kamin, a Town in the Palatinate of Kalisch.

The ninety ninth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Spicimiria or Rizepice, a District and Town in the Palatinate
of Siradia.

The hundredth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Inowlocz.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Kowalow, a Town in the Palatinate of Bresty.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Zandoc, a Town in the Palatinate of Posnania.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Sochazovia, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Rava.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Warsaw, a District and famous City in the Province of Masovia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Gostinin, a District and capital City in the Palatinate of
Rava.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Wisna, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Masovia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Radzanow, a Town in the Palatinate of Plosko.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Sieprcz or Siepez, a Town in the same Palatinate.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Wissegrod, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Masovia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Ripin, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Dobrina.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Zacrol, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Masovia.

Senator is,

The Castellan of Cickanow, a District and Town in the same Palatinate.

The hundred and thirteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Liw or Liwo, a District and Town in the same Palatinate.

The hundred and fourteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Slonsk, a District and Town in the Palatinate of Dobrina.

The hundred and fifteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Lubazow, a Town in Royal- Prussia.

The hundred and sixteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Konarzew, a Town in the Palatinate of Siradia.

The hundred and seventeenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Konarzew, in the Palatinate of Lanschet.

The hundred and eighteenth Lay- Senator is,

The Castellan of Konarzew, in the Territory of Cujavia.

No enjoying Plurality of Offices.
Having thus gone through the several Precedencies of the Bishops, Palatins, and
Castellans in the Senate; Your GRACE may please to observe, that a Palatin
cannot be a Castellan of the same Place whereof he is Palatin: Nor can either
of them two be a Starosta, or any other Officer in the same Palatinate or
Castellany; except some few, and all those of Lithuania and Prussia, where the
Palatins govern wholly by Martial Law. Neither can a Palatin, Castellan, or
Starosta have two Commands, either of the same Kind, or any other at the same
time.

It is likewise to be observed, that no Castellan can be Burgrave of the Castle
of Cracow, or any other Castle, whilst he is Castellan.

Castellans, how called in Polish.
In the Polish Tongue the Castellans are called Lords of a Place, by adding
only the Termination of Ki or Ski to it; as Pan Poznanski, Lord of Posnan, etc.

The ten Crown-Officers.
Last of all the Lay- Senators, come the ten Crown-Officers, who stand about
the Throne on each Side of the King. Their Degrees are as follow, viz.

The great Marshal or great Steward of Poland. The great Marshal or great
Steward of Lithuania. The great Chancellor of the Kingdom. The great Chancellor
of the Duchy. The Vice Chancellor of the Kingdom. The Vice Chancellor of the
Duchy. The great Treasurer of the Crown. The great Treasurer of the Duchy.
The little Marshal or Court-Marshal of the Kingdom. The little Marshal or
Court-Marshal of the Duchy.


Those of the Kingdom precede.
Here it is to be observed, that the five Senator-Officers of Lithuania have
the same Dignity and Power with those of the Kingdom, except that they give
place to the Former: But first for,

Lay-Senator.
The hundred and nineteenth Lay-Senator who is,

The great Marshal, or great Steward of Poland.

His Office.
His Office is to prepare every thing for the general Diet, either by Command
of the King, or the Primate; to assign Stations for the several Members, to
exclude such as are none, and to provide Lodgings for foreign Ministers; and
moreover, to take care that all be safe, where that general Assembly of the
States is to convene. Likewise to set Prizes upon all Vendibles, and to
moderate public Shows.

Power and Authority.
He may punish Offenders and seditious Persons, even with Death, without being
subject to an Appeal, unless it be in a Matter of very great Consequence. He
has the Authority to impose Silence, and to give Liberty to speak. He has a
Power to admonish a Senator or Deputy, if he exceeds the Bounds of Modesty in
his Harangue. His Business is to promulgate the Acts of the Senate., and to put
in Execution the King's Decrees, either in Cases of Infamy or Death. His Duty
is Duty and Privilege.
also to carry a Staff erected before the King wherever he goes, and to take
care that all the Court-Officers perform their Duty in their several Stations,
over whom he has the sole Jurisdiction in criminal Cases. If any Person so much
as wounds one of his Officers, he loses his Head for it, by a Law made in the
Year 1573. He is moreover the Introducer of all Ambassadors.

His Perquisites.
He has an exceeding great Benefit, by imposing Prizes on Merchants Wares, for
they generally make him great Presents and Bribes, to augment their Profit.
Nevertheless his Power is very much lessened in the Time of the Election of a
King* for then he must act in Conjunction with the Grand Marshal of Lithuania.

Deputy, and who officiates in Cases of Absence.
He always acts by Assistance of the Court- Marshal, who is his Deputy in his
Absence. And when the Court- Marshal absents likewise, the Duty of that Office
is required from the Grand Marshal of Lithuania, and in his Absence from his
Little Marshal: And when all these are absent, that Duty is incumbent on the
Chancellors and Treasurers in their respective Turns.

Senator is,

The grand Marshal or grand Steward of Lithuania.

Marshal of Poland.

Senator is,

The great Chancellor of the Kingdom.

Senator is,

The great Chancellor of the Duchy.

Senator is,

The Vice Chancellor of the Crown.

Senator is,

The Vice Chancellor of the Duchy.

Qualifications of these of the Kingdom.
The Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of the Kingdom must be the one
Ecclesiastical, and the other Secular; by a Law made at Cracow, in the Time of
Sigismund I. But those of the Great Duchy are both obliged to be Secular; tho
Lib. 2. Cap. 3. p. 528.
Hartknoch says there is no Law against a Bishop's being Chancellor there.

Both have Seals and equal Authority.
They have each of them two Seals, the Chancellor the greater Seal, and the
Vice Chancellor the lesser: Their Authority is equal, except that the former
always takes Place of the latter, though he happens to be a Bishop, and that the
Vice Chancellor does not act but in Absence of the Chancellor, or at least
under him.

Their Office and Power.
The Chancellor's Office is to take Cognizance of all civil Affairs; to see
Justice done, the Laws observed, and to render ineffectual the Cabals and
Intrigues of foreign Princes, in Prejudice of the Liberties and Authority of
the Republic. They are to seal all the King's Mandates and Grants, and to
receive and answer all his Letters. Their Power also is so great, that they can
seal several things without the King's Consent, and refuse as many, where he
commands, if they are contrary to the Constitution of the State. The
Chancellor, or in his Absence, the Vice Chancellor, answer to all Speeches made
the King, and propose all Matters to be debated in the Senate. He of the two
that is Ecclesiastical, has a Power over the King's Secretaries, Chaplains and
Preachers; as likewise over all the Ceremonies of the Church, which in any wise
relate to the King. They are the general Chroniclers and Publishers of the
Laws, and take Cognizance of all Appeals made to the King.

Succeed each other.
The Vice Chancellor generally succeeds the Chancellor, tho sometimes in
Lithuania it has happened otherwise: The Ecclesiastical Chancellor or
Vice Chancellor of Poland is, for the most part, chosen out of the meaner
Bishoprics, as Culm, Premislia, Chelm, etc.

How ought to be Qualified.
They ought to be Persons of great Prudence, Learning, and Probity; their
Business being to admonish, advise, and direct the King in his Administration
of the Government.

Senator is,

The great Treasurer of the Crown.

Senator is,

The great Treasurer of the Duchy.

Their Office and Authority.
These Treasurers are Masters and Guardians of the Treasure and Revenue of the
Republic, which is brought them in by four general Collectors, who all keep a
true Register of it, giving a Copy thereof to the King, and another to the
Treasurer. They also have the keeping of the Regalia, as the Crown, Scepter,
Globe, Sword of State, Robes, etc. They moreover have in their Custody all the
King's Furniture and Records, and are to preside in the Office of the Mint:
They likewise pay all Salaries, either of the Military or civil List. The
Treasurers Privilege is so great, that they are not obliged to give any
Account, either to the King, or any of his Officers, how they perform their
Trust; but in due Time the Diet appointing Commissioners for that Purpose, they
are obliged faithfully to charge and discharge themselves before them;
otherwise the Republic may sue them for it, and confiscate their Lands:
Nevertheless the Treasurers (who most commonly misemploy the public Stock) by
treating the Commissioners well, and making them considerable Presents withal,
often obtain their Discharge without much Difficulty.

A remarkable Breach of Trust.
I may here give your Grace an Account of a Passage that happened when Count
Morstyn was great Treasurer of Poland, who having more Regard to his own
private Interest, than public Benefit, sent all the Riches of the Treasury
into France, when fearing that the Diet would soon think fit to call him to
Account, he retired privately with all his Effects out of the Kingdom, and went
to settle in France, where he purchased the whole County of Chateau-Villain,
which is worth above an hundred thousand Livres a Year.

The hundred and twenty seventh Lay- Senator

The little or Court- Marshal of the Kingdom.

The hundred and twenty eighth Lay- Senator

The little or Court- Marshal of the Duchy.

Contend for Precedence, but refused it.
These Court- Marshals, in the Time of Vladislaus VII. had a Contest with the
Chancellors for Precedence; but at length they were ordered to be contented
with the last Place in the Senate; therefore Starovolscius, who in his Colen
Edition of the State of Poland, places them next to the great Marshals in that
of Dantzic puts them last of all.

Extra-Senatorial Officers
It will not be here amiss to acquaint Your Grace, that besides these ten
Crown-Officers there are three other Sorts of Officers which are not Senators,
and they are either of the Kingdom and Great Duchy, the King's Court, or
belonging peculiarly to Palatinates and Districts. The Principal of the first
Kind are these:

Great Generals
The two Grand Generals, of the Crown and Great Duchy, who are the King's
immediate Substitutes, and have a full Power to do whatever his Majesty could,
were he present. Tho this Dignity of Great General be the most considerable and
honorable of any in the Republic, yet does it not make the Person that enjoys
it to be a Senator, nor qualifies him to have the least Seat in the Diet,
unless he be therewithal a Palatin or Castellan, as most commonly he is.

Have equal Authority.
The two great Generals of Poland and Lithuania have equal Power in their
respective States, and have no Dependence upon each other, unless that the
Great General of Lithuania always gives Place to him of Poland; yet has he the
sole Command of the great Dutchy's Army, and receives no manner of Orders from
the Crown-General, except where both are jointly engaged in a Battle.

Their Power,
These great Generals in the King's Absence, have the greatest Power in the
Kingdom, for they have then a supreme Command in the Army: They give Battle,
and besiege Towns without the King's Participation, and settle Winter Quarters
where, and upon what Lands they think fit: This Power of theirs is so
extraordinary considerable, that a great General is formidable to all the
Nobility.

and Duty.
Their Duty is to keep good Order and Discipline in the Army; to punish
mutinous and seditious Officers and Soldiers; to settle the Prizes of all
Commodities and Provisions brought into the Camp; to give Command or necessary
Orders for a Charge or Retreat: and in fine, to do any thing that his Majesty
could were he present.

King's Interest to head his Army.
It is therefore the Interest of a King of Poland always to head his Army
himself, to have his Sons with him in the Field, and to give them Opportunity
to gain Reputation and Credit by their Valor and Conduct; for the more the
King increases his own Fame, or that of his Sons, the more he diminishes the
Credit and Power of his Generals, who are the only Persons in the Kingdom that
are most to be feared, and who have the greatest Power and Influence over the
Gentry in the Election of a King.

Present great Generals.
The present great General of Poland, is the Count Jablonowski, of the French
Faction; and of Lithuania, Prince Sapieha, supposed to be of the Austrian
Faction.

Dignity successive.
When the Office of great General is vacant, the little or Lieutenant General
has a Right to succeed him.

Lieutenant-Generals, and their Office.
The two Lieutenant-Generals of Poland and Lithuania are to preside in all
Court-Marshals, and to take care that Guard be strictly kept throughout the
Camp. Also they are to observe, that all Spies and Scouts be sent out as often
as Occasion requires; and lastly, to see that foreign Soldiers be duly paid.

Chief Commander of the Guards.
The Business of the chief Commander of the King's Guards in the Camp, is to
command solely those Soldiers who are assigned to guard his Majesty's Person in
the Camp; but upon the Kings Departure, this Officer's Power ceases.

Other great Officers in the Army.
There are several other Officers of Note in the Army, the most considerable of
which are, the great Ensign or Standard Bearer, the great Master of the
Artillery, the Camp Notaries, and Commander of the Guards against Incursions;
of which two last I shall only speak here.

Camp-Notaries.
Camp-Notaries are Pay-Masters General for the Army both of the Kingdom and
great Duchy.

Captain of Guards against Incursions.
The chief Commander of the Guards against the Incursions of the Tartars, etc.

This Officer is posted on the Confines of the Kingdom toward Crim-Tartary,
etc. and is to give Notice of all the Motions of the Enemy.

Great Secretaries and their Authority.
For the civil State-Officers, there are the two great Secretaries of the
Kingdom and Duchy. They have a Power to enter into the Privy Council, and to
take Cognizance of what the Chancellors and Vice*Chancellors do. They must both
be Ecclesiastics, and their Office is a great Step to the Chancellor's
Dignity. They have the keeping of the King's Signet, and are qualified for the
highest Episcopal Honors, and have Precedence before most Officers of the
Court or Kingdom.

Referendaries and their Office.
The Masters of Requests, or Referendaries of the Kingdom and the great Duchy:
Their Business is to receive Petitions made to the King, and to give his
Majesty's Answer. They have a Place in any of the King's Courts of Justice.
These are in all four; one Ecclesiastical and one Civil for the Kingdom, and
the like for the great Cup-Bearers, Carvers, Sword-Bearers. Court-Treasurers
and their Office.
Duchy.

Two Cup-Bearers for each Nation. for the same Two Carvers and Two Sword-Bearers

The Treasurers of the Court in the Kingdom and the great Duchy: These supply
either the Absence or Vacancy of the Office of the great Treasurers.

Treasurer of Prussia.
The Treasurer of Prussia, whose Business is to take all Accounts of the
Collectors of Revenue in that Province, and to transmit them to the great
Treasurers.

Associates to Judges.
Associates to Judges, which are generally such as reside in the King's Court,
viz. the Masters of Requests, Vice-Chancellors, etc.

Chief Notaries.
Two chief Notaries of the Courts of Justice for civil Causes, either of the
Kingdom or the great Duchy.

Registers inChancery.
Two Registers in the Chancery of both Nations.

Escheator.
An Officer that looks after the Escheats, called by us Escheator. He can
either sue for or seize any such Lands or Goods as fall to the Crown.

Commissioners of Custom House.
The Commissioners of the Custom-Houses, who give in their Accounts as often as
the great Treasurers require them.

Governors of Mines.
The Governors of the Silver, Lead, and Salt Mines: They exercise Jurisdiction
over the Workmen there, but must nevertheless admit of Appeals to Court.

Governors of the Mint.
The Governors or Wardens of the Mint, which are for the most part the
Treasurers of the Kingdom: Their Business is to take care that the Money there
coined be of Weight and Value.

Court-Officers.
The chief Officers of the King's Court are treated of before in the Letter to
his Grace, the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Civil Officers of Districts.
The Officers of Districts may be divided into two Sorts; Civil and Military.
The civil are,

Vice-Chamberlain and his Office,
The Vice-Chamberlain, whose Office is to decide all Differences within his
District about the Bounds of Land, etc. to which he is sworn. He has several
Deputies under Chamberlains.
him, called Chamberlains, whom he chooses out of the Gentry of his
Jurisdiction, and to whom he gives an Oath to be true and faithful in the
Execution of their Office. It is at his Pleasure to displace these as often as
he thinks fit.

Judge and Assistant.
The Judge; who together with his Assistant, determines all civil Causes and
Controversies.

Prothonotary.
The Prothonotary, who in those Courts has likewise a Power of giving his
Opinion.

Head Collector.
The head Collector of the public Revenue, who is accountable above.

Other Officers, and why so called.
The other Officers are less considerable, being Sewers, Carvers, Cup-Bearers,
Sword-Bearers, etc. The Reason of there being such Officers in every
Palatinate, is because formerly each Province of Poland was a Sovereignty, and
had its peculiar Princes, who had all their Court-Officers. But now tho these
Offices remain, yet it is only with Honorary Titles, and some few Privileges,
the chiefest of which are, that when the King comes into their Palatinate, his
Court-Officers must leave to them the Honor of serving him at Table, bearing
the Sword before him, etc.

Military Officers of Districts.
The Military Officers of a District are,

Starostas with and without Jurisdiction.

Starostas with Jurisdiction.
Starostas with Jurisdiction are Governors of Castles and Royal Cities, who
sit and hear private Causes of small Moment once a Fortnight, and those of
greater concern every six Weeks, if nothing intervene to prevent them.

Vice-Starostas, etc.
These have Vice- Starostas, Judges, Clerks, and Servants in the Nature of
Sheriffs Officers, to enforce Justice, in Cases of Resistance.

Jurisdiction of Starostas.
The Jurisdiction of these Starostas extends not only over the Commonalty, but
likewise over the Gentry. They have also a Care of the King's Revenue arising
within their District, and may discount a fourth Part for their Trouble.

Starostas without Jurisdiction.
The Starostas without Jurisdiction are those who are properly Tenants in
Capite. They have no Power to exercise Justice, unless in very slight Cases.

Burgraves and their Office.
Burgraves and Tribunes have the Custody of Castles, Forts, etc. and are to
keep constant Guard there, either by themselves or their Deputies. These are
subject to the Starostas.

Revenue of Starostaships.
The Revenue of Starostaships partly arises from Agriculture, and partly from
Manufacture and Handicrafts. They have been sometimes known to have been
Mortgaged to raise the King's Revenue more speedily, especially those without
Jurisdiction.

Zuppars, what.
Here likewise the Officers of the Mines (called Zuppars in Polish) may be
taken notice of, who have diverse Officers and Substitutes under them.

The Minor Ecclesiastical and Temporal Officers and Persons of this Kingdom
being, in all Respects, like to those of other Nations, I have purposely
omitted them.

Thus, My LORD, I have gone through the several Particulars which I proposed to
entertain Your GRACE and the Public with, yet at the same time cannot but be
highly sensible of my Presumption in prefixing Your Great Name to so imperfect
an Account; therefore hoping Your GRACE'S Pardon upon an humble Acknowledgment,
I beg Leave* to subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your GRACE'S Most Obedient and Most Humble Servant, J. S.

LETTER III.
To the Right Honorable JAMES VERNON Esquire Principal Secretary of State.
Of the Grand Diet, Little Diets, and other general Assemblies in Poland; with
an Account of all the several Courts of Justice, from the highest to the
lowest: As likewise of the Judges, Laws, and Punishments in that Kingdom.

SIR,
THE high Trust lately confided in you, and your eminent Services to this
Government in your former Stations, sufficiently proclaim both his Majesty's
Prudence, and your Merit: But as the Business of your Office requires a
universal Inspection into Foreign States, and presuming you might not have
hitherto had Leisure to look into the present Posture of Affairs in so remote a
Country as that of Poland, I have ventured to Address the following Account of
the Diet of that Kingdom to You, tho I were highly sensible at the same A. The
Present King in his Throne.

BB. The ten Crown Officers.

C. The A Bp. of Gnesna with the Cross born behind him.

DDDD. The other Ecclesiastical Senators.

EEEEE. Foreign Ambassadors admitted only to the Diet of Election.

FFFFFF. The Palatins and Castellans in the three Rows on each side.

GGGGGG. The Deputy s in the two back Rows on each side.

H. The Nuncio Marshall or Speaker of Deputy s.

IIII. Vacant seats for such others as are sometimes admitted.

1. The Arms of Poland. 2. The Arms of Lithuania.

time, that you must necessarily meet with a great many Imperfections in the
Performance, yet I hoped my Endeavors might atone for my Incapacity, and the
rather because I have advanced nothing in this Letter, but what I had either
from the best Books, or the latest Memoirs.

SIR,

What the Diet is.
The Grand Diet or Parliament of Poland, by the Natives called Seym Walny, is
an Assembly of the King, Senators, and Nuncio's, or Deputies of every Province
met together in any City or Town of Poland or Lithuania, in order to deliberate
upon State Affairs, and the Means to secure and preserve the Kingdom, both in
Times of Peace and War.

By whom called, and where and how often meet.
It is the King, or during an Inter regnum, the Primate who has the sole Power
of convoking this great Assembly, as likewise to determine the Place where, and
the Time when it shall sit. By the Constitutions of the Kingdom, the King is
obliged to call a Diet every third Year, and of every three successively
called, two must be held in Poland, most commonly at Warsaw, and the third in
Lithuania, in the City of Grodno, in the Palatinate of Troki, twenty Leagues
from Vilna, Capital of this great Duchy: So that every ninth Year the King,
with all the Senators and Deputies of the Kingdom, goes into Lithuania; and
every third the Senators and Deputies of Lithuania come into Poland. The Reason
of the Diet's being held in Lithuania was, because the Lithuanians complained
that it was not a little inconvenient for them to come so far as Poland.

Manner of calling it, and Proceedings thereupon.
When the King has a mind to convoke this general Meeting, he is to send out
circular Letters six Weeks before the time he appoints for its Session, by the
Constitution in the Year 1613. to all the Palatins of the Provinces,
acquainting them with his Design, together with the Time he intends it shall
meet. He sends them likewise a List of all the Affairs and Articles which are
to be treated of in that Diet. Whereupon every Palatin or his Deputy, in his
own respective Government, forthwith dispatches Notice to all the Castellans,
Starostas, and other Gentry, requiring them at a certain Time to meet together,
in order to deliberate on the Articles and Affairs proposed by the King's
Letters, as likewise to choose a Nuncio or Deputy to represent their Intentions
and Decisions in the Great Diet. These Letters are proclaimed by a Herald
(called by the Poles Wozny) and afterward pasted up upon all the Town-Gates
and Church-Doors. These Assemblies in the Provinces are termed by them
Comitiola (in the Polish Language Seymiki) or little Diets. In Cases of
Extremity, six Weeks Notice need not be given, as appears by the Constitutions
of the Year, 1638.

Where the little Diets meet.
The several Places these little Diets meet at are as follow.

I. In Great Poland.
In Lower or Great Poland.

In the Palatinates of
Posuan and Kalisch, Siradia. In the Cities and Towns of Sroda, Schadkow,


In the Castellany of
Vielunia In the Cities and Towns of Vielun,


In the Palatinates of
Lanschet, Bresty, and Inowlocz. In the Cities and Towns of Lanschet, Radzieiow.




Appointed by the Vide Herburt. Voce Comitia, p. 92. and in Edit. Polon, p. 257.
Constitutions in the Year 1510.

In the Palatinate of Dobrina, the little Diet meets in the Town of Ripin.

Appointed by the Constitutions in the Year 1567.

In the Palatinates of
Plosko, Rava in three Places. In the Citys and Towns of Radzanow, Rava,
Sochaczow Gombin.




Podlachia,
and Masovia.
In the Provinces of
Podlachia in three Places. In the Cities and Towns of Droghiczin, Mielnik,
Bransko.

Masovia in ten Places. In the Cities and Towns of Cirna, Warsaw, Wisna,
Wissegrod, Zakrol, Ciekanow, Lombze, Rozan, Liw, and Nur.




II. In Little-Poland.
In the Province of Upper or Little- Poland.

In the Palatinate of
Cracovia in two Places. In the Cities and Towns of Zator for the Duchy of
Oswieczin, and Prossovia for the Palatinate.




By the Constitutions of the Year 1667.

In the Palatinates of
Sendomir and Lublin. In the Citys and Towns of Opatow and Lublin.




III. In Lithuania.
In the Great Duchy of Lithuania.

In the Palatinates of
Vilna in four Places. In the Cities and Towns of Vilna, Osmian, Wilcomitz,
Braclaw.

Troki in five Places. In the Cities and Towns of Troki, Grodno. Cowno, Lida,
Ponienwiez.

Polocz In the Cities and Towns of Polocz.

Novogrodec in two Places. In the Cities and Towns of Slonim, Wolkowizko.

Witebsko in two Places. In the Cities and Towns of Witebsko, Orska.

Briescia or Polesia in two Places. In the Cities and Towns of Briescia, Pinsko.

Mscislaw, In the Cities and Towns of Msceislaw.

Minsk in three Places. In the Cities and Towns of Minsk, Modzir, Reczycza.




IV. In Prussia.
In the Province of Prussia.

In the Palatinates of
Pomerania, Marienburg, Culm, Elbing. In the Cities and Towns of Imprimis, in
all the Districts, then in Stargar-Stuma, (die. Michalovia, and Graudentz*
Elbing.



V. In Russia.
In the Province of Russia.

In the Palatinates of
Russia in five Places. In the Cities and Towns of Leopol, Praemislaw, Sanoch,
Halitz, Chelm.

Belsko, Podolia. In the Cities and Towns of Belsko, Caminiec.




Since Caminiec's being taken by the Turks, its Little Diet meets at Leopol.

In the Palatinates of
Kiovia, Braclaw. In the Cities and Towns of Zytomierz afterward at
Woldzimiers in Volhynia.




VI. In Volhynia.
In the Province of Volhynia.

In the Town of
Vinnicza, afterward at Woldzimierz.
VII. In Samogitia.
In the Duchy of Samogitia.

In the Town of Rosienia.

Qualifications for, and
All Sorts of Gentlemen, both rich and poor, providing they have but three
Acres of Land in their Possession, which must be worth at least eight Crowns
Sterling a Year, have a Right to come to these little Diets, where they all
have equal Authority and Votes, but however no body under a Polish Gentleman,
has a Suffrage there. One of these Gentry once hindered a Person from being
chosen Chairman of a little Diet till the Candidate had given him a Pair of
Polish Boots, for he was before almost barefooted, after which he consented
and came in and approved of the Election.

Manner of voting in little Diets.
All the Decisions here, as in the great Diet, did not formerly go by Plurality
of Voices, but by unanimous Consent, which frequently bred abundance of
Disorder, and oftentimes the Diets broke up without having concluded any thing,
and that by reason of the Contests and Obstinacy of some private Members who
had the Power to oppose all the rest, and who most commonly were bribed by one
Side or other. At these little Diets the poorer Sort of Gentry always side with
their Seigneur, and ever approve of what he says, without knowing sometimes
what the Matter in Hand is: An Example whereof, Dr. Connor says, happened in
his Time at one of these Assemblies, in the Province of Masovia, where some
Affairs of the Province being in Debate, and one of the Gentry declaring
against them, his Party or Mob, not knowing what the Business was, cried like
Madmen, that such an Affair should not pass, whereupon a witty Fellow,
observing their senseless Rage, started up and cried, Brethren, you are Fools
to oppose this Affair, for the Question is only to abate the Price of Wheat and
Aquavitae; whereat they immediately consented to, and approved of the Matter
proposed, and cried, that their Seigneur was a Rogue that had betrayed them,
and moreover threatened him with their Sabres.

Who, and how many chosen Deputies: With their Instructions.
Notwithstanding every little Gentleman can vote for whom he pleases, yet the
Election always falls upon some rich Nobleman, who can treat high, and make a
Figure suitable to this honorable Charge. Most commonly they choose two or
three Deputies for every Palatinate; one of which is always an understanding
Man, and the rest are young Noblemen, chosen only for Honors sake, or that
they may be trained up betimes in the Service of their Country. When the
Deputies are chosen, they receive full Instructions from the Gentry of their
Province, of what they are to consent or dissent to in the general Diet, and
when once they are entrusted with these Instructions, they dare not for their
Lives transgress them; so that if but one Deputy has Orders contrary to the
rest, it lies in his single Power to break all their Measures.

Proceedings in little Diets.
In these little Diets, their first Care is to choose a Marshal or Chairman,
whose Office is much the same with the Marshal or Speaker of the general Diet.

Hartknoch lib. 2. cap. 6. p. 682. etc.
This Chairman in Lithuania, when once chosen, continues the same for Life.
This Officer being elected, they next proceed to the receiving of the King's
Nuncio, which is done by the chief Deputy, and by him placed at the upper End
of the Table. This Person proposes in the King's Name, what they are to debate
upon, having first satisfied them of his Commission. But here it must be
observed, that to some of these Conventions, the King transmits his
Instructions by a Starosta.

Deputies, how chosen.
The Nuncio's or Deputies are now elected by Plurality of Voices, to avoid
Confusion and Disorder.

Hartknoch lib. 2. Cap. 6. p. 689.
The Number of all these Nuncios amounts commonly to 174. besides those of
Prussia, which are uncertain, and which in the Year 1685. were 70. of
themselves.

Cannot be Senators.
These Deputies cannot be chosen Senators, and are for the most part elected
out of the common Magistrates, excepting the Judges of the high Tribunals,
Assessors, Collectors of the Revenue, etc.

Their Salaries.
It is to be observed, that these Deputies have certain Salaries assigned 'em
by the Constitutions in the Year 1540.

When first sent.
These Nuncios were first sent to the Diet under the Reign of Casimir III. who
having had thirteen Years War with the Knights of the Teutonic Order, and being
at a Loss to pay his Army, orders the Provinces to send Deputies to lay
Impositions; which, they being Representatives of their Country, might Vide
Constitut. An. 1581. p. 375.
be the easier complied with. These Deputies have continued ever since.

Their general Meetings.
Besides the Convention at the little Diets, the Senators and Deputies, when
elected, have general Meetings before they come to the grand Diet at these
several Places.

Poland at Kolo in Kalisch.

To which belong the Palatinates of
Posnania, Kalisch, Siradia, Lanschet, Bresty, Inowlocz, Ploczkow, Dobrina,
Rava,
With the Territory of
Vielunia.


Poland at Corzin in Sendomir.

To which belong the Palatinates of
Cracovia, Sendomir, Russia, Podolia, Belsko, and Lublin.
By the Constitution in the Year 1613.

For Prussia at Graudents or Marienbourg.

To which belongs all Royal- Russia, or the Palatinates of
Culm, Marienbourg, Pomerania, as also the Bishopric of Varmia.


For the Great Duchy of Lithuania at Slonim Novogrodec.

To which belong the Palatinates of
Vilna, Troki, Briescia, Novogrodec, Minski, Polocz, Witebsko, Mscislaw, Zlucz,
Braclaw.
By the Constitution in the Year 1631.

The other Palatinates which are not mentioned in this Division, have all
general Meetings, though I do not find where.

Diet divides into three Nations.
When all the Deputies of the Provinces are assembled at the Place appointed
for the grand Diet, they divide themselves into three Nations, viz.

Into the Deputies of
High and Low Lithuania. Poland and



Speaker, how chosen, and Heats thereupon.
Out of these three they next proceed to choose their Marshal or Speaker.

The first time they choose him out of the Deputies of High- Poland, the second
out of the Deputies of Low- Poland, and at the third Diet out of the Deputies
of Lithuania. Oftentimes they spend several Days in bloody Contests before they
can agree about an Election: Nay, it happens sometimes, that they never agree
at all, as in the Diet convened in the Year 1695. when all the Senators and
Deputies which had made great Preparations to appear in their Grandeur (whereof
some came above three hundred Miles) were forced to return home again without
effecting any thing for want of agreeing about a Marshal.

He that designs to get to be elected Marshal, must treat the Gentry all the
while, otherwise he would have no Vote for him, and commonly they prolong the
Election that they may live the longer at the Candidates Charges.

How occasioned.
The Reason of this great stickling is, because the Dignity of this Marshal is
not only very honorable, but also exceeding beneficial, which occasions
several Noblemen among the Deputies, to raise Cabals and Intrigues to secure it
for themselves. He has likewise great Authority, and can, by his eloquent and
subtle Speeches, turn Affairs on what Side he pleases, which is the Reason that
he is often bribed either by the King, Foreign Princes, or some great Men of
the Kingdom.

Next Proceeding.
On the Day prefixed for the Meeting of the Diet, the King, with all the
Senators and Nuncios, goes to hear a Sermon, which being ended, he retires into
the Senate, where he is severally saluted by the Members thereof: And the
Nuncios retiring likewise into their House (called by the Poles, Izba Poselska)
confer together about electing a Speaker, during which, the last Speaker or
Marshal officiates till a new one be chosen, and then is obliged to resign his
Staff to the Marshal elect, who is to take an Oath to be true and faithful
before he enters upon his Office.

Further Proceedings.
When the Marshal or Speaker is elected, he with all the Deputies of the
Province, goes to kiss the King's Hand in the Diet-Chamber, where his Majesty
sits on a Throne erected for that Purpose. Then the Chancellor in the King's
Name proposes all the Points to be debated in the Diet, and desires the
Senators and Nobility to take them into Consideration, whereupon the King
immediately leaves them, lest his Presence might be an Awe upon them; and then
the Senators retiring into their Room by themselves, and the Nuncios into
theirs, by them called Izba Poselska, they forthwith set about deliberating on
the Articles proposed.

Reflection of Hauteville.
Here SIR, I may remark a pleasant Reflection of Hauteville, in his Account of
Poland, where he says, That the Poles employ more Time in drinking and
feasting, than in debating Matters of State, for that they never think on that
Work till they begin to want Money to buy Hungarian Wine.

Speakers Request for the Deputies.
After the Chancellor has thus proposed to the Diet in the King's Name, all the
Articles they are to go upon, the Marshal of the Nuncios likewise on the Part of
the Deputies, presents to the King what they desire of his Majesty, which is,

1. To make void all Intrenchments, either upon the State or the People. And,

2. To bestow all vacant Offices upon Persons of Worth and Merit.

His Authority.
This Marshal of the Deputies has a great Authority over them in the Diet, for
he it is that commands Silence among'em, and who transmits all their Requests
to the King or Senate; and seeing that by his Power he can either animate or
moderate them, it is not to be wondered at if he be a Person of no ordinary
Esteem, and that the Court always endeavors, by various Favors, to secure him
for their Friend.

Proceedings in the lower House.
The Manner of Proceedings in the Nuncios House is much the same as in the
Little Diets: No body offers his Opinion there till having first asked Leave of
the Marshal, who alone introduces all Messengers from the King, Senators, Army,
or Foreign Princes, and answers them all in the Name of the House. If any
Disserences arise among the Nuncios or other Tumults are raised by the
Spectators, he causes Silence immediately, by striking his Staff against the
Ground.

Conferences with the Upper, and Nuncios Power.
The two Orders being thus separated, there are nevertheless frequent
Intercourses between them, as are between our two most Honorable Houses. The
Nuncios have a Power of impeaching all Magistrates and Officers for Male
Administration, and to put the King in mind, as often as they think fit, of his
Coronation Oath: Moreover, the Nuncios Power and Authority appears the greater,
in that no Constitution or Law is of any Validity or Force that was not first
begun in their House. Nay, their Marshal is to be the first Starter of all
Laws, and when concluded upon, it is his Office only to read them before the
Senate. For this Reason, in the Year 1668. the Marshal protested against a
certain Law, because it was first concerted in the Senate. But what is more to
be admired than all this is, that the Dissent of one single Nuncio is
sufficient to annul the whole Proceedings, and to occasion the Diet to be
dissolved.

Confirmed and encouraged.
To confirm this Authority, and for the futher Security of the Nuncios,
Sigismund I. in the Year 1510. ordained that it should be High Treason to
Injure any Member of the Diet, tho he afterward in the Year 1539. restrained
this Law to the Royal Person, but which notwithstanding John Casimir in some
measure renewed in the Year 1649.

Their Privilege.
Constitut. An. 1649.
If one of these Nuncios commits any Crime, he is to be tried only by his
Fellow Members. This Privilege of the Nuncios begins a Month before, and lasts
as long after the Diet.

Committees.
Upon some Occasions the Marshal assigns Committees of these Nuncios, who are
to transact apart such Matters as are entrusted to them.

How long sit.
The Nuncios remain in their House till the fifth Day before the Conclusion of
the Diet, when they are all to go to the Senate. Et sic Comitia ad Patres
transfer dicuntur. But if within the Time assigned by the Laws, they find
they are not able to finish their Business, they humbly petition the King that
the Diet may be prorogued.

Upper House how employed.
Whilst the Nuncios are thus providing for the public Good in their House, the
King and Senate do not pass their Time idly in theirs; for after the Chancellor
has given the Charge to the lower House, and they are retired; he, together
with the Senators, tries criminal Causes for a whole Week, which being ended,
there are several other Matters assigned for certain Days, until the lower
House bring up Bills to be debated.

Manner of breaking up Session in the lower.
Near the Conclusion of the Diet, and before the Senators and Nuncios are
joined, the Marshal of the lower House, in a set Speech, gives Thanks to the
Deputies for the Honor and Favor they have conferred upon him, and is
answered by one of the Nuncios in the Name of the rest, who returns him their
Acknowledgments for his faithful Execution of his Office.

Two Houses joined.
When the Nuncios are come to the upper House, their Marshal or Speaker sits on
a Form below the Senator- Marshals, and the rest of the Deputies stand behind
the other Senators, who are seated all in their Order. Being thus joined, they
proceed to confirm, create, or abrogate Laws. No body speaks here without
having first obtained leave of the great Marshal.

Speakers Power devolves to great Marshal.
In this Meeting the Nuncio-Marshal's Power is at an End, his Office being then
officiated by the great Marshal, either of Poland or Lithuania, or in their
Absence, by some other of the Senator. Officers. The great Marshal has
Authority, not only to check a Nuncio, but also a Senator in speaking, if he
exceeds his Bounds: He also, in case of great Disorders, imposes Silence, by
striking his Staff on the Ground.

Where the King suspends his Opinion.
In Cases of Controversy, the King always suspends his Opinion till the
Differences are reconciled. This the Kings, Henry and Stephen promised
faithfully to observe, as may appear by the Book of their Laws, Page 254.

What required to establish a Law.
To establish a Law or Constitution in the Diet, the Deputies must first
propose it by their Marshal, and then the King and Senate are to approve of it;
but however, before it can have any Force, it must be reviewed by the great
Marshal and two Deputies, or by three Senators and six Deputies. Having been
thus reviewed, it is read out in the Diet by the Nuncio- Marshal, after which
the Chancellors demand with a low Voice, If the King, Senate, and Deputies
consent to apply the Seal; which being answered in the affirmative, it is
presently sealed and enrolled among the Acts in the Register of Warsaw, and
this by the Care of the Deputy's Marshal, who is to see it done soon after the
Conclusion of the Session. After this, one of the King's Secretaries is to get
it printed and dispersed among the several little Diets and Tribunals all over
the Kingdom.

Where it cannot be printed:
It must be observed that where the Diet has been dissolved through the Obstinacy
of any particular Member, no Laws or Constitutions can be committed to the
Press: Whereupon in the Year 1665. the Nuncios severely reproved their Marshal
for but suffering them to be transcribed where the Session had been adjourned.

The same Law is to be observed in all Decrees of the Diet, for immediately
after the publishing of them by the Referendary, they are to be transcribed,
signed, sealed, and printed* Those Decrees that concern the Treasury, are to be
signed only by a Prothonotary appointed for that Purpose.

Session of the Diet limited.
By the Constitution of the Kingdom, the Diet ought never to sit above six
Weeks, and the Gentry are so very exact in observing this Privilege, that as
soon as ever that Time is expired, they send their Marshal to take Leave of the
King in their Name, and moreover to acquaint him that they intend to wait on
him to kiss his Hand, which they are admitted to do soon after. They are so
obstinately bent upon defending this Custom, that though the Urgencies of State
require never so short a Continuance of the Diet after the Time prescribed, yet
they always vigorously oppose it, as they did in the Year 1649. when the
Tartars and Cosacks had almost overrun the Kingdom.

Wherefore.
The Reason, I suppose, why the Members of the Diet are so punctual in
observing this Constitution above any other is, because by that Time their
Money generally is spent, and other Provisions, which they bring in Wagons
from home, as Beer, Wine, Meat, Fowl, etc. Consumed by the great Train of
Guards and other Domestics which they have with them.

Affairs treated of in the Grand Diet.
The Affairs generally treated of in the grand Diet, are either a King's
Election or his Marriage; sending Ambassadors to Foreign Princes; declaring
War or making Peace; imposing Taxes to carry on a War; making Alliances with
other Princes; and all other State Affairs: Likewise all Suits of Law between
private Persons, have their last Appeal from the Tribunals to the Diet: As may
appear by the Difference adjusted by them between the Order of Malta and Prince
Demetrius Wiesnowiski, who withheld Possession of what was given by his
Brother-in-Law, the Duke of Ostrog, to this Order. Also in criminal Cases they
judge and condemn as they did those who assassinated Gonczeski, Lieutenant
General of Lithuania, who had all their Heads cut off by Proceedings in this
Court.

Who not to be present at Trials for Treason.
In Cases of High Treason, the Poles say their King ought not to be present at
the Trial of any Traitor, and therefore the Marshal Lubomirski complained of
John Casimir's condemning him in the Diet for Contumacy. Also they do not
generally admit the Nuncios at that Time, tho Stephen Batori, at a Diet held at
Warsaw in the Year 1582. caused them to be present at the Trial of Shorowski
for Treason, to the End that they might all be Witnesses of the Injustice done
him.

Naturalization and Manner of making Noble in Poland.
It Is likewise in the Diet that Strangers are naturalized, and Natives of the
Country, who are not freeborn, are made Gentlemen. Formerly no Person was
capable of this Honor, but such only as had served in the Wars for a
considerable Time, or else who had done some other good Service to the State;
but now there needs no other Merit or good Qualities than to be rich enough to
purchase the Favor of the Court, or the Protection of some great Man. They
that pretend to the Indigenat, that is, to be made Noble, have no more to do
than to apply themselves to the Nuncio-Marshal, who has the Power to put their
Names into the Roll of those that desire to be made Polish Gentlemen. After
which they are to give in a Note of their Genealogy, Names, Sir-names, Family,
and Services; and to put their Arms in the Middle. When they have been received
and accepted by the Diet, and have got their Patent signed, they are to take an
Oath before the same Marshal to be true and faithful to their King and Country,
and whereof the Marshal afterward gives them a Certificate.

Restrained in some Respects notwith standing.
Nevertheless, tho the Candidate be declared Noble by the unanimous Consent of
the three Orders, yet is he capable only of mean Employments, and to have a
Vote among the Gentry, it not being in the Power of the King to bestow either
on him or his Children any important Preferment till the third Generation be
past, and the Republic is thereby satisfied of their Fidelity, Loyalty, and
Affection for their Country.

Great Concourse at the Diet.
Though no other Person but the King, Senate, and Nuncios can have any Business
or Vote in the Diet, yet vast Numbers of other People still flock thither. Also
most commonly Foreign Princes choose then to send their Ambassadors according
to the Interest they have to maintain in the Diet. At this time likewise the
greatest Part of the Nobility, that have wherewithal to appear in any Sort of
Grandeur, meet here together with their Wives and Children, though they have no
other Business than to see and be seen. It is then their Sons get acquainted
with others of the young Gentry, and often are married to some of the young
Ladies that come in like manner to be observed, and to get Husbands. In short,
the Diet is a kind of general Rendevouz of all the People of Quality in the
Kingdom, as well Men and Women as Children, so that what City soever the Diet
sits in, there are always Thirty Thousand, and sometimes Forty thousand Persons
more than there used to be.

Provisions indifferent Planty notwithstanding.
Nevertheless Provisions are not very scarce, by reason that every Gentleman
almost brings his Necessaries along with him: Nay, the greatest Part send their
Fuel and Provender for their Horses by the River Vistula to Warsaw, when they
come from that Side of the Country. There are likewise several Gentlemen that
always come from Germany, Sweden, and other adjacent Countries, to see this
general Meeting, which is a fine Sight, and the only thing that is worth
observing in Poland.

Dangerous to walk a Nights.
At this Time there is always such a Crowd of Soldiers, Heydukes, and Footmen
in the Streets, that it is not safe to be abroad after Day shut in, for Fear of
being robbed or stripped naked, as happens almost every Night, for the Polish
Gentry give so very short Allowance to their Guards and Servants, a Dragoon
having but fifteen Pence of our Money a Week, to maintain his Horse and
himself, that they must be forced to rob, or be otherwise very industrious to
live.

Visits at this Time unacceptable.
This is the Reason that Visits from these Gentry are seldom acceptable to any
Body. The great Senators, and more especially the Generals of the Army, come
always so numerously attended, that the King himself, for greater Security, is
always wont to increase his Guards at the Time of the Diet, otherwise he might
be exposed to the Insults of the Gentry, who often take a Liberty in the Diet
to threaten and abuse him to his Face.

Great Guards of some Gentry.
Some of these Gentry have a Row, and sometimes two Rows of Guards that reach
from their Houses to the King's Palace, where the Diet is kept.

Order of Session in the Diet.
The Order of Session in the Diet is as follows. First the King sits on a
Throne under a Canopy, upon which are placed on each side the Arms of Poland
and Lithuania: On the two Sides of the Throne stand the Ten Senator-Officers,
whereof five for Poland are on the right Hand, and as many for Lithuania on the
left. Then the Bishops sit in two Rows, whereof the first part are on the Right
Hand with the Archbishop of Gnesna, and the other on the Left, with the
Archbishop of Leopol: Below and behind the Bishops sit the Senators according
to their respective Precedence; and next behind them stand the Deputies of the
Provinces, all with their Caps off. All the Senators sit covered before the
King in the Senate, though in all other Places they stand bare before him.

Members wear no distinguishing Habits.
The Members of this Diet wear no particular Habit of Ceremony or formal
Distinction, but sit in the same Clothes they usually wear at home, with their
Swords or Sabres girt by their Sides. The same Custom is observed by all the
Judges and Magistrates of the Kingdom. Hartnoch lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 512.
Sigismundus Augustus is said to have endeavored to distinguish the Palatins
from the Castellans, and those from the Nuncios, by different Habits, but this
without Effect.

What proves Equality among Polish Gentry.
Nothing proves the Equality of the Polish Gentry more than the Order of their
Great and little Diets, for though all the Freeborn are by them divided into the
greater and Lesser, or rather Richer and Poorer Nobility, yet have they all the
same Power in the Diets, and in making or breaking Constitutions, the Minor
Gentry of every Province being superior in Number, keep, by their Votes, and
sometimes by their Scymitars, the greater Sort in Awe. Their Power is so
extraordinary, by reason of their Number, that the great Gentry do in a manner
depend upon the little, and that in so great a measure, that they are as it
were afraid of them, and consequently are rather apt to oblige and court, than
anger and displease them. They always do what lies in their Power to procure
their Affections, saluting them by the familiar Titles of Mosci Panowie Bracia;
that is, Gratioss Domini Fratres; which is the greatest Demonstration of real
(or at least pretended) Friendship and Equality imaginable. These Titles being
omitted in the Year 1667. there arose great Disturbances for want of them.

Intended Limitation of Votes like to produce a bad Effect.
King Casimir observing the great Abuses that spring from every little
Gentleman's pretended Privilege to fit in the little Diets, ordered that none
should have a Vote there, in electing a Deputy or Nuncio, but such only as had
at least two Hundred Crowns a Year. whereupon the Palatin of Posnania offering
to put this Law in Execution in his Province, was not only affronted, but also
narrowly escaped with his Life.

Deputies awe the King and Senate.
These Deputies which depend on the free Nomination of the minor Gentry, in
their respective Provinces, by their superior Number, keep likewise the King
and Senate in a great Dependence on them in the great Diet, since they can do
nothing, nor conclude the least Matter without the free Consent and Approbation
of these Deputies.

Causes of Disunion in the Diet.
This great Dependence of all the three Orders of the Republic on one another
should, one would think, cause the greatest Union between them, and make them
to have but one common Interest to agree in their Assemblies to all the
Articles that tend to the public Good; but on the contrary, Self-Interest, and
the excessive Liberty and Privilege, not only of every Order of the Republic,
but also of every individual Member of the Diet, produces another-guess Kind of
Effect, for certainly there is no Assembly in Europe more subject to Disorders,
more distracted by Cabals and Factions, and in fine, more corrupted by Bribery
and base Practices, which is the Reason that the Diet of Poland seldom
concludes upon what they sit and deliberate about, though it should be of the
greatest Importance imaginable.

Fomented by the Empire and France.
All these Intrigues and Mismanagements are generally fomented by the two
powerful Factions of the Houses of Austria and Bourbon. Every one knows the
great Advantages the Emperors have had when they have maintained a good
Correspondence or Confederacy with the Poles against their common Enemy the
Turks and Tartars. And on the other Side, it is the French Interest to prevent
and oppose such Correspondence, and endeavor to render all Means ineffectual
which might otherwise favor the Emperor to enlarge his Dominions. Hereupon the
Poles are so weaksighted, that they never reflect that neither the Emperor,
nor the French King have any Kindness for them, but only make Use of them as
Instruments, the better to accomplish their Designs.

What promotes foreign Factions.
There is nothing that can promote or favor Foreign Factions more than the
unlimited Prerogatives of each Member of the Diet, for the King, Senators, and
Deputies have all equal Voices and equal Power in their Affirmative or Negative
Votes; and Affairs are not concluded or agreed upon by Plurality of Voices, but
universal Consent of all the three Orders, and the free Approbation of every
Member of the Diet in particular; so that if but one Person only, who has a
lawful Vote, thinks fit to refuse his Consent to what all the rest have agreed
to, he alone can interrupt their Proceedings, and annihilate their Suffrages:
Nay, what is yet more extravagant, if, for Example, there were Thirty Articles
or Bills to pass, and they all unanimously agreed to Nine and Twenty, yet if
but one Deputy disapproved of the Thirtieth, not only that, but also the other
Nine and Twenty are void and of no Force; and this because all the Articles at
first proposed have not passed.

Members not to give Reason for Dissent to any Bill.
Hence say they, the Diet can make no Law without its having been concluded by
their Concludere Comitia, or Breaking up of the Diet. They understand likewise,
that all the Points proposed are to be unanimously agreed upon, which
nevertheless happens but very seldom; for most commonly some Factious Person or
other, having perhaps been bribed or otherwise biased, will protest against
their Proceedings, and who consequently oftentimes prefers his own private
Interest to the public Good of his Country. Moreover their Liberty extends so
far, that this corrupted Member is not obliged by Law, to give any Reason for
his said Refusal, but is only to say after their usual Manner, Nie pos Volam;
It is not my Pleasure that it shall be so. Whereupon he immediately withdraws
from out of the Diet, and most commonly retires into the Country for Fear of
being either killed or abused (as it often happens such People are) by some
desperate Member of the Diet.

Easy Matter to annul the Projects of the Diet.
Thns SIR, you may plainly perceive how easy a Matter it is for any Foreign
Prince to interrupt all the Projects of this Diet, if they seem in any wise to
move against his Interest. If Poland be in Peace, and has a mind to declare War
against any Nation contrary to the French Interest, the French Pistoles can
easily find some Senator or Deputy to oppose this Design. Or if by the Heat and
Resolution of some great Men, War be denounced, the French King can never fail
of somebody to break their Ways and Means of raising Money to carry it on, as
he effectually did in the War the late King had against the Turks and Tartars.
Then on the other side, if the Poles are actually in War with the Turks and
Tartars, which is for the Emperors Interest, the Court of Vienna will never
want some Christianly disposed Bishop, or some other Member to persuade or
oblige the Diet to continue the War as long as it agrees with the Affairs of
the House of Austria, and this under Pretense of serving God and the Apostolic
See. This appears sufficiently in this present War, for the Poles having been
extremely fatigued and impoverished by the continued and fatal Interruptions of
the Tartars for near these fifteen Years, do all no doubt wish for a Peace, and
have proposed it in every Diet for several Years, ever since the Siege of
Vienna: But notwithstanding either through their own Disorders, or the Austrian
Faction, they could never yet accomplish their Design. Thus the Austrian Party
keeps them in a tedious War, and the French prevents them from carrying it on
with Vigor, insomuch that between these two, that Nation is almost ruined,
since on one Side they are hindered from making Peace to remedy the prodigious
Desolations made upon them; and on the other, prevented from raising Money
sufficient to carry the War into the Country of their Invaders.

Great Freedom of Speech there.
Every Member of the Diet, after having obtained Leave of their Marshal, who
can only stop their Mouths, has a Right to speak and harangue there as long as
he pleases: Nay, can say what he will, for they often abuse one another, and
affront their King to his Face, branding him with the infamous Titles of
Perjured, Unjust, and the like. They often likewise threaten both him and his
Children, when perhaps they have the least Reason. The Occasion of this is
generally in that they come drunk into the Diet* and consequently talk only as
the Spirit moves, either good or bad. Nay, you shall have some of these
Fuddle-caps talk Nonsense for two or three Hours together, trespassing on the
Patience of the soberer Sort with a railing, carping, injurious, and ill
digested Discourse, without any bodies ever daring to interrupt them, though they
spin it out never so long, for if the Marshal himself should then presume to
bid 'em hold their Tongues, they would infallibly dissolve the Diet, by
protesting against the Proceedings thereof; so that the prudenter Way is always
to hear them out, and moreover, to show no Dislike to the impertinent Speeches
they have made.

Unhappy State of the Polish Government.
No body but sees the unhappy State of the Government of Poland; that their
Constitutions and Privileges are most pernicious; that the unlimited and
absolute Liberty of each Member makes all the Republic Slaves, either to the
Whimsy or factious Obstinacy of one particular Man; for can there be any thing
more unreasonable than that after all the Senators and Deputies have come from
most remote Provinces with excessive Expense, to the Diet, and labored jointly
with the King to conclude Matters for the common Benefit of the Nation, it
should be in the Power of one disaffected or corrupted Person, without giving
any farther Reason than his own Pleasure, to annul the Proceedings of the rest,
and to dissolve the Diet at a Juncture especially, when there is the greatest
Occasion for their Concurrence?

Thus SIR, you may perceive that Affairs of the greatest Consequence depend not
only on the prudent Deliberations of sober Men, but also on the whimsical
Humors of the senseless or depraved. This excessive Liberty of every private
Man shows that both the Nation and the Diet have none at all.

Policy of concluding Matters by unanimous Consent.
This Constitution of concluding Matters in the Diet, rather by universal
Consent than Plurality of Voices, was established to deprive their Kings of all
Means and Opportunities of ever becoming absolute, for they imagined it was
morally impossible (as it really is) that whatever Interest or Authority the
King might get in the Country, that he should ever so far prevail as to bring
all the Members of the Diet (for he might have the Majority) to consent to any
Article or Bill which might any wise be injurious to the Nation. But on the
other hand, observing the many bad Consequences that usually attend, and must
still necessarily follow, such Constitutions, they once proposed to decide
their Affairs by the two Thirds of the Voices, yet which they could never agree
in, by reason that the greatest Part of them being overfond of their Liberties,
were loath by these means to consent to part with them; and so that Proposal
had no Effect.

Wonderful how the Polish Government can subsist.
SIR, you may have just Reason to admire how the Polish Nation could, for above
a Thousand Years, subsist with such bad Constitutions, and still possess, not
only a vast Kingdom, but also hitherto enjoy their Freedom and Liberties in
their utmost Force and Extent. It Is wonderful also that far from losing or
limiting any of their Prerogatives, they rather enlarge and increase 'em as
often as they elect their Kings. Nay, considering the Power of their King; the
absolute Prerogative every Gentleman has in his own Lands, in a manner above
the Laws; the Turbulency of their Diets; and the small Obligation the Officers
think they lie under to perform their several Duties, the Poles themselves have
owned it to be no less than a Miriacle that they should have subsisted so long,
and Dr. Connor says, he has often heard them say, that their Preservation was
to be attributed to God alone, that protected 'em to be the invincible Bulwark
of Europe against the Progress of the common Enemies of Christendom, the Turks
and Tartars.

Must always flourish for several Reasons.
Here we need not have Recourse to any peculiar Providence bestowed by God on
the Poles, since by his own ordinary Concourse to all natural Causes, we may
easily collect that the Polish Nation could not but subsist hitherto only, but
likewise must in all Probability last as long as any Kingdom in Europe, and
this for several Reasons.

I. Reason.
First, Because, though the King's Power is limited by the Law, his Credit and
Authority nevertheless is so great, that he can dispose the Affairs in the Diet
as he pleases, especially where they tend to the public Good of the Kingdom;
for very few, if any at all, will venture to protest against any Proceedings
there, that are for the Interest of the Nation, unless they be supported by a
good Party of Senators and Deputies, and this because it is not only infamous
and scandalous to his Person, but also prejudicial to his Posterity that breaks
up a Diet; as also not a little dangerous to his Life, to irritate and disobey
so powerful a Body; for they are commonly very liberal in their Passion, of
bestowing several Slashes of a Scymitar on any ill-natured corrupted Member
that opposes the Interest of his Country, though in Reality he has the Law on his
Side. It is certain therefore that where any Person withstands the rest in the
Diet, it is either because the King has not sufficiently employed his Authority
to pacify him, or Policy to win him with a small Present; or else by reason
that he does not care they should agree; or lastly, because there is a
considerable Party of Senators and Deputies that support, or rather employ him
to protest against an Act that they do not think for their Interest to let
pass. It is a common Practice, where any of the Members of the Senate have any
particular Advantage, by opposing the Diets Proceedings, not to expose
themselves either to the Hatred or Anger of that numerous Body, but rather to
sacrifice some private Deputy to their Fury, who for a small Sum of Money will
come into the Diet and declare in plain Terms, without any manner of Reason,
that it is not his Pleasure that such a Matter, then in Agitation, should pass.
Whereupon he immediately withdraws, if he can, into the Country for Security.
But generally these Oppositions are never practiced where the public Interest
of the Nation is concerned, as appears in the raising the last Siege of Vienna
by the Turks; where the Poles finding that the Loss of that City would turn be
very much to their Prejudice, marched directly under their then reigning King,
John III. to the Relief of it, which they soon effected to their immortal
Honor and Glory. It Is true, that it is not an easy Matter to bring the Poles
into the Field; but when once they are got together into a considerable Body,
their Courage and undaunted Resolutions render them invincible.

II. Reason.
Secondly, The Order of their Government, and their Courage and Resolution does
not so much contribute toward their Preservation, as the Envy and Jealousies
of their Neighbors among themselves; for when the late King of Sueden, and
Elector of Brandenbourg made War with Poland, the Tartars came to assist the
Poles, and at the same Time the King of Denmark made a considerable Diversion
in Suedeland. When the Tartars likewise declare War against Poland, most
commonly either the Emperor or Moscovite come to its Relief; or else make
great Diversions on their Sides; for as it is the Interest of the Princes their
Neighbors, not to let them grow to that exorbitant Power which they had
formerly; so it is not at all for their Benefit to let them perish; for whoever
could be able to conquer Poland, and unite it to his own Dominions, would
quickly be too powerful for all the rest.

III. Reason.
Thirdly, The Poles, besides this, can the easier conserve their Dominions by
reason that they have no strong Forts or Castles to shelter their Enemies,
where they happen to make any Progress in their Country; yet I verily believe
that an Army of fifty Thousand well-disciplin'd Men would at present conquer
the whole Kingdom of Poland, though at the same Time I am of Opinion that an
Hundred Thousand could not be able to keep it. Carolus Custavus, King of
Sueden, with about Forty Thousand Men, entirely subdued Poland in less than two
Years Time, yet when he began to encroach too much upon their Constitutions and
Liberties, the Polish Gentry joined unanimously together, and soon drove the
Suedes out of the Kingdom. The Tartars in numerous Bodies make frequent
Incursions into this open Country, but still as soon as they have loaded
themselves with their Booty, they make all possible Haste away. The Loss of
Caminiec makes the Poles admire at their own Policy in having no strong Towns,
for they say, had not that been so well fortified, it had not served for
Shelter to a strong Garrison of Turks and Tartars at their Doors. Insomuch that
it may be observed that Forts and Castles which we count our greatest Security,
would inevitably be the Ruin of the Poles; they being not skilled in besieging
Towns, and moreover, having no good Artillery, Ingeniers, Ammunition, or other
Necessaries, since they never were, nor ever will be able to retake Caminiec,
tho it is a Place of no extraordinary Strength, and for my Part I verily
believe that if it should be surrendered to them, they would quickly raze and
demolish it.

Assemblys of the Convocation and Synods in Poland.
SIR, Having thus far treated only of the Diet or Parliament of Poland, I will
now proceed to present you with a cursory Account of its other Assemblies and
Courts of Justice, and therefore must acquaint you, that besides the Grand Diet
and Senate, the Clergy there have both a general Convocation and two Provincial
Synods; but which are wholly regulated and awed by the Pontifical Chair. I may
take notice that the Archbishop of Leopol, tho he can call and hold his Synod
apart, yet is he altogether subject in Spirituals to the Archbishop of Gnesna,
or Primate of Poland. The general Convocation is for the most part convened
every third Year at Petricovia, Lanschet, or Lowitz, whereof the minor Clergy,
as in England, are admitted by their Deputies or Representatives.

The Kaptur. Court.
As for Course of Justice, the Poles have one that is wholly peculiar to the
Interregnum, which they call the Kaptur. This is twofold, either general, which
sits during the Interregnum, to prevent Disorders, and which has Power over
Life and Death: Or particular, in the several Palatinates of the Kingdom. The
Judges of the former are chosen out of the Prime Nobility, and those of the
latter out of the Nobility in general of every Palatinate, at the several
particular Conventions, and in the Beginning of every Interregnum. All these
Courts cease three Weeks before the Assembly for Election meets, and after the
Election, they sit again to the very Day of the Coronation.

Ecclesiastical Courts and their Jurisdiction.
The other Courts of Justice in Poland are either Ecclesiastical, Civil or
Military. The Ecclesiastical, as in other Nations, are altogether in the hands
of the Bishops, who have Each their Chancellor, Register, etc. from whom
Appeals may be made to the Archbishops; and even from the Archbishop of Leopol
to him of Gnesna, who is the Popes Legate Born, and Primate and Metropolitan of
all Poland: Nevertheless, from him Appeals lie to the Sea of Rome. These Judge
according to the Canons and Customs of the Church; and the Civil Magistrates
are obliged to be Assisting to them in the Execution of their Sentences as
often as they shall be so required.

Court of Nunciature.
To the Ecclesiastical Courts belongs the Court of Nunciature held by the Popes
Nuncio, for that purpose always residing in Poland. However, before he can have
any Jurisdiction, he must have presented the King and the Principal Ministers
of State, with the Apostolic Brief of his Nunciature.

Gentry's Civil Courts.
The Civil Jurisdiction is divided among diverse sorts of Judges, and belongs to
the Commonalty as well as Gentry. Some of these determine Causes exempt from
Appeals, and others cannot.

High Tribunals.
Those from whom there lies no Appeal are the three High-Tribunals instituted
by Stephen Batori, the Judges whereof are all Gentry. Two of these Tribunals
are for the Kingdom, and one for the Great Duchy. Those for the Kingdom keep
their Session Six Months at Petricovia in Low- Poland; and the other Six at
Lublin in High- Poland: That for the Great Duchy is alternatively one year at
Vilna, and another either at Novogrodec or Minski. They all consist of so many
Judges both Ecclesiastical and Civil, chosen out of every Palatinate, the
former once in four years, and the latter once in two. Judgment is pronounced
here by Plurality of Voices: but where Matters are purely Ecclesiastical, there
ought to be as many of the Clergy as the Laity. The Causes here are heard in
Order; for three days are allowed to enter all that come; and whatever are not
entered within that time cannot be adjudg'd that sitting. A Man that has a
Trial in these Courts, may be said to have all the Nation for his Judges,
Deputies both Ecclesiastical and Temporal being sent thither for that purpose
from all Parts of the Kingdom.

The Senate and Green-Cloth.
The Senate also Judges of Civil or Criminal Matters without Appeal: As do
likewise the Great- Marshals in all Cases relating to the King's Officers; And
the Great Chancellors in matters of Appeal to the Court which they have only
Cognizance of. But the Marshal's Jurisdiction extends over all Merchants, and
Strangers; both who find but little Justice done them in Poland when they have
occasion for it.

Exchequer Courts.
Also there are two Exchequer Courts for the Revenue, one held at Radom in
High- Poland, and the other at Vilna. These Courts seldom sit above a Fortnight
or Three Weeks.

Gentry-Courts not free from Appeal.
Those that are not exempt from Appeals, are the Courts of the Gentry and
Commonalty in every Palatinate; which are by no means to have any of the Clergy
for Judges. Those for the Gentry are either the Courts of Land-Judicature, or
those of the Starostas, and are more, or fewer in number, according to the
Extent of the Palatinate where they are held.

Of Land-Judicature with its Judges.
The Courts of Land-Judicature have one Judge, an Associate, and a Natory, or
Head-Clerk to Try Causes, and Administer all Civil Justice; in some Places
four, in others six times a year; and in others once a Month. The Courseof
these Courts can only be interrupted by the Death of any of their Judges, by
the Diet, or by the general Meeting of the Palatines and Magistrates; which
last is every Autumn, to hear Appeals from Inferior Courts. The Towns where
the Gentry sit are in great number; and it must be observed, that none who have
Lands or Goods within each Jurisdiction, can be made to Appear at a Court where
they have none.

Vice-Chamberlains Court.
The immediate Appeal from these Courts is to the Vice-Chamberlain of the
Palatinate, who either by himself or his Deputy, the Chamberlain of that
District, restores all that have been Dispossessed, and ascertains all Bounds
and Limits of Lands. This is as it were his whole Jurisdiction. But where there
is any Contest between the King and any of the Gentry in this Kind, then at
their request Commissioners to take Appeals.
Commissioners are appointed out of the Senate to inspect the matter disputed,
and to do Justice therein. Likewise where the Difference is between the King
and a Clergyman, Commissioners are ordered; but there the Bishop of the Diocese
Claims the Nomination of one or more of them. When any of the Officers of the
Courts of Land-Judicature die, the King cannot Name others, till the District
to which they belonged, have chosen Four out of the Housekeepers; but then he
may pitch upon One for each Election. This Office being once obtained, it
cannot be forfeited but by a Higher Promotion, or Male Administration.

Gentries Criminal Courts.
The other Courts for the Gentry are those that take cognizance of Criminal
Cases, whereof there is one only in every Starostaship, called Sudy Grodskie:
Where either the Starosta himself, or his Lieutenant-Criminal, Administers
Justice in his Castle, or some other public Place, at least every Six Weeks.
He likewise has Cognizance of Civil Causes between such as have no Lands, and
such Foreigners as come to Trade here. Process in Criminal Cases is to be
served here a Fortnight, and in Civil, a Week before the Court sits.

Starostas Power and Office.
He is also the Executive Minister of all Sentences pronounced, and likewise a
sole Conservator of the Peace within his Territories. He is obliged by himself
or his Officers, to see all Public Executions performed.

The Courts of the Commonalty are either in Cities or Villages.

Courts of Commonalty in Cities.
In Cities Justice is Administered by the Scabins, Town Hall, or Judg-Advocate.
The Scabins have cognizance of all Capital Offenses, and Criminal Matters, the
Town Hall of all Civil Cases; to which likewise the Gentry are subject; and the
Judg-Advocate of Offenses committed by Soldiers. Civil Matters of small Moment
are determined solely by the Governor of the City, but which are subject to
Appeal to the Town Hall, and thence to the King.

In Villages.
In Villages the Commonalty are subject to Scabins, being the Kings Officers,
and to Scultets or Peculiar Lords; from which last lies no Appeal. Here Justice
is almost Arbitrary, except in Criminal Cases. The Scultets are Hereditary
Judges. The Execution of all Sentences in Cities and Towns, is in the hands of
its own Magistrates, though in some cases they are forced to beg Assistance
from the Starostas.

Officers and Magistrates of Plebeian Courts.
The Officers and Magistrates of the Plebeian Courts are some named by their
Peculiar Lords, and some Elected by their Fellow Citizens, except in Cracow
only, where the Palatine has a Right of Choosing the Magistrates, though he has
not the same Power to dis-place them after they are once chosen; for they are
to continue their Office for Life, unless they forfeit it by Infamy or
Inability.

Out of the XXIV (composing the Council or Senate of Cracow) the Palatine every
year deputes Eight with the Title and Power of Presidents. He also Names the
Judge and Scabins by the Magdeburg Laws, though these in other Cities are
chosen by the Council. The Scultets or Hereditary Judges, cannot be removed but
in extraordinary Cases.

(...) Profits.
The Profits of all Offices are but very small and scarce any certain, the
Poles esteeming the Honor of enjoying them sufficient Recompense: Nevertheless
they have all Salaries and Perquisites, though inconsiderable.

Military Jurisdiction.
The Military Jurisdiction of Poland is wholly in the hands of the King, or his
Generals, although the Palatines and Castellans who generally Accompany his
Majesty to the Wars, retain their Authority over their respective Inferiors;
but where those are Refractory, a Court-Marshal Adjusts the Debate.

Origin, Progress, and present State of Laws.
As for the Laws of Poland, it is on all hands agreed, that it had none till
the time of Casimir the Great, and then but very few made by him; although it is
certain, that the Poles hadlong before been Christians, and were well enough
versed in the Human-Learning, yet was there never any Law or Statute of any
Prince committed to Writing; but that People were contented to be governed by
the Customs and Manners of their Ancestors, handed down to them from Father to
Son. Casimir III. therefore (called the Great from his prudent Administration)
observing the disadvantages his Kingdom labored under by the Germans, who then
frequently came into Poland on account of Trade, received the Saxon Laws (now
called Magdeburg-Laws, from the City of Saxony whence they were taken) by which
Poland is at this day principally governed, although the Gentry have many
peculiar Customs, and some Statutes which have been since made: And which in
the Time of Sigismundus Augustus, being compiled into one Volume by Learned
Men, were entitled the Statutes of the Kingdom; and since (some having been
Approved and Augmented, and others Changed and Altered in several Diets) have
obtained the Name of Constitutions of Poland; to which nevertheless all that
Kingdom is not Subject, Lithuania and Volhynia observing its own Laws. Prussia
likewise, both Regal and Ducal, has a Municipal Law of its own, commonly styled
the Law of Culm; from which notwithstanding Three Cities are Exempt, viz.
Elbing, Bransberg, and Fraumberg, all which make use of the Laws of Lansberg.

Punishments in Poland.
The Punishments in Poland are various, and differ only according to the
Quality of the Crimes, and not of the Persons; for a Thief is to be hanged of
what degree soever he be, and Capital Offenders of all other Kinds and
Qualities are to be Beheaded, except in Notorious Villainies, where the Offender
is commonly broke on the Wheel, or else Tortured by cutting off two Thongs, or
long Pieces out of the Skin of his Back. A Nobleman is sometimes punished by
forfeiting half his Estate to the King, and the rest to an Informer; and
sometimes by Imprisonment only.

Manner of chastising Servants.
Masters also have a Power of Chastising their Servants; which they do after
this manner: If the Servant they are about to Punish be a Polish Gentleman,
then they make him lie down on his Belly on a Carpet spread on the Ground, or
upon a Stool, when another Gentleman-Servant lays him on unmercifully on the
Back, with a Rope or Stick, giving him as many Blows and Lashes, as the Master
who is then present, orders. After which, he that is beaten embraces the Knees
of him that had commanded him to be Beat, and salutes him with the good-natured
Title of Benefactor. This Discipline seems a little too severe; but however,
the Temper of these People makes it necessary. The Peasant-Servants are
punished after the same manner, only with this difference, that they have no
Carpet spread under them. Some of the former sort think it an Honor to be so
lashed; which Honor they always receive liberally as often as they deserve it.

No Disgrace to the Genty to be thus beat.
This Custom of the Poles in punishing their Gentlemen-Servants so rigidly,
ought not much to be wondered at, if it be considered, that they may serve in
the meanest Offices without derogating from the Nobility of their Birth, or
incapacitating themselves for the Highest Preferments. For (says Hauteville) I
have known some, who from being Footboys to great Lords, and Drummers in a
Company of Dragoons, have been advanced to the Dignity of SENATORS. Also in
general, Nothing debases Nobility in this Country, but a Handicraft or Mechanic
Employment.

This SIR, is all that I could meet with by various Reading, relating to the
Legislative and Executive Justice in Poland; and which, though not capable to
pass your Censure with the Name of a Regular Composition, I hope may obtain
Effects of your Candor under the Regretted Title of a hasty Compilation.

I am SIR, with all Humility Your most Obedient Servant, J. S.

LETTER IV.
To the Right Honorable JOHN, Earl of Marlborough, Governor to his Highness
the Duke of Gloucester.
Of the Election and Coronation of a King of Poland, with the Proceedings in
the Inter-regnum, and all other Ceremonies; as likewise a short Account of the
Coronation of the Queen.

My LORD,
TO whom can this Letter, which treats of the Election of a King, more properly
address it self than to your Lordship, who has lately been pitched upon by the
wisest of Monarchs, to be Governor to the presumptive Heir of his Crown? No
Doubt his Majesty saw those united Qualifications in you, which were but to be
singly met with in all others, and which moreover could not but be required to
copy a successor from so great an Original as himself. These Considerations, My
Lord, have emboldened me to present your Lordship with this imperfect Account,
but which, I hope, in regard it has been extracted from so many Volumes, may
favorably pass your discerning Censure, tho it must not in the least pretend
to deserve your Approbation.

My LORD,

Crown vacant has many ways.
The Crown of Poland may be vacant four Ways, for either the King abdicates
voluntarily, and publicly, like John Casimir; is deposed for his Vices, as
Locticus was; runs out of the Kingdom as Henry III. of France did; or dies,
which is the ordinary Cause of an Inter-regnum.

Diet summoned
When the Crown is once become vacant, the Archbishop of Gnesna being the first
Senator of the Kingdom, is the Prime Minister, and has the same Authority as
the King had, most of the Crown Revenues being invested likewise in him, during
the Interregnum. After the King's Death, he issues out circular Letters to all
the Provinces, to acquaint them therewith, and to command their several
Officers to make Publication of the Inter-regnum, as likewise to summon a
general Convocation of the Gentry to meet at Warsaw at a Time prefixed.

Proceedings in little Diets before Grand Session.
Before this general Meeting, they meet at the Little Diets, where Care is
taken to secure the Roads from Thieves, and to set strong Guards every where on
the Frontiers, to oppose an invading Enemy. Next, Spies are sent into all
Neighboring Kingdoms, to have Intelligence of what they design or do. Then all
Persons are prohibited either to go out or come into the Kingdom during the
Interregnum, as likewise to carry any Horses out of it. All foreign Letters
directed to any Members of the Senate are intercepted; All the Highways are
blocked up with Trees felled down, and Ambuscades are placed about them: None
of the Senate, nor no Foreigners are permitted to write to the Army: All the
Gentry are commanded to have every thing in Readiness for public Defense: The
common Use of Guns is forbidden, Taverns are shut up, and Concerts of Music
silenced. Then they proceed to institute the Court called Kaptur, treated of
before.

Who officiates where no Interregnum.
This Diet consists of the Archbishop of Gnesna, who represents the King's
Person, and the other Senators, together with the Deputies of the Provinces.
Lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 275.
In Case there is no Archbishop of Gnesna when the King dies, the Office of
Inter-Rex comes to the Bishop of Cujavia, and next to the Bishop of Posnan, and
so to the rest of the Bishops of Lower Poland, which in this Respect is
preferred to the Higher, though in nothing else. Yet however they may grant away
their Power, as they did in the Inter-Regnum before the Election of the late
King, when the Bishop of Cracow officiated during the whole Interregnum, by a
common Consent of those Bishops.

First Proceedings.
Hartnoch lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 291.
Some of the Senators and Deputies are dispatched to the Generals of the Army,
to remain with them, and to be assisting to them with their Counsel in the
Affairs of the War. Some Senators and Deputies likewise are appointed to
inspect the Crown-Treasure deposited in the Castle of Cracow, and to take an
Inventory thereof, which they are afterward to report to the Diet. This
Treasure is commonly committed to the Custody of eight Senators, who are the
Castellan of Cracow, the Palatins of Cracovia, Posnania, Vilna, Sendomir,
Kalisch, and Troki; together with the Treasurer of the Kingdom, each having his
particular Seal and Key, and therefore none to act without the unanimous
Consent of all. Also Commissioners are sent to inform themselves of the King's
Crown-Revenue, which they are likewise to make their Report of, during this
Session, and till a new King be proclaimed, the Republic Ibid. lib. and cap.
eodem p. 306.
claims the Title of Most Serene from all Sovereign Princes and Crowned Heads,
although Hautaville says, he has observed, that the King of France, writing to
this Diet of Election, has not faluted them with that Title, but only expressed
himself in these Terms; To our dearest and well beloved Friends and Allies, the
States of the Kingdom of Poland, and Great Duchy of Lithuania.

Courts of Justice cease except two.
Whilst this Diet sits (which by the Laws is not to be above a Fortnight
without Prorogation) and from the Time of the Circular Letters, to the
Conclusion of the Diet of Election; all Courts of Justice cease, except only
that of the Marshal's, which continues as before, and a Court established to
prevent Disorders in the Diet. As for all private Affairs, and Suits of Law,
they are delayed till after the new King's Coronation. The Proceedings in this
Diet are much of the same Nature with those in other Diets.

Foreign Ministers on this Occasion.
Most Crowned Heads, and other Christian Princes, send Ambassadors to this
Election, and more especially the Emperor and King of France. The Pope also
always sends his Nuncio to take care that the Election should fall upon a
professed Catholic, and one that is in the Interest of the Sea of Rome. The
Emperor and French King always raise great Factions to promote their several
Interests.

Notify their Arrival and how received.
Before any Ambassadors arrive, they are to send Notice of their coming to the
Archbishop of Gnesna, who is to appoint them Lodgings at a Distance from the
City, and to assign them a Polish Gentleman, whose Business is rather to
observe their Conduct, and to acquaint the Diet therewith, than to do them
either any Service or Honor. But however these Rules are but seldom observed,
for Princes Ambassadors now generally live publicly at Warsaw. A Gentleman,
it is true, is still appointed to be always with them, whose chiefest Business
is to prevent their corrupting any with Money; but this Precaution is
notwithstanding now become useless, since Avarice bears so great a Sway in
Poland, that even the Fidelity which a Polish Gentleman ows his Country, cannot
withstand the Charms of a Thousand Crowns.

Ambassadors from the Republic.
Ambassadors are not only received from Foreign Princes, and their Masters
Letters publicly read; but also Polish Ministers are sent at this Time from
the Republic to all Neighboring States, to answer their Embassies, and to
request their Amity. Here it may be observed, that all Ambassadors or Envoys,
who have had Audience of Leave before the late King's Death, are desired to
depart within eight Days.

Caution to foreign Ministers.
Ambassadors from foreign Courts must take especial Care to secure the Diet in
general, since the bare disobliging of one particular Member may render them
for ever incapable of bringing their Designs about, as it happened in the
Election of Michael Wiesnowiski, where the true Reason of the Duke of Newburg's
being excluded, was the Quarrel with the Chancellor Patz: Nevertheless it must
be acknowledged that that Election was tumultuary, the Nobility had not their
free Votes, and that they were in a manner hurried away by the Violence of the
Multitude, which was so great, that Prasmowski, then Primate, was forced to
proclaim him, though he knew that the Republic at that Juncture had need of both
a rich and valiant King, neither of which that Prince could in the least
pretend to be. He was no sooner proclaimed, but the Chancellor began to
insinuate that he owed his Crown to him, nor was it a difficult Task for him to
impose on a Prince who was easily governed, and who had always shown more good
Nature than Judgment.

Deputies Business after this Diet.
After the Diet of Convocation ended, the Nuncios and Deputies retire to their
several Countries, where they acquaint the Gentry, being a second Time
assembled in their Little Diets, of the Proceedings in this general
Convocation, and particularly of the Day assigned for the Election; Whereupon
the Gentry immediately begin to consult about what is proper to be proposed in
the Diet of Election, and they proceed to choose new Deputies. In Prussia the
Bishop of Varmia being sole Lord Lieutenant, summons all these little Diets by
his Mandates.

Diet of Election.]
The general Diet for the Election of a King, was formerly held at Petricovia,
but since the joining of the Kingdom with the Great Duchy, is always held in
an open Field half a League from Warsaw, and near the Village of Vola, and is
not to continue by the Laws above six Weeks. The Crown-Treasurer, at the
Charges of the Republic, builds there a large Booth or Hall with Boards, not
unlike Booths in our Bartholomew Fair: The Name the Poles give to this Place,
is Hartknoch lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 295.
Szopa, signifying a covered Room against the Injuries of Weather. It has but
three Doors to go in at, and they fortify it round with a broad and deep
Ditch. When this Place is thus finished by the Care of the aforesaid Officer,
and the Day fixed for the Diets convening is arrived, the Senators and Nobility
go in great Order to St. John's Church at Warsaw, where they pray God to assist
them in the Election of a King, who may have all the Qualities necessary to
defend the Church, and protect the Republic. Then they go to wait on the Queen
Dowager, to condole the Death of the deceased King her Husband, the Primate
speaking for the Senate, and the last Nuncio-Marshal for the Deputies, who are
then answered in the Queen's Name by her Chancellor. After which they march to
the Szopa, where the Nobility elect their Marshal or Speaker by Majority of
Votes, who after being chosen, takes the usual Oath, which runs thus, That he
will discharge his Office faithfully, receive no Bribes, keep private
Correspondence with none of the Competitors, and will not subscribe a Schedule
of a free Election without the Knowledge and Approbation of the Republic.
After this he goes to wait on the Senators for their Approbation. It must be
understood that the Senators only sit in the Szopa, for the Deputies have their
Session in the open Field, which they call their Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 1. p. eadem.
Rota Equestris.

First Proceedings therein.
The first thing that the Senators and Nuncios, or deputed Gentry, do in this
Diet, after establishing of the Kaptur, is to take a mutual Oath on their
Knees, administered by the Prmate, to a strict Union and Intelligence among
themselves for the common Interest of the Nation: Next, not to acknowledge any
for their King, but him that is lawfully elected by the unanimous Consent and
who must withal swear to preserve inviolable, the Rights and Privileges of the
Republic; and they moreover promise mutually, that he who will act otherwise,
shall be deemed and declared an Enemy to his Country. Likewise they
reciprocally promise not to give their Voices for an Election, nor to enter
into any Agreement with any of the Candidates or their Ambassadors, till all
the Irregularities or Disorders, either in the Kingdom or the Great Duchy, be
first considered and redressed. They annul all the Decrees of the Tribunals,
and even the Statutes of Kings that are found to entrench on their Liberties:
They declare that all other Judgments pronounced before the Publication of the
Interregnum, shall be valid: They set up a new Court of Justice called Kaptur,
which is to Defend the Country, Coin Money, Raise Soldiers, and for Maintaining
of the Laws. They give Orders that no Body shall come to the Diet with
Firearms, nor bring any Strangers along with them: They cause the Generals to
take on Oath before Commissioners to discharge the Trust reposed in them,
faithfully to employ their Forces against the Enemies of the Republic, and to
defend the Frontiers, thereby to secure the Honor and Liberties of the
Kingdom. They oblige them also to swear to assert the public Interest in Case
of Sedition or Rebellion, to restrain Soldiers from injuring any Person, to
receive Money neither from Clergy nor Laity, and to prevent their Soldiers from
receiving any. And lastly, they forbid them to advance with their Troops into
the Heart of the Kingdom, and more especially to come Piasecius ad An. 1632. p.
530.
near the Diet for Fear of being forced to an Election against their free Will:
And providing the Republic should be attacked by such a Force, as the Army
were not strong enough to resist, then they declare, that from that very Minute
they summon all the Nobility to meet together without Delay, at the Time and
Place which the Primate and his Council shall appoint; that the Review of the
Soldiers raised in general by the Republic, or in particular by the
Palatinaetes, shall be made in the Camp; that each Palatinate shall take care
to pay its own Troops, and not disband any but such as the general Diet shall
think fit to dismiss. They forbid the Treasurers of the Crown or Great Duchy,
to give out any Money without Knowledge and Approbation of the Archbishop and
his Council, but only for Payment of the Troops of the Republic: They order
that skilful and honest Persons shall be sent to visit the Salt-Works, and to
regulate all Reparations that shall be found necessary there; and in the last
Place, that the Deputies of certain Cities shall not be admitted to the Diet,
till they have sufficiently proved their Right to come thither. In short, the
Poles in this Diet take all the Measures and Care imaginable to secure their
Frontiers, maintain the Kingdom in Peace and Quietness, to settle a good
Intelligence among themselves; and lastly, to prevent Bribery or any private
Interest in any of the Members of the Diet that might tend to hinder a free and
unanimous Election.

Exorbitancies examined, and Ambassadors received.
Matters being thus disposed, they immediately proceed to the Election,
examining first, the Exorbitances, that is to say, the Disorders and Excesses
committed during the last Reign, to the end that they may prevent the like for
the future. These Exorbitances are not examined by the whole Session, either of
the Senators or Deputies, but by a certain Number assigned out of both, who sit
a-Mornings in the Castle of Warsaw. Then the Diet gives Audience to the
Ambassadors, both of those Princes that pretend to the Crown, and those that
recommend others to it, sending first, a great Train of Coaches to wait on them
to the Rota Equestris, whither it must be understood that on this Occasion the
Senate goes.

When these Ambassadors are thus sent for, the Pope's Nuncio is always
preferred, then comes the Emperor's Ambassador, next the French, and after
these the Spanish: But since the Diet of Election convened at Warsaw after the
Death of Sigismundus Augustus, when the Spanish Ambassador demanded Audience
before the King of France, who notwithstanding was preferred, Spain has sent no
Ambassador on this Account into Poland; for as for Don Pedro Ronquillos, who
was present at the Diet of Election of John III. he durst never assume either
the Title or Quality of Ambassador, for Fear he should be forced to give Place
to the Ambassador of France.

Manner of Receiving them.
The Manner of receiving these Ambassadors is this: The Pope's Legate is
introduced by a certain Number of the Ecclesiastical and Lay-Senators, as
likewise by the Marshal of the Deputies, and an assigned Number out of their
Body. The Inter-Rex arising out of his Chair, moves two or three Steps to meet
him, and places him on his Right Hand. The secular Ambassadors are introduced
by some of the Lay-Senators and Deputies only. The Emperor's Minister is
placed by them between the Great Marshal and the Nuncio-Marshal.

What requisite in foreign Ministers.
When the Ambassadors receive Audience, they make their Harangue in Latin, to
which the Archbishop that presides, answers for the Senators, and the
Nuncio-Marshal for the Nobility. It is absolutely necessary for all Ministers
that have any Interests of their Masters to carry on in the Diet, to be not
only eloquent, but liberal and generous, that by their Treats, Feasts, and
chiefly their Money, they may gain or purchase the Good Will and Suffrages of
the Senate and Gentry. It is so essentially requisite for Ambassadors to make a
great Figure, keep an open Table, spend a vast deal of Money, and to make
considerable Presents, that if the Diet do but in the least suspect any Avarice
or Niggardliness in them, they will presently impute it to the Poverty of the
Prince that sent them, which would prove no small Obstruction, either to his
Election or Interest in Behalf of any body else. Ambassadors must likewise take
more than ordinary Care to keep in with the Clergy; first, by obliging the
Bishops, because they bear great Sway in the Diet, and next the Priests and
Friars, they having no less Influence and Authority over the People. But
however Presents are not to be made them in gross, but by little and little,
lest they fly off when they expect no farther Recompense; for the Poles
generally think themselves obliged to serve you, not for what they have already
received, but because they are still in Hopes of receiving more. They are all
likewise apt to neglect your Interest, and will sometimes take Money from
another Prince or his Ambassador, to vote against you. The late King is accused
of taking Money of the Emperor, the Duke of Lorrain, and of the Duke of
Newbourg, to employ it in their several Interests in the Election; but however,
he did more wisely to make use of it himself to get to be elected, in which we
find he had good Success.

Diet proceeds to Election.
After the Ambassadors have thus had Audience, and that all other Matters are
settled in the Republic, they proceed to the Election of a King, but first
they implore the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, by singing the Veni Creator:
Then they proceed to give their Votes, and communicate them to each other, when
if they are unanimous for one Candidate, the Archbishop of Gnesna, or Bishop
that presides in his Place, demands thrice if the Grievances and Exorbitancies
are redressed; which being answered in the Affirmative, he immediately
proclaims the King Elect, which is likewise done at the same Time by the
Marshals of the Crown and the Great Duchy, and then they all join in the
singing of Te Deum.

Further Particulars thereof.
Here it may not be amiss to give your Lordship farther Particulars, of the
manner of Election, which is this. As Soon as the Anthem is ended, the Senators
and Deputies remove from their Places, and divide themselves into their several
Palatinates, making so many peculiar Rota's, the Archbishop of Gnesna only
still keeping his Seat. The Orders being thus divided, the first Senator of
every Palatinate, numbers their Votes; which afterward are transmitted into a
Roll, and delivered under their several Hands to the Nuncio-Marshal. All these
Suffrages are then reckoned together by the Senate in the Szopa, where if there
be a Majority for any one Candidate, they labor what they can partly by
Persuasion, and partly by Promises, to bring the Electors to be unanimous; for
till then no King can be lawfully Proclaimed: yet when there is a Division in
the Diet, as most commonly it happens, the strongest Party still carries it, as
it appeared in Stephen Batori's Cafe, and that of Sigismund III. which last
coming soonest into Poland, was Crowned King at Cracow, notwithstanding that
Maximilian was proclaimed at Warsaw by Cardinal Radzvil. It may be observed
that the House of Austria has been put by the Crown of Poland no less than
thrice. First in the Person of Ernest, by the Election of Henry of Valois; and
Secondly and Thirdly, by the Exclusion of this Maximilian: And this because the
Poles have a Maxim, never to Elect any Powerful Neighboring Prince for fear of
being subdued, and brought under an Arbitrary Power. The Day after the Election
all the Senators and Deputies meet either in the Rota Equestris, or the Castle
of Warsaw, and draw up the Decree of Election, subscribing it with their
several Hands; which is immediately afterward sent to the Press to be Printed.

Great Concours at the Election and Policy to bias them.
To the Election of a King of Poland, not only all the Gentry of the Kingdom
and Great Duchy, but likewise a great Number of Strangers from all adjacent
Countries come, yet notwithstanding that, People come from all Parts of Poland;
the Senators and Deputies only, have a lawful Vote in the Election:
Nevertheless, the other Gentry Interest themselves either in favoring the
Senators, or the Factions of the Deputies, and sometimes fall out among
themselves about it, so that it is the absolute Interest of the Candidate to
treat and present, not only the individual Members of the Diet, but also these
Nobles, although they have no actual Voices in the Election, for their great
Number can easily favor and carry on a Faction, by threatening the Senators and
Deputies, in Case they do not elect such a Prince as they propose. This was
confirmed in the Election of Michael Wiesnowiski, where none of the Electors
thought of choosing a Piasto, and much less such a weak poor unexperienced
Prince as this Duke was; yet the turbulent Mob of Polish Gentry soon forced
them to elect and proclaim him King, notwithstanding, this being no free
Election, they never paid him any great Deference, but undervalu'd, and were so
displeased with him, that some say, after four Years Reign, he was poisoned by
the Contrivance of the Great Men. Thus it is palpably more safe and creditable
for a Candidate to purchase himself a strong Party in the Diet, and to support
and back them by procuring the Affection and good Will of the rest of the
Gentry, than to rely barely on the inconstant and tumultuous Suffrage of a
senseless turbulent Mob, as the late King sufficiently experienced before his
Election.

Qualifications required in a Candidate.
There are several Conditions required in a Candidate, that aspires to the
Crown of Poland, which are now past, as Constitutions of the Kingdom, for he
must not be a Native (which Lib. 2. Cap. 1. p. 309. to 312.
Hartknoch says he may, and which he proves by a great many Persons) nor
married, nor Ibid. p. 431.
present at the Election, but must be rich, and no absolute or neighboring
Prince: And as for his Religion, he must either actually be, or promise to
become a Roman Catholic before he can be crowned. All this after the Death of
King Michael the late Elector of Brandenburg, and Duke Ernest of Brunswick
promised, being not willing, it seems, to lose a Crown for an exterior Show of
a Piece of Religious Ceremony.

Rules observed by the Poles in Elections.
The Gentry of Poland think themselves so great, and so equal in Respect to
each other, that they do not willingly consent to elect a Piasto or Native to a
Crown, which their Birth gave them a parallel Right to. They besides think it a
great Advantage to their Nation to choose a foreign and rich Prince, that they
may make more Alliances abroad, and oblige such Kings to bring all their
Effects with them to enrich the Kingdom. They are for an unmarry'd Prince, that
they may have the Opportunity of matching him, and so to strengthen their
Alliances that Way. They care not to elect a neighboring Prince, for fear he
should become absolute by his adjoining Force. But however these, like their
other Constitutions, have not been always observed; for the only Maxim they
have hitherto kept inviolable, is not to elect any Prince but a Roman
Catholic, for the late King was both a Piasto and married before he was
elected: It Is true, they would have had his Queen divorced from him, that they
might have married him to King Michael's Queen Dowager Eleonora, at present
Duchess Dowager of Lorrain; but the Affection the King always bore to his
Queen, in Conjunction with her own Intrigues among the Senators, soon broke
this Design. They have also sometimes elected absolute and neighboring
Princes, as the King of Sweden, the King of Hungary, the King of Bohemia, and
the Prince of Transylvania; but then this Constitution was not in Force, being
only made of latter Days, for they are now resolved to admit of no such
Election hereafter: So that at present a Prince must be very rich to purchase
the Votes of so many Hundreds that compose the Diet, and to treat the Gentry in
general: And besides, must have many Heroic and Warlike Qualities, and a great
Reputation in the World, to obtain the Crown of Poland: Insomuch that before he
can be elected and crowned, it must necessarily cost him several Hundreds of
Thousand Pounds Sterling: And moreover, the vast Sums that all the Competitors
spend liberally at this Election, far exceeds what the elected Prince has
spent, so that the Members of the Diet must needs get well by their Election,
which I take to be one of the chiefest Reasons why they maintain their Kingdom
elective.

Why preserve their Kingdom elective.
The others are, first, That they take that Government to be easiest, which is
executed by a Person whom they have unanimously chosen to obey, being not
thereby obliged to be subject to a Prince that Nature only has set over their
Heads. Secondly, That they esteem an elective Kingdom free from those Hazzards
which one that is successive most commonly incurs during the Minority of its
Princes, for that then either its Neigbours take an Occasion to invade it, or
its Great Men to embroil it, the better to secure the greater Share in the
Government to themselves, under so weak a Head. If this be pretended to be
remedied by assigning fit Tutors and Counselors to the young Prince; They say,
that the Government will be miserably mistaken, for that we do not want in
History several Examples of young Kings, who have been driven out of their
Thrones by their assigned Governors: And moreover, that seldom any Kingdom has
been known to continue long in Peace, during the Minority of its King. The
third Reason they give is, that in an elective State, rarely any Blood is shed
about the Succession, as has frequently happened in other Countries, without
fetching any Examples from Antiquity. Fourthly, They say, that a King chosen by
the free Consent of the People, will be likely, in common Gratitude, to
retaliate the Obligation by the Clemency and Justice of his Reign. The fifth
Advantage which the Poles pretend by an Election of their Kings is, that in no
other State Princes take so great Care to educate their Children, as in theirs.
And the sixth is, That by Means of electing their King, the Gentry (who are
only considered in Poland) have the greater Power of conserving their Liberties
and Privileges, in which their greatest Happiness consists. And the seventh is,
by limiting the Actions of their Kings to the unanimous Consent of the Diet. I
might here mention many more Reasons, but for Fear of tiring your Lordship by
too long a Digression, I return to my Subject.

Who have Votes, and who not.
As for those that have Suffrages in this Election, it must be observed that
the Diet have in general, as likewise the Deputies of some particular Cities,
especially the greater ones of Prussia, which formerly had not only Place among
the Nuncios, but also in the Senate. As for the lesser, the Bishop of Varmia
generally subscribes in their Names. There are others who have pretended to,
but have been denied a Vote in the Election; as the Dukes of Prussia and the
Dukes of Curland, when they were only tributary to Poland. The King's Sons also
are excluded from a Vote, though they should be dignified with Consent of the
Republic. Soldiers likewise are refused a Suffrage, though it is no wonder that
they laid Claim to such a Privilege (being for the most part chosen out of the
Gentry) when the Cosacks once pretended to it, but who were rejected with
Contempt, being looked upon to be no better than the Scum or Dregs of the
Populace.

The Pacta Conventa.
At the Time of this Election, the Diet apply themselves to the Conservation of
their Rights and Liberties, for this is the best Time to secure their
Constitutions and Privileges, and to prevent any Abuse of, or Breach in their
Laws* for which Purpose they are always then very busy in making new Laws, not
only to preserve, but likewise enlarge their Prerogatives. As soon therefore as
their King is elected, they propose to him certain Articles or Capitulations to
be agreed to before he can be proclaimed. These Articles they call Pacta
Conventa, being properly a Contract between the King and People, which he
swears afterward to keep inviolable before the Altar in the Church of St. John
at Warsaw.

When taken by Ambassadors.
Providing the elected King be a foreign Prince, then must his Ambassador who
represents him, sign these Articles, and take this Oath for him. Thus at the
Election of Henry of Valois, his Ambassador John de Monluc, Bishop of Valence,
was obliged to come to the Diet, where, after the Conditions to be observed by
the new King his Master were read to him, he signed them in the Name of the
said Henry, and of Charles IX. his Brother, King of France. Then was he
conducted to St. John's Church, where after taking the abovesaid Oath, his
Master Henry of Valois was proclaimed King of Poland by the Great Marshal, the
eighteent of May, in the Year 1573. Afterward, according to Custom in these
Cases, Ambassadors were sent by the Republic to take the Oath from that King
in Person at Paris, which they did on the tenth of September following. This is
the Method prescribed by the Laws for swearing, to observe the Pacta Conventa;
yet which is not always punctually observed, for King Michael and John Sobieski
took that Oath several Days after their Election.

By whom drawn and after what manner Administered.
The Form of this Agreement or Capitulation is drawn up and methodiz'd by Order
of the Senators and Deputies, at the same time that they make the Decree of
Election; after which the three Orders, viz. the King elect or his Ambassador,
the Senate and Deputies go to the Church, where the Chancellor or Grand Marshal
reads distinctly with an audible Voice, the whole Contract as follows.

The Form and several Articles.
1. That the King shall not assume to himself the Quality of Heir of Poland,
nor will appoint any to be his Successor; but on the contrary, will preserve
and maintain inviolable, the Laws and Constitutions made for the free Election
of a King.

2. That he will pretend to no Right of Coining Money, but will entirely leave
that Power, and the Profit thereof, in the Hands of the Republic.

3. That he will ratify and confirm all the former Articles of Peace made with
foreign Princes.

4. That he will make it his principal Care to preserve and maintain the Quiet
and Tranquillity of the Public.

5. That without the Consent of the Diet, he will not declare War against any
Prince; bring any foreign Troops into the Kingdom, suffer no Soldiers to go out
of it, nor levy any new Troops.

6. That all the Field-Officers shall be either Poles or Lithuanians, or at
least Natives of such Provinces as depend upon the Crown of Poland.

7. That all the Officers of his Regiment of Guards shall be likewise either
Poles or Lithuanians: That their Colonel or chief Commander shall be a Polish
Nobleman, and who shall take an Oath of Fidelity to the Republic, and that all
the Officers in general shall be subject to the Jurisdiction of the Grand
Marshal.

8. That as to Affairs which concern the Republic, he shall not make use of
his Privy Seal.

9. That in six Weeks after any Charge or Office vacant, he shall take Care to
bestow it on some worthy and well qualified Polish Gentleman, and on no other.

10. That he will not confer on any one Person, the Offices, Benefices, or
Dignities which the Laws of the Kingdom prescribe to be enjoyed by more.

11. That he will not marry, but according to the Laws, and with the Consent
and Approbation of the Senate, who shall assign his Queen that Retinue only
which they think fit and convenient.

An Article Violated.
This Article King Michael broke when he married Eleonora the Emperor's Sister
without Approbation of the Senate, but which nevertheless he afterward
repented of, for they murmured heavily against him, and did not scruple to tell
him to his Face, that he had violated his Coronation Oath. Likewise when Prince
James the late King's Son, married the Princess of Newbourg, the Senate
procured the King to send his own Guards, that no German Guards might come into
the Kingdom.

12. That together with his Council, he will regulate the Number of Horse and
Foot, which is necessary, to the End that the Republic may have no need of
foreign Troops, nor be put to an unusual Expense, and that he will take care to
preserve such good Discipline among the Soldiers, that they shall commit no
Disorders, either in their Quarters, or their March.

13. That if it be necessary for the Interest of the State to have a Fleet,
that he shall build none without the Consent of the Gentry, and Advice of the
Senate.

14. That he will no ways diminish the Treasure reposited in the Castle of
Cracow, but will rather study to increase and augment it.

15. That he will borrow no Money, nor consent that any shall be borrowed for
his Use, without the Knowledge and Approbation of the Diet.

16. That he will always administer Justice by the Advice of the Senators and
Counselors which attend him.

17. That for the Expenses of his Table, he shall be contented with those
Revenues that have been granted by the Republic to the Kings his Predecessors;
and moreover that he shall enjoy them only for Life.

18. That he shall not introduce any Strangers, of what Rank or Quality soever,
into his Council, and that he will bestow no Offices, Dignities or Governments
upon them.

19. That for the Preservation of his Power and Dignity, he will not diminish
or abrogate any of the Offices at his Disposal, either in the Republic or
Court.

20. And lastly, That he will inviolably keep, maintain, and defend, and
confirm by his Letters Patents, all the Rights, Liberties, Immunites, and
Privileges lawfully granted by former Kings, either to the Poles or
Lithuanians, or to any of the Provinces which depend upon either of those two
Nations.

Occasional Articles*
To these Articles they commonly add several others, which vary according to
the Circumstances of Time or Quality of the Person elected King. Dr. Connor
says, when he was in Poland, he heard the Poles say, that at the next Election
they would make a Law, by which the King should be obliged to reside always at
Warsaw, which in a manner seems to be the Center of the Kingdom. The Reason
that made them think of this was, because the late King almost always had an
ambulatory Court, having no certain or fixed Residence or Abode: For sometimes
he lived on his own Estate in Prussia, and sometimes in Russia at Zolkiew, and
so rambled about from one Country Palace to another, where oftentimes the
Courtiers, Ambassadors, or several Gentlemen of the Kingdom, that were forced
to follow him about Business, found but very indifferent Lodgings and
Entertainment. It may here be observed, that at new Elections they always make
some new Constitution or other, for the Benefit of the Nation, and to abridge
the Power of their Kings.

Ceremony of the Kings swearing.
The Formalities which they use when they make the King swear to the Pacta
Conventa are as follow. The Archbishop of Gnesna, and the Nuncio-Marshal carry
these Articles before the King, after Mass, and when they are come to the Great
Altar, his Majesty repeats after the Chancellor these Words.

The Oath.
We Frederick Augustus, duly elected King of Poland, and Great Duke of
Lithuania, Duke of Russia, Prussia, Masovia, Samogitia, Kiovia, Volhynia,
Podolia, Podlachia, Livonia, Smolensko, Severia, and Czernicovia, do promise to
Almighty God, and swear upon the Holy Evangelists, that we will observe,
maintain, and fulfill all the Conditions agreed upon at our Election, between
our Ambassadors, and the Senators and Deputies of the Kingdom of Poland, and
the Great Duchy of Lithuania, which were confirmed by the Oath of our said
Ambassadors, and that we will moreover perform the same in all Rigor, Vigor,
Points, Articles, Clauses, and Conditions therein contained. All which we
promise to ratify and confirm by Oath on the Day of our Coronation.

Presented with the Decree of Election.
When the King has thus sworn to observe the Pacta Conventa, the Chancellor
presents him with the Decree of his Election written in Parchment, and signed
by all the Senators and Deputies.

The Poles make use of these Precautions in the Election of their Kings, by
reason that if they at any Time act contrary to what they had promised they
might have a Right to remonstrate to them, and put them in mind of their Duty.

It is observable, that from the Time of the King's Election, to that of his
Coronation, the great or petty Marshal does not carry the Staff erected before
him; that when he issues out any Orders or Proclamations, he assumes only the
Character of King-elect, and that nothing can then be sealed but by the Signet.

Concerning the Election of a Successor.
Before I proceed to describe the Coronation of a King of Poland, I may here
reasonably insert something concerning the Election of a Successor, which though
it be contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, and repugnant to
the Privileges of an elective Monarchy, yet a Father will have always that
Respect for his Child, that he will endeavor to get him to succeed him, even
while he lives: So Sigismund II. was named King in the Lifetime of his Father
Sigismund I. but still on Condition that he should not meddle with the
Government so long as his Father lived. But Sigismund II. being dead, the Diet,
after having inspected the Laws of the Realm, Decreed that there should be no
Successor named for the future, while the Predecessor survived. This
Constitution Stephen Bateri would have invaded, but the Republic opposed him
so vigorously, that he was forced to let fall his Design.

Interest of foreign Princes to oppose it.
All Christian Princes having a feasible Right to the Crown of Poland, it is
the Interest of each of them to oppose the Election of a Successor, since they
would thereby absolutely be excluded from it: This occasioned the present
Emperor Leopold, to send Francis de Lisola, to the Diet held at Warsaw in the
Year 1661* where John Casimir had a Mind to propose a Prince to succeed him:
Wherefore in Conjunction with John Owerbeck* Envoy to the Elector of
Brandenbourg, Lisola raised Factions in the Diet, which were seconded by
Marshal Lubomirski, insomuch that they quickly overthrew King Casimir's Design,
and caused the Diet to confirm the former Constitution against electing of a
Successor: Several of the Lithuanian Gentry had the same Intentions with John
Casimir, but however with these following Precautions: First, That such a
Successor should be elected a*new, after the King's Death. Secondly, That he
should be a Roman Catholic. Thirdly, That he should not be a Piasto or Native.
Fourthly, That he should neither be an Emperor, King, nor Sovereign Prince of
another Country. Fifthly, That he should not be any Neighbor of Poland.
Sixthly, That he should neither be too young, nor too old. And Seventhly, That
he should not be married.

Reasons for and against such an* Election.
No doubt, the Designs of King Casimir, and of all those that were for the
Election of a Successor were good, for they had thereby a Mind to secure the
Government from those Divisions and Intestine Jarrs which commonly happen in
Interregnums. But those who opposed them affirmed, that the Election of a
Successor would undoubtedly soon introduce an Hereditary Monarchy, and be the
ruin of their Liberties and Privileges, whatever care they could take to
prevent it: That it would be likewise against the Constitutions of the Realm to
Elect a Soccessor in the King's Life time; and that if the Republic consented
to it, they would be no longer at Liberty to oppose it: That it would moreover,
be an Injury done to several Princes, who all had a kind of Right to the
Kingdom of Poland, which would therefore infallibly embroil it in new Troubles,
when it was the Interest of that Crown to be at Peace with all the World. These
were the several reasons offered by the two Parties, the last whereof, as I
said before, got the better.

The King has no Regal Authority till Crowned.
Till a King of Poland be Crowned, he has really no Hartknoch lib. 2. cap. 1.
p. 331.
Regal Authority; for he can bestow no Benefice, give no Office, nor Pardon any
Offense: Neither can he make use of the Great Seal of the Chancery, nor set the
Courts of Justice a going; which are always silenced during an Interregnum,
till he has taken his Coronation Oath.

Appoints the Day of Coronation.
It belongs to the King-Elect to appoint a Day for his Coronation; which
formerly was wont to be at Neugebaver. Hist. Polon. lib. 3. p. 185.
Gnesna, till the Coronation of Vladislaus Locticus was solemnized at Cracow in
the year 1320. where it was fixed by the Constitutions of the Kingdom;
nevertheless Vladislaus VII. would needs Crown his Queen Caecilia Renata at
Warsaw; but which was not performed without excessive Murmurings of the Gentry.

Manner of his entering Cracow, with other Ceremonies.
The Day of Coronation being arrived, the King makes his solemn Entry into
Cracow, with great Pomp and Acclamations. The Scabins of the City carry the
Dais over him, preceded by all the Horse and Foot-Guards, with their Officers.
Immediately after the King follow the Bishops, Palatins and foreign Ambassadors
on Horseback. Just before the King Rides an Officer, who throws some Coronation
Medals among the People; but which seldom amounts to any great Sum. Thus
Attended, his Majesty is conducted through the City to the Castle, having first
received the Keys of the City from the Magistrates in the first Gate thereof,
and passed under several Triumphal Arches, with Motto's of various Invention.
At the Castle-gate he has the Keys of that Important Place also presented him,
with a solemn Harangue, by the Starosta of Cracow. The rest of the Day is spent
in Banqueting and Feasts.

Obsequies of Deceased King and order of Procession.
Piasetius in Chron. Anno 1632. p. 525.
The Day following, being that which precedes the Coronation, the Obsequies of
the deceased King are to be celebrated, when they carry his Body to Schalka to
the Church of St. Stanislaus. Hart*knoch lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 336.
The Order of Procession is this. First the new King marches on foot, then
follow all the Officers of the Crown and Great Duchy, together with the
Deputies, the Ensigns, with the Standards of every Palatinate, and lastly, the
Crown, Scepter, Globe, Sword, and other Regalia being carried before the Corpse,
pointed toward the Ground. After these come a great Number of other Gentry,
and next after them march the several Companies of Trades barefooted, belonging
both to the City and Court, each having an empty Coffin and Pall born before
them, on the Shoulders of two Men. It is to be observed, that all that assist
at this Procession, must be in Mourning.

Ceremonies at the Interment.
At the Place of Interment, the Marshals break their Staffs against the King's
Tomb, and all the other Officers are discharged of their Authorities several
Ways. After which the Body is interred in the Cathedral Church, among the rest
of the Kings of Poland, who for the most part lie all buried there. I should
have remembered that the Myter'd Clergy generally march about the Corpse.

Day of Corenation and by whom performed.
The Day after the Funeral is assigned for the Coronation, the Ceremony whereof
is to be performed by the Archbishop of Gnesna, as Primate of the Kingdom,
although that Office was once Herbert. Tit. Cardinalatus p. 63.
disputed with him by S^igneius Olesnicius, as being both Bishop of Cracow, and
Cardinal at the same time; yet nevertheless Casimir IV. decided that Difference
in Favor of the Archbishop, and which was afterward confirmed by Alexander.
Heidenstein lib. 2. Rerum Polon. p. 95.
Notwithstanding if the Primate be either dead or refractory, that Right
devolves to the Bishop of Cracow, and upon his Obstinacy, Absence, or Death, to
the Bishop of Cujavia. The two Bishops that assist at the Coronation are the
Bishops of Cracow and Cujavia.

Procession in order to Coronation.
The Ceremony of the Procession, when the King goes to be crowned, is ordered
by the Master of the Ceremonies; but before his Majesty stirs out, he is
habited after a very splendid Manner, by the Great Marshal of the Kingdom. The
King is conducted from the Castle to the Cathedral, by the Senators, foreign
Ambassadors, and a great Number of the Gentry.

Ceremony at the Coronation.
Before he enters the Church, the Great Master of the Horse brings the Crown,
Scepter, and naked Sword to the Archbishop, who places them all upon the Altar.
After which the Bishops of Cracow and Cujavia having received the King, they
hold him under each Arm, and present him to the Archbishop, to whom he makes a
Bow.

Further Particulars of the Ceremony of Coronation.
I imagine a more particular Account of this Ceremony may neither be
unacceptable to your Lordship, nor the Public, and therefore I shall for the
future describe all the most remarkable Circumstances thereof, as it was
practiced in the last Election, with as much Brevity and Succinctness as
possible, and which are as follow.

King exhorted and sworn.
After the King has thus been conducted into the Church, the Ceremony forthwith
begins. First the Archbishop in a short Oration exhorts the King to continue
steadfast in the Roman Communion, to exercise all Regal and Princely Virtues,
and lastly, to remunerate his Obligations to the Republic, by a just and
inviolable Administration of the Government: After which the Archbishop asks
him to this Effect in Latin; Will you support and maintain the Holy Catholic
Faith, and uphold it by good Works? To which the King answers, I will. Then the
Archbishop asks him again, Will you protect and defend the Churches and their
Ministers. Answer. I will. Then the Archbishop again, Will you govern and rule
the Kingdom committed by God to your Charge, according to Equity and Justice?
Answer. I will. Then the King-elect kneeling, and kissing the Archbishop's
Hand, and laying his own upon the Evangelists, sworn to perform all that he had
before sworn to observe at St. John's Church at Warsaw, with some other
Particulars that induce me to repeat the Form, which runs thus.

His Coronation Oath.
We Frederic Augustus, duly elected King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania,
and Duke of Russia, Prussia, Masovia, Samogitia, Kiovia, Volhynia, Podolia,
Podlachia, Livonia, Smolensko, Severia, and Czernicovia; by all the Orders of
both States of Poland and Lithuania, and by all the Provinces incorporated and
depending thereupon, do sincerely promise and swear before Almighty God, and
upon the Evangelists of Jesus Christ, to maintain, observe, keep, and fulfill
in every of the Circumstances, Particulars, and Articles; all the Rights,
Liberties, Immunities, and Privileges, both public and private (excepting such
as are contrary to the common Rights and Liberties of both these Nations, or to
any Law, either ecclesiastical or civil) that have been justly and lawfully
established by our Predecessors the Kings of Poland, Great Dukes of Lithuania,
and Dukes, etc. Or which have been granted by all the Orders during the
Interregnum, to the Catholic Churches, Lords, Barons, Gentry, Citizens, and
Inhabitans, of what Rank or Condition soever, together with the Pacta Conventa,
agreed upon between our Ambassadors and the Orders of the Kingdom of Poland,
and Great Duchy of Lithuania. We do moreover promise to maintain and acquiesce
in whatever has been enacted or established in the Diet of our Election, as we
do likewise to what shall be agreed upon in that of our Coronation: Also that
we will restore both to the Kingdom and Great Duchy, whatever has or shall be
alien'd and dismembered from their Lands or Revenues. Moreover, we promise not
to lessen the Bounds of either the Kingdom or Great Duchy, but rather to
defend and enlarge them: We swear likewise to establish Courts of Justice
throughout the Kingdom and Great Duchy, and to see that Justice be rendered
every where without Intermission or Delay, without any Regard to, or Favor of,
Persons or Things. And lastly, we consent that if it should happen (which God
forbid) that we should in any wise violate this our Oath, or any Part thereof,
that the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, and all our Dominions shall be totally
discharged and exempt from paying us Obedience and Fidelity.

Words at kissing the Book.
This Form or Oath having been distinctly repeated by the King after the
Chancellor, and before the Archbishop, his Majesty takes the Testament in his
Hand, and Kissing it, uses these Words: So may God help me, and the Contents of
this Book inspire me, as I perform inviolably this sacred Oath.

Unction with other Ceremonys.
After the King has been thus sworn, he rises and hears the Pacta Conventa
read, and confirms the Oath which he had taken concerning them. Then he Kneels
again, and receives the Benediction of the Archbishop and other Bishops; after
which he rises and has the upper Part of his Clothes taken off, when the
Archbishop Anoints his right Hand and Arm, up to his Elbow and Shoulder, with
consecrated Oil with these Words: I anoint thee King with consecrated Oil, in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Amen. And then he has his Clothes
put on again. Afterward the two Bishops lead him to a Chapel, on the left
Side of the Church, where they Habit him anew, somewhat like a Bishop: After
which he has other Ornaments put on by the two Marshals of the Kingdom and
Great Duchy, and then he is conveyed by the Senator-Officers, the
Standard Bearer of the Kingdom walking before, to the Throne raised for him in
the Middle of the Church, whence, after having heard Mass, he is brought back
to the Altar, where the Archbishop delivers a drawn Sword into his Right Hand
with these Word, Receive this Sword, and cordially protect and defend the Holy
Church against all Unbelievers. Then the King delivers the Sword to the Great
Sword Bearer of the Kingdom, who having put it up in its Scabbard, returns it
to the Archbishop, who then girds it to the King's Side, whereupon the King
immediately rises, and drawing it again, Flourishes it three Times over his
Head, to signify that he will defend the Trinity and Church against all
Unbelievers.

Manner of Crowning him.
This being done, the King kneels again, and the Archbishop puts the Crown,
after a very solemn Manner, on his Head, which the two Bishops bear up with
their Hands till the Archbishop has said certain Prayers: After which the
Archbishop puts the Scepter into the King's Right Hand, and the Globe into his
Left, when the King rising, his Sword is given again to the Sword Bearer of the
Kingdom to bear before him.

Is Enthroned,
After this his Majesty is brought back between the Archbishop and the two
Bishops, to the Throne, wherein he is forthwith placed by the Archbishop with
these Words; Sit and maintain the Place given you by God, etc. The King being
thus seated, the Archbishop and Bishops return to the Altar, where they sing Te
Deum, which being ended, and the Archbishop sit down by the Altar, the King
comes and Offers him Gold, Kisses his Hand, and having made his Confession to
him, receives the Sacrament and Benediction from him.

And prenounc'd King.
Thus the Ceremonies being at an end, the Archbishop rises and gives his
Benediction to all present; when the Court-Marshal, with a loud Voice cries
out, Vivat Rex, Vivat Rex: Which Signal being taken from him by the People, all
the Church soon rings with the same joyful Notes; after which the Great
Treasurer scatters a great Number of Coronation-Medals among the People, and
the Guns begin to roar out their Satisfaction in what had been done, when the
King forthwith returns to his Court with great Pomp and Magnificence.

Feasts thereupon*
The Coronation being thus completed, the rest of the Day is spent in various
Kinds of Feasts and Rejoycings, among which there is one very particular in the
King's Court, where they roast three whole Oxen stuffed and larded with diverse
Kinds of fatned Wild Beasts, when they also give a great many Hogs-heads of
Wine and Beer to the People.

Procession to receive Homage; and Citizens Knighted.
Next Day the King goes on Horseback, richly attired and in great Pomp, to the
Townhouse, some of the Senators carrying the Regalia before him: The Order of
March is, the Bishops behind, and the Lay- Senators before, and then the other
Officers, Nuncios, etc. before them. While he is in Procession, the Great
Treasurer of the Kingdom scatters among the People a great Number both of Gold
and Silver Medals more, from the Castle to the Townhouse: Here he is habited
anew with his Royal Robes, and seated in a splendid Throne erected on purpose,
when the Senate sitting in an inferior Degree on each Hand of him, the
Magistrates of the City come to pay him their Homage, and to assure him of
their Fidelity and Loyalty, presenting him again with the Keys of every of
their Gates gilded and laid in a Silver Plate: Which done, the Chancellor
assures them of the King's Favor, and then reads aloud the Oath of Fealty to
them, which they then take on their Knees, holding up their Hands all the
while. Having thus sworn, the Magistrates Present him with a Purse of Gold, and
then receive their Keys back. After which the King having delivered the Scepter
and Globe to some of the Senators standing about him, he receives a naked Sword
from the Great Sword Bearer, which rising up and flourishing over his Head
toward the four Quarters of the World, he sits down again, and by a light
Stroke of the Blade on the Shoulders of some of the Burghers, creates them
Knights. This done, the Great Treasurer, in the King's Return back to the
Castle, scatters some more Medals among the People, whilst the Canons proclaim
their Joy, and if it be Night, as generally it is by that Time all these
Ceremonies are over, the Fireworks are lighted, and various Proofs of
Satisfaction are every where both to be seen and heard.

Inter-Rex resigns and King Proclaimed.
The King being thus established in the Throne, the Diet of the Coronation
sits, where first the Primate lays down his Authority of Inter-Rex, and then
every individual Member of the Senate and Diet takes an Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy to the King. after which his Majesty is invested with the Plenary
Regal Authority; he gives new Seals to the Chancellors, and the Marshals bear
their Staffs erected before him: then he issues out his Royal Proclamation,
commanding all Magistrates, and all other Officers of the Kingdom, Great
Duchy, and annexed Provinces, to cause his Coronation, and Confirmation of the
Peoples Liberties and Privileges, to be proclaimed on the first public Days in
every City and Town, and afterward to be registered in their Journals. Also by
the same Proclamation he gives Liberty to all the Courts of Justice, to proceed
after their usual Manner; and then confirms a^ the Acts and Constitutions which
have passed in the Diet during the Inter-regnum.

Queens where Crowned and where not.
As to what relates to a Queen of Poland's Coronation, we must first observe
that she cannot be Crowned unless she be a Roman Catholic, an Instance whereof
we may see in Helena Wife to King Alexander, who being of the Greek Persuasion,
and not caring to reform, was not Crowned. Also we may read in History, that
Queens have either been Crowned with their Husbands or without; with their
Husbands, when they were either married to them before or at the Time of their
Coronation; and without, when they were married afterward with Consent of the
Diet; for it has always been thought so very necessary to have their Consent,
that it is inserted among the Articles of the Pacta Conventa. Likewise the King
cannot be Divorced from his Queen without the Approbation of the Diet; Neither
can he crown her if she be married to him after his Coronation, without their
Consent; but if she were married before, he may.

Place of their Coronation,
The Place of the Queen's Coronation is generally Cracow, although there have been
some Examples to the contrary; for Vladislaus VII. caused his Queen, Cecilia
Renata, to be Crowned at Warsaw; and King Michael, his Queen Eleonora, in the
same City; but however this last was with Leave of the Diet, though at the same
time they forbad it to go for a Precedent for the future. What has been said
about a Queen's not being to be crowned if a Dowager survived, is not so, as
may appear by several Examples.

And what required to confirm it.
As for the Manner of a Queen's Coronation alone, it must be with the King's
Consent; he must request it of the Republic; he must be present at the
Ceremony; he must lead his Queen into the Church, and he must present her to
the Archbishop or other Bishop, who is to Crown her, Anoint her with
consecrated Oil, and to put a Scepter into her Right Hand, and Globe into her
Left. The King likewise is to carry his Queen to the Townhouse, but she is to
receive no Homage there.

Having thus, My Lord, amassed the several Particulars intended for Your
Lordships Perusal, I have nothing left to do but humbly to acknowledge my
Presumption, and to have Recourse to your Candor and Goodness for Pardon and
Protection.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most devoted Servant, J. S.

LETTER V.
To the most Honorable JOHN, Lord Marquess of Normanby.
Of the Power of the Gentry, and Slavery of the Commonalty in Poland; with an
Account of the Customs and Manners of the People of that Kingdom; as likewise
of some peculiarly relating to particular Countries.

My LORD,
TO approach so great a Person as your Lordship on so trifling an Account as
the Subject of this Letter, I was conscious to my self, was no way suitable. On
one Hand your known Abilities might reasonably deter my Presumption, and on the
other, your elate Quality check my Ambition: Yet, considering at the same time,
that sometimes the greatest Genius's and Persons have stooped to be entertained
with the Follies and Transactions of the Crowd, I hoped, among the rest, I
might not offend if I addressed this Letter to you; and the rather because it
was first designed for the Entertainment of your Lordships Leisure Hours.

My LORD,

Gentry only capable of Preferment.
The Third Order of the Republic of Poland, is that of the Nobility; out of
which all the Senators, and all other Officers, as well Civil as Military, are
taken; for no Body else that is not a Polish Gentleman, though he be never so
Noble in his own Country, can be capable of any Preferment here, unless it be
some inconsiderable Posts in the Army, the highest whereof is a Colonel, or at
most a Major General, which is much the same with a Brigadeer in our Army. So
that there is little or no Encouragement for Persons of foreign Countries, of
what Merit or Degree soever, to go to serve this Republic, which proves no
small Inconvenience and Prejudice to their State.

Commonalty Incapable except some few.
As for the Citizens and Peasants, they are excluded from all Preferments, and
can have no Possessions unless they be a few Houses in a City, or a small Piece
of Land about a League off in the Country. But here the Citizens in Prussia are
excepted, for they may possess Lands of what Extent soever, out of their
Cities. Also the Inhabitants of Cracow may purchase and enjoy Lands in any Part
of the Kingdom. Likewise the Magistrates of Vilna have a Power to possess
Lands, and the City of Leopol in like manner has a Privilege for its private
Citizens to hold Lands.

Gentrys Power and Privileges.
A Nobleman, Gentleman, or one that is freeborn of the Kingdom of Poland, are
the same thing. Every Gentleman has his Coat of Arms granted him by the
Republic but then; either he or some of his Family must have Possessions in
Lands there. He can pretend to all the greatest Employments and Offices in the
Kingdom, and buy Lands where he pleases all over the Dominions of Poland and
Lithuania: He has moreover a Right to the Crown, if his Credit and Interest can
procure it. Every Gentleman is a Sovereign Lord and Master in his own Lands,
for he has the Power of Life and Death over his Tenants, or (as the Poles term
them) his Subjects, though I may better call them his Slaves, for they have
neither Privilege nor Law to protect them, but are to be governed absolutely by
the Will and Pleasure of their Lord. They dare not leave his Lands to go to
another, under Pain of Death, unless he sells them to his Neighbor, as he has
the Power to do, or has violated or ravished their Wives or Daughters; insomuch
that I have heard that some have wished to have had a fine Wife or Daughter,
that their Lord might thereby have given them Occasion to get rid of him.

Cannot be Apprehended till convicted.
If a Gentleman kills another Gentleman's Slave, he is neither to be tried nor
punished for it, and is only obliged to give that Gentleman another Slave in
the Room of him, or as much Money as will buy one: And besides, to maintain the
Family of the Person that he has killed: likewise if he kills one of his own
Slaves, he only pays a matter of fifty Livres to be quit. Nay, if one Gentleman
kills another, he cannot be apprehended nor clapped into Prison for his Crime
Nisi Jure Victus, unless a Court of Justice has first convicted him, which
commonly gives him Time enough to escape, for he must first be cited to appear,
and upon his Neglect he is declared contumacious, and consequently convicted:
But it may very well be supposed, that he who knows himself guilty, will not
run the Hazard of Appearing, nor venture the losing of his Head. This Honor
the Poles likewise bestow on the common People, Hanging being not the usual Way
of Execution in their Country.

Exception.
However, Hartknoch has these Exceptions from this Privilege; for (says he) if
a Nobleman be taken in the very Act of Ravishing, Burning of Houses, Theft,
Robbery, or the like, he may be apprehended by the Laws: Likewise if he will
not give sufficient Caution, according to the Quality of his Offense; or
lastly, if he be found in the Register to have been thrice convicted before.

Notwithstanding this Privilege of the Nobility (says Hauteville) I have known
one Instance to the contrary, for those who assassinated Gonczenski, Petty
General of Lithuania, were seized without any Formality, and carried Prisoners
to Elbing, and were afterward condemned to be beheaded at the general Diet at
Warsaw, in the Year 1664. but then this Crime of theirs was so notorious, that
the Nobility might well have waved their Privilege; for these Villains took
that Gentleman out of his Bed at Vilna, and putting him into a Coach with a
Confessor, carried him out of the City, where they scarce allowed him Time to
say his Prayers before they shot him dead with Pistols.

Cannot be Executed without the Kings Consent.
A Polish Nobleman, though he be proscribed and cited, and found guilty, cannot
be executed without the King's Knowledge and Consent, as may appear by the Case
of Samuel Zborowski, who though he had been proscribed and condemned by the Great
Chancellor and General of the Army Zamoiski, yet would he not presume to Behead
him till he had known King Stephen's Pleasure therein.

Need not Quarter Soldiers.
The Polish Gentry also have another Privilege which is, that no Soldiers or
Officers of the Army can be Quartered upon them, for if any one should presume
to attempt such a thing, the Diet would either condemn him to Death, or
pronounce him infamous, whereby he would be deprived of the Power of giving his
Vote in all Assemblies, and moreover be rendered incapable of enjoying any
Office or Employment in the State, and this is as being degraded from his
Nobility; whereupon I may take notice of a Passage that happened at the Diet of
Election of John III. and which did not a little contribute toward his being
chosen. The Palatin of Smolensko's Son went and quartered at the House of
Wiesnowiski, without his Leave (as was reported) by Order of the Grand General
Patz, which occasioned the Marshals, who are Judges in these Cases, two Days
before the breaking up of the Diet, to deprive this Palatin of his Vote in the
Election, whereby Sobieski was freed from a declared Enemy, and the Austrian
Faction lost a professed Friend.

Other Privileges of the Gentry.
The King likewise cannot now lodge in any Nobleman's House against his Will, as
he could before the Year 1433. Also wherever any Foreigner dies without Heirs,
his Estate Escheats to the Lord of those Lands where he died, and not to the
King. And where any Polish Gentleman dies without Heirs, the King cannot seize
upon his Estate by Right of Escheat, if he have a Relation left of the eighth
Degree inclusively. The Gentry also may have Houses in the King's Cities and
Towns, but then they must not let such Trades inhabit them, as may prove
obnoxious, or a Nuisance to the Citizens; and likewise these Houses ought to be
subject to the Jurisdiction of the City, but which however is seldom or never
observed. The House of a Nobleman moreover is a Kind of Asylum, for though
Delinquents may be arrested there with his Consent, yet cannot they be taken
thence by Force.

Need not pay Taxes unless obliged by the Diet.
Not less are a Nobleman's Privileges as to Customs and Taxes, for if he will
swear his Goods were not bought, but arising from his Lands, he may send them
any where out of the Kingdom to be sold without paying Duties; and where he has
once so sworn, his Testimonials alone for the future will suffice to exempt
them. Also his Subjects will have the same Privilege wherever they trade. In
Prussia the Nobles are not only free from Customs, but likewise all the other
Inhabitants by the Magna Charta of Culm. But although the Polish Nobility are thus
said to be free from Taxes, yet upon emergent Occasions and Exigencies, the
Diet usually obliges them to pay them for a certain Time.

Privilege of Preemption.
The Nobility also have a Privilege of Preemption of Salt; for in the Staples
for that Commodity, there must be at least a Months Notice before any can be
sold to any body else.

Have one Grievance notwithstanding.
After all these Privileges, the Polish Nobility have one very great Grievance,
which is that they are obliged to serve in the Pospolite Ruszanie, or General
Muster of the Militia, at their own Charges.

How they came by these Privileges.
How the Polish Gentry came by all these Privileges, it may not be here
improper to enquire, since it is certain that formerly they were not much
better than Slaves: For to pass by many other Examples, Cromerus says, they
were once obliged to keep the King's Dogs. The first Glimpse of their Liberty
may reasonably be ascribed to the Privileges granted the Clergy by Boleslaus
the Chaste; but afterward when Poland began to be harrass'd by Civil Wars, the
Gentry obtained many larger Privileges from their Kings, and which they have
since always taken Care to get augmented at every new Election.

All equal and consesequently value no Honor.
All the Gentry of Poland are equal by Birth, notwithstanding some of the
meaner Sort send their Children to serve the Great Men as other Servants, and
this principally to learn Breeding and to be kept in Awe; yet may that very
same Servant have as good a Vote in the Diet as his Master. They neither value
nor care for Titles of Honor, for they think the greatest they can have, is to
be a Noble Pole, or Gentleman of Poland. Neither the King nor Republic gives
any Title of Prince, Duke, Marquess, Count, Vicount, Baron, or Knight, to any
of the freeborn of the Nation, thinking (I suppose) that none can be any ways
raised above another by a bare exterior Denomination, which argues more the
Favor of the Prince, than Merit of the Person preferred, but rather by their
Services in the Offices and Employments which they enjoy.

Title of Prince despised.
There are no Princes of the Kingdom, but those which are of the Royal Family,
for although some of the Poles have been made Princes of the Empire by the
Emperor, as Prince Lubomirski, etc. Yet it gives them no Precedence in Poland,
but rather renders them odious and despised by the rest of the Gentry, who
cannot endure that any should pretend to any Superiority among them, especially
by a Title which is not annexed to some Employment in the Nation.

An Order Instituted but undervalu'd.
King Sigismund III. thought of establishing an Order of Knighthood of the
Immaculate Conception in Poland; and had effectually created several Knights
thereof, allowing them certain Privileges, and a Superiority above others; but
these were so despised and undervalu'd by the rest of the Gentry, that scarce
any one afterward cared for that up-start Honor; whereupon that Order soon
dwindled into nothing. The Poles have a Proverb to prove their Equality which
is, That they are measured like a Bushel of Corn, that is, whenever any one
pretends to rise but a Grain above the Level, he is immediately struck off and
ridiculed.

What Dutchies in Poland.
There are some Gentlemen in Poland, that have had Dutchies time out of mind
annexed to their Estates, as Duke Radzivil in Lithuania, etc. But there are no
Dutchies or Counties created by the King.

Polish Gentry assume Titles when they Travel.
Tho the Poles in their own Country have no Honorary Titles above a Gentleman,
yet several have been known to have usurped them when they have traveled into
France, Italy, and Germany, for they there frequently assume those of Counts to
themselves, in like manner as the Germans in foreign Countries do those of
Barons, for nothing is more common than Monsieur le Conte Malakowski, Il
Signior Conde Potoski, Mynheer Graff Jablonowski, etc. And this they do to be
the more easily admitted into Company, especially in Germany, where it is scarce
thought that any body can be a Gentleman under a Baron, and consequently not
fit for Conversation. Dr. Connor likewise says, he has known some of our
English Gentry in these Countries that have not scrupul'd to call themselves
Lords to procure them the greater Respect, since they saw that the Title of
Gentleman alone was not regarded there.

Farther Power of Polish Gentry.
The Gentry of Poland make and defend their own Laws and Liberties, elect their
King with all manner of Freedom, give him the Crown and Scepter, appoint
Ministers to counsel and instruct him, and their Number far exceeding that of
the Senate, they easily keep the King and Senators in their Duty, and threaten
both very often, especially in the Diet, where each Member has a Liberty to
speak what he thinks, and to think what he pleases. It Is they that despute the
Nuncios, out of themselves, for every Province, to meet and sit in the General
Diet, with full Instructions, and absolute Power not to consent to any
Proceedings which should in the least entrench on their Privileges, or if such
Deputies should happen to be bribed to act contrary to their Instructions, then
have the Gentry of the Province whence they were sent, a free Authority to
punish them for so doing.

What makes them so Great.
Not only these excessive Privileges make the Polish Gentry Powerful and Great,
but likewise the vast Territories which a great Number of them enjoy with a
Despotick Power over their Subjects, for some possess Five, some Ten, some
Fifteen, some Twenty, nay some Thirty Leagues of Land out right, whereon they
have always their several Pod-Starostas or Gentlemen-Stewards residing, who are
to take Account of their Revenues, to sell some things, and to send the rest to
their Masters Houses, to defray the Exigencies of the Family. Some also are
Hereditary Sovereigns of Cities which the King has nothing to do with, and one
of the Princes, Lubomirski, possesses above Four Thousand Cities, Towns, and
Villages. Moreover, some can raise an Army of Five, Six, Eight, and Ten
Thousand Men, and maintain them at their own Charges when they have done. Dr.
Connor says, Prince Lubomirski had actually Seven Thousand Horse, Foot, and
Dragoons in Pay when he was in Poland.

Their Excessive Grandeur and Magnificence.
All the Gentry of Note live most splendidly: They have all their Horse and
Foot Guards, which keep Centry Night and Day at the Gates of their Houses (they
call them Courts) and in their Anti-Chambers. These Guards go before and after
their Masters Coaches in the Streets: But above all, these Noblemen make an
extraordinary Figure at the General Diets, where some have Three Hundred, some
Five, and some a Thousand Guards always attending them. Nay, Hauteville says,
that formerly some Great Persons have been known to come to the Diet with above
Ten Thousand Men. They esteem themselves not only equal, but also above the
Princes of Germany, especially such among them as are Senators. It Is certain,
they want nothing to be as so many Sovereign Princes, except the Liberty of
coining Money, which the Republic has reserved wholly to it self. The Doctor
says, he has no where seen Subjects live with such excessive Grandeur and
Splendor; for these Great Men, when they go to Dinner or Supper, have always
their Trumpets sounding, and a great Number of Gentry to wait on them at Table,
some whereof carve, some give to drink, others reach Plates, and all serve with
extraordinary Respect and Submission; for tho all the Gentry in Poland are
equal, and have all their free Votes in the Diet, yet the Little and Poorer
Sort think it no Disgrace to serve them that can maintain them. It Is true, the
Gentleman they serve is commonly very civil to them, for the eldest of them
generally eats with him at Table with his Cap off, and every one of them has a
Peasant-Boy to wait on him, which the Master maintains; yet if any one of these
Gentlemen-Servants neglects his Duty, his Master punishes him severely, though he
has no Power to take away his Life because he is a Gentleman, but he may get
him whipped naked with a certain Formality which I have mentioned before.

Means to support for ever the Polish Republic.
It may not be here amiss to observe to your Lordship some few Maxims whereby
the Republic of Poland might always subsist, and the Gentry retain their
ancient Privileges. First, By reducing all the Gentry of the Kingdom to an
equal Authority in the Election of a King, and other public Deliberations, by
which the King or Senate would be deprived of a Power of raising any
considerable Factions; and the Grandees be discouraged from affecting and
hunting after Foreign Titles which commonly ensnare them to the Prejudice of
their Country. Secondly, By keeping up the free Choice of their Nuncios, which
would disable the Court and Senate from getting their Creatures elected, to the
utter abrogating of the Privileges of the Gentry, wherein the Poles now follows
the prudent Example of the Roman Commonwealth. Thirdly, By preserving the
Custom of the Gentries appearing in great Numbers at the Diet, which animates
both the Senate and Deputies in the Prosecution of Affairs for the Good of the
Kingdom, and deters them from being biased by any sinister Means. Fourthly, By
obliging both Senators and Deputies to give an Account of their Proceedings,
which must needs incline them to act with a great deal of Precaution. Fifthly,
By prohibiting the Army to come near the great Assembly of the States, for Rome
never enjoyed so great Happiness as when the Gown had Preference of the Sword.
Sixthly, To maintain the Law of Equality in Matters of Descent, whereby the
Gentry would be kept at an even Lay, and hindered from disturbing the
Government by too great a Power. Seventhly, Never to prefer any Native to the
Crown, because of the great Disorders it might in all Likelihood occasion.
Eighthly, To maintaim the Authority of their Democracy established for so many
Ages, by the Prudence of their Ancestors, and all along continued with no small
Hazards and Trouble. And Ninthly, Never to permit any Foreign Princes to
intermeddle with their Affairs.

What foreign Ambassadors are obliged to.
There is no Country where Ambassadors are obliged to make so great a Figure as
in Poland, especially if they have any Interest of the Prince their Master to
maintain or carry on in the Diet or among the Gentry; for the Great Men there
generally despise all such as either do not or cannot make the same Figure with
themselves, which is so excessive, that an Ambassador must have three
remarkable Qualities to keep up with it. For first, he must have a great Train
of Coaches and Servants proportionable; next keep a plentiful and open House
continually, to Treat and Fuddle the Gentry, and where he must be very humble
and familiar with them, they being generally very civil and easy in their
Conversation: And lastly, which is the surest way to gain their Affection and
Suffrages, he must give 'em ever now and then a little Money, and he still
promising them more, for Reasons I have mentioned before.

Law Differences decided by the Sword.
When the Great Men of Poland have any Suit at Law, or other Difference to be
determined, the Justice of the Kingdom is commonly too weak for them; for though
the Diet or other Tribunals had decided the Matter in Favor of one of the two
Parties, yet the Execution of their Judgment must be left to the Power of the
strongest Sword; for these Grandees generally think it beneath them to submit
to the Sentence of a Company of Judges without a Field-Battle. Sometimes they
will raise five or six Thousand of a Side, plunder and burn one another Towns
and Cities, and besiege each others Castles and Forts, and after a great deal
of Bloodshed, Fatigue, and Expense, the unjuster Cause shall commonly get the
upper Hand.

An Example.
Dr. Connor says, When he was in Poland, there was a Quarrel between Duke
Raazivil and Prince Sapieha, about whether of the two should be Guardian to the
young Princess of Newbourg, Niece to the present Empress, for her Mother was
Duchess Radzivil of Lithuania, and Heiress of the greatest Estate in the
Kingdom. Both Parties had their Troops in the Field, and had some Skirmishes,
but it was thought that Prince Sapieha, being Great General of the Forces of
Lithuania, would get the better, though it seems Duke Radzivil, as being her
Mother's Relation, had more Right to the Guardianship of her. All this while
the King never concerned himself in the Quarrel, nor declared for either Party.

Nature of Descents in Poland.
As to Matters of Descent, The Father's Estate is always equally divided among
his Children, in like manner as in Italy, Germany, and most Foreign Countries,
but when the Father is dead, the Mother can enjoy all his Estate for Life, and
it is absolutely in her Breast to allot every one of the Children their Quota,
or to keep all the Estate to her own Use during her Life. Some Mothers Marry
after the Husbands Deaths, and so spend their first Childrens Fortunes with
their second Husbands. This makes the Children more than ordinary obedient to
their Mothers, especially during their Widdowhood.

Children however support their Families.
Although Estates in Poland are equally divided among the Children, which one
would think should absolutely weaken or ruin their Families, yet do they
generally find Means to support and keep them up; for most commonly some of the
Brothers turn Monks, and so get to be made Abbots or Bishops, whose Revenues
are here sufficient to enrich any Family; and the rest look after
State-Employments, which are likewise considerable. Some of the Daughters also
many times become Nuns, so that being in the Church Service, they are obliged
to live in Celibacy, and consequently leaving no Heirs, all their Goods or
Estates fall to their Married Brothers or Sisters, or to their Children. In
this Country the Daughters always walk before their Mothers, as in Italy, and
the unmarry'd Sisters before the married.

Good Temper of the Poles and its Effect.
I cannot but admire at the honest and good Temper of the Polish Gentry; for
though their Liberty is extraordinary; though they have Power of Life and Death
over their Subjects; though they are in a manner above their own Laws, and though
Justice is administered in Poland more slightly than in any other Country, yet
Dr. Connor says, that all the while that he was in that Kingdom, he neither saw
nor heard of any Murder or Slaughter, or of any Barbarity or Cruelty committed
by the Gentry on their Subjects; nor, what is a greater Wonder, of any Highway
Robbers, but always observed the Poles in general to be good humored,
harmless, and generous: When it is certain, had we in England but the third
Part of their Liberty, we could not live together without cutting one another
Throats, since Experience daily shows, that notwithstanding the great Vigilance
of our Officers, the Severity of our Laws, the just Rigor of our Judges and
Magistrates, and the punctual Execution of their Sentences and Judgments, the
Gallows and Gibbets are more frequently visited here, than even the Prisons are
in Poland.

How Occasioned.
I fancy the Reason that the Poles are so quiet and good natured is, because
being born free, and living in an excessive Liberty, under no Laws nor
Arbitrary Power, there is nothing before them that can constrain their Minds,
bridle their Passions, or curb their Thoughts; but as there is nothing that can
entice them to do ill, so nothing likewise can hinder them from doing it.

Polish Peasants how first Enslaved.
Dr. Connor says, He has asked some Polish Noblemen, why they so inhumanely
treated and undervalu'd their Boors: They answered, That formerly all the Boors
of the Kingdom revolted from their Landlords, rebelled against them, (as the
Swissers did against their Gentry) and conspired together to extirpate and
destroy them all; that they Murdered and killed a vast number of Gentlemen;
and that the rest were obliged either to hide themselves, or to leave the
Kingdom. But that at length the Gentry getting together from all Parts; and
being moreover Assisted by their Neighbors, they so frighted and defeated the
poor Peasants, who had made a general Insurrection against them, to set up a
Commonwealth of their own, that they brought them to such Extremities, that
ever since they have been contented to be kept Slaves. Yet the Poles say, that
though they have an Absolute Power over them, they seldom make use of it any
more than other Christians do over their Dogs or Horses. Strange Comparison! As
if they spared the poor Peoples Lives rather out of Self-interest, than
Charity; and by reason that they thought they would be more serviceable to them
Living than Dead; not unlike some Kings, who give Malefactors their Lives, only
to prefer them to their Gallys.

Live satisfied notwithstanding.
Notwithstanding the Peasants in Poland being born Slaves, and having no manner
of Notion of Liberty, live very well satisfied and contented. In Curland they
are as subject to their Landlords as in Poland; and in both Countries, Masters
are almost paid Adoration. Their Slaves love them, and Fight willingly for
them; and all they have is absolutely at their Devotion. Nay, though they
Debauch their Wives and Daughters, yet they only care to obtain their Liberty
by it; and this is so common a thing among these poor Wretches, that they never
value their Women the less for it, nor think themselves a whit either injured
or dishonored by it.

Their present Condition.
The Condition of the Kmetons (as the Poles call them) or Boors, or Rusticks,
at this Day in Poland is such, that they lead miserable and wretched Lives,
haviug no Laws, no Judges, and scarce any Religion among them; but like Brutes,
they are forced to Work on Sundays, and dare not so much as Appeal to the King
or Diet for Redress. However, in Royal Prussia their Condition is something
better; for there they enjoy almost the same Laws and Liberties with the
Gentry. Formerly Casimir the Great made several Laws in their behalf; but which
at this day are seldom or never practiced. All Bishops, Abbots, Palatins,
Castellans, etc. are obliged to be of the Nobless, except a certain Number
assigned by King John Albert out of the Plebeians, to be capable of being
inferior Divines, Lawyers or Physicians only. An Exception from this Law may
be seen in the Person of Peter Gamratus, who from a Plebeian was preferred by
Sigismund, to several both Ecclesiastical and Temporal Dignities: But in
Prussia, as I have remarked before, the Customs are much more indulgent to the
Common People.

Enrich their Lords.
As I have hinted before to your Lordship, a Gentleman's Revenue in Poland
partly consists in his Slaves; for he cannot well be esteemed Rich, unless he
has a great Number of these poor Creatures under his Power; whereof there is
scarce any but earn their Lords a 100 Franks a year. It may not be improper
therefore, to observe here the Manners and Customs of these poor Wretches; And
it may first be remarked, That these Slaves can enjoy nothing of their own, nor
ever become Free, unless they can get into some Convent, or get to be Ordained
Priests, or else incline their Masters to Debauch their Wives or Daughters,
whereby the Law sets them Free: But most commonly their Lords have a watchful
Eye over them, and obviate all their Policies.

How established in a Farm.
These Lords never Let their Lands to Farm; but to establish a Peasant on them,
they forthwith order the other Peasants of the Village at their own Charges, to
Build him a House, Furnish him with a Cow, Hens, Geese, and a quantity of Rye
sufficient to keep him a Year: so that a Lord of a Village is at no other
Charge to set up a Slave on his Lands, than he first Cost him.

Their Service annexed thereto.
These poor Slaves, or Subjects as they call them, most commonly work three
Days in a Week for their Lords, to one for themselves, and sometimes four. Dr.
Connor says, in his time a Countryman had a mind to forward his Son in
Learning, and would have sent him to the University; but which the Signior
would by no means condescend to, and put the Son in Prison for refusing to be
his Secretary, till at last the Father was forced to purchase his Liberty at
the Expense of 400 Crowns which he had Borrowed. When a Lord sells his Land,
the Slaves commonly go along with it, though he can dispose of either
separately, if he pleases.

Meet to reap their Lords Corn.
At the time of Harvest all the Peasants of the Village meet together to Reap
their Lords Corn, who are supervis'd, and forced to Work by very rigid
Taskmasters. Their Punishments are sometimes several Blows of a Cudgel, and
sometimes a kind of Pillory, wherein those Wretches shall be sometimes set for
a whole Day together. I should think now, these poor Wretches the most
miserable Creatures Breathing; but they on the contrary, never having known any
better Condition; and having seen their Fathers Slaves before them, are well
satisfied and contented with their Servitude. But however, they have this
Happiness, that they seldom want for Victuals and Drink; for their Wives
chiefest Employment is to provide them with that.

Their Manners at Bed and Board.
They have generally three or four sorts at a Meal, viz. One of Pease, with a
little Bacon sliced among it. Another of Course Wheat, Barley, or Millet,
whereof they make their Cachat; and two others of several sorts of
strengthening Roots; whereof they have great Plenty, and very good. The
Movables of these Peasants Cottages are only a few Earthen or Wooden Dishes,
and a hard Bed, which they make themselves, with a very wretched Coverlet.
Their Children are not suffered to have a Bed till they are Married; but are
forced to lie upon Boards by the Hearth side. These sort of Hearths have no
Chimneys; and the Smoke has only a little Hole to get out at the Top of the
House. In Poland it is impossible to subsist a Nights without these Hearths;
and therefore not only the Peasants, but Gentry likewise, are obliged to have
them; though the last are of different Make and Materials from the former.

Children how taught to go.
The Peasants Children, especially in Russia, go Naked till they are four or
five years Old. They are not taught to go till they are indifferent Strong, and
then their Mother sets them against the Threshold of the Door, where they first
begin to Essay their Strength. After they have rolled about till they are
sufficiently Dirty, she takes them and washes them in Cold Water, as I observed
before; so that this being first considered, it need not be wondered that they
afterward become so exceeding hardy. I have seen some of these Children (says
Hauterille) that would slide along upon the Ice for a good way together stark
Naked.

Habits of both the Men and Women.
For the Habits which these Peasants use in Winter, they are a Sheep Skin with
the Wool on; and in Summer, a Close-body'd Coat of Course Stuff, of a Color
much like our Chimney-Sweepers. They also wear ordinary Caps on their Heads.
Sometimes they have Boots for their Legs, but most commonly the Rind of Trees
only wrapped round them, with the thicker part to guard the Soles of their Feet
against Stones: The same Custom is used in Lithuania, as may be seen hereafter.
The Women-Peasants are habited in like manner as in other Countries, except
that their Smocks and Petticoats are exceeding Short. Those in Russia go
generally in Summer in their Smocks, with an Apron before them that reaches
lower than ordinary.

Nobility how acquired in Poland.
Now I shall proceed to inform your Lordship how Nobility is acquired in
Poland, which is first by Birth, where both the Parents were Noble:
Nevertheless now adays, by a long Tract of Custom, not only such are reputed
Noble, but likewise those whose Mothers were Plebeians* for nothing is at
present more practiced in Poland than for the Gentry to match with the
Commonalty, especially with those that are rich. Secondly, Nobility is acquired
by Creation, which formerly was wholly at the King's. Pleasure, but of latter
Days is only at the Disposal of the Senate or Diet.

Creation of a Gentleman.
The Manner of making a Gentleman is this. The King not being sole sufficient
for that Purpose, he is obliged to send to all the little Diets of the Kingdom
for their Consent, which afterward also must be approved by the Great Diet,
and then a Gentleman may have his Diploma, and be enrolled. All this Ceremony,
and a great deal more goes to the making of a Gentleman in Poland. A Jew is
made a Gentleman, first by becoming a Christian, and then by signalizing
himself in the Wars, when he is proposed by the King to the little Diets, and
afterward confirmed by the great one. It may be here observed that it is better
to be born than created Noble, for these last (called by the Poles Scartabelli)
are subject to several Impositions and Inconveniences which the others are
exempt from.

A third way of becoming Noble.
There is a third way of becoming Noble, which is by serving as Magistrate in
some privileged City, particularly in Cracow and Vilna, where the Consuls or
Senators are qualified to transmit their Privileges to their Posterity.

Three ways of forfeiting it.
Also as Nobility is to be gained, so likewise it may be forfeited three Ways:
First, by some heinous Crime: For Example, where a Nobleman permits one that is
Ignoble to usurp his Coat of Arms. Secondly, by exercising any Trade or
Merchandising, or any sordid Calling in any City or Town; whereby he
immediately forfeits his Privileges and Quality. And thirdly, by being a
Magistrate in any City not Privileged.

In what Case restored.
However, though Nobility may by these Means be lost and forfeited, yet many have
been known to be restored where their Parents had quitted their Quality through
Poverty, the Poles justly considering the Force of that Condition, which is
able to drive Men to the most Ignoble Actions.

Chracter of the Poles.
To give your Lordship a Character of the Poles, I may affirm that they exceed
all the Nations of Europe in Vivacity of Spirit, Strength of Body, and living
long, which cannot be occasioned by their Climate, because the Swedes,
Moscovites, and Germans live all under the same Parallel, and yet enjoy not the
like Vigor and Health, and therefore must proceed,

First, From their Diet, which as to Meat is generally fresh roasted Flesh (for
they scarce ever eat any boiled or salt) and Fowl, which increases the volatile
and fixed Salts, and thence comes their Vigor and Vivacity.

Secondly, From their Drink, which is spirituous and strong, being chiefly
Hungarian Wine burnt, or Aniseed Water, both which they guzzle down in great
Quantities almost all the Day long. The poorer Sort have a Liquor distilled
from Wheat, Oats, or Barley, which the Gentry rectify with Anniseeds or
Aromaticks.

Thirdly, From their living hardily, for they hate Effeminacy, and a poor
Country Cottage pleases them as well as a Palace, and they frequently weave
Tapistry and Arras, as they travel along upon the Roads.

Nay, many of them will sleep in Time of Frost and Snow without any Bed or
other Convenience, and the little Children, two Months after they are born,
have been seen carried about stark naked.

Fourthly, from hunting, which is very much in Use among them, and particularly
of a wild Beast which they call Zubra, having no cloven Feet. They eat these
Animals, which they find only in Lithuania. The Poles are extremely addicted
to, and expert in Horsemanship, which might probably occasion the Arms of
Lithuania.

Fifthly, From other Exercises, for the Poles are very much inclined to
Dancing, Leaping, Vaulting, Jumping, etc. as likewise exceedingly given to
Talking and Conversation, wherein they agree with the French.

Sixthly, Their Beds, Fasting, and Temperance in Eating, very much contribute
toward their living long; for hard Beds knit their Bones, and Temperance
refines their Spirits. The Slaves among them have no Beds, and the Masters
seldom use any but Quilts, and the like.

And seventhly, Their Health, Vigor, and Vivacity may reasonably be augmented
by their great Freedom and Privileges; for where Slavery hebetates and blunts
the Mind, and consequently enervates the Body, Liberty exhilerates the one, and
by that means strengthens the other.

Their Complexion, Constitution, etc.
The Complexion of the Poles is generally enclining to fair, as likewise their
Hair to a pale Yellowish Color. Their Stature is commonly of the middle Sort,
though a little tending to the tallest. Their Constitutions are generally good,
and their Bodies gross, yet the Women of Quality make it their chief Study to
make themselves lean and slim: But Painting and Washes to meliorate their
Complexions they abhor, neither have they any Occasion for them.

Manners of the Polish Men.
The Polish Men cut their Hair about their Ears like Monks, as I observed in
the first Volume of this History. They raze away all the Hair from their Faces,
leaving only one large Whisker. They walk gravely with a Poll-Ax in their
Hands, and a Sabre by their Sides, which they never put off but when they go to
Bed. This Sabre hangs by a Strap of Leather, to which is also fastened a
Hankercheif, a Knife and Sheath, and a small Stone set in Silver to whet their
Knife upon. They wash their Faces and Necks every Morning in cold-Water, and
the Fathers are accustomed to make their Children to wash themselves as soon as
they are stirring, even in the sharpest Weather.

Their further Character.
The Poles are generally open-hearted and honest (as Boterus observes in his
Relations) more apt to be deceived than to deceive, and not so easily provoked
as appeased. They are likewise for the most part very dutiful to their
Magistrates, and courteous and hospitable to Strangers, which last they will
not only invite to their Houses and freely converse with, but also endeavor to
imitate. I have known some (says Hauteville) that have entertained French Men,
Italians, and Germans whom they did not know, merely because they were out of
Employment.

Education and Learning.
From their greenest Years they apply themselves to Letters, yet which
generally speaking, seldom extends much beyond a perfect Knowledge of the Latin
and their own Language, although they have not however all along wanted for famous
Mathematicians, Historians, Orators, Philosophers, and Poets; as likewise for
learned Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines; some of which have illustrated both
the Church and their Native Country with their Writings. And doubtless the
Learned would have been obliged to more of their Nation had not their Works
perished for Want of Printing, which Art has been but lately received among
them. Your Lordship will find no People with whom you may more generally
converse in Latin, and where all Records are written in that Language: The
Women also learn Latin in the Nunneries.

To what generaly apply themselves.
The Adult among the Plebeians generally addict themselves, the Men to Trade or
Agriculture, and the Women to good Housewifry. The Gentry also apply themselves
to serve the Church or State. Yet both Gentry and Commonalty are often given to
Travel, and easily imbibe the Idioms of foreign Nations. Their Parts are
sprightly and active, yet nevertheless more apt for Imitation than Invention.
Formerly the Poles were not much given to Trafick, but now, by the Example of
their Neighbors who came to trade among them, they strive to outvy each other
in Riches and Covetousness; yet for the most part they love to make a Show, and
will appear very splendid upon the least Occasions.

Worst part of their Character.
For the worst Part of their Character we must observe with Barclay, that they
run mad after Liberty, and rather drive than invite their Kings to observe
their Laws. They not only hate the Name of Slavery, but likewise abhor a just
and hereditary Monarchy. The Gentry claim prerogatives that will scarce give
them Leave to be guilty of any Crime, and whenever they happen to acknowledge
any such, the Prince has seldom a Power to punish it. They are not only
licentious in their Morals and a civil Life, but likewise in Religion and
sacred Observances, for without Fear of Ecclesiastical Censures, they will both
talk and act as they please against that Function, affirming themselves
self-sufficient to be their own Guides in those Matters.

Genius how inclined.
Their Genius enclines them generally to Arms, though they fall far short of
their ancient Glory, by reason there are now so few public spirited Persons
among them, each having greater Regard to his own private Interest and Gain,
than either the Honor or Safety of his Country. Nevertheless not all have been
of this Character, for several of latter Days have approved themselves worthy
Patriots, and courageous Defenders of the Republic, and for the most part they
are still good Soldiers, providing there appears any Money or other Reward to
push them on.

Enured to Hardship.
It is probable they would be almost invincible were they but well Disciplined,
for they are so inured to Hardship, that they look upon even the Germans to be
an Effeminate Sort of People, not fitting to support the Fatigues of War, and
the Rigor of Weather. The Polish Army has been known to lie encamped in the
Snow, which it did in the Year 1663. for King Casimir set forth from Leopol in
the Beginning of September, and did not return from the Frontiers of Moscovy
till the Spring of the Year following.

Greedy of Money.
The Poles are so very greedy of Money, that there is scarce any thing they
will refuse to obtain it; but when they have once got it, tho they borrow it,
they never think of Payment or Restitution; nay, they will laugh at such as
demand it of them, bidding them go use the same Means as they did to get it:
This one would think should altogether interrupt Commerce and Trade; therefore
it would not be here amiss to inform your Lordship how they Lend and Borrow in
Poland.

Manner of Lending and Borowing.
It must first be observed that Bonds and Obligations are of no Use there, for
when the Gentlemen borrow of one another, they mortgage their Lands or
Villages, and when they borrow of the Tradesmen or Merchants, they always leave
Pledges, and besides pay 14 per Cent. which is allowed by the Laws of the Land.
But providing the Sum so borrowed be not paid within a Time prescribed, then
is the Creditor at Liberty to dispose of the Pledge without any Account to be
given.

Love to make a Figure.
As I observed before, the Poles love to make a Show, keeping a Multitude of
Servants, and great Store of Horses and Arms for that Purpose: But more
especially, they affect to go splendidly clothed, yet still rather according
to their several Conditions than Qualities. They have formerly delighted much
in foreign Modes, and their Soldiers, have been the first Introducers of their
Fashions, for Example; when they had Wars with the Moscovites, according to the
Mode of that Country, they wore large long Gowns, lined throughout with rich
Furrs, as likewise very broad-brim'd and high-crown'd Hats. Afterward when
they were engaged against the Turks in Valachia, they changed their Fashions to
the Turkish and Tartarian Habits: And after that to the Suedish and German
Modes, when they were in War with the Suedes in Prussia.

Their present Fashions.
Their present Fashion is, A Vest that reaches down to the middle of their
Legs, with a long Robe, not unlike our Morning Gowns, lined with Furr, and tied
about their Wastes with a Sash; Little Boots with Iron Heels, on their Legs,
and Furred Caps upon their Heads with a Sabre or Cutlace girt about their
Loins. When they appear on Horseback, which is one of their chief Delights,
they wear besides all that has been mentioned, a short Cloak that hangs over
their Shoulders, much like an Irish Mantle; which is most commonly Furred
within and without.

What Furrs used.
The better (that is the Richer) sort make use of the Furrs of Sables, which
are brought from Moscovy, when the others content themselves with the Skins of
Tigers, Leopards, Panthers, and a kind of Gray Furrs. Some of the finest of
these Furrs cost above a Thousand Crowns; but they are worn only at Diets, and
descend from Father to Son. The Fashion the Women use, comes nearer to that of
the Men than in most Countries.

Rusticks Habit in Lithuania.
In Lithuania, the meaner sort make Shoes of Bark of Trees, which they wrap
about, and put under the Soles of their Feet. These Shoes they call Chodakys.
Of the tenderest Bark also they make Stockings, turning and winding it about
the Calves of their Legs. Before they come into any Town, they always take care
to put on fresh Chodakys. These every Countryman almost makes; so that it is
commonly used as a Jest in Poland, That there are more Shoomakers in Lithuania,
than in all Europe besides. The same People likewise wear a sort of Habit, with
Sleeves woven all of a Piece. This they call Samodzialka. It is commonly Gray
and very thick, and worn equally by Men and Women among the Rusticks.

A few follow the French Mode.
Some few of the Poles imitate the French Fashion, and wear Linen, Lace,
Point, Perukes, and Swords; for those who retain the Polish Habit, have no
other Linen but Shirts and Drawers, and some of them Socks. The ordinary sort
of Gentry, and even some of the Great Men, put sifted Chaff into their Boots,
which serves them instead of Socks. When I speak of the Poles wearing Linen, I
mean only the Gentry and Citizens; for the Peasants wear none at all, unless
some by chance happen to have Shirts of Course Cloth.

The Women's former and late Fashions.
The Women formerly had only Garlands on their Heads, composed of Gold, Gems,
Flowers, Silk, and the like; but now they wear Silk Caps lined with Furr, like
the Men. They also formerly imitated the Women of Foreign Countries; and in the
late Reign all the Women of Quality, particularly those that resided at Court,
followed the French Mode, King John III's Queen being of that Nation. Never
does the Price hinder their having fine things; for they suffer themselves to
be Bubbled by Foreign Merchants (especially French) at a ridiculous rate.

Poles great Extravagance.
Both Women and Men are Extravagant to an infinite Degree; insomuch that some
among them will have fifty Suits of Clothes at once, all as Rich as possible;
but what shows their Prodigality yet more is, that they will almost have their
Servants go as well dressed as themselves; whereby they generally soon spend
their Estates, and are reduced in a short time, to the extremest Want. But
this Prodigality of theirs does not only extend to their Habits, but likewise
to their Buildings, Equipage, and other Customs. In their modern Buildings,
many of them imitate the Italians, though generally speaking indeed, their Houses
are Small and Low, especially in the Country.

Description of their Houses.
They never live above Stairs, and their Houses are not united: The Kitchen is
on one side, the Stable on another, the House on another, and the Gate in the
Front: All which make a Court either Square or Round. These Houses are for the
most part of Wood, though the other sort are both of Brick and Stone.

Furniture.
The Inside of their Houses is generally hung with Tapestry or Arras, and all
the rest of their Household Stuff and Utensils, proportionably suitable: Yet
toward Tartary, they do not much care to have any Furniture extraordinary for
fear of the Incursions of that Barbarous People. Therefore in that part of
Poland, the Gentry content themselves with a few small Beds with Taffeta
Curtains, just enough to serve their Family; for if any go to Lodge at their
Houses, they generally carry their Beds along with them.

No Gardens nor Orchards.
The Polish Gentry have seldom any Gardens or Orchards to their Houses, though
their Country be very proper for Fruit Trees, whereby they might save the
Expense of a great deal of Corn, which they consume in Beer, by making of Cider
and Perry.

Private and public Baths with their Effects.
Although it be extreme Cold in Poland, yet will the Polish Gentry have almost
every one a Bagnio in his House, in which the Women have their Apartments
separate from the Men. There are likewise public Baths in every City and Town
for the use of the Common People; which they frequent not only in Summer, but
also in Winter. From their frequent use of Baths, probably comes the reason
that the Polish Children are seldom Scabby, either in Head or Face. It may be
here also observed, that the Children in Poland are seldom distorted, crooked,
or illshap'd, as it often happens in other Countries, because here they do not
Swath their Children, but only wrap them loose in Linen Clouts.

Poles great admirers of Shows.
The Poles are generally so great Admirers of Splendor and Show, that their
Women seldom stir out of Doors without a Coach and Six, though it be only cross
the way, either to Church, or to Visit a Neighbor; but the Men for the most
part go on Horseback, and rarely on Foot, which they look upon to be very
Ignoble.

Their Atendants.
Both Men and Women are always attended with a great Number of Servants of both
Sexes: The Women to wait on the Women, and the Men on the Men. The Principal
Senators always Ride or Walk, in the middle of their Retinue, putting the best
Clothed of their Servants before them. When the Gentry of either Sex go abroad
a Nights, they have twenty four or more Whitewax Flambeaux carried before their
Coach. Women of Quality generally have their Trains born up by He or
She-Dwarfs. These Ladies have also with them an Old Woman, which they call
their Governante; and an Old Gentleman for their Gentleman Usher, whose Office
is to follow their Coach on Foot, and to help them out of it when they Alight.
It may be remarked, that their Coaches go always very slow and gravely.

Women very Modest.
The reason of these two Old Peoples waiting on the Ladies, is not because
their Husbands are Jealous, as in most of the Eastern Countries; for the Polish
Ladies are generally very Modest; and do not at all abuse the great Liberty
allowed them.

Exception.
But this Rule does not hold among the Common People; for Maids with them,
never think themselves awhit the worse for being unmarried Mothers: Nor is
their Frailty any hinderance to their Fortune; for they soon Marry again, and
thereby repair the Scandal. These sort of Grass-Widdows, most commonly serve
for Nurses; for a Virtuous Married Woman, though she be never so Poor, will
hardly ever Nurse any Child but her own.

Women's Liberty restrained.
It may be observed, notwithstanding all these Honors done the Women in
Poland, that they do neither keep the Purse, nor wear the Breeches; for when
they have a mind to have any thing, they are obliged to ask their Husbands for
it by Kneeling, Embracing his Knees, and calling him their Benefactor, except
some few Trifles, of course allowed them; As Butter and Eggs after the House is
served; and Flax ready hitchell'd by the Peasants; all which indeed they may
dispose of without their Husband's Privity; but as to other Things they cannot:
For the Man is the sole Manager of all Things in Poland; and the Women have
little more to do than to Eat, Drink, and Divert themselves.

Indifferences in the Polish Temper.
As the Poles bear their own Losses, and suffer all Disasters with a great deal
of Temper, so likewise they regard the Miseries and Misfortunes of others with
the same Indifference, for they will often stand and see a House burn without
offering in the least to lend a helping Hand to quench it. Neither are they
more indulgent to their Children, or on the contrary, the Children to their
Parents, both whom are reciprocally suffered to continue Slaves to the Tartars,
when but a small Sum of Money would purchase their Redemption.

What Exercises Practiced.
In Poland there are neither Academies nor Schools, for the Manege (Riding the
Great Horse) Fencing nor Dancing, and yet the Gentry being naturally bent to
those Exercises, will either Practice them at home after their own rude
Fashion, or Travel to inform themselves of Strangers abroad. Of all these
Pastimes, Music and Dancing are their Darling Pleasures; for even the very
Nurses are ordered to teach their Children this last as soon as they can go. So
that you shall often see two Children tripping it about a Room to the dull
Notes of their Nurses, or a Servants Pipes. The Poles are so addicted to
Music, that Barge-men may be frequently seen Playing on Fiddles as they Sail
along the River Vistula with Corn.

The other Customs and Manners of the Poles I shall inform your Lordship of as
methodically and succinctly as the Variety of Matter will admit. But first a
word or two of the Polish Families and Names.

Polish Families and,
The Gentry are divided into many Tribes, all distinguished, not by Places or
Countries, but by several peculiar Appellatives and Coats of Arms: Out of every
one of these, springs several Families of different Names and Affinity. For
example, to the Tribe of Lelivicz, whose Standard is a Field Azure, charged
with a New Moon in chief, and a Star of the first Magnitude between its Horns,
belong the Families of Zarnowiski, Pileczki, Melstin, etc.

Names formerly and now.
Formerly the Poles had their Names from several occasions; but of latter days
they have been accustomed to take them only from Castles, Cities, Towns and
Villages, most commonly by adding the Termination ski or ki, which signifies
Son, though some say Dominion, because they are generally so called from the
Place which they Govern. In Lithuania the Termination for the most part is in
witz, which rather implies Son than Ski. Sometimes also they take their Names
from these Places by omitting Ski and Witz, and putting before the Place, a,
ab, in, or de: As a Gorka, in Tenstin, de Fulstin, and the like. Some of the
Poles usual Names are (which I mention for the difficulty of Pronunciation.)
Chrzonstowski, Krzikritzki, Grzmialtowski, etc. Lastly, Several Names in Poland
begin with an O, as Opalinski, Osolmski, Vzaorwski, Orzakowski, and such like.

Marriages and their duration.
Now as to Marriages among the Poles, it must first be observed, that the
Feasts of those of the Gentry always last three days, be they that make them
either Poor or Rich; wherefore they must necessarily be exceeding Expensive. If
a Lady Marry any of her waiting Maids, she generally Expends as much as for one
of her Daughters. But as the Court-Marriages will show the greatest
Magnificence of this kind, I shall entertain your Lordship out of Hauteville
with one of that sort.

Court-Marriages.
When the Queen Marries any of her Maids of Honor, or when any Senator or
great Lord is to be Married, the first and second day the King gives a great
Feast. For this purpose a large Hall is pitched upon, where there are three
Tables set out. At the first Table sit the King and Queen, in a Manner that
they both Face the Hall. Next the Queen sit the Two that are to be Married; and
next to the King the Popes Nuncio, and Archbishop of Gnesna. At the same Table
likewise sit the Foreign Ambassadors over against the King and Queen. At the
two other Tables, extending the whole length of the Hall, all the Ladies,
Senators and Officers, except only such as wait on the King and Queen, are
placed by an Officer, according to their respective Precedence.

Customs thereat.
Most commonly this Feast begins about four or five of the Clock in the
Afternoon, and lasts to two or three in the Morning. Here it may be observed
that the Senators are accustomed to rise often, and go up to the King's Table
to drink his Majesty's Health on their Knees. At these Feasts they eat little,
but drink Hungarian Wine to an immoderate Degree. The Ladies, out of Modesty,
only touch the Tops of the Glasses with their Lips, and so set them down before
them, or pour them into their Plates, in a manner tha^ more Wine is thought to
be spils and lost here than drank. When they have sat about five or six Hours
at Table, the Violins, and a little Sort of portable Organs begin to strike up,
and then they spend the rest of the Time in Dancing. In this Exercise every
body joins, and not so much as the old People of either Sex are excused. Those
that begin the Dance are generally the ancient Senators and old Ladies who move
slowly about, like so many Friars or Nuns in Procession; but although the Dancing
begins with so much Gravity and Formality, yet it usually ends with a great
deal of Hurry and Confusion.

Presents made the Bride.
On the second Day all the Guests present the Bride with something new, and
none give less than a small Piece of Plate. All these Presents are made before
the Queen. This Ceremony is performed before they sit down to Table. These
Presents most commonly make a good Part of the Brides Portion. The late
Princess of Poland, when she was married to the Elector of Bavaria, had above
the Value of 100000 Crowns presented her.

Espousals and Ceremonies.
On the third Day are solemnized the Espousals: All the Wedding Guests
accompany the Bridegroom and Bride on Horseback to Church, as likewise in
their Return Home, when they are always to pass by the King's Palace. During
all the Time of their coming and going, the Trumpets sound from the Balconies
on both Sides the way. When the Bride has been conducted to her Husband's
House, and a magnificent Feast there prepared is ended, and the Company gone,
the Bride begins to fall a crying, it being the Custom it seems in Poland for
Maids to weep at that time, and to seem concerned for fear they should be
thought impudent and immodest. The other Marriages of the Gentry in Poland, are
performed much after the same Manner, only with less Magnificence.

Who not Married without Dispensation.
The Men and the Women that are Godfathers and Godmothers to Children, are
always Cousins and Relations, tho they were not so before, and consequently
cannot be married without a Dispensation from the Bishop of the Diocese.

Burials and order of Procession.
The Ceremonies of Burial in Poland are usually celebrated with so great Pomp
and Magnificence, that one would rather take them for Triumphs than Enterments.
The Corpse having been put into the Coffin, it is placed in a Hearse or Chariot
with six Horses, all covered with black Housings, The Coffin has a large black
Velvet Pall thrown over it, with a Cross of red Satin in the Middle, and six
long black Silk Tassels hanging down from it, which are born up by as many of
the deceased Person's Domestics, all in close Mourning. Before the Chariot
march several Priests, Monks, and a great Number of People, each of which
carries a white Wax Torch lighted in his Hand, next to whom, and immediately
before the Hearse come three Men on Horseback who carry the Arms of the
deceased, one his Sword, another his Lance, and the third his Dart.

Other Proceedings.
The Procession thus set out, marches very slowly, in a manner that they
usually come late to the Church. After the Burial-Service is over, those that
carried the Armor enter the Church on Horseback, and furiously riding up to
the Coffin, break the Arms of the deceased thereupon; after which the Body is
Interred. Then they return to the House, where there is always a great Feast
prepared, when the Lay-Guests will not only drink to Excess, but likewise force
the Clergy to follow their Example.

Particulars relating to the King and Queens Enterment.
Here it may not be amiss to observe something relating to the Interment of the
King and Queen of Poland. As soon as the King dies he is laid upon a Bed of
State, and a certain Number of the Senators, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal,
are appointed to attend about his Corpse. The Republic also orders all
necessary Expenses relating hereunto, to be levied out of the Crown Revenues. A
deceased Queen likewise has the same Ceremonies and Honors as a King; for
Queen Mary Ludovica Wife to John Casimir, was carried from the Suburbs of
Warsaw, where she died, to the Castle where she lay in State, till she was
carried to Cracow to be buried.

Cause of J. Casimir's Queens Death.
It may not be improper to entertain your Lordship with the Manner of her
Death, there being something observable in it. She died of a Defluxion upon her
Lungs, or of a Consumption, occasioned by Excess of Passion, on Account of a
Contest she had had with the Chancellor Patz about something she had proposed
to him which he would not consent to. This Princess loved so dearly to
intermeddle with, and to govern the State solely according to her Fancy, that
she was not a little jealous when the King her Husband spoke to any other
Women, and that chiefly for fear he might en^line to be governed by another
more than her self. This your Lordship may imagine gave him no great Cause to
be concerned at her Death, for at the very Instant of her expiring, he posted
away to a Mistress he had formerly loved, but whom he durst not have spoke to
during his Queen's Life.

Manner of Mourning in Poland.
As Mourning is not only a necessary Circumstance, but also the Sequel of a
Funeral, so I think my self obliged here to give some short Account of it. The
Mourning of the Men is much like ours, only differing according to the Habits
of the Country; but the Women of Quality are generally apparelled in a Sort of
coarse black Stuff, and their Linen is not much finer than Canvass, and the
greater the Quality, always the coarser the Linen and Stuff. This Habit does
not misbecome Widows that are both young and handsome. It may here be observed,
that the Senators, Deputies, and all others that have a Mind to appear at the
Diet of Election, must be in Black, though the Fashions of the several Countries
of Foreigners are not required in like manner to be altered.

Edibles among the Poles.
For the other Customs of eating and drinking among the Poles, both at Feasts
and elsewhere, they are various, but first I must give some Account of the
Edibles and Potables. Their ordinary Meat is Beef and Veal, for Mutton they do
not value, and generally give it to their Servants. They have great Store of
gray, but no red Partridges; a great many Hares, but no Rabits, for they would
sooner eat a Cat than these last. They have it is true, some white Rabbets which
they breed tame for the Sake of their Furrs. In Poland there are a great many
Roe-bucks, but few Stags: Abundance of wild Boars, Hogs, Poultry, Pigeons, and
the like: But as for wild-Foul, they have great Store indeed in Summer, but
none in Winter, as in other Countries, when they are best. They have a great
many wild Oxen, which, when moderately salted, are great Dainties with them.

Way of Hunting wild Oxen.
The Manner of hunting these wild Oxen it may not be improper here to give some
short Account of; when they have surrounded the Beast with a great Number of
Horsemen, each of them rides up to him and darts him with an Arrow, when the
Beast feeling himselfwounded, eagerly pursues its Enemy, while another Person
darting him from behind, he turns in great Rage after that Person, and then
another darting him, as likewise many others successively; at length the poor
Beast is so tired with pursuing so many Assailants, that he falls down and is
easily taken or killed. They have another way of taking them in the Woods,
which is by causing the Rusticks to enclose a great Number of them with Trees
feil'd down, who also immediately raise up a Stage for Spectators; when the
Hunters, assigning themselves, every one a Post, and the Beasts being frighted
into the Middle by Dogs and the great Vociferation of the Assailants, as they
move toward each Person, they are wounded with Darts, which making them to run
with great Force against their Enemy, and finding an Opposition by the Trees,
they endeavor to force their Way, whilst the Hunter from behind, most commonly
gives them their Deaths Wound; but if they happen to break through then the next
Hunter holds out a Piece of red Cloth, which it seems, this Beast having an
Antipathy against, forthwith leaves that Person and runs at the other, who
being provided for him, most commonly kills him, or in Case of Danger, his
Neighbor has Recourse to the aforesaid Stratagem which never fails of
diverting the Fury of this wild Beast. It may be also observed that this Beast
has a Power of drawing a Man to him with his Tongue, it being rough, if he can
but reach any Part of his Coat, or the like.

Odd Dainties.
Near the Mountains of Hungary, there are also wild Goats which they admire
mightily for Meat. They likewise make a fine Dish, as they think it, of Beavers
Tails, but throw away the Body. They likewise eat Bears Paws when pickled, for
Dainties. When they take or kill Elks; they do not gut them for fourteen or
fifteen Days afterward, and sometimes in Winter, not in a whole Month. When
the Great Men come to the Diet, they commonly bring these with their Skins and
Guts, and hang them at their Windows some five or six at a Time, until they
turn rank like Venison; then they roast some, and dress others like Beef a la
mode. This is esteemed delicious Meat, and none but Great Men's Tables have it.
The Manner of taking Bears also I presume may not be unacceptable to your
Lordship.

Manner of taking Bears.
They are generally taken with Nets, even though they be of the largest Size:
When they have hampered one, all the Hunters ride in great Numbers about him,
and having pinned down his Head and Feet with great wooden Forks, they bind him
every way about with strong hempen Cords that he is not able to stir, then they
roll him into a great wooden Cage, but it must be understood that the Knots of
the Cords are so contrived, that with one artful Pull they may be unloos'd,
after which the Bear is kept so shut up till they have a mind to let him forth,
by lifting up a Trap Door, to be hunted.

Other sorts of Fowl.
In Poland likewise they have a great many Heath-Cocks, most of which are of
the Bigness of a Capon: There are also abundance of Pheasants in Lithuania, and
of Bustards in Prussia. They have moreover about Lowitz, a little Bird not
unlike a large Sparrow, which comes and disappears with the Snow, and thence is
called a Snow-Bird. These are very agreeable to the Taste. As for tame-Fowl,
the Poles never eat any but such as is brought alive into their Kitchins in the
Morning and killed for Dinner.

What Fish they have.
For Fish, the Baltic being the only Sea that borders upon Poland, has scarce
any, but that Defect is abundantly supplied by the great Plenty of fresh Water
Fish, both in their Lakes and Rivers; some Sorts whereof are not to be found in
other Countries. It may be observed, that those which are taken out of Rivers,
are more palatable than those bred in Lakes and the Sea.

Way of ordering Cabbage.
The Poles have a peculiar way of ordering Cabbage. They chop it small, and put
it into a Tub between Lays of Salt, then they press it very hard, and after
pour warm Water upon it, which makes it ferment* and serves for Pickle: Thus
they preserve it all Winter, and sometimes for a whole Twelvemonth. Though this
Dainty of theirs smells very strong at a Distance, yet do they nevertheless
think it good Meat.

Their Potables.
Their Potables are of different Kinds, but their usual Drink is Beer, which in
Prussia is made only of Malt, but in the rest of Poland, with Wheat ground
small, and boiled with Hops; sometimes they mixed Spelt (a Kind of Wheat in
Italy and Flanders) and Oats along with it*

Beer of what Quality.
Their Beer is generally of an Amber Color, and of a brisk and poignant
Sweetness, especially that of Varka, or that which the Gentry make for their
private Use, which is stronger and better than the Brewers fell.

Sorts of Mead.
In Lithuania, Russia, and Vkrania, they have two Sorts of Liquor made with
Honey which are red and white, both which they call Mead, tho'we give that Name
only to the latter, the former with us being Metheglin: Prussia and Masovia
also has some Honey, though at Warsaw it is made after a peculiar Manner, by
mixing Juice of Cherries and Blackberries, as likewise Aromaticks along with
it, and thence has the several differing Names of Kerstrang, Malinicz, and
Troinicz.

And of Wine.
Besides Beer and Mead, both the Poles and Lithuanians have several Sorts of
Wine brought from Hungary, Italy, France, and Germany: That of Hungary excels
the Spanish in Strength, and is brought to Cracow over the Carpathian Mountains
in large Casks drawn by Oxen. The best is sold at twenty Shillings a Polish
Pot, which amounts to no more than three of our Quarts, so that we may
reasonably believe that the poorer Sort are obliged to obstain from so costly a
Liquor. The Italian Wine is brought likewise over-Land, but not drank so much
as the other, by reason of its Lushiousness and Price, being brought much
farther. The French and Rhenish Wines come by way of the Baltic to Dantzic.
These, as they are naturally weaker than the former, so they lose much of their
Strength by coming by Sea. As to the Rhenish Wine, that seldom goes much beyond
Dantzic, although some be sold in other Parts of Prussia, yet which they always
drink with Sugar, by Reason of its Sharpness.

What strong Waters.
Strong Waters in Poland are generally Spirits drawn from Wheat, Barley, Oats,
Sider, etc. and mixed with Water, but these are only drank by the common People,
unless in Winter, when the Gentry likewise drink them, but they then are
rectified with Aniseeds and other Aromaticks.

Customs in Eating and Drinking.
For their Customs in eating and drinking, it must be observed, that they
seldom or never eat any Breakfasts, and do not care for cold Meat. In the
Mornings both Men and Women generally drink Ginger, Yolks of Eggs and Sugar
boiled in Beer. They are immoderate Lovers of Pig roasted, though their Sauces
have commonly an odd Taste. The Great Men seldom dine without a Dish of Peace
and yellow rusty Bacon sliced, which it seems they prefer. They eat all manner
of Mushrooms, not excepting those that cleave to the Trees, which they gather
and dry, to preserve them. Those of above a Nights Growth, we commonly esteem
Poison, and which perhaps may be so here and not there, no more than Poppy
Seeds, which they likewise eat in great Quantities, for they drink the Milk of
them, as also make it into several Sauces or Dishes by it self. They also make
abundance of Oil of this Seed, as likewise of Hemp and Flax Seeds, etc. which
they eat on fasting Days.

Potage and Sauces.
They seldom eat any Potage, unless what the French Cooks make, which they will
feast on with a great deal of Pleasure. They do not boil their Meat over much,
and that gives it the better Relish. Their Sauces also differ extremely from
ours; some whereof are yellow and made with Saffron; others white, consisting
chiefly of Cream; a third Sort gray, being of Onyons; and a fourth black, being
made with the Juice of Plums. Into these Sauces they put a great Quantity of
Sugar, or sometimes Pepper, Cynamon, and sometimes Ginger, Cloves, Nutmeg,
Olives, Capers, Kernels of Pine Apples, and Prunes. Their Fish Sauces excel
both ours and the French. The Poles use Spices to that Degree, that some Great
Men have been found to spend above fifty thousand Livres A Year in that single
Commodity: They do not want for all Sorts of choice Potherbs, and some that are
not to be found elsewhere. They have also Sweetmeats of various Kinds, and all
Manner of Deserts, especially Pistacho Nuts.

Poles eat little Bread.
The Poles generally eat a great deal of Meat to a very little Bread, although
they have such Plenty of Corn in Poland, especially Rye, which is much better
than in other Countries. They are great Admirers of Roots, which they dress
different Ways, and very palatably.

Crachat how made.
They have a Sort of Dish which they call Crachat, and which is made of the
coarse Meal of Wheat, Barley, Millet, or Oats, or sometimes of a small Grain
called by them Manna. This Crachat is very good when well dressed. On Flesh
Days they eat it with Milk and Butter, and on Fasting Days only with Oil: But
notwithstanding there are some who dispense with this Rule, especially on
Saturdays. The common People, for want of Wheat or the like, are accustomed to
make Bread of Acorns dried and ground.

Customs at Feasts.
When the Poles make a Feast, they never serve at Table either Spoons, Knives,
or Forks, but the Guests are to bring those along with them, or their Servants
for them. They also have a broad Piece of starched Linen to serve for Napkins,
sowed round the Table Cloth for fear it should be stolen away. The Guests
being set down at Table, immediately the Gates of the House are shut, and are
not opened till all the Company are risen, and the Plate taken Account of and
locked up; for should it be otherwise, the Footmen are generally so
light-finger'd, that they would infallibly Nim some of it, and this is the
Reason also why they do not lay Spoons, Knives and Forks on the Table.

Banqueting Hall.
Every Person of any Fashion, has his Banqueting Hall in his House, peculiarly
set a part for Feasts and Entertainments. Here there is a Place made up with
Ballasters for the Side-board Table, from which the Cloth is never taken till
it is very dirty, being always loaded with a great Quantity of Plate. Over this
Place there is a Gallery for Music, usually consisting of Violins and Organs.

Particulars of Servants.
Those that are invited, always bring their Footmen along with them, to whom,
as soon as they are seated, they cut half their Bread, and as much Meat, and
give it over their Shoulders. This Servant being thus provided, stands and eats
what is given him behind his Master. If the Master asks twice for Wine, the
Servant brings him as much again, and, after his Master, drinks out of the same
Glass without rincing. Although there are great Quantities of Victuals brought
from the Kitchen, yet do they rarely carry any back, for the Servants
immediately seize on what is left, and their Ladies make them carry each of
them a Napkin to prog for dried Sweetmeats or Fruit.

Manners at Table.
After the Cloth is taken away, the Poles are accustomed to sit a good while
drinking. The Genteelest Part of them, at least, have a very decent way of
eating. They never once touch the Meat with their Hands, but carve with so
great Address, that they dexterously cut a Partridge into six Parts in a Trice,
holding it on the End of a Fork. While they are eating they mind nothing else,
and though any body sends in for them, they never stir from Table till they have
done. After their Meals they generally take a Pipe of Tobacco, as the Custom is
with us and other Countries, the Manner whereof may not be unpleasant to be
related.

Poles way of taking Tobacco.
They generally smoke Tobacco without injuring either their Heads or Stomachs,
and that by these Means: They have a Pipe stuck through a little round Box, into
which they have before put Sponge that had been soaked in distilled Vinegar;
this Sponge, by means of a few little Holes through the Pipe, communicates its
Mildness to the Smoke, and besides sucks away all the Oil of the Tobacco,
whereby the Heat is exceedingly lenify'd, and the Pleasure of smoking
consequently improved. When they would render smoking Tobacco yet more
agreeable over and above this lenifying the Heat, they have a way of persuming
the Smoke, by placing another Box of a lesser Size than the former, nearer to
the Bowl of the Pipe, wherein they are wont to put Cotton dipped into some Sort
of Essence, which by means of the like Holes made as before within that Box,
and through the Pipe transmits its odoriferous Quality to the Smoke. They
generally place this Box five Inches from the Bowl of the Pipe, and the other
as many more.

Feasts made by turns.
These Feasts are made alternatively by every Friend and Relation that are
Neighbors, whether Men or Women; for it must* be understood that the Poles
converse freely with the Female Sex, without occasioning them any Scandal, and
especially where the Women are young, if they have but their Parents or nearest
Relations along with them. By these Means Matches are frequently promoted and
Friendships propagated or continued. Nevertheless sometimes, by immoderate
tippling, intestine Jars arise, and bloody Broils ensue; yet that Master of a
Feast will always be esteemed an unreasonable Niggard that does not allow his
Guests wherewithal to work them up to such a Pitch.

Brimmers much practiced.
Those we call Brimmers are very much in Request among the Poles, for they will
scarce ever excuse a Man unless he pledges them Super-naculum. This Vice reigns
equally in Feasts and Taverns, and Saints Days, are not excepted out of their
Drunkards-Calendar, which is notwithstanding winked at and tolerated on Account
of the great Revenues and Excise it brings to the State. However, now adays
this Custom is not so much in Practice among the better Sort of Gentry as
formerly, yet they all still retain their ancient Luxuries of other Kinds.

Customs in Traveling.
The Customs and Manners of traveling in Poland, with other Circumstances,
come next to be inspected. It must first be understood, that there are scarce
any Inns in this Country, except those the Natives call Karczma's, where
Travelers are obliged to lodge with the Cattle.

Description of Inns.
Those Inns, or rather long Stables, are all built up with Boards, and covered
with Straw. Within there is no Furniture, neither are there any Windows, but
all the Light comes in either at Holes made by the Weather, or the Crevices of
ill joined Boards. It Is true, at the further End they have a little Chamber
with a Fire-Hearth, but then there is no lodging in it, because of the Flies,
Fleas, Bugs, and especially the noisome Smells that incommode it; for if they
happen to have a little Window there, yet do they never open it though the
Weather be never so hot; so that Strangers choose rather to lie in the
aforesaid Stable, where the Gospodarz or Innkeeper lodges himself with his
whole Family, than to be suffocated by the Stink and Smell of so close and
small a Room. In the long Room likewise there is an intolerable Smell,
occasioned by a Parcel of rotten Cabbages, which those People always keep by
them: And this, though it may be agreeable enough to the Natives who are used to
it, yet to Strangers it must needs be very offensive.

Have few Conveniences.
In these Inns or Stables, there are no Tables or Beds, except one of the last
in the little Room before mentioned, but however scarce any body cares to lie
in it, because they can have no Sheets but what are very coarse, and have been
often lain in before; neither is the Straw in the Stable much better, because,
even of that, every Company cannot have fresh, for the Gospodar, after his
Guests are gone, generally gathers it up and preserves it for New-Comers, yet
it is still preferable to the Bed, by Reason that he most commonly Airs it
after it has been used. All along this Karczma or Inn, there are great Numbers
of wooden Pins fixed for Travelers to hang up their Clothes, Portmantues, etc.
This Sort of bad Accommodation many avoid by lying in Barns, where they get
fresh Straw.

Travelers obliged to carry Provisions, etc.
By Reason of this ill Entertainment on the Roads, all Travelers in this
Country are obliged to have a Calash with two Horses, wherein they must carry
all their Necessaries and Provisions. Their Beds, Quilts, Bolsters, Sheets, and
the like, are generally put into a large Serge Bag, which afterward serves them
instead of a Seat in the Calash. Also they must provide a Case for Bottles of
what Drink they please, and a Basket with a Lid for their Meat, Bread, etc.
They must moreover furnish themselves with every individual thing that they may
have occasion for, and take care to renew what they have exhausted whenever
they have the first Opportunity, for there is scarce any thing to be had in
these Karczma's but that indifferent Lodging I mentioned.

Traveling cheap in other respects.
Thus your Lordship may perceive that one that travels in Poland, must as it
were carry his whole House along with him, and besides undergo not a few
Incommodities to boot. However, when a Man is thus provided, he may travel at a
very inconsiderable Expense; for Lodging (as indeed it ought not) costs but
very little, and there is nothing to pay for any thing else, because it cannot
be got, the Reason I suppose being that the Gentry of the Country never offer
to pay for what they call for, and there is no way to force them to it; so that
where they ask for any thing, the Gospodar always puts them off with a Nie
Masz, that is, I have nothing: Yet nevertheless when they have any thing to
spare, they will freely give Part of it to Strangers, though generally, there
being but few Travelers in that Country, they provide only for their own
Families: When Foreigners happen to want for Provisions, they usually apply
themselves to the Dvour, or Lord of the Village, who forthwith supplies them
gratis.

Poles manner of Traveling.
Poland being for the most part a Champagne Country, a Galash and two Horses
will rid a great deal of Ground there in a Day. Some of the Poles are so
provident as to drive their own Calashes themselves, but of these there are but
few. When they come to the Inn, they commonly put their Horses to Grass,
because the Gospodarz will not be easily induced to trust them for Hay. There
are some likewise that travel on Horseback with a Quilt for their Bed about a
Foot and half broad, laid under their Saddle. They commonly employ the
Gospodarz to fetch them in Beer, Bread, and whatever else they have Occasion
for, and which Service they must not refuse to do for them at their Peril.
Traveling is here so easy to the Gentry, that it costs them little or nothing.

Incommodities in Travel how remedied.
A Traveller would do well to take more than ordinary Care in passing over
Bridges in this Country, because they are generally very bad and seldom
repaired. In VVinter there is no traveling without a Case for ones Feet, the
Air being excessive sharp and keen. This Case is generally a furred Sack, though
Horsemen content themselves with thick Boots, having some Straw in them to keep
their Feet warm. They also take a good large Sip of Strong Waters before they
mount. In passing over the Ice, especially when there is Snow upon it, one must
take care to procure a Sledge to put the Calash or Coach in, which is always
drawn by Horses.

Disturbed a Winter Nights by Boors.
In VVinter likewise one shall find it a hard Matter to rest a-nights,
especially on Holydays, because then all the Peasants of the Village are
gathered together to Carouse and make merry in that Room where you are obliged
to lodge for want of a Fire elsewhere, for at that Time there is no sleeping
without; Nay, as I said before, scarce with it, though a Man be commonly very
weary when he comes off a Journey, these Drunkards making such a continn'd Din
in your Ears with their excessive singing and dancing about the Room.

Danger of losing Noses.
I should have observed to your Lordship, that sometimes in VVinter Travelers
Noses are frozen with the extreme Cold, when they must take immediate Care to
apply Snow to them, for should they suddenly enter into a warm Room without so
doing, they might, for ought I know, endanger losing them.

Manners of peculiar Countries.
Before I conclude this Account of the Customs and Manners of the Poles, I
might reasonably inform your Lordship of the Manners both ancient and modern,
of the Lithuanians, Samogitians, Prussians, etc. especially where they differ
from those of the other Parts of Poland.

Concerning Lithuania.
That we are descended from the ancient Romans (says Michalon a Lithuanian
Author) is past Doubt, since our Language is almost half Latin, and we not
long since had the same Customs and Ceremonies, as burning the Dead, divining
by Augurs, and such like Superstitions: Nay, which we still retain (continues
he) in many Parts of this Country, especially by worshipping the God Esculapius
under the Form of a Serpent. This Author reckons up a great many Words which
have the same Signification at present in Lithuania, as they had formerly in
Rome. He thinks likewise the Romans Expedition into this Country was under
Julius Caesar, and vouches Florus for a Proof. He also is of Opinion, that the
Cause of this Country's being called The Great Duchy, proceeds from the great
Number of Dukes inhabiting therein.

What relates to Courts of Justice there.
As to what relates to the Courts of Justice in Lithuania, the tenth Part of
the thing adjudg'd in all real Actions, goes always to the Judge's Box, thence
called Peressud (a close Chest) which is immediately to be paid down in Court:
But in personal Actions, he claims half the Damages given to the Plaintiff.
Murder, etc. is punished by Mulct only, in like manner as in Poland: If the
Murderer fly, it is usual to preserve the dead Carcass, for that he cannot be
condemned till he has been shown the Body of the Person he has slain. Also a
Judge here has all stolen Goods wherever found.

Former Judges.
These Judges are now appointed to be the same as they are in Poland, though
there were formerly but two in all Lithuania, both Palatins, and who had no
peculiar Place of Residence assigned, so that all that had Business with them,
were obliged to follow them, though never so far distant; but these Palatins had
their Deputies, who were accustomed to sit and adjudge Differences at public
Feas(...) but who nevertheless had always greater Regard to the filling of
their Peressud, than either to the Justice or Innocence of the Person offended
or offending. Other Particulars relating to these Matters I have omitted for
Brevity's sake (although for the most part they differ from the Laws of other
Countries) presuming they might not probably be acceptable to your Lordship and
the Public. But I must take notice of the Gentry and Citizens of Lithuania,
etc. and so shall proceed to the Rusticks.

Of the Gentry and Citizens.
First then it must be understood, that the Lithuanian Gentry were chiefly
owing for their Privileges to Jagello King of Poland, and to Alexander his
Successor in Lithuania; both which Princes, that they might the better bring
the Natives to embrace the Christian Faith, bestowed on their Nobility the same
Liberty and Privileges as the Polish Gentry enjoyed. Russia also and Podolia
had the same Privileges granted them at the same time, and Prussia likewise had
great Immunities added to its ancient Privileges by Castmir IV. whose
Assistance it had implored against the Teutonic Knights. As for the Citizens of
Lithuania, Samogitia, and Russia, they are much on the same Foot with the other
Parts of Poland, only those of Prussia are preferred in many Cases, as has been
obsrev'd before.

Rusticks and their Condition.
The Country People in Lithuania, etc. are rather more miserable than in
Poland, for a Gentleman there, attended by a Troop of Servants, will commonly
go into a Country-Man's House, and take all he has from him, misusing and
beating him shamefully into the Bargain; in which, or any other Case, if the
Rustic applies himself to his Lord for redress, he must not come empty handed;
and though he does not, yet all the Favor he shall obtain, will be to have his
Case recommended to the Starostas and other Officers, where he must fee again,
so that he is generally unable to go through with the great Charge of getting
himself revenged.

Work on Sundays.
Whereas these poor Wretches work but three or four Days in a Week for their
Lords in Poland; in Lithuania, etc. they commonly work five or six, Mondays
only being allowed to themselves, and in case they have Occasion for them that
Day, then they work on Sundays for themselves, for these Boors observe no
manner of Holy Days: Yet this Custom is more peculiar to Russia; for if one
should ask a Slave there Why he works on Sundays, he would answer by a
Question, If he must not eat on Sundays.

Pay rigid Duties, etc.
These poor Wretches, out of their scanty Gettings, generally pay rigid Duties
three or four Times a Year, to the State, besides being obliged to satisfy the
frequent and arbitrary Impositions of their Lords. If a Slave happens to be
condemned to Death by his Lord for any Crime, he must be his own Executioner,
or will be forced to it by Threats of a worse Punishment than hanging.

Their Edibles and Custom at grinding Corn.
The Bread they usually live upon, is a coarse black Sort, made of Rye, sooty
Wheat, and Barley Ears, all ground together. Their Meat is both Flesh, Fish,
and Fowl, and what Cattle or Poultry they foresee they shall not be able to
keep in VVinter, they usually kill in Autumn, and preserve with Salt. They are
for the most part good Marks-men, and maintain their Families in a great
measure that way. To grind their Corn they have in every House in the Country,
four or five Hand-Mills. While they are at work, they sing continually, and
often repeat the Word Melior, which in their Language signifies the same as in
Latin, thereby implying, as I suppose, that their Condition is still better
than a worse. They have also a Sort of very long wooden Pipes, which when they
found, they always make the Standers by deaf, and usually so grate their Ears,
that they do not recover their Hearing in a good while.

Their Habits.
The Rusticks of Lithuania, Samogitia, etc. wear generally a coarse
ash-colored Habit, insomuch that scarce one in a Hundred is to be seen
otherwise clothed. For their Legs, they have a kind of Bark-Buskins, as I have
observed before.

Carriages, and how made.
These Peasants have a Sort of Chariots or Wagon, all of VVood, and very
light, which they make by raddling or interweaving Boughs with one another.
They have commonly a Covering of the same Fashion, but the Wheels of this
Machine are of one flat and entire Piece of VVood turned round. In a Word,
they are not much unlike our Colliers or Lime-burners Carts, that may be
frequently seen in the Country. When any Number of these Chariots are going
together, they make an intolerable squeaking Noise, by reason that their Axel
Trees are never greased. These Sort of Chariots are much in Use also among the
Russians, as may be learnt from the Poet.

Neque linunt Ruteni querulos pinguedine Currus;
Haud picis Auxilium Stridulus Axis habet.
Auditur veniens long crepitare Colassa:
Sic fragiles Currus, Russe, vocare soles.
Number faciunt habiles, Vno Vectore, Quadrigas
Invectas Ruteni; quas Equus unus agit.
Nec facile invenies ferrato haerentia Clavus
Plaustra; facit ligni cuncta Ministerium.
Et sine ferri usu pangunt sua plaustra terebris,
Et lignum ligno consolidare solent.
Houses.
The Houses these Peasants inhabit in, are built round, and thence called by
them, Towers. They are narrow and open at Top that the Smoke and Stink might go
out, and they are generally covered with Boards, Straw, or Bark of Trees. Here
Men, with their Families and Cattle, live together; by which means it often
happens that both are alternatively mischiev'd.

Employments within and without Doors.
The Employments these People busy themselves in are various, whereof one
belonging to the Men in VVinter, is to help to stuff Feather beds made of
chopped Feathers, and Stalks that grow in the Marshes. These Beds must needs
make the most drowzy not a little vigilant. Part of the VVomens Business within
Doors, is to weave Coarse Cloth. Both their Employments without, belongs
either to Husbandry or Houswifry, as in other Countries.

Why little Horses, here.
The Reason why they have generally little Horses, Guagnini thinks is because
of the excessive Cold that reigns there, yet, says he, they are not a little
strong, for one of them carried me above a hundred and twenty Polish Miles in
four Days.

Qualifications for Marriage.
Among these People, a Maid never marries till she is twenty four or thirty
Years of Age, when she must also have wrought with her own Hands several
Baskets full of Clothes of different Kinds, which at the Time of her Espousals,
she is to distribute among the Guests that her Husband brings along with him:
She likewise must have served her Mother in all Domestic Affairs for a certain
Time. The same Rule holds in Respect of a Son. Another Observation may not be
omitted, that those who are employed to make the Match, always enquire more
strictly into the Manners and Behavior of the Persons, than after the Cattle
and Corn that they enjoy.

Character of these Rusticks.
The Character of these People is, that they are good natured, honest, and
exceeding chaste, for rarely any Quarrels, Robberies, Rapes, or Incests are to
be met with among them. The young Wenches are so extremely reserved, that they
will draw a Knife at a Man that but offers to kiss them: And besides, their
Mothers have a very watchful Eye over them, for they make them wear little
Bells before and behind, to give them Notice where they are, and what they are
doing.

Samogitia differs from Lithuania.
The Samogitian Peasants differ but little from the Lithuanian, however some
Peculiars there are to be observed.

First, The Rusticks of Samogitia are not so laborious as those of Lithuania,
and consequently have not that Plenty of Provisions, etc. therefore instead of
Bread, they are accustomed to eat a Sort of great Turnips as big as ones Head,
which grow of themselves without sowing.

Next, They have a peculiar way of making Mead, Metheglin, and Beer; for they
are want to quench several red-hot Stones in it successively, after it has been
boiled a whole Night, to make their Bellies soluble. This Drink they put into
Vessels made of Bark of Trees.

Sturdy Drinkers rewarded.
Thirdly, They have a Custom of rewarding a sturdy Drinker, by presenting him
with a Shirt, Frock, Handkercheif, and the like.

Fourthly, They live to a greater Age than ordinary in Samogitia, for it is no
wonder to see a Person of a hundred, or a hundred and twenty Years old there,
which may be partly manifested by a Passage which happened while a Monk was
preaching about the Creation of the World, at the Time of Jagello's Expedition
to convert hsi Countrymen.

Proof of great Age.
This Man is a notorious Liar (said one of the Pagans, addressing himself to
the King, and interrupting the Monk) I, and many more among us, have lived for
above these hundred Years, and yet never remember any such thing as he speaks
of, for even from the Time that we were Boys, the same Seasons and Vicissitudes
have continued: To which the King mildly replied. Father, you say true, neither
has the Priest affirmed an Untruth, for these things he speaks of, happened
many Hundred Years ago, long before your Time, when the World was assuredly
made out of nothing by a divine Ordination and Power. I conceive, My Lord, this
may as well serve for an Argument of their Ignorance as of their Longevity.

People more robust here.
Fifthly, Their Character differs something from the Lithuanians, for they are,
generally speaking, more robust, bold, and nimble, and the Defense and Arms
they use, are for the most part a Coat of Mail and a Hunter's Javelin.

Sixthly, No Part of Poland produces so much Honey, for here almost every Tree
contains a Swarm of Bees. It is observable also, that the Honey of this Country
is more free from Wax than elsewhere.

I shall now entertain your Lordship with a few remarkable Customs in Husbandry
peculiar to these two Countries, and wherein I will be as brief as I am
sensible that Art is not much either known or esteemed, being appropriated
chiefly to vulgar Conditions.

Manners in Husbandry.
It may be observed, that these People plow, sow, and harrow, all at the same
Time, and that their Ground having been but once fecundated with burning, will
bear great Crops seven or eight Years together without dunging. When they burn
the Woods on the Lands, if they meet with high Trees, they do not cut them
down, but only prune off their side Branches, so that the Sun may not be kept
from the Ground, the manner of doing which is uncommon, for one Peasant will
prune above a thousand Trees together without so much as once coming down.

Strange way of Pruning Trees.
To effect this, he provides himself of a Seat of Rope, much like a Stirrup,
the which he fastens to a long Cord, and having cast it over an Arm of the
Tree, a Boy that is on the Ground draws him up and down, and when he has so
done, by Help of another Cord, easily transfers him to the next Tree. This
Peasant has always a Hook by his Side, with which he uses to lop off the
Branches.

Peculiar manner of Sowing.
They have moreover another odd and peculiar Way of sowing in these Countries,
which is by mixing two Parts of Barley with one of Wheat, and putting them
into the Ground together in the Spring, whereby it happens, that the Barley may
be mowed on one Harvest, and the Wheat reaped the next. This Wheat being trod
down by those that mow the Barley, the next Harvest commonly comes up so thick
and high, that there is scarce any passing through it for Fear of being stifled.

Ways of ordering Corn.
In Time of War these Boors have a Way of securing their Corn, etc. by
burying it in a Place made up under Ground with Posts and Bark of Trees for
that Purpose. Their Way of ordering their Corn is also extraordinary, for they
first dry it with Smoke before they lay it up in their Graneries, by which
means it will keep good for several Years together.

Peculiar Customs in Prusia.
As for the Prussians, both Gentry and Commonalty, they may likewise be
considered by themselves in some Respects, for the former are not altogether so
gaudy in their Habits, as the more Southern Parts of Poland, and the latter
differ something from the Polish Peasants in their Habits, wearing sometimes
long strait Coats of Leather.

Habitations and Furniture.
Formerly the Prussians dwelt in Wagons or in Huts made of Boughs twisted
together, and at this Day the Commonalty are not much improved in Architecture,
for they generally live in Hovels built with Stakes, and raddled with Rods,
having either Earth or Fern for their Covering: Neither is there any great
Improvement in their Furniture, for the old Prussian slept on the Ground, or on
Skins of Beasts, and these lie upon the Straw.

Meat and Drink.
They are naturally content with spare Diet, and addicted more to Sloth than
Gluttony: Yet, like the Poles and Lithuanians, no ordinary Dose of Drink
suffices them, especially at Feasts, where they will frequently get very Drunk.
Heretofore their Drink was Water or Mares Milk, mixed sometimes with Blood, and
now for the most part it is Mead or Beer. Their Ordinary Food is Fish, and they
never knew the Use of Roots before the Teutonick Order came amongst them, though
now among the Peasants it is the Chief of their Dainties. I speak most of this
of the Peasants of Prussia, for the Gentry generally agree in their Customs and
Manners with the Poles.

These, My LORD, are all the Particulars I could possibly meet with, relating
to the several Subjects proposed to be addressed to your Lordship, and which I
must humbly acknowledge I have hastily put together, without that due Order and
Method which I ought to have done: Yet, in Regard, my Helps were not a little
confused, I hope your Lordship will be pleased to pardon the ill Performance,
as well as the Presumption of Inscribing them to You; Granting me the Honor to
subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, J. S.

LETTER VI.
To his Grace, JAMES Duke of Ormond, One of his Majesty's Lieutenant-Generals.
Of the Army, Castles, Forts, and other Military Affairs in Poland.

MY LORD,
YOUR constant Fatigues and vast Expenses during the late bloody War, discover
both an undoubted Zeal to serve your Country, and a Natural Inclination, like
that of your Noble Ancestors to Warlike Atchivements. Wherefore, being to treat
of the Military Affairs in Poland, I thought no Person more proper to address
my Account to than your GRACE, though I were well assured at the same time, that
it is most impossible to give you any tolerable satisfaction therein, unless I
my self had more Experience in those Matters, or the Poles had a better
Discipline in their Army. But since they must own their Defect in the one, as I
do ingenuously confess my Ignorance in the other, I hope your Grace will be
pleased to accept this Letter, rather as a Proof of my endeavors to entertain
your Leisure, than of any Presumption I had to lay down any thing which might
in the least contribute or add to the Knowledge of a General Officer of your
Experience.

MY LORD,

The Pospolite or Polish Militia.
In the Infancy of the Polish Empire, the Poles were rather forced by an
Arbitrary Power, than commanded by indulgent Laws, to defend their Country and
extend its Limits; but since Christianity has been received among them
Bolestaus Chrobry, their first King, ordained a certain number of Horse out of
every Palatinate and District, and a set company of Foot out of every City and
Town, to be ready at a short warning, and to bring their Provisions and
Ammunition along with them. This is what they call their Pospolite Ruszenie, or
the whole Body of Militia of the Kingdom gathered together under one Head or
General, at a place and time appointed by the King, and those of the Senate
that are always to attend him as his Privy Council.

Who obliged to serve in the Horse.
To this General Expedition, first, all Landed Gentry, as well Public as
Private, a few only excepted, which I shall name hereafter, are obliged to
come. 2. All Gentry that live in Cities or Towns upon Usury, or otherwise. 3.
All Citizens that enjoy Lands or Tenements. These, besides all in Prussia, are
those of Cracow, Vilna, and Leopol. 4. All Tenants that have hired Lands are to
go themselves or to send out others. 5. The Kings Tenants. 6. Ecclesiastical
Scultets, or Advocates. 7. In cases of imminent danger, all Citizens in general
are ordered either to send or go themselves. 8. Even those Gentry that are
clapped up in Jails for heinous Crimes, are to be let out to assist at the
Pospolite, yet when that is once over, they are to return to Prison again, to
expiate the whole extent of their Sentence.

Who in the Foot, and Penalty for neglect in both.
All these are to be Horse, well accoutred, but as an Army cannot be complete
without some Foot, this Pospolite also did consist formerly of the 20th Boor
out of every Village, or rather Farm, who was to be armed with a Scymitar, long
Gun, and Pole-Ax, but which is often now changed to a Mulct to hire
Foreigners: Yet there are still some Polish Foot, though of small Esteem. Every
Citizen that is now worth 8000 Florens, is to find a Horse, and he that has
only 4000 is to set out a Foot-Soldier well provided. The Boors also are to fit
out one among 28 Families, and to furnish him with Provisions sufficient for
half a Year. The Poles term both these Wybrancy's, that is, Picked or Selected
Men, so that Wybraniecka Piechota is a Picked Soldier. If any of all these
refuse to appear upon the third Summons, their Lands or Goods are immediately
confiscated to the King's Use.

Who are excused from serving.
Those Gentry that are excused from appearing at the Pospolite, are, 1. Such as
may depute others in their Room, viz. Superannuated or Sick Persons, Widows,
Orphans, Minors, and lastly the Clergy for their Temporalities. When any
Public or Private Nobleman is Sick, he must notisie and attest it by the Oaths
of several sufficient Witnesses. Also it must be observed, that in Lithuania a
Clergy man must send out both for his Spiritual and Temporal Estate, as
likewise in Poland, where there are any Temporal Lands annexed to his Benefice.
2. Those that have Estates in several Palatinates or Districts, are obliged but
to appear for one. 3. The poorer sort of Gentry are eased in some measure, for
several of them may join in the fitting out of one Horse, which is practiced
especially in Masovia. Also Brothers that are Joint-Tenants may Depute one to
appear for all. 4. The King's Court and Retinue*are not obliged to Muster under
the Palatins, and where the King does not go into the Field in Person, they are
to be totally excused. 5. About 30 of the Gentry of the Queen's Court are
exempt. 6. About 12 of the Archbishop of Gnesna's Court, and oftentimes some
Officers of the Bishop of Cracow, and other Bishops Courts, especially where
their Attendance is otherwise required by the Republic. 7. All Ministers to
Foreign Courts, together with their Domestics, are absolutely to be dispensed
with. 8. All Starosta's that are left in Garrisons, and their Tribunes; And
lastly, the great Constable or Governor of Cracow Castle, with his Deputy, the
Burgraves, and two Captains of Foot are to be excused.

Several Provinces and Palatinates likewise, have peculiar Privileges relating
to this general Meeting, for in the Palatinates of Masovia and Plockzko, six
Brothers, although they have distinct Estates, send but one Horseman. In
Podlachia, out of ten Farms they send but one Light Horse, and out of twenty
but one Cuirassier. The Palatinates of Kiovia and Braclaw, have likewise
peculiar Privileges. In a general Expedition, the Gentry of Podolia were to
continue in Garrison at Caminiec, while the Poles had that City in possession.
The Prussians also need not march beyond the River Vistula, Ossa, and Drebnicz.
And lastly, Lithuanians are not to go beyond the bounds of their Great Duchy.

The great numbers of the Pospolife formerly, and now.
As to the great number assembled at this Pospolite, Basko, a Polish Writer
says, that only in the Palatinate of Lenschet, in the time of Boleslaus
Chrobry, 2000 Cuirassiers, and 4000 Light Horse were raised at one time.
Starovolscius says, that Uladislaus had 100000 Horse against the Prussian
Knights, over and above what he had left to defend the Provinces. I might
observe several other prodigious Lustrations out of the aforesaid Author, but
for brevity sake I omit them; only I may affirm with Boterus, in his
Description of Poland, that in case of necessity the Poles can raise upwards of
100000 Horse, and the Lithuanians 70000: But Starovolscius is of Opinion, they
can both raise above 200000 Horse without Expense. Also Fredro thinks, that the
Poles can raise above 200000 Horse.

The number of Polish Foot is uncertain, they being at Liberty to appear, or to
be excused for Money. Starovolscius says, that in his time they did not amount
to many hundreds, being discouraged by the rigor of their Starosta's, and
wholly confined to their rustic Drudgery, though (continues he) they are more
able to sustain the hardships of War, then either the Germans or Hungarians,
who can scarce live in the Polish Air. He also is of Opinion, that the Polish
Infantry, if encouraged, might amount to a considerable number, and be not a
little serviceable. The Foreign hired Foot have sometimes exceeded 30000, when
the Cosacks served the Poles, but they fought also on Horseback, and King
Stephen in his Expedition against the Suedes in Livonia, had above 16000 German
and Hungarian Foot in his Pay.

The manner of their being Raised and Mustered.
Now I shall proceed to present your Grace with an account of the manner of
raising and Mustering this vast Body of Men. When a Pospolite is once agreed by
the General Diet to be summoned, the King, after the Ancient manner, sends out
his Writs, or Letters into all the Palatinates or Districts of his Kingdom,
which being received by the inferior Officers, they are fastened by a small
Cord to a long Pole (whence they are called Literae Restium by some, and by
others VVici, signifying in Polish, a Staff) and carried alost to every one of
the Chief Noblemen of the District thrice in a Month, and Proclaimed as often
in all Cities and Towns. All Courts of Justice cease at the third reading of
these Letters, unless it be those of the Vice- Starosta's, who exercise their
Jurisdiction as before. After the last reading of these Letters, a Place is
appointed by several private Assemblies of the Nobility in every District, for
particular Musters, and afterward for the General Muster of every Palatinate.
Here the Palatins and Castellans take an exact Account of the Men, Horses,
Arms, etc. neither of which can be changed after that Muster. At the same time
also, the Palatin divides the Districts among the several Castellans, and
orders them their several Posts. In those Palatinates where there is but one
Castellan, there part of his Duty is performed by a Vice-Chamberlain, etc. and
in Lithuania by a Marshal of every District. This particular Muster being over,
the Castellan of every District leads the Gentry under* his Command to the
place of general Muster for the Palatinate, where the Palatin Musters them
again, and takes an account of the Defaulters. Before the Castellans come to
the Palatins, Justice is absolutely in their Hands, but afterward they must
resign it to the Palatin, though Capital Crimes are always reserved for the
determination of the General, or rather of the King, who of late days has had a
Council of War Assigned him for that purpose.

I may here observe, that the Gentry are always Mustered and Registr'd annually
by their respective Officers. Starovolscius reasonably Things required in vain
of the Polish Cavalry.
requires two necessary Qualities in the Polish Horse, which they seldom or
never have, and those are Expedition and Obedience. As to the former, he says,
they are always unwilling to leave their Wives and Children, and therefore
never care for appearing, before they are forced by the third Summons: And as
for the latter, when they are got together, he says, thinking themselves
Powerful, they are always Plotting, and ready to Rebel against their
Superiors; and the reason is, that although the Kingdom of Poland abounds with
all manner of Plenty, yet in every Expedition almost, the Soldiers are ready to
starve, which is occasioned by a shameful neglect of the Chief Officers to
furnish the Army with requisite Provisions, whence it often comes to pass, that
though matters are brought to the nearest issue, yet they are generally forsaken
before they are accomplished, the Soldiers Heads running after nothing but
Forage and Plunder, which they take wherever it comes in their way, whereby
the Country is generally injured instead of being righted and defended. There
are other Causes of this Confusion and Disorder in the Army, which I shall
speak of hereafter.

Meet at the General Rendezvous
When the Gentry have been thus Mustered by the Palatins, they are next to be
led by their Officers to the Place of general Rendezvous, where every Palatin
delivers up his Charge to the Supremacy of the Great General. In their March
they are not to be quartered upon any of the King's or Gentrys Estates, but are
to encamp in the open Fields, that they may make no disturbance in the Citys.
At this day the Generals Power is very much limited in respect of what it was
formerly, for then a General was altogether Absolute, and his Will alone went
for a Law, but now he can do little without the consent of such as the
Republic has Assigned him. Besides the Great Generals, and Field-Marshals, the
King, by the Laws, is obliged to be in the Army in Person. This appears by the
example of King Alexander, who, by reason the Gentry demanded his Presence
among them, though Sick, was forced to be carried in a Litter into the Camp. This
was thought to have been Plotted by the Contrivance of the Duke of Glinski, who
hoped thereby that the King would catch his Death.

A Division of the Army, and first of the Horse.
Before I proceed any farther, I ought to give your GRACE a Division of the
Polish Army, and therein observe, that it is composed of different kinds of
Soldiers, as first of the Pospolite, or Militia. 2. Of hired Soldiers. 3. Of
Auxiliaries. 4. Of Quartarian Hirelings. And 5th of Volunteers. And again, it
consists both of Horse and Foot, and those Natives and Foreigners; the Natives
are for the greatest part Horse, or Cavalry, and may be divided into four
sorts, which may also be considered in two manners, as first heavy-Arm'd, and
secondly Light Horse. The former are, 1. The Hussartz, which, with their
Horses, are both in close Armor. And 2 the Tovarzysz, which have only a
Breast Plate, Helmet, and Gorget. These are both choice Men, and the latter are
so named from a word in Polish which signifies Companion.

Heavy Armed.
The first of these are Armed with short Lances, Sabres, and Pistols, and the
second, with Carabines, Bows, and Arrows, etc. These short Lances are called by
the Poles, Kopye, whence also the Body of Men that uses them is termed
Kopiynick. These Kopiie are about 6 Foot long, and tied to the Horsmen's Wrists
with strings of Silk. When they come near their Enemy, they dart their Lances
with all their Force against them, and if they miss their Bodies, they suddenly
snatch back the Lance, by help of the Silken string, but where they have
mortally wounded any, then they slip the Silk, and leave the Lance in their
Bodies, till such time as they can ride up to them to cut of their Heads with a
broad well tempered Sabre, which always hangs by their Saddles.

Both the Hussartz and Tovarzysz, with their Horses, look frightfully, being
stuck all over with Wings of Storks, Cranes, Turky-Cocks, etc. and Clothed
over their Armor with skins of Leopards, Tygres, Bears, Lions, etc. all which
they do to make themselves the more terrible to their Enemy. These Cavalry for
the most part set themselves also off wilh various Partycolour'd Mantles, which
oftentimes shine with Jewels, Gold and Silver. Of the Hussartz there are but 5
Companies in Poland, every Company consisting of about 300 Men, all Armed
Cap-a-pe. They have but one Lieutenant in each Company, which they call
Poruczknik, and one Korazy, or Trumpeter, with a particular sort of Trumpet,
which they call Koronzy. One of these the present King of France caused to be
brought into his Kingdom, with design to have the like made, but being
extremely costly, and not like to be of any great use among the Cannon, he laid
his Intention aside.

Light Horse.
The Light Horse are also of two sorts, and are either with Armor, or without.
The first sort wear Coats of Mail, and differ in Names as they do in Countries.
The Poles call them Pancerznicy Koragwy, and the Lithuanians, Petihorsky
Koragwy, which last differ something in their Dress from the former. The number
of these far exceeds that either of the Hussartz, or Tovarzysz. They are both
separate Companies, and are Incorporated into no Regiments. They are in all
about 6 or 7000, and are Armed with Darts and Sabres, and, if they please, they
may wear Wings and Feathers. Those out of Armor which are the fourth sort of
Horse, wear a Burka, or rough Mantle about their Necks, and have for Arms a Bow
and Arrows, with a Sabre. These are the most numerous of all, and compose the
main Body of the Army, call d by the Poles, Woysko. The number of these is
always determined by the Diet. Neither these nor the others ever wear Liveries,
as in most Countries, because they are all Polish Gentlemen. These, were they
better Disciplined, and better paid, would, perhaps, be the finest Cavalry in
the World.

A Division of the Foot.
As for the Foot, they are either Poles and Lithuanians, or Foreigners, levied
chiefly in Germany and Hungary. The Zaporohensian Cosacks formerly served the
Poles as Volunteers, for very small Pay. They sometimes came in 30000 strong,
Armed with hooked Lances, Scymitars, and long Guns, and each having his Horse,
they fought either Mounted or on Foot. They used their own Discipline, and
chose all their Commanders out of their own Body, and would frequently depose
even their General without any reason if he were not successful.

I have observed some of the Manners of these Cosacks in the first Volume of
this History, and here it may not be a-miss, by way of Digression, to say
something more of them, especially in what relates to War, wherein I shall be
as brief as I ought in reason.

A further account of the Cosacks.
They had their Name of Zaporohensian from the Russians, calling them Porohi,
importing that they lived beyond the borders of the Kingdom of Poland. He that
Governs them at present is their General, who, instead of a Scepter, bears only
a Commander's Staff made of Cane. As this Person is not Elected by Votes, but
by tumultuary Acclamations, and throwing up of Caps, so he is frequently
deposed after the same manner, by the inconstant Suffrages of the Populace; but
however, while he injoys his Supremacy, he has an Arbitrary Power over Life and
Death. Next to him are the 4 Counselors of War (called by them Assavuli) and
the Lieutenant General: After these are the several Prefects, and other
Sub-Commanders.

Proceedings in their Counsels of War
In their Counsels of War, the General having caused all the People to be
Convened, and standing under a Canopy bare headed, together with the
Counselors, and Lieutenant General, after making a small Reverence to the
Multitude, who are sitting all the while, proposes to them what is fit to be
debated at that Session; then is also his time to clear any Accusations made
against him, or to request any Favor of the Public, which he always does with
a great deal of Submission and Respect. While the General is speaking, the
People all hearken with profound silence, but as soon as he has done, they
pronounce their Pleasure with no less Noise and Vocifieration.

Way of fortifying their Camps and Boats.
By Land, like the Ancient Gauls, they fortify their Camps with their
Carriages, and at Sea they are wont to defend their little Boats against the
Fury of Tempests, by fencing them all round, and over head, with Reeds radled
together, not unlike our Arbors. Of these Cosacks, Amurath the Great, Emperor
of Turkey used to say, That in spite of the other Potentates of Europe, he
could sleep on both Ears (a Turkish Expression) but that these Gad-flies would
scarce suffer him to sleep on either.

Their Power.
We may guess at the Power of the Cosacks, by observing, that at one time they
had above 200000 Men in the Field, in their Rebellion against Poland, but then
indeed they had assistance from the Russians, who Rebelled likewise. At present
they have pretty good intelligence with the Poles, being very uneasy under the
Turkish and Muscovitish Yoke, and they did the late King John Sobieski no small
service in his Wars against the former.

What the Polish Foot are, and how employed.
To return to the Polish Foot, as I said before, they are either Natives or
Foreigners. How the Natives are raised I showed before. They are generally
nothing but the vilest Mob, and their business is rather to serve as Pioneers
than Soldiers, for the Gentry only make use of them to dig and fill up Trenches
and Ditches, to undermine Walls, build Bridges, clear the Roads, to load and
drive the Carriages, to keep Guard in the Camp, while the other Soldiers are
absent, and, in a word, to do all manner of drudgery they shall be commanded to.

Hired Foot, and their Condition.
These are mixed for the most part with the German hired Foot, who do not meet
with much better treatment in the Army. When we design to Besiege any Place,
(says Starovolscius) we commonly send into Germany or Hungary to hire Foot,
they being more Expert and Expeditious at any such work than ours. Among these,
the word of Command is generally given in the German Tongue. They are all
divided into Regiments and Companies as in other Countries, and Commanded as
well by Polish as German Officers. The Soldiers are generally so ill provided
for, that most of them have neither Swords nor Shoes, and when they are in
Winter Quarters, they have not above a Penny a day allowed them, besides what
they can steal. Neither are their Officers much more kindly dealt with, for
they scarce fare so well in any respect, as our common Sentinels do here.

Why so much used, and their Arms and Liveries.
Although there is a set number of Polish Foot that are Natives, allowed out of
every Village and Town, and which consequently is part of the Pospolite; yet
because these General Expeditions are very slow in getting together, and so
instead of relieveing their Country, rather oppress and expose it to Danger,
the Poles have always almost, made use of Foreign Soldiers upon sudden
Occasions, which would the easier be made subject to Discipline, and fit to
undergo any Hazard or Exploit. The Arms of all these Foot are chiefly a long
hooked Battle-Ax, and which the Poles call in their Language, Bardysz, but
sometimes they have a sort of long Guns. When the Cosacks and Heydukes serve
the Poles, the latter have Liveries given them of one Color, and the former
have a sort of course Cloth of what Color they please. They both have Horses
to use upon occasion. What other Foreign Horse or Foot there are, I shall give
your Grace an Account of in their proper places, but at present, for Method's
sake, I must go back to the Pospolite.

Gentry how far obliged to March; with other particulars.
The Gentry are not obliged to go beyond the Frontiers above five Miles, nor to
continue above six Weeks in the Field, and if they are compelled by a unanimous
Agreement of the Diet, (which never happens but upon very extraordinary
Occasions) then either the King or State is to bear their Charges, and make
good their Damages. When the Gentry take any Prisoners they are to present them
to the King, and he is to make them some return by Custom, but when they are
taken themselves they are to be ransomed out of the Public Treasury. For
Foreign Expeditions the Poles make use of Stipendiary Soldiers, provided the
Enemy be not extraordinary strong; for in such case, the Nobility, by a decree
of the Diet, is to march against them: So the Turk once coming toward Poland
with 600000 Men, the King did not care to trust even to 70000 hired Foreigners,
but convok'd the Gentry together at Leopol, with whom, if he had set forward as
speedily as he was advised, he might have totally extirpated the Infidels, for
ought I know, out of Europe. The Gentry are obliged to be in Arms as long as
the King or State has occasion for them. They all serve on Horseback, not only
for Honors sake, but likewise, that they may the more speedily intercept and
oppose the Enemy before they reach their Frontiers. When the Wars are over, the
Nobility are not ipso facto Discharged, but must wait till they are
methodically dismissed the Roll or Register by the Palatins, the reason of
which is, for fear they might otherwise misuse the Citizens and Boors in a
tumultuous Return.

Hungarian Foot when first hired.
Of the hired Soldiers I have spoken something before: All that I think proper
to add is, that the Hungarian Foot which the Poles call VVegerska Piechota,
were first instituted by Stephen Batori, in his Wars against the Muscovites, to
the maintaining of which, almost every Diet contributes something, yet which
seldom or never suffices them. Formerly the hired Foot consisted as well of
Natives as Strangers.

Auxiliaries, what?
The Auxiliary differ from the hired Forces, in regard that the former are such
as have been agreed to be furnished the Poles by Foreign Princes in a Treaty of
Peace; and the latter are such as have been levied in other Countries by
permission.

Example.
Of this first sort were a certain number allowed Boleslaus Crivoustus by the
Russians, and to Casimir IV. by the Tartars against the Prussias, which were to
have some Rewards from the Poles: These Rewards the Tartars afterward required
yearly as a Tribute, nay, though they did no manner of Service for them;
whereupon King Stephen repelled their Importunacies with an absolute Refusal,
as I have observed before in that King's Life, which occasioned great heats and
disturbances, but at length a Peace was concluded between these two Nations,
under the Reign of John Casimir, whereby the Poles were obliged to pay a
certain Stipend to the Cham; and on the other hand, the Cham was to be
assisting to the Poles whenever they had occasion, but it is certain that the
latter broke his promise, which induced a nonperformance in the former. There
are other Examples of these kinds of Soldiers, and at present some Allies are
still obliged by such Contracts. These Soldiers are both Horse and Foot, as the
Agreement is made.

Quartarians what, and whence so called*
This breach of Alliance by the Tartars, occasioned the Poles a new sort of
Soldiers; for Sigismundus Augustus, to prevent their Incursions into his
Kingdom, allotted a fourth part of his Crown-Revenues, to maintain a Guard on
the Frontiers toward Tartary. This fourth part was sometimes augmented, and
that as often as Exigencys required. It was to be supervised by two Senators,
and two of the Gentry, in conjunction with the High-Treasurer of Poland. The
Starosta of Rava had the Custody of it, and was to give in his yearly Accounts
how he had distributed it. From hence these Soldiers had the Name of
Quartarians. Before this time the like Institution had been attempted at a Diet
held at Vilna, to guard the Frontiers of Lithuania against the Muscovites, but
this met with Opposition, and consequently was laid aside: These Forces
generally consist of Foot, and are always kept in Garrison.

Volunteers what in Poland.
Besides all these Soldiers beforementioned, some of the richest Gentry in
Poland have all along been accustomed, at their sole costs and charges, to
raise several Troops of Horse for the public Service; some few Examples of the
Power of which it may not be amiss to insert. Examples.
By the help of these, Zamoski, in the Reign of Sigismund III. worsted
Carambeius the Scythian, with 3000 Men only, who with 70000 came to Invade
Poland, but with the loss of many thousands of his Tartars, was quickly forced
to return home: And in the same Reign, Zolkievi, with only 3000 Horse, set upon
80000 Muscovites unawares, and routed them entirely, bringing away three German
Regiments that served among them. Also in the late Reign, Andrew Trzebicki (who
afterward was made Primate) when but Bishop of Cracow, and Duke of Severia,
raised a considerable number of Forces at his own proper Expense, to be sent
against the Turks, and which performed Wonders under the then General John
Sobieski. I omit many others that have done the same thing.

Selected out of the Gentry.
These Soldiers have been for the most part selected out of the Nobility, which
has been the occasion of their so frequent success in but small numbers, in
respect to those of their Enemies. From this voluntary raising of these
Soldiers, they have had the Name given them of Volunteers, though in other
Countries, that Title is appropriated to such as serve of their own Accord, and
without Pay.

Causes that weaken the Polish Force.
Notwithstanding the great number and Warlike Disposition of all these several
kinds of Soldiers, yet their Power is very much abated by their want of
Discipline, and the neglect of the State, and their Officers, in the due
administration of Affairs; for first, as to the State, the Diet consisting of
so many Persons of differing Sentiments, is so exceeding tardy in fitting
matters for Action, that like a Clock made up of many contrary Motions, its
Progress must consequently be very slow; and likewise, before the Senators and
Gentry can meet together, there are so many Ceremonies to be past, (which they
scarce ever abridge in the greatest Extremities) that a Potent Enemy may
overrun the Kingdom, before the Pospolite can well be got ready to oppose
them. This was experienced when the Czar of Muscovy took Polocz and Smolensko
from Sigismundus Augustus, who by reason of the disagreements at that time in
the Diet, was never afterward able to revenge it. The same Czar likewise
invaded Livonia without opposition, through the like Defect, which he could never
have effected with so good success, had the Poles been in a readiness to have
marched against him; but they are generally so long in fitting out, and so
unwilling to part with their beloved Luxury at the Diet, that they cannot
easily change to the rougher exercise of War.

Four things required to defend a State.
Boterus, in his Description of Poland, says, that four things are
indispensibly requisite to the Defense of a State; and they are, 1. Native
Force. 2. Numerous. 3. Potent. And 4. Expeditious. First, their Force ought to
be Native, that they may not be betrayed by trusting it in the Hands of
Strangers, who have not so great Interest in the Success as themselves.
Secondly, Numerous, that they may always be able to bring on fresh Supplies in
cases of Extremity. Thirdly, Potent, because Numbers without Courage would
rather contribute toward their Defeat than Victory: And fourthly, Expeditious
and Active, that they may be qualified for hasty Marches, and to rally upon the
greatest Rout. Now, though the Poles have a sort of Claim to the three former of
these Qualities, yet they are a little wanting in the latter, especially before
they come into the Field, the causes of which may be the want of sufficient
Authority in the Prince, or the slow and defective Supplies of Money, which has
always been justly esteemed the Sinews of War. The insufficiency of the Princes
Power may appear all along in the reading of this History; and the defect in
supplies of Money is apparent, by the bad Paying and Providing for the Army,
for the Soldiers that are to receive Pay, are never paid above once in half a
Year, and oftentimes not at all, but are forced to subsist upon Plunder, or
upon what they can find in the Woods; nay, Hauteville says, they have sometimes
been reduced to eat Horseflesh. As for the Officers, they receive no Pay above
once a Year, and sometimes but once in two.

Manner of paying the Army.
The manner of Paying them is particular, and therefore it may not be improper
to present your GRACE with an account of it. Commissioners deputed by the Diet
for this purpose are ordered to meet at a place that is a good way off from
Court, to the end the King may not concern himself in it, though every thing
there be done in his Name. Then they proceed to allot every Officer his quota,
but they commonly retrench part of their due, especially where they are
Foreigners, and which may the better be tolerated, because the Officers are
generally at no charge to subsist and recruit their Companies, and yet their
Commission runs, as if they had taken care of them, so that however the
Soldiers suffer, the Officers have no reason to complain.

The Rokosz, and its manner of proceeding.
By the Armies being so seldom paid, and sometimes not at all for want of
Money, the Soldiers frequently Confederate together and Mutiny, the manner
whereof is commonly this. The Officers after they have found that their
repeated complaints both to Court and the Diet, prove fruitless, are wont to
Assemble and make a Rokosz, which in the Polish Language implys, a forsaking
their Generals. The Subaltern Officers being thus Assembled, Elect two among
them, one for their Marshal, and another for their Lieutenant, which last they
term their Substitute; both these they immediately make to Swear, That they
will use their utmost endeavors to procure their Pay from the Republic. After
this, the said Marshal forthwith takes upon him the Office of General; the
sequel of which may be easily conjectured to be nothing but Ruin and
Desolation; for then the Army instead of Marching against the Enemy or securing
the Frontiers, minds nothing else but Plunder, Rapine and Destruction.

Example.
An Example of this kind happened under the Reign of John Casimir, when one
Swiderski was Marshal, and one Borzecki, his Lieutenant or Substitute. This
Confederacy which was not easily quelled by the King, was thought to have been
occasioned more by the influence of some Malcontents, who hoped to effect
their Designs in such a Confusion, than for any great omission in paying the
Army. Other inconveniences which suppress the Pole's Power.


There are other inconveniences which introduce Confusion and Disorder into
the Polish Army, and consequently Oppression of the people; and these flow
chiefly from the Officers, and first from the General's being perpetual, the
King being often obliged to give that great Charge to a rich Nobleman, that
knows little or nothing of Warlike matters, yet when he has once bestowed it,
he cannot recall his Grant, though he foresee never so many ill Consequences that
attend it; so that it is no wonder if Poland often makes false steps in Martial
Affairs, when it has frequently so unexperienced a Guide. On the contrary, if
this high Command were only conferred on, and continued to Merit, what wonders
might not the Polish Cavalry be able to perform? for being so vast a number of
Horse, they might easily hem in and Cut off the greatest Body of Foot, of which
the Armies of their Enemies chiefly Consist. Another inconvenience proceeds
from the ill Conduct and Remissness of the under Officers, the greatest whereof
is that, especially those of the Gentry, seldom come to the place of
Rendezvous, till a Month or six Weeks after the time appointed, and this
neither the King nor General dares offer to remedy, for fear of disobliging
that serviceable Body. In like manner the Gentry are sometimes accustomed to
leave the Army a Month before the Campaign is ended, which grievance is also
not to be redressed without danger. The cause of their being so tardy in
appearing, is in a great measure to be Attributed to the defective Orders given
them; for when the Officers are Commanded to March to such or such a place in
the Kingdom, neither the time they are to march in, nor the Towns they are to
pass through, are comprehended, so that by these means they are at liberty, to
delay on account of their own private Business, as much as they please, or
else, to wander all over the Kingdom, either for their Profit or Pleasure;
whereby the Country they March through is not a little damaged, and the best
laid Designs of the Army frustrated by their Absence. Another Inconvenience
arising from the Officers, is, That they employ so much Money in fitting
themselves out with costly Arms, and splendid Equipage* that for want of timely
Pay, they have seldom any thing left, in a little time, to support their
Necessities: Which Defect they are wont to make up, by oppressing the People
after an unreasonable manner. From this Extravagance of theirs, proceeds
another Inconvenience to the State; For, after they have thus exhausted their
Pockets, they usually lay the Occasion of their Misbehaviour either on the
Court, or the Government, which, in the succeeding Diet, oftentimes produces
great Heats and Disturbances. When any new Levies are to be made in Poland, the
Officers not only excuse, for Money, what Places they think sit; but also, as I
observed before, seldom pay the Soldiers the Rates that they are allowed for
them; so that these latter are, in a manner, forced to pillage and plunder even
their own Country, without their Officers being able to hinder them, by reason
that they have first set them Examples for so doing.

Means proposed to avoid these Inconveniences, but ever-ru^'d:
To avoid most of these Inconveniences, some discerning Politicians have
proposed to the Diet, to keep the Soldiers always Encamped, to the end that
they might be made more subject to Discipline, by disabling them from pillaging
the Country; and by keeping them together, they might be always at hand to
oppose the sudden Inroads of an Enemy. By these Means also, the People, being
delivered from Oppression, would be the better able to pay their Taxes; which
would remove that fatal Inconvenience, of the Army's being ill paid. This
Advice some approved of, and argued for: But others vigorously opposed it;
alleging, that it might be of very ill Consequence to entrust so great a Power
in the Hands of one Person, their General; and to confide it to more than one,
would, probably, through Emulation, occasion no less Disorder and Danger to the
Commonwealth. After a great many Debates, Pro and Con, these last got the
better, and prevailed to have the Army continue in the same Disorder as before.

^reat Force of Cavalry notwithstanding; with Examples.
Notwithstanding all these Inconveniences that the Polish Government lies under
as to Military Affairs, yet, in time of Action, their Cavalry especially, have
effected Wonders; a few Examples of which it may not be improper to entertain
Your GRACE with, out of Starovolscius. He begins with the Reign of Sigismund I.
and says, That the General Lesniovius, with not above 1500 Spear-men, routed
above 40000 Moscovites, killing upwards of 9000 on the Spot. In like manner,
another General, Boratinius, with 2000 Horse, defeated 30000 Moscovites,
killing 7000 of them, and bringing away all their Cannon. In the same Reign
likewise, Camenecius, with only 6000 Horse, overthrew above 25000 Tartars. And
about the same time, Tarnovius, with 4000, beat 22000 Turks and Valachians,
taking from them above 52 Fieldpieces. In Sigismund II's Reign, Duke Radzivil,
with 7000 only, routed 30000 Moscovites, and took from them the Castle of Ula:
And Prince Sapieba, with 5000, both defended the Fortress of Venda, and
defeated the Besiegers, which were upwards of 24000 Moscovites and Livonians.
Under King Stephen, General Zborowski, with scarce 2000 Horse, discomfited the
whole Army of Dantzic-Rebels, made up out of several Nations, and left above
8000 dead upon the Spot. Also, in Sigismund III's Time, General Zamoski, with
scarce 6000 Horse, beat the Archduke Maximilian, who had with him about 18000
Men: He likewise repulsed the Tartars with only 3000 Men, who were coming to
invade Poland with 70000. About the same time also, Chodkievicz, with no more
than 3000, routed the Suedes in Livonia, killing 9000, and taking 4000
Prisoners. Starovolscius has some few other Instances of the Polish Valor; but
whether what I have already mentioned will be credited by your GRACE, and the
Public, I am not able to determine: However, I may affirm, that this Author
has never hitherto been esteemed for Fabulous.

Two Qualities necessary in War.
What I have remaining to say, as to the Poles Force, is, That however great it
has hitherto been, yet is it rather to be attributed to their good Fortune,
than Conduct; for two principal Qualities to make a Warlike Enterprise
especially, successful, have ever been Strangers to them: These are, The Power
to keep a Secret; and an exact Intelligence of their Enemy's Advances, and
Condition. As to a Secret, which is the Soul of all great Proceedings; that is
so little observed in Poland, that scarce the meanest Officer in the Army, but
knows what the General intends to do almost as soon as himself: And, for
Intelligence of the Posture and Capacity of the Enemy, by reason they make use
of no Spies, they never know any thing of the matter till they happen to meet a
Party, and take them Prisoners; from whom they are accustomed to extort
Confessions in Cases of Obstinacy.

Soldiers Pay; from what it arises, and how raised.
As to the Pay of the Polish Army, I have showed before how it is executed; now
I must give some short Account, from what it arises, and the manner of Raising
it. It arises either from Occasional Impositions, or Perpetual Customs, and
Yearly Taxes: Of the former Kind, are, a General Poll, or Capitation; and
Voluntary Gifts of the Clergy, for they cannot be Taxed by the State. Of the
latter Sort, are, All fixed Duties upon the Jews, Tartars, Land, Merchandise,
Art, etc. From Yearly Taxes, all Scholars, and such as busy themselves in
Study, are excepted. The Fourth Part of the King's Revenue, set apart for
maintaining a Guard on the Frontiers, may likewise be ranked under this
Denomination of Fixed Duties. The manner of Raising these Taxes and Duties, is,
for the most part, left to the King's Discretion, though sometimes the Diet
assumes that Authority, as likewise to supervise the Distribution of the Money
raised. It may be observed, that a Collector's Office is to last no longer than
the Imposition he is to collect.

Provisions and Ammunition, what.
As to Provisions, there are no Sutlers in the Polish* Army, for two Reasons;
First* Because they would never be paid for what they sold; and then, though they
durst venture, yet they would run no ordinary risque to be plundered before
they reached the Camp; and this especially by the Lithuanians, who are
generally more given that way than the Poles. There are likewise no Magazins,
as in other Countries; so that the Officers especially are obliged to have
great Equipages, and many Carriages, to convey their Necessaries along with
them, wherever they march: Among these, their Tents are extraordinary fine,
though very heavy. Also, neither the King, nor Republic of Poland, has any
public Armories, or Arsenals; though it be true that Uladislaus Jagello
instituted some few Repositories for Great Cannon, yet, which are now of no
great Consequence; and those, which are in far greater Numbers, and much more
useful, are chiefly in the Hands of the Gentry, or in the great Cities; whence,
as often as the King has Occasion, he either takes them at Pleasure, or at
Sufferance.

Gun-Founders, Foreign.
Poland likewise being not wanting in Metal, several new Cannon are founded,
whenever the Old become unserviceable; the which, for the most part, is
performed by the Germans, the Poles not being so skilful in that Art. The Arms
the Polanders generally use, I have spoken of before; yet it may not be
improper to add what Hartknoch says of the Ancient Polish Historians; which is,
That they affirm, that formerly the Poles made use of a very heavy sort of
Arms; insomuch that when Boleslaus II. in his Expedition against the Prussians,
waded with his Army through the River Ossa, many of his Soldiers were drowned
merely by the Weight of their Arms.

For Fortifications.
For Castles, Poland has a great Number, scarce any considerable City or Town
being without one; yet which are now of little or no Use, except some few which
are still kept up, the rest being suffered to decay by the Nobles that have got
Possession of them. The Cause of the first Fortifications in Poland was on
Account of the frequent Incursions of its Neighbors; though Now (says
Starovolscius, speaking of himself, and his Country*men) being not desirous of
invading others, we find that we are sufficiently capable to defend our selves
with our Bodies; tho, were we otherwise inclined, we might raise as strong
Fortifications as any in Europe; yet, which we look upon to be not so
consistent with true Courage and Valor.

Pretended Advantages thereby.
It is certain, that Unfortify'd Countries lie most exposed to sudden
Irruptions, as this Kingdom of Poland has often experienced: But then this
Mischief continues but a little while; for, as soon as the Nobility can be got
together, the Invaders are generally forced to retire; as may appear by several
Examples in our Modern Histories alone. These Maxims of the Poles, to have few
or no Fortified Places, are founded upon several potent Reasons; for they
thereby promote the Personal Valor of their own Men, and weaken that of their
Enemies, by not leaving either a Place of Retreat. If we reflect on those
States that have a great many Fortifications, we shall find, that with the Loss
of but one Battle, they have been in a manner ruined; for the Enemies being
once got into their Strongholds, are not easily forced out of them: When, on
the contrary, the Poles always rally in a Field-Battle; and having no Places to
retire to, either for themselves, or their Enemies, never give out till they
have totally excluded their Invaders. Besides, the Poles look upon Garrisons to
be the Promoters of Effeminacy and Softness, by the Examples of several Heroes
of Antiquity; for the Courages of Alexander and Hannibal were altogether
enervated by their Revels at Persepolis and Capua; and Boleslaus, buried, as it
were, in his Debauches at Kiovia.

Generals; their Power and Duration.
Next, I must proceed to present Your GRACE with an Account of the General
Officers of the Army: And first, Of the Generals, whereof there are two; one
for the Kingdom, and another for the Great Duchy, as I have observed before.
He that is for the Kingdom, is styled Hetman Wielki Koronni; and he for the
Duchy, Hetman Wielki W. X. Litheuskiego. These, as I have said before, have
almost the same Power with the King, whilst they continue in the Field, over
their respective Armies; for their Authority is altogether independent on each
other. This Dignity does not entitle them to sit in the Senate; yet, for the
most part, they are chosen out of the Senatorian Order, and that to procure
them the greater Respect; and sometimes they have, at the same time, been the
highest Officers in the Kingdom; as, Great Marshal, Great Chancellor, etc. for
John Zamoski was both Great Chancellor and General at once. Yet this was
afterward abrogated; and now the Office of General, or Lieutenant- General, is
usually conferred either upon the Palatins, or Castellans; who, although they be
in a manner superior to the Great Officers of the Kingdom, in respect of their
Sitting in the Diet, when the others are to stand about the King; yet they are
not presumed to have so great a Power in the Republic. This Office was, not
long since, perpetual; but now, by the Constitutions in the Year 1666. it is to
expire at the End of three Years.

Lieutenant Generals, their Power
Each of these Generals has his Lieutenant- General. The Office of these is
described in the Letter to his GRACE the Duke of NORFOLK, and therefore need
not be repeated here. The Title the Poles give the former is Hetman Polny
Koronni; and to the latter, Hetman Polny W. X. Litheuskiego. In the absence of
the Generals they have almost the same Power with them, and formerly had equal,
though the Generals were present, but that was afterward abrogated. They are
chosen out of the Senatorian Order, in like manner as the Generals.

Other Generals Officers*
Besides these, there are the Generals of the Frontier-Guards, which are
independent on all but the King and Diet: Likewise the General of the Cosacks,
whose power is established by the Constitution in the Year 1661. Next may be
reckoned the Chief Commander of the King's Guards in the Camp, whose Office has
been described already in the Letter beforementioned. Next to these
General-Officers come the Great Masters of the Artillery, whereof there are
two, one for the Kingdom, and another for the Great Duchy; Their Office is to
take charge of, and to provide the Armies with all sorts of Cannon, etc. and to
see the Soldiers want for no Ammunition. After these may be ranked the Pissarsz
of the Army, that is to say, the Intendant, the Great Ensign, the Camp-Marshal,
the Captain of the Guard, or Watch; and lastly, the Major- Generals, which are
much the same with our Brigadiers.

Other Officers of the Army.
Then come the Colonels, Captains, etc. There are two other sorts of Officers
belonging to the Army, which are the Camp-Notaries, and the Roto-Magistri. The
former are to take an exact account of the number of Soldiers in the Army every
three Months, and to transmit a Copy thereof to the Great Treasurer, and
another to the Nuncio-Marshal; but in Lithuania this is to be done every Month,
and the Nuncio-Marshal's Copy is to be given to the General. The Roto-Magistri
are, as it were, Captains, or Centurious of the Frontier-Guards, and who cannot
by the Constitutions, enjoy such a Commission, and be Senators at the same time.

Some few particulars of the Poles Jus Belli.
As to the Laws relating to Arms, Your GRACE may first be pleased to
understand, that though the King cannot properly be said to declare War without
the unanimous consent of the Diet, yet in cases of sudden Incursions* he might
formerly with the Approbation only of such of the Senators as were then about
him; And under Sigismund III. there was a Council of War assigned by the Diet,
or elected by the little Diets, amounting to a considerable number, to attend
and advise in those matters, which Council continues even at this day; however,
with this restraint, That what they do is not altogether valid, till it has
been confirmed by the General Diet; but, as to offensive War, that belongs
peculiarly to the Great Diet to declare. The King in like manner cannot either
give to, or receive Assistance from any Foreign Prince, without the consent of
the General Diet; neither can he place any Foreigner in the custody of Castles
or Forts, without their Approbation. The Poles have many other Laws concerning
Martial Discipline, which I have not Room here to Insert, only I may take
notice to Your GRACE, that Deserters are punished not only with the loss of
their Reputation, but also whatever else they have in the World is Consiscated
to the sole use and benefit of the Army. By the Laws also, no Women are
suffered to follow the Camp, though too great a number of Servants and useless
Rabble are allowed of, insomuch, that in an Army of but 10000 Men, there will
at least be 50000 of that Gang.

Thus, my Lord, I have presumed to present your GRACE with what particulars I
could find, as well in the best Polish Historians* as in some private Memoirs,
relating to the Military Affairs in Poland, and which, I hope, though not capable
to afford what satisfaction might be expected, may, at least, give no occasion
of Offense.

I am, My LORD, Your Grace's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, J. S.

LETTER VII.
To his Excellency Monsieur de CLEVERSKERK, Ambassador in Ordinary to his
Majesty WILLIAM III. from the States of Holland.
Of the Trade, Coin, and Riches of Poland, with an Account of the Famous City
of Dantzic, its Manners, Privileges, Strength, and Revenues.

MY LORD,
TRADE has ever been justly esteemed so necessary toward the Support and
Grandeur of any State, that no Nation in the World has hitherto been found so
Stupid, as to be without it. Some Countries indeed, have wholly confined it to
the limits of their own Dominions, but how much they have been in the wrong,
may appear from the vast advantages which Foreign Commerce has brought to other
Nations. England and Holland are sufficient Demonstrations of this Assertion,
who, during the late War, have been thereby able to contribute so largely
toward the opposing a Potent Monarch, who otherwise might have been so far
from affording such wonderful Concessions, as we have obtained by the late
happy Peace, that he might rather, in all Probability, have overrun the
greatest part of Europe.

Poles not much inclined to Trade, and why.
As for the Trade of Poland, my Lord, the Poles are but little addicted to
industry of that kind, the Gentry being absolutely forbid it on the forfeiture
of their Honor, and the Commonalty for the most part wanting Funds sufficient
to promote it; therefore, what Trade they have is chiefly followed by Foreign
Merchants. Besides, those of the Poles, who have the best Fortunes, generally
spend too much of their Revenues in costly Habits and Luxury to be able to
undergo any considerable matters in Traffic. Also this Kingdom of Poland is
not in the least commodious for such an undertaking, it not having any
considerable Port, that of Dantzic only excepted, which would suffice for the
exotic Trade of so vast a Country. Hence it follows, that what Commodities are
transported into Foreign Countries are so very inconsiderable, that though they
are of several sorts, and of general use, yet being counterpois'd by the
incredible quantity, and richer variety of foreign Merchandise, they scarce
suffice for Balance to the Cloth, Silk, Jewels, Tapestry, Fruit, Spice,
Salt-Fish, Wine, Tin, Steel, etc. Imported from England, Flanders, Portugal,
Spain, etc.

Commidities Exported and Imported.
Starovolscius enumerates the diverse particulars Exported and Imported, wherein
it may not be improper to follow him. He says, that over and above those
already mentioned, there are likewise rich Furrs, Gold and Silver, both wrought
and unwrought, and great variety of Kickshaws and Delicacies Imported, and as
for what are Exported, they are Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Millet, and all sorts
of Grain and Pulse, Wool, Hemp, Flax, Hops, a sort of Herb for Dying, Hides,
Tallow, Tanned Leather, Furrs brought out of Musaovy, but dressed here, and
transported from hence. Likewise Polish Furrs, Honey, Wax, Amber, Pitch,
Potashes, Masts, Planks, and several Materials both for Shipwrights and other
Builders. Poland also exports, Salt, Beer, Opium, Vitriol, Nitre, Lapis Lazuli,
Vermillion, Brass, Lead, Iron, Copper, Pit-Coal, Glass, and Earthen Ware.
Moreover it supplies the Neighboring Countries with Horses very much coveted
for their swiftness, hardiness, and easy pace. It also furnishes other Nations
with vast numbers of Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, etc. with which it greatly abounds.

But little Money, and why.
Notwithstanding all these Exportations, yet as I said before, the Trade of
Poland is overbalanc'd by Foreign Commodities, whence it comes to pass, that
there is but little Money to be met with in that Kingdom. What small matters
the Merchants receive for their Goods at Dantzic, they generally give to the
Hungarians, etc. for Wine; nevertheless, they have some Foreign Coin, and some
of their own stirring amongst them.

Coin most current in Poland.
That which is most current in the Kingdom, is either all of Copper, or Copper
mixed with Silver, though they have likewise some few Silver and Gold Coins of
their own. The two first of these sorts are the most common, and which are
always Coined in such small pieces, that it is very troublesome either
receiving or paying out any Sum. Of the first kind are their Chelons, being of
Copper Silvered over, whereof three make a Polish Gross, (the Grosses of
Dantzic being of greater value) and three Grosses, the value of Two Pence of
their Money: Though Hauteville says, these nine Chelons are not worth above a
French Sous.

Contributes to Poverty.
This base Polish Coin contributes very much toward the Poverty of this
Kingdom. It was introduced on Account of Necessity, when the Poles had no Money
to pay their Army, which began to Confederate, and join in a Rokosz, for want
of it. It is not likewise of late Days that this Coin has been introduced, for
the Officers of Casimir III. are said to have coined it; and which was
afterward grievously exclaimed against at the Diet held at Petrikow, in the
Year 1459, under the Reign of Casimir the Great. In those Days, it seems, the
Kings had a Power to coin Money; and the first that resigned his Right to the
Republic, was Sigismond III. in the Year 1632.

Other Coins.
The next of their Coins are called Choustacks, being small pieces of Silver of
base alloy, whereof three make a Tinfe, which is also a sort of Silver Money of
base Alloy. This was first Coined to satisfy the Mutinous Army in the Year
1663, of the value of about 15 d. These Coins are not the same in Prussia and
Dantzic, as shall be showed hereafter. The Polish Silver Coins of good Alloy,
are the Attine, or four pence halfpenny, and the Trigross, and Segross, the
former of which two last is three, and the latter six times the value of a
Gross: Yet of these three there are at this day but very few remaining. As for
Gold Coins, Casimir the Great was the first that caused any to be stamped in
Poland, but of which, either Coined by that King or his Successors, there are
few now made use of, the Silver and Gold Coins that have any Currency in the
Kingdom, being for the most part Foreign. Those of Gold are Ducats, which are
worth two French Crowns, or two German Rixdollars. Those of Silver are
generally of the German Coin.

Poles not very rich, and why.
Though it may hereby appear, that the Polish Wealth is not over considerable,
yet says Starovolscius, it has always been sufficient to defray the Expenses of
the Kingdom, without the help of any Neighbors, though the same Author
afterward gives this Character of his Countrymen; that they are not over rich
by reason of their sending the greatest part of their Commodities abroad, and
generally receiving nothing in return, but such as serve to support Luxury, and
encourage Vice. Hauteville gives another reason why the Poles may not be so
rich as formerly, which is, because of the many and frequent Incursions of the
Muscovites, Turks, Cosacks, and Tartars into this Kingdom, who were accustomed
to carry off great numbers into slavery, and thereby to dis-people the Country;
also by reason of the many bloody Wars, and sweeping Pestilencies which this
Country has undergone.

Particulars of Trade.
Having already spoken of the Trade of Poland in general, it may not be here
amiss to entertain your Excellency with some particulars relating thereunto.
And first I shall observe something of Salt, which was omitted in the first
Volume of this Undertaking.

Concerning Salt.
The Spaces, or Allies, which I there took notice of are formed by rows of
large Pillars cut out of the Salt to keep the Earth from faling in, and which,
by reflection of the Light make a very agreeable Prospect, seeming so many Rows
of sparkling Crystal. The Salt is taken out of these Mines in huge Masses, and
laid in heaps all about the entrance, whence it is transported in Carriages
throughout the whole Kingdom, except Prussia only, where French Salt is alone
made use of. This Salt is ground in Mills like Corn. The Gentry of this Kingdom
have a right to any of these Mines, as likewise to those of any Metals found
upon their Lands; there being by the Constitutions no Royal Mines in Poland,
except those of white Salt only, which belong peculiarly to the King.

No Fulling or Paper-Mills.
Throughout all Poland and Lithuania there are a great many Corn and
Cachat-Mills, but scarce any for Fulling, or Paper, yet which they might very
well have, by reason of their great number of rapid Streams. In this, and in
other respects, the Poles are very negligent of their own Interest, being
content to pay great rates for Cloth and Paper, when they might easily have
both of their own Manufacture.

Concerning Leather and Fish.
As for Leather, though no People use it more, (having almost all Boots and
Chariots, which they call Ridevans) yet do they not care to take the trouble of
dressing it themselves, but suffer Foreigners to do it for them, and which
commonly they pay very dear for when done. The Poles Trade very much in fresh
Fish amongst themselves, and the manner of their Fishing, I imagine, may not be
unacceptable to your Excellency, having something peculiar in it.

Manner of Fishing.
Their Lakes and Fish Ponds in Poland and Lithuania being generally so large,
that it would be almost impossible ever to drain them, They usually choose to
Fish them in Winter when they are all frozen up. They first make a great hole
in the Ice to let down their Nets, and afterward several little ones from
place to place, that they may draw them along from hole to hole with a Rope
fastened to a long Pole, till they bring them back to the first large opening;
When the two ends of the Nets are brought together, they pull them up, and
bring out with them all the Fish that happen to be within the space of Water
through which the Nets were drawn, for they cannot possibly leap over them,
because of the Ice.

Honey, and its Produce.
Throughout all Poland and Lithuania, there are huge quantities of Honey to be
found in the Woods, either in hollow Trees, holes of the Ground, or any where
else that the Bees can find to settle in. Of this Honey, as I said before, the
People make several sorts of Mead, with which, and the Wax that comes from it,
they Trade very much into the Neighboring Countries. Now is it not a great
wonder, that these Bees can produce so great plenty of Honey in so Cold a
Climate? But it seems they find something in the Fir-Trees, whereof there are
great numbers in every Wood, that supplies the place of Flowers, which they
suck their materials from in other Countries.

Former Trade of Prussia.
Before I proceed to give your Excellency a description of the Famous City of
Dantzic, I must take some cursory Notice of the former Trade of Prussia, before
its Inhabitants came to have the use of Money. In the XIIIth Century, the
Teutonic Knights coming out of Germany into Prussia, brought along with them
the Coin of their Country, for before that time the Prussians only bartered
Commodities with their Neighbors. Their chiefest Trade then lay in Electrum,
or Amber, of the Nature of which, Hartman, a late German Author gives this
account. He says, that since it can neither be melted down nor is Malleable, it
is impossible it should be Metal, and because it is too solid a Body to come
under the Species of Sulphur, or Bitumen, it must necessarily be ranked among
the precious Stones. This Amber is of diverse Colors, and notwithstanding
Hartman insinuates it to be always solid, yet is it certain, that sometimes it
is as liquid as Oil. There is a black sort of it, which is no other than what
we call Jett.

A Description of the City of DANTZIC.
^antzic here Si^ate.
TO come to the Description of Dantzic, (in Latin, Dantiscum, or Gedanum) your
Excellency may be pleased to understand, that it is the Capital and Largest
City in Royal- Prussia, and lies in 41 Degrees and 30 Minutes of Longitude, and
in 54 Degrees and 20 Minutes of Latitude. It is Situate in one of the three
Islands, (of which Regal Prussia consists) called by the Germans der Dantzicher
Werder, the other two having the Names of der Marienbursche Werder, and der
Elbings^her Werder. This Name Der Werder implies properly so many pieces of
solid Ground encompassed by Fenns and Boggs.

By whom built, and whence so called.
By whom this City was first built remains as yet undetermined. Becanus will
have the Danes to have been the Founders of it, and from them to have been
called Danes-wick, i. e. Danes-Town; but this derivation seems to have too much
Dutch in it, therefore it is more probable, that to the word Dan, Cdan, or
Gdan, was added the Sclavonian term Scke, (signifying a Town) which made it
Danscke, Cdanscke, or Gdanscke, and which might very reasonably be supposed
afterward, for better Pronunciation's sake, to be changed into Dantzig, or
Dantzic. How distant from other places.
It is distant about 80 Polish Miles from Cracow, 40 from Posnan, 50 from
Warsaw, 30 from Gnesna, 22 from Thron, 24 from Koningsberg, 8 from Elbing, 6
from Marienburg, and near 4 English Miles from the Baltic Sea, and is built on
the borders of the Vistula, on the North-West side of the aforesaid Island.

Its Division and Strength.
The Town it self is watered by the Rivers Rodawn and Motlaw, and divided by
the former into two parts, the Old and the New; On the Southern and Western
side it is surrounded with high Mountains, and was well fortified with Bulwarks
against the Incursions of the Swedes, in the Year 1656. It has a large and high
Wall, so broad, that Coaches easily go round the Ramparts, and so large in
compass, that it is three hours Journey round, which I may very well compute at
six English Miles. At the Entrance of the Rodawn, on the other side, it has a
strong Fort, wherein there is commonly kept a Garrison of 1000 Soldiers. It is
impossible this City should be Bombarded from the Sea, by reason of its
distance from it, but from the Neighboring Hills it may, and therefore some
Works are raised there, and always a certain number of Soldiers, with store of
Cannon and Ammunition placed in them for its greater security.

One of the Hanse- Towns,
This City is at present a famous Mart, and one of the principal of the
Hanse-Towns, being altogether governed by its own Laws though under Protection of
the Crown of* Poland, from which it has a Castellan appointed over it. Half of
the Suburbs belong to that Crown, and the other half to the City; for in some
Parts, the Crown Lands reach to the Suburbs; but in others, the City-Lands go
several Miles together into the Country.

Parishes, Buildings, Streets, and Gardens.
There are Twenty Parishes in the City and the Suburbs. The Houses are
generally of Brick; and the Streets most commonly very large, and well paved,
though somewhat dirty in Winter, as most of the Towns in Poland are. The chief
Part of the City, called by the Inhabitants Die rechte Stadt, was built by
Conrad Wallenrodt, Master of the Teutonick Order, about the Year 1388. There
are no Gardens in the City; but, nevertheless, several very fine and large ones
in the Suburbs.

Inhabitants, their Number and Religion.
The Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs are generally Germans, and computed
to be upwards of Two Hundred Thousand Souls; whereof, the greater Part have
adhered to the Auspurg Confession ever since the Year 1525. and the Lutherans
alone are admitted to a Share in the Government: Yet all other Sects are
tolerated, and allowed a free Exercise of their Religion.

Churches,
The Public Buildings of this City are, First, Their Churches; whereof, there
are two very famous, viz. St. Mary's, and St. Peter's; the former of which is,
by much, the stateliest Fabric in all Prussia, being very highvaulted, and
having in it exceeding fine Organs: Besides, it is said to have 48 Altars, 3722
Windows, and a Font, made at Antwerp, which cost 24000 Rix-Dollars, or 5400
Pounds Sterling.

Townhouse
Next, There is the Townhouse, where the Magistrates sit. This is a very
magnificent Fabric, with an exceeding high Spire. It has abundance of noble
Inscriptions in several Rooms, into which it is divided. The Court of
Judicature here is very fine, being all built with Freestone, and named
Arlus-House, from its Founder.

Three Magazines.
In this City are three Magazines; whereof, one is very considerable, and
plentifully provided with all kinds of Stores and Ammunition for Landforces.

A College, Exchange, etc.
Here is no University; but, however, a very famous College, with Professors of
all Faculties; yet, who do not give the Degree of Doctor. Here is likewise a
tolerable Exchange, for Merchants to meet in; The Palace of St. Dominick, a
beautiful Edifice; A College for Jesuits, etc.

Jurisdiction and Government.
The Jurisdiction of Dantzic extends to above 40 English Miles Circumference.
It sends two Deputies to the Diet of Poland, as I have observed before, in the
First Volume of this Book. The Absolute Government of it is in the Hands of
Thirty Senators, Elders, or Magistrates; whereof, the greatest part are Persons
of Learning, though some few are Merchants, but of no other Trade. None of the
Clergy can be of this Magistracy, though any Foreigners may; yet, none of any
other Religion but the Lutheran, except the Calvinist, whereof there must
always be Four in the whole Senate.

Senators and their Division.
The Senators, when once created, continue the same for Life. The first, and
chiefest among them, are the Four Burgomasters, or, as they call them,
Proconsuls; out of which a President is chosen every Year, Under these, there
are Thirteen Consuls, who choose the aforesaid Burgomasters out of their Body,
as often as they die away. They likewise have the Choosing of all other
Officers, belonging as well to the Old, as the New City.

The Twelve Scabins, and Syndic.
There are Twelve Scabins, or Judges, for all manner of Process; from whom
there lies Appeal to the Thirteen Consuls, and Four Burgomasters; and from
thence, to the Court of Poland. The Thirtieth Senator is their Syndic, or
Orator; who is like a Master of the Ceremonies, to receive and compliment any
Foreign Ministers or Agents: He takes Place of all the Scabins, as the Consuls
and Burgomasters do of him.

Burgrave, to represent the King.
The King nominates every Year, out of the Consuls or Burgomasters, a Burgrave,
to represent his Person in the Senate: And all Sentences of Death must be
signed by him, in the King's Name; for no body can be executed here without
such Signing. I may take notice to Your Excellency, that there is a Distinction
in Executing Criminals of this City; for Natives must always be executed before
Arlus-House; and Foreigners, near one of the Gates of the City, where the
Prison lies. All that are executed in the City, are beheaded: But all Thieves
and Robbers are to be hanged about two Miles out of Town, at a famous Gallows,
supported by four Pillars of Brick.

Centumviri, their Power.
To represent the Grievances of the People, and to maintain their Privileges,
there are an Hundred Burghers chosen, to inspect the Conduct of the Senate.
They have likewise a Vote in Electing the Clergy, in Conjunction with the
Senate. Within this City, and its Jurisdiction, there are no Bishops, but only
a College of the Clergy, who have no Power, except to examine such as are
designed to be Elected Priests, by the Senate and Centumviri; the manner of
whose Election is this.

Manner of Electing and Ordaining Priests.
The Candidate first makes his Application to the Clergy, to examine him; which
done, they give him a Certificate, that they think him capable, and allow him a
Liberty to preach: After which, the People or Congregation of some Parish
present him to the Senate and Centumviri, desiring he may be Elected for their
Minister; when, by Plurality of Voices, he is Elected accordingly, and
thereupon sent back to the College of the Clergy, to be Ordained; which is
performed by Imposition of Hands, Reading of Prayers, and some other
Ceremonies. This is likewise the Manner of Electing and Ordaining the Clergy in
most Lutheran Countries.

Four Roman Catholic Churches.
In this City there are four Roman Catholic Churches; whereof, one is the
King's Chapel, and the rest are for Monks: There are also two for Calvinists,
where the Senate has no Power to nominate the Clergy. I may here observe to
Your Excellency, That in Dantzic there is a particular Custom, relating to
Marriage; which is, That there is a Roman Catholic Official, a Priest, who, by
his Power, can oblige any Person to marry a Woman, that he has but promised, or
given any Present to whatsoever, though the Party never meant any such thing;
which occasions a great deal of Confusion and Disorder.

King's Power and Revenues here.
As for the King's Power in this City, he can save any Body's Life that he
pleases, though condemned to die by the Magistrates. To him half the Port-Customs
come: And one Mill brings him in every Hour of the Day and Night, 24 Gold-
Ducats. This Mill is moved by the Rodawn, which runs through the City. It grinds
such a great Quantity of Corn all the Year round, that its Revenue amounts to
4320 Pounds Sterling to the State, and the King, beside the Profit made by the
Proprietors. The City is obliged to put the King's Effigies on one Side of
their Coin, though they commonly have their own Arms on the other. When the King
comes thither, they are to treat him and his Court for three Days together:
But, however, he can bring but a few of his Guards into the City. The
Dantzickers are obliged to have always a Secretary at the Court of Poland; who,
as Dr. Connor says, in his Time, was one Mr. Alberti, an ingenious Gentleman,
now, or lately, Syndic of Dantzic.

City-Power and Privileges.
As for the City-Privileges; They can coin their own Money without the King's
Leave, choose their Magistrates, make their own Laws, and determine absolutely
in Matters of Debt, to the value of 500 Guilders; but where the Action exceeds
that Sum, an Appeal lies to the Tribunal of Poland: Yet, in such Case, the
Appellant is obliged to lay down 100 Guilders in the Townhouse, before he can
proceed; and this is, to deter People from making such Appeals for the
Dantzickers do not much care that any of their Money should get into Poland,
but where they cannot help it.

Force by Land and Sea.
This City has always above 2000 Soldiers in Service, and they can easily
maintain 12000; but in Cases of Necessity, they have been known to have raised
60000. For Ships, they have no Men of War, but abundance of Merchantmen, of 3
or 400 Tuns each, and 30 or 40 Guns apiece. They never Trade so far as the East
or West Indies; but into the Streights, and all over Europe, they do.

First Coin in Prussia.
Here it may not be improper to give Your Excellency some short Account of
their present Coin in Dantzick: But first, by way of Digression, I may observe,
that the Coin which the Teutonic Order brought into Prussia not proving
sufficient to furnish that Country with Money, those Knights soon began to set
up Mints, and to coin Money of their own there; which they performed with so
much accuracy, that most Nations have allowed, that, wherever invented, the
Art of Coining was there first brought to Perfection. This has been confirmed
by the great Antiquary, Spelman; who was of Opinion, that our English Word
Sterling came from the Easterlings, a People of Prussia; and who coming from
thence, into England, first taught us the Art of Refining, and Coining purer
Silver than we had before made use of.

Present Coin in Dantzic.
The Species of Money now Current in Prussia, or rather in Dantzic, are these:
Gold- Ducats, Ourts, Choustacks and Chelons. A Ducat is worth two Rix-Dollars,
or 9 Shillings English: An Ourt is a Silver Coin, equal to the French Piece of
15 Sous, and worth 18 Grosses of Dantzic, and 30 of Poland: A Choustack is of
the value of 6 Dantzic-Grosses, or 10 Polish: And as for their Chelons, three
of them make one of their Grosses. The farther Difference between the Polish
Money and theirs, stands thus: The Tinfe, that is worth 30 Grosses of Polish
Chelons, is worth but 18 of those of Dantzic: The Ducat, which is of the value
of 12 Franks of Polish Chelons, is worth but 7 of the Current Money here: Five
Choustacks, or an Ourt and two Choustacks, make a Livre of Dantzic-Money;
because 5 Choustacks make 30 Grosses, and 30 Grosses make 20 Pence.

How often taken and regained.
This City of Dantzic was taken from the Danes, by Sabislaus, Grandson to
Swentorohus, about the Year 1186; and was seized by the Poles some short time
after. The Knights of the Teutonic Order made themselves Masters of it in 1305;
and Walled it round in 1314. Casimir III. King of Poland, surnamed The Great,
regained it in 1454, and granted very great Privileges to the Citizens; who
afterward declaring for the Auspurg-Confession, sided with Maximilian of
Austria, against Stephen Batori; insomuch that the latter proscribed, and even
besieged them in 1577. but however, by the Mediation of other Princes, they
were restored to their Religion and Liberties in 1597.

In 1656. they vigorously repulsed the Suedes, and adhered to the Interest of
John Casimir, King of Poland: And at present they make one of the Members of
this State, having been admitted to a Suffrage in the Election of the Polish
Monarchs, in the Year 1632.

Admitted to Vote in Election of Polish Kings.
This, my Lord, is what I have been able to gather from Dr. Connor's Memoirs,
and the best Authors that have writ any thing of the Trade of Poland, and of
the famous City of Dantzic, and wherein, if I may not be so happy as to
correspond every where with your Excellency's greater Knowledge of those
matters, I hope, at least, I may be excused upon account of my good will to
entertain you, and the public, as far as my assistance went, which, if
granted, will abundantly recompense the Endeavors of,

My LORD, Your Excellency's Most Humble Servant, J. S.

LETTER VIII.
To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Burlington.
Of the Origin of the Teutonic Order, and the Succession of all its Great-
Masters in the Holy Land, Prussia, and Germany, together with its present State
in the Empire.

MY LORD,
DR. Connor having designed this Letter for your Lordship's Entertainment, and
not having had leisure to accomplish it himself, by reason of the urgency of
his Profession, desired of me to Address it for him; but upon a just Reflection
on the meanness of my Abilities, and an awful Regard to your Lordship's
Grandeur, I found I had more than ordinary reason to decline it: Yet, however,
upon balancing your goodness with your great Quality, and considering my well
meaning at the same time with my attempt, I hoped I might not be so unfortunate
as to Offend if I undertook it, and the rather, because of the great conformity
which the subject I were to write of, had with the hopes which the Nation has
in you.

My LORD,

Origin of Teutonic Order.
Your Lordship will here find, that this Order was first founded to reward and
encourage Great Actions, and that particularly in the German Nation, whence it
came to have the Title of Teutonic; for when the Emperor Frederic Barberossa
had engaged in the Crusade for recovery of the Holy Land, a great number of
German Nobility and Gentry joined his Army as Volunteers. Of this Crusade were
several other great Princes of Europe, such as Philip King of France; Richard
I. King of England; Frederic Duke of Suabia; the Dukes of Austria and Bavaria;
Philip Earl of Flanders; Plorant Earl of Holland, etc. After this Emperor's
Death, the Germans being before Acon, or Ptolemais which they then besieged,
chose for their Leaders Frederick Duke of Suabia, second Son to the aforesaid
Emperor; and Henry Duke of Brabant. Under these Generals they behaved
themselves so well, both at the taking of Acon, Jerusalem, and other places of
the Holy Land, that Henry King of Jerusalem, the Patriarch, and several other
Princes, thought themselves obliged to do something extraordinary in honor of
the German Nation. Hereupon they immediately resolved to erect an Order of
Knights of that Nation, under the protection of St. George, but afterward they
changed that Saint for the Virgin Mary, by reason that she had an Hospital
already founded on Mount Sion at Jerusalem for the relief of German Pilgrims,
of the manner of building which, Ashmole, in his Order of the Garter gives this
following account.

Who built their Hospital of Jerusalem.
He says, that in the time of the Holy-War, a wealthy Gentleman of Germany, who
dwelt at Jerusalem, commiserating the condition of his Countrymen coming
thither on Devotion, and neither understanding the language of that place, nor
knowing where to lodge, received them hospitably into his House, and gave them
all manner of suitable Entertainment. Afterward obtaining leave of the
Patriarch, he erected a Chapel for them, and Dedicated it to the Virgin Mary,
whence the Knights that were established there afterward, came to have the
Title of Equites Mariani. Other German Gentlemen contributed largely to the
maintaining and increasing this Charitable Work, insomuch, that in a short time
these Knights became very numerous and wealthy, and gave themselves to Military
Employments, and to acts of Piety and Charity.

Their Order confirmed, and by what Title.
In the Year 1190 they elected their first Great Master, Henry Walpot, and in
the Year following had their Order confirmed, upon the request of the Emperor
Henry VI. by the Rull of Pope Celestine III. under the Title of Teutonic, or
Dutch Knights, of the Hospital of St. Mary the Virgin, vowing Poverty,
Obedience, and Chastity, and obliging themselves to receive none but Germans
into their Order.

Another Hospital; with their removal into Germany and Prussia.
After they had thus received Confirmation from the Papal See, some rich
Citizens of Breme and Lubeck joining with them, and making large Contributions,
another Hospital was erected for them in the City of Acon, or Ptolemais in
Syria. But after that City, together with Jerusalem, and all the Holy Land had
been taken by the Sarazens, under the Command of Saladin, having been in the
possession of the Christians for more than 87 Years before. One Hermannus, then
Great Master, with the remaining Knights, removed into Germany, on whom the
Emperor Frederic XI. and Pope Honorius III. (or as some will have it, Conrade,
Duke of Masovia in 1226) in the Year 1229 bestowed the Province of Prussia,
where having Conquered Marienburg built.
that Nation, and reduced it from Paganism to Christianity, they built the City
of Marienburg, or Mary-Town; and in the Year 1340, fixed the Residence of their
Great Masters there.

For sake Prussia, and wherefore.
This Country they enjoyed till about the Year 1525, when Albert, Marquess of
Brandenburg, the last Great Master of this Order, by a Solemn Renunciation
became Feudatory to Sigismund King of Poland, who raised Prussia to a Dukedom,
and made this Marquess first Duke thereof; but however, some of the Knights
disliking this Action, proceeded to Elect another Great Master, which was
Walter de Cronberg, and forthwith leaving Prussia, seated themselves in
Germany, where they continue at this day, though in no great Reputation, except,
that the younger Sons of the German Princes are commonly admitted of their
Order.

Their Statutes, Habit, Number, and Manners.
Their Statutes were composed after the Model of those of the Knights
Hospitallers, and Knights Templars, at this day the Knights of Malta; but
nevertheless, to distinguish them from these Orders, their Habit was ordained
to be a white Mantle, with a plain black Cross on the Breast, though others will
have it to have been a black Cross Voided with a Cross- Potence. This Cross
they were also to have upon white Banners, as likewise upon their Shields, and
in their Coats of Arms: They were moreover enjoined to live conformable to the
Order and Rules of St. Austin. Their first number was 24 Lay-Brothers, and 7
Priests; yet Heysse, in his History of the Empire, Tome I. says, they were at
first 40. They both were allowed to wear Armor and Swords, and might Celebrate
Mass in that Habit. None of them shaved their Beards, but by their Order were
obliged to let them grow, and to sleep upon sacks of Straw: But however, this,
with their other primitive Injunctions soon vanished.

Are much favored by several Princes.
This order being established after the manner as we have showed before, all
Christian Princes endeavored to give them encouragement; and among the rest,
the Pope and Emperor gave them particular proofs of their Favor and
Liberality. Philip King of France also being willing to do the like on his
part, made them great presents, and moreover, granted their Great Master a
liberty to wear the Flower deluccs on the 4 extremities of their Cross.

Great Masters in Prussia.
Their Power and Force in War will appear in the following succinct account,
and Series of their several Great Masters.

I Great Master, 1190.
Their first Great Master, as I observed before, was Henry Walpot, a Native of
Germany, Elected in the Year 1190, who died, and was buried at Acon, or
Ptolemais.

II Great Master, 1200.
The Second Great Master of this Order was Otho de Kerpen, a Nobleman of
Germany, who after having enjoyed this Office but 6 Years died, and was buried
at Acon.

III Great Master, 1206.
The Third Great Master was Herman Barth of Alsace, who was Elected under Pope
Innocent III. and the Emperor Philip II. he presided over these Knights only 4
Years, then died, and was buried at Acon. Under these two Great Masters this
Order first began to increase and flourish.

IV Great Master, 1210.
The fourth Great Master was Herman a Salzen, a Nobleman of Misnia, under the
several Pontificates of Pope Innocent III. Honorius, and Gregory IX. and in the
Reigns of the Emperor's Otho and Frederic II. This Master obtained great
Privileges for his Order, both from the aforesaid Popes and Emperors. And John
King of Jerusalem, for their having protected him against Conrade King of
Syria, added to the Arms of this Order, a Cross- Potence Or, which were the
proper Ensigns of that Kingdom. In his time Conrade, Marquess of Thuringen was
admitted of the Order. He had above 2000 German Noblemen and Knights in his
Order at once, all which he governed for about 30 Years. During his
Administration, his Order having been driven out of the Holy Land by the
Sarazens, settled in Prussia to the number of 20000, and by help of the Poles,
soon expelled the Pagan Prussians out of the Province of Culmigeria, He lies
buried at Marienburg, which he built.

V Great Master, 1240.
The Fifth Great Master was Conrade Marquess of Thuringen, who was Elected
under the Pontificat of Celestine IV. and the Reign of the Emperor Frederic
II. He very much augmented the Conquests of his Order, and restored many
ruinous Fabrics. He built Koningsberg, in Ducal- Prussia, and lies buried at
Marienburg.

VI Great Master, 1252.
The Sixth Great Master was Poppo ab Osternaw, in the time of Pope Innocent IV.
and of the Emperor Conrade IV. He had several glorious Conquests over the
Prussians, Livonians, and Swentopelus Duke of Pomerania, but at length, before
the City of Lignitz, was killed and routed by the Tartars, who had almost
overrun all Sarmatia (Poland) and was afterward buried at Uladislaw. It is
said that the aforesaid Swentopelus had been so extremely beaten by these
Knights, that he was forced to clap up a Peace with them, and afterward on his
Deathbed, earnestly recommended to his Children, to preserve the Friendship he
had Contracted: But however, Mestowin, his eldest Son forgetting his Father's
Orders, declared War anew against them, but being likewise beaten, the Knights
overrun all Pomerania, and at length forced this Duke to a Peace: And
moreover, 3 of his Brothers, whereof the Eldest was named Sambor, became
Knights of this Order.

VII Great Master, 1263.
The Seventh Great Master of the Teutonic Order was Johannes Sangerhusensis,
who took upon him that Office under the Pontificat of Alexander IV. He very
much allayed the Insolence of the Pagan Prussians, and in great measure,
regained the credit of his Order forfeited to the Tartars. He Ruled 12 Years,
and lies buried at Treves. In his time the City of Brandenburg was built.

VIII Great Master, 1275.
The Eighth Great Master was Hartman Count of Heidelberg, who was Elected in
the time of Pope Clement IV. and of the Emperor Rodolfe I. He was a very
industrious Person, and got great ground of the Prussians. In his time the
Castle of Marienburg was built in the Year 1281. He died, and was buried at
Venice.

IX Great Master, 1283.
The Ninth Great Master of this Order was Buchardus a Swenden, Elected in the
time of Pope John, and the Emperor Rodolfe I. Under his Administration of
Affairs the Prussians were totally reduced. After 7 Years enjoyment of his
Office, he Abdicated it, and lived afterward at Rhodes, where he lies buried.

X Great Master, 1290.
The Tenth Great Master was Conrade de Feuchtwangen, who was Elected in the
time of the Emperor Rodolfe I. and Pope Nicholas IV. Although this Order made
considerable progress under his Administration, yet, at length, it received a
great check in Syria, where the City of Acon, which had been the chief Seat of
this Order for some time, was taken by the Souldan of Egypt. He died at
Prague, and was buried at Trebnicz.

XI Great Master, 1297.
The Eleventh Great Master was Godfrey Count of Hohenloh, who was Elected,
Adolphus being Emperor, and Celestine V. Pope. He was a Venetian born, and
governed this Order 10 Years; he retook Riga in Livonia from the Russians, and
caused its Fortifications to be demolished, but not long after he restored the
Inhabitants to their ancient Privileges, having built a Castle there to awe
them. He at length resigned his Office, and died in Germany.

XII Great Master, 1307.
The Twelfth Great Master was Sigfridus de Feuchtwangen, in the time of Albert
Duke of Austria's being Emperor, and Clement Pope. He removed his Seat from
Marpurg to the Castle of Marienburg; for this Order had resided there ever
since their being obliged to leave Syria. This Master ruled only 2 Years, and
died and was buried at Marienburg.

XIII Great Master, 1309.
The Thirteenth Great Master was Charles Beffart, Elected in the Reign of the
Emperor Henry, and the Pontificate of Pope Clement V. He was a very Wise and
Warlike Person, and in the Year 1312 founded the Castle of Memula in Courland,
to hinder the Incursions of the Lithuanians. Upon his return from Rome, whither
he had been cited for, and cleared of Maladministration, he died at Vienna,
where he lies buried.

XIV Great Master, 1322.
The Fourteenth Great Master was Vernerus Urselensis, Elected in the time of
the Emperor Lewis V. and Pope John. He executed his Trust with a great deal of
Fidelity and Bravery, and was afterward Murdered by a Brother of the Order,
one John Bunsdorfius, while he was going out of the Church from Vespers.

XV Great Master, 1325.
The Fifteenth Great Master was Lewis D. of Brunswick. He was a very Prudent
and Pious Man, but ruled only four Years.

XVI Great Master, 1329.
The Sixteenth Great Master was Districhus Count Algemburg, Elected when he was
80 Years old. He was a Person of Great Eloquence, Authority and Justice. After
having built St. Mary's Church at Marienburg, he died at Thorn, and was buried
at St. Anns in Marienburg.

XVII Great Master, 1339.
The Seventeenth Great Master was Rodolfe Duke of Saxony, Elected in the time
of the Emperor Lewis V. and Pope Benedict XI. He gathered great Forces
together, and Besieged and took Neumarcovia. In the Interim the Lithuanians
invaded Prussia, overrunning all with Fire and Sword, which this good Master
took so much to heart, that he first became Mad, then was deposed from his
Office, and afterward died of Grief at Marienwerder, where he was buried.

XVIII Great Master, 1342.
The Eighteentth Great Master was Henry de Desmer, or Tuchmer, Elected in the
Pontificate of Clement VI. He had a Famous Battle with the Lithuanians and
Russians, wherein he killed above 10000 of the Enemy. He died and was buried at
Marienburg.

XIX Great Master, 1348.
The Nineteenth Great Master was Henry de Kniprodien, Elected in the time of
Pope Clement VI, and of the Emperor Charles III. The foregoing War with the
Lithuanians and Russians broke out a fresh in his time, wherein the Great Duke
of Lithuania, Keystutus, was taken Prisoner and carried to Marienburg, whence
he afterward escaped by means of a Servant. In this Great Master's time, one
of the Sons of the aforesaid Great Duke became a Christian at Koningsberg, and
afterward was made a Prince of the Empire, by the Emperor Charles IV. During
his Administration, which was about 31 Years, this Order abounded in Learned
Men. He died at Marienburg, and was there buried.

XX Great Master, 1379.
The Twentieth Great Master was Conrade Zolner, Elected in the time of the
Emperor Wenceslaus, and of Pope Urban VI. He had several contests with the
Lithuanians and Samogitians, during the several Reigns of Keystutus, Jagello,
Votoldus, and Suidrigielo, Great Dukes of Lithuania. He died and was buried at
Marienburg, after 8 Years Administration of the Government of this Order.

XXI Great Master, 1388.
The Twenty first Great Master was Conrade de Valenroden, Elected during the
Papacy of Pope Boniface. He was a Person of a very Warlike Disposition, but
withal of an odd Temper: He hated and refused his Ecclesiastical Brothers
access to him at the hour of his Death. In his time this Order made a Descent
upon Lithuania, by way of the River Niemen, and built three Magazines near the
Castle of Cowno, by help of which they made great devastations in that Country
for a considerable time.

XXII Great Master, 1394.
The Twenty second Great Master was Conrade de Jungingen. He was of a very
peaceable Temper, and therefore not much beloved by his Order. However, he
ruled 12 Years, and afterward died at Marienburg, and was there buried.

XXIII Great Master, 1404.
The Twenty third Great Master was Ulric de Jungingen, Brother to the aforesaid
Conrade. He was Elected in the time of the Emperor Rupert, and of Pope Gregory
XII. He was of a Warlike Temper, and to that degree, that he deviated not a
little from his Order: He Persecuted his Brothers, and took several of their
Possessions from them. After several Wars had with the Poles and Lithuanians,
Jagello, King of Poland, and Vitoldus, Great Duke of Lithuania gave him a total
overthrow, wherein this Great Master with about 200 Commendadors, and 5000
other Knights was killed, and his General taken Prisoner, although at the first
onset the Lithuanians lost about 7000 Men.

XXIV Great Master, 1406.
The Twenty fourth Great Master was Henry Count of Plaven, Elected in the time
of the Emperor Sigismund, and Pope John. This Person was resolved to revenge
the late overthrow on the Poles, but before he could effect any thing
considerable, he was deposed, thrown into Prison at Engelsburg, and thence
removed to Lecksteg, where, after 7 years confinement he died in Chains, and
was buried at Marienburg.

XXV Great Master, 1414.
The Twenty fifth Great Master was Michael de Sterbergen, Steward of the
Household to the Emperor Sigismund. In the very first year of his Government
Jagello and Vitoldus took from him and destroyed several Cities, but were at
length forced to retire. He governed this Order 9 years, but afterward
desiring his Quietus, he obtained it, died at Dantzic, and was buried at
Marienburg.

XXVI Great Master, 1323.
The Twenty sixth Great Master was Paul de Rusdorfien, Elected in the time of
Pope Martin: During his Administration several of the Provinces and Cities of
Prussia shook off the Teutonic Yoke, and revolted to Casimir IV. King of
Poland. He enjoyed this Office nine Years also, but dying was buried at
Marienburg.

XXVII Great Master, 1432.
The Twenty seventh Great Master was Conrade ab Herlingshausen, Elected in the
time of the Emperor Albert III. This Great Master treated Casimir King of
Poland at Thorn, where at that time there was an inviolable Peace struck up
between them. This Person had no Wars during his Regency, and at last died of
Grief, on account of his Brother's perverseness. He was buried at Marienburg.

XXVIII Great Master, 1450.
The Twenty eighth Great Master was Lewis ab Herlingshausen, Elected in the
time of the Emperor Frederic III. During his Administration a farther part of
Prussia revolted to the aforesaid Casimir, to whom also the Garrison of
Marienburg sold that City for 476000 Florens, together with several other
Cities and Castles. Afterward the King of Poland enters again into a Peace
with this Order, by which means he obtained Pomerania, for which the Poles had
contested with these Knights for upwards of 150 Years, This Great Master died
and was buried at Koningsberg.

XXIX. Great Master, 1467.
The Twenty ninth Great Master of this Order was Henry Rhews, Count of Plauen,
Elected in the time of the Emperor Frederic III. He only governed eleven Weeks,
and then died and was buried at Koningsberg.

XXX Great Master. 1468.
The Thirtieth Great Master was Henry Count of Richtenberg, Elected in the time
of the Emperor Frederic III. and of Pope Sixtus IV. He was a Man of a very
turbulent and inexorable temper, for he threw Theodore a Prussian Bishop into
Chains, and suffered him to die with Hunger. He governed this Order twelve
Years, and then died at Koningsberg, and was buried there.

XXXI Great Master, 1480.
The Thirty first Great Master was Martin Truchses of Uveczhausen, Elected in
the time of the Emperor Frederic III. and of Pope Sixtus IV. He paid Homage and
Obedience to Casimir King of Poland, died at Koningsberg, and was buried there.

XXXII Great Master, 1489.
The Thirty second Great Master was John de Tiefen, a Swiss, Elected when
Maximilian I. was Emperor, and Julius Pope. The first Year he swore Allegiance
to Albert King of Poland, and in the next assisted that King against the
Valachians, but by whom he was defeated and killed. He was buried at
Koningsberg.

XXXIII Great Master, 1498.
The Thirty third Great Master was Frederic Duke of Saxony, and Marquess of
Thuringen: This Person refused to do Homage to the King of Poland, and
therefore his Dominions were very much ravaged by the Poles for 12 Years
together, and he excluded his Country, at what time he died.

XXXIV Great Master, 1512.
The Thirty fourth and last Great Master of the Teutonic Order in Prussia was
Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, Nephew to Sigismund I. King of Poland. He was
Elected in the time of Maximilian the Emperor, and Pope Julius. The Chapter of
this Order chose him in hopes that being so near a Kinsman, he might prevail
upon the King of Poland, his Uncle to restore to them what had been taken from
them by the Poles; but this Great Master was so far from answering their
expectation, that he likewise refused to Swear Allegiance to the King of
Poland, and fortified all his Cities for his Defense, whence it followed, that
he drew a bloody War upon himself, wherein great numbers were frequently slain
and taken on both sides; the particulars of the chiefest of his Actions I
thought might not be unacceptable to your Lordship, and which are as follows.

Dantzic B sieg'd by Albert.
In the Year 1519, the War broke out between him and his Uncle, and some few
places were lost and taken on both sides; but in 1529, Wolfang Duke of
Schonemburg, General of the Teutonic Army, which consisted of about 10000 Foot,
and 4000 Horse, sat down before Dantzick, and from the Bishop's Hill (vulgarly
so called) threw away near 4000 Bombs into the Town, to little or no purpose,
whilst the Besiegers were not a little incommoded by the Town-Cannon, for
scarce a Man durst show his Head, but he had 40 shot at him. This so
discouraged the Besiegers, that the major part of them soon discovered their
Inclinations to be gone, and for that purpose began to Mutiny against their
Officers. Whilst they were thus wavering in their Resolutions, and scarce doing
any Duty but by compulsion, the Polish Army appeared, being 12000 Horse, sent
by the King to raise the Siege. It was now high time for the Besiegers Siege
raised by the Poles.
to scamper, which they immediately set about with such Precipitation, that the
Poles found it no difficult matter to overtake even their Foot; yet, however,
they killed some and took others Prisoners. After this the King's Army took in
Dirschow, Stargardie, and the strong Castle of Choinicz, and afterward
proceeded on with so great Vigor and Diligence, that most of the Cities and
Castles of the Order Surrendered themselves. By these means the Teutonic
Knights were totally expelled Prussia, which their Great Master Albert
perceiving, as likewise that he was no longer able to contend with so powerful
a Monarch as him of Poland, though his Ancestors had formerly done it for many
Years, yet then they were in a better condition than he at present was in,
resolved to submit himself and his Order to his Uncle's Mercy, which he not
long afterward did in the public Marketplace of Cracow.

Albert submits to Sigismund.
For this Purpose a Throne was erected for the King, much after the same nature
with that wherein he is wont to take the Homage and Oaths of his Subjects after
his Coronation, as your Lordship may observe in the Letter to my Lord
Marlborough; then the Marquess delivering up the Ensigns of his Order to the
King, and swearing all manner of Allegiance to him, his Majesty returned him
the Ensigns of Prussia, quartered with the Polish, and at the same time created
him a Duke of part of that Country, which from thence forward has had the Name
of Ducal Prussia, and continued all along in his Family to this Day.

Great Masters in Germany.
The Teutonic Order being thus expelled Prussia, they transferred their Chapter
to Mergentheim, or as some say, to Marienthall, in Franconia, where they chose

XXXV Great Master, 1531.
Walter de Cronberg for their Thirty fifth Great Master and Administrator of
Prussia. This Great Master appealed to the Emperor concerning the wrong done to
his Order by Albert, as likewise got Albert Excommunicated by the Pope. He
afterward took his Seat in the General Diet of the Empire, equal with the
Archbishops, as being Great Master of the Teutonic Order. He died after 18
Years Administration of this Office, and was buried at Mergentheim.

XXXVI Great Master, 1543.
The Thirty sixth Great Master was Wolfang Schutzbar, otherwise called
Milchling, Elected in the Chapter at Spire the 16th of April. He had been
Provincial Commander of the Country of Hesse, and was one of the first that
went to the assistance of the Emperor Charles V. in his Wars about Religion.
He recovered the Seat of this Order at Marpurg, which had been usurped by the
Landtgrave of Hesse. After several more famous Actions he died in the Year 1566.

XXXVII Great Master, 1566.
The Thirty seventh Great Master was George Hundt de Menckheim Governor of the
Circle of Franconia. He died after 6 years Regency at Mergentheim, and was
buried there in the Year 1572.

XXXVIII Great Master, 1572.
The Thirty eighth Great Master was Henry de Bobenhausen, Elected at the
General Assembly of the Knights at Ulm upon the Danube. This Great Master, upon
George Frederic Marquests of Brandenburg's possessing himself of the Title and
Duchy of Prussia, thought himself obliged in the Name of his Order to enter
Protestations against it. He resigned his Office to the Chapter after 8 Years
Administration.

XXXIX Great Master, 1587.
The Thirty Ninth Great Master of this Order, and Administrator of Prussia was
Maximilian Archduke of Austria, who had earnestly Solicited the Electors for
that Charge, and offered to wear the Habit of the Order: Afterward being
invited to the Crown of Poland, this Order was in great hopes of being restored
to their Dominions of Prussia, but upon his being defeated by Sigismund III.
they soon lost all those hopes. He nevertheless continued their Great Master,
and being a brave Prince was named for their General against the Turks in
Hungary, when he had a Company of Guards all Knights of the Order. He held his
Administration 34 Years, and ended his days at Inspruck, where he was likewise
buried.

XL Great Master, 1619.
The Fourtieth Great Master was Charles Archduke of Austria, who, after 5
years Regency died at Madrid whither he had been invited by the King of Spain
to go his Viceroy into Portugal.

XLI Great Master, 1624.
The Forty first Great Master was John Eustache de Westernach, who was Elected
at Mergentheim the 19th of March, in the Year 1625, and died 82 years old, in
the Year of our Lord 1627.

XLII Great Master, 1627.
The Forty second Great Master was Gaspard de Stadion Provincial Commander of
Alsace and Burgundy, and particular Commander of Altschausen. He after having
governed this Order with great Reputation for fourteen years, desired the
Chapter to Elect Leopold William Arch Duke of Austria, for his Coadjutor in the
Administration of his Office; and which being done, he gave him the Cross of
Prussia as a Testimony of his consent.

XLIII Great Master, 1644.
The Forty third Great Master was this Leopold William who succeeded Stadion
by Virtue of his former Election. He governed this Order alone to the Year
1662, when he died at Vienna the 20th of November, and was buried there.

The same Year the Chapter was Convened, and would have chosen Charles Joseph
Archduke of Austria to have succeeded Leopold William his Brother, but he died
the same Year, and thereby their designs were frustrated.

XLIV Great Master, 1664.
Afterward the Chapter being Assembled at Mergentheim, in the Year 1664, chose
for their Forty fourth Great Master one of their own Knights, called John
Gaspard of Ambringens, Provincial Commander of the Circle of Austria, and this
they did to prevent the Intrigues which several Princes always made to get
Elected to this Dignity.

A Prince of Neubourg Elected of the Order.
This Great Master Convening the Chapter at Mariendal, received Duke Lewis
Anthony of Neubourg, Abbot of Fescamp, and third Son to Philip William Duke of
Neubourg, into this Order.

Ceremony of Creation, and present State of Knights.
Ceremony of Creation.
THe Ceremony was performed in the Great Church, whither he had been conducted
by the Great Master, the Commendadors and Knights. The Counts of Ottingen,
Hatzensten, and Fugger, who had been named Commissioners to inspect his Titles
of Honor, reported upon Oath, that they had examined and found his Honor to
be unquestionable. After which he was sworn to Chastity, Poverty, and to go to
the Wars against the Infidels whenever occasion should so require. When they
gave him the white Mantle with the black Cross, being the Ensigns of this
Order, and withal, pronounced these Words according to Custom. We Promise to
give you, as long as you live, Water, Bread, and a Habit of our Order.

Elected likewise Coadjutor
Next day the Great Master proposed to the Chapter to Elect this Prince for his
Assistant in the Government of the Order, which the Electors desired time to
consider of; and after several Meetings had about it, they answered, they were
content to Elect him, providing he would sign a Capitulation offered him, which
he agreeing to do, he was accordingly Elected.

Present State of Teutonic Order in Germany.
The Teutonic Order at present consists of 12 Provinces, which are, Alsace and
Burgundy for one, Coblentz, Austria, and Etsch; these four still retain the
Name of Provinces of the Jurisdiction of Prussia, as the eight following do
that of Germany, being the Provinces of Franconia, Hesse, Bressen, Westphalia,
Lorrain, Thuringen, Saxony, and Utrecht, although this last is now altogether
under the Dominion of the Hollanders. Every one of these Provinces has its
peculiar Commanderys of the Commendadors, of which the Provincial is Chief. Of
these Provincial Commendadors there are 12, counting one for every Province. It
is these Commendadors who compose the Chapter of the Electors. The Great
Master's ordinary Residence has been at Mariendal in Franconia, ever since this
Order has been driven out of Prussia.

This, My Lord, is a short account of the Origin, Progress, successive Great
Masters, and present State of the Teutonic Order, which I hope, your Lordship
will favorably accept, being all that the proposed brevity of this Undertaking
would admit of.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant, J. S.

LETTER IX.
To Sir THOMAS MILLINGTON President of the College of Physicians.
Of the State of Learning, and present Language; of Natural Knowledge, and
particularly of the Practice of Physic in Poland; with an account of some
Natural Things, and chiefly of a Disease in the Hair peculiar to the Poles,
commonly called Plica Polonica.

SIR,
THIS Letter courts your Acceptance on a double score, your Learning and your
Profession. As to your Learning, though it will doubtless be on all Hands
allowed, that it has no need of Superstructure, yet nevertheless, sometimes it
may require those Diversions which are here designed, and possibly, in part,
unknown to you: And as to your Profession, being highly sensible of my
imperfect account of the state of Physic, especially in Poland, I thought no
Protection so safe to pass it under as yours. My presumption, I hope, will be
justified upon Dr. Connor's first intending these Subjects for your Perusal;
and as to my Performance, I entirely submit that to your Candor and Generosity.

SIR,

Two Universities.
In the Kingdom of Poland, and Great Duchy of Lithuania, there are two famous
Universities, with all sorts of Professors. The former of these was Founded at
Cracow by Casimir the Great, and was finished by Jagello, or Uladislaus V. in
the Year 1401, conformable to the last Will and Testament of his Queen
Hedwigis; And the latter at Vilna, being at first but an Academy Founded by
King Stephen, but afterward was erected into an University by Pope Gregory
XIII. at the Request of Valerian Bishop of that City, who had very much
augmented the Colleges and Endowments.

Chief Study there.
In both these Universities the Chief Study is to speak good Latin, for as to
all parts of Polite Learning, the Poles are not so curious as in other
Countries, yet have they a great many that will write good Verses, for their
Genius is mightily bent that way; and besides, they are very apt to quote
Classick Authors in their Discourse, and this particularly when they get Drunk,
which is very frequently. Their Poet Sarbievius Casimir is no small Ornament to
his Country, who, in his Odes, has endeavored to imitate Horace; and the
Purlty of Language is not contemptible.

Learning formerly.
They have had several Latin Historians among them, such as Cromerus,
Starovolscius, etc. who have all Written the Annals and Constitutions of their
Country. They have likewise had some Historians, who have written in their own
Language. They also have not wanted for Learned Divines, Great Philosophers,
Famous Astronomers, Logicians, etc. The great Astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus
was a Native of this Country, having had his Birth in the City of Thorn in
Regal- Prussia. The reason why these Learned Men have not transmitted more to
Posterity was, because that while they lived there was but little or no
Printing in Poland, that Art having been but lately received in this Kingdom.

Oriental Languages dis-regarded.
Though the Poles are so extremely expert in Speaking and Writing Latin, yet are
they not curious in any of the Oriental Languages. They affect speaking Latin
to that degree, that Dr. Connor has informed me, that he had a Servant while he
was in Poland, that always used to talk to him in that Language; and I have
moreover read, that almost all the Common People speak Latin fluently there, a
proof of which you may please to observe in the first Volume of this History,
in the Life of Stephen Batori, who very much promoted the Study of that
Language.

Present Languages in Poland.
As the Poles have the same Origin with the Muscovites, Bohemians, Croatians,
Moravians, Silesians, Cassubians, Bulgarians, Rascians, Servians, Illyrians,
etc. so (Cromerus says) they have likewise the same Language with them, although
they differ in Dialects, and that scarce to be understood by each other. Their
terms of Mechanic Arts are chiefly borrowed from the Ancient Germans, who
formerly had, as still they have, frequent intercourses with this Country. Nay,
there are at present whole Towns and Villages that make use of the German
Tongue, that Nation having formerly planted several Colonies in this Kingdom.
Also there are several of the Noble Families purely German, as may appear both
by their Names and Coats of Arms. Likewise Hebrew, Armenian, Russian,
Tartarian, and in some places Italian, are frequently spoken in this Country.

Polish hard to Pronounce.
The Polish Language Cromerus allows, is neither so Copious, nor so easy to
Pronounce as those of other Nations, but as the French, Italian, etc. consists
chiefly of Vowels, that of Poland is made up in great measure with Consonants,
insomuch, that you shall sometimes meet with Polish Words that have seven or
eight Consonants together without any Vowel, or at most but one, interposed, an
Example of which, Sir, you may have in the word Chrzeszcz (Scarabaeus, a
Gad-Flie,) this, with diverse others in the Polish Tongue, scarce the Natives
themselves are able to Pronounce, yet they always have a sort of lisping sound
of Vowels in their Pronunciation, though they do not write them.

Reasons why the Poles affect Latin.
It must not be understood, however universally Latin is spoken in Poland, that
the Poles have it from their Mothers, as the Common People have in some parts
of Hungary, for they take pains to learn it from Masters as other Nations do.
The chiefest reasons why they generally Affect it is, First from their Natural
Dispositions to learn it. Secondly, By reason of the Syntax of their
Mother Tongue the Sclavonian, which has great Affinity with that Language, for
they both decline their Nouns, and Conjugate their Verbs as the Romans did.
Thirdly, Because in all the Villages throughout the Nation, they have
Schoolmasters for that purpose, who are either Rectors of Parishes, or some
other qualified Persons appointed by them, or by the Bishop of the Diocese. And
fourthly, because in all Towns of Note, the Jesuits have Colleges set apart to
instruct Youth in that Language.

Have no solid Learning.
As for depth in any Learning or Sciences, Dr. Connor informs me, he could
never meet with any Persons in Poland so solidly versed in them, as he has done
in other Nations, for that the Poles, as soon as they can speak Latin, and
discourse of most matters in that Language, never think of any farther
Knowledge, but believe they have acquired all the Learning, and all
Accomplishments that either Universities or Schools can give them, unless they
be Persons that make some particular Science their Profession; As Divines,
Physicians, and Lawyers, of all which I shall proceed to give some particular
account, as they stand at present in that Nation.

How far that of Divines extends.
The Divines in Poland make all their Learning consist in adapting Aristotle's
Logicks, and Metaphysics to their School- Divinity, so that you may every
where hear them talk much of Entities, Modes, Quiddities, Essences of Things,
and the like, for they value themselves more in being well versed in the
signification of Logical Terms, than in the Nature of Things themselves, which
they reason about. In this Country they have a particular Veneration for
Albertus Magnus, and quote him to attest the Truth of any Assertion, in like
manner as the Spaniards and Italians are accustomed to do Aristotle, though they
have not less respect for this last Philosopher than other Nations have. Yet,
notwithstanding, they seldom take right his meaning, and particularly in
matters that are Ambiguous, for they have Published several large Commentaries
upon him which do frequently contradict one another.

Their Divinity.
The Polish Divines are seldom well versed in Practical Divinity. They study
but little the Old and New Testament. They make few Enquiries into the Practice
of Primitive Christianity, and know little of Church History. In a word, they
trouble their Heads but seldom about convincing their Reason of the Sublimity
and Goodness of the Christian Doctrine; implicit Faith, and Passive Obedience
to Council and Church-Decisions being entirely their Guides. They will allow of
no body's enquiring into the reasonableness of Things, as if they should
imagine, that a Law, or a Doctrine given by God should not be consistent with
Reason. They have a more than ordinary respect for Thomas Aquinas, and Scotus,
and their principal Erudition consists in being well Read in the School-Points
controverted by those two Great Men.

Lawyers; their number and study.
As for Lawyers there are a great number in Poland, and that chiefly at the two
Great Tribunals of Petricovia and Lublin. These study the Civil- Law, though they
have likewise several Statutes of their own which they term Constitutions.

Who seldom go to Law.
The Grandees of the Kingdom seldom go to Law, for they generally decide their
Quarrels by the Sword, bringing numerous Armies into the Field against each
other: But if it happen sometimes that they do condescend, to submit to
Justice, even then their Pride will never allow them to refer their Case to any
other Court than the Grand Diet. Also the Polish Nation in general is not much
inclined to go to Law, by reason of the litigiousness and corruption of the
Lawyers, for the Poles have as little Opinion of the honesty of that Profession
as any People in Europe.

A supposed Judgment on a Lawyer.
Dr. Connor was once sent for to a Lawyer that lay sick at Warsaw. His Disease,
the Dr. says, was a Cancer on his Tongue, which had swelled it to that
prodigious bigness, that it had not only filled all his Mouth, but also hung
about an Inch out of it, insomuch, that he could neither speak one word, nor
breath through his Lips, but had that benefit only by his Nose. This Disease,
the Dr. says, he at first judged to be incurable, and so in effect it proved,
for he died soon after. This Person it seems had purchased a plentiful Estate
by the Law, wherefore the People could not be persuaded but that the cause of
his Death was a Judgment upon him, believing it Just, I suppose, that that
Tongue which had been the occasion of wronging so many People, should
nevertheless do Justice on its Master.

Physicians, and their Abilities.
As for Physicians in Poland, there are no great number there, and those few
that are, for the most part are either French, Italians, or Germans, scarce any
of the Natives caring to addict themselves to that Profession; for having
little convenience to improve themselves in it in their own Country, none but
the richer sort of Gentry can bear the expense of going to learn it in Foreign
Countries, and then such of the Nobility as do Travel are generally either too
Lazy or too Proud to apply themselves to what requires so much fatigue to
study, and so much judgment afterward to put in Practice. This, Sir, is the
reason why the Poles have hardly any Person thoroughly learned in this
Profession.

Not allowed to study till qualified.
Dr. Connor tells me, that he met with a young Physician at Rome, that came
thither from Poland to pick up Experience. Some of his Countrymen that were
then in that City told the Doctor, that he was Son to a rich Peasant in their
Nation, and that his Father was Vassal, as they termed him, or Slave to one
Starosta Cowalski; moreover, that his Father, for the consideration of 100
Rixdollars had bought his Freedom, and afterward sent him to the University,
and from thence to Travel, for without having first bought his Liberty he could
not have sent him out of the Service of his Lord, his Service being as much the
Lord's Inheritance as his Land was.

Discourges Learning.
By all this, Sir, you may perceive what discouragement Learning meets with in
Poland; for the Common People there, who make about nine parts in ten of the
whole Nation, are either through Poverty or Slavery rendered incapable of
addicting themselves to it, and it is certain, that in all Ages, Persons of the
meanest Birth have ever made the greatest progress in Sciences, and this, by
reason that their Bodies are apter for fatigue, and that they have no other
ways to subsist than by their Merit.

Natural Observables and Rarities in POLAND.
SIR,
Natural Observables and Rarities.
BEfore I proceed to give you an Account of the Diseases and Practice of
Physic in Poland, I must here desire leave to entertain you with some
Observables and Natural Rarities of this Country, extracted as well from Dr.
Connor's Memoirs taken there, as out of the best Modern Authors that have
written of this Kingdom.

Of Wood and Earth.
In Russia, all along the River San, there have been several Trees found
buried, having no Roots, and being as black as Ebony. The Country People say,
that they have lain there ever since the Deluge, but it is probable they might
have been washed down by the course of that River a great while since, and
preserved from rotting by the Sand. There are several places both in Poland and
Lithuania where petrefi'd Wood is to be found; likewise several Beds of Earth
lying one upon another, whose substance is not unlike that of the Unicorn's
Horn. Also Argentum Capillare, or Vegetans, being Silver, hanging from Rocks in
the nature of Hair.

Strange Waters and their Effects
Near Javorisvia, in the District of Leopol, in the Palatinate of Russia, there
is a Lake, called by the Poles, Skla, (Glass,) where formerly there was a
little Town, but which is now sunk into the Ground. The Water of this Lake has
a strong, sulphurous, and stinking Smell, but withal clear, like Crystal, and
of an insipid Taste. The Doctors of this Kingdom have recommended it to sick
Persons to Drink for recovery of their Healths, and one Sixtus Leo, a famous
Physician of those parts, has written a Learned Treatise concerning it. It is
much frequented, and does a great deal of good. There are likewise several
natural Baths in this Kingdom, which cure all kinds of Scrofulous Diseases and
Ulcers, both in Men and Beasts. In the County of Scepuz in Lesser- Poland,
there is a sort of Spring that flows from the Rocks, which makes perfect
Gutters of Stone as it runs from thence through the Meadows to the Mills. The
Lake Biala (in Polish white) so called by Antiphrasis, in the Months of April
and May makes the Fish that are in it Brown, though they afterward return to
their Natural Colors. I must not omit what Cromerus says of the Lake Crinice
in the Palatinate of Belsko in Red-Russia, which is, that every second or third
Year, it becomes wonderfully Tempestuous, and in a little time discharges all
its Waters through unknown Caverns, insomuch, that though before it were very deep,
it of a sudden almost grows fordable, but then in a little time afterward its
Water returns with the same roaring noise it went out.

Monstrous Fish.
Dr. Conner, in his Memoirs says, that it was reported when he was in Poland,
that the Year before he came thither a Barbel Fish was found in the River San,
at Velasco, an Estate of the late Queens, which was above 4 Polish Else long,
which is better than 8 Foot of our measure, and near 3 Foot broad, and weighed
at least 200 weight. He says that the same Species of Fish, of this largeness,
are very common in that River, and one was reported to have had an entire
Skeleton of a Man, supposed to have been drowned some time before, found in his
Belly, together with a Knife and Sheath. This Fish has no Scales. He says
likewise, that there are Fish in Lithuania which are made use of to show the
change of Weather: For this purpose they are to be put into a Bottle, where
they will make a sort of squeeking noise when the weather is to alter.

Fowls of odd Qualities.
As to odd kinds of Fowl, there are a sort of Birds near Lowitz in the
Palatinate of Rava in Lower- Poland, about the bigness of Sparrows, that appear
and disappear with the Snow, and from thence have the Name given them of
Snow-Birds. These are scarce to be seen any where else throughout the whole
Kingdom. There are also a sort of Quails in the Plains of Russia and Podolia
with Green Legs, and which being eaten cause the Cramp. There are moreover a
kind of Swallows and Martlets, that gathering up their Legs, and folding close
their Wings will dive into the Water at the latter end of Autumn, and live
there all the Winter, but as soon as the Spring returns they come out and fly
away. If they chance to be taken by Fisher-Nets in the Winter, though they will
revive upon being laid near the Fire, yet do they seldom survive long the
Trespass upon the Ordination of their Nature.

Beasts of strange kinds.
In Great- Poland there are a sort of Hogs with uncloven-Feet, which differ in
no other respect from our Hogs. In Poland likewise, but more especially in
Lithuania, there are a kind of little Beasts like Weesels, called in Polish,
Zassicz, whose Fur is a little courser than Ermine, and in Summer is Brown; but
as soon as the Snow appears, in one Night they become all over White, and so
continue till the Spring, when they resume their former Color: This Animal is
something less than a Squirrel. I may here, Sir, give you a description of the
wild Ox, being a Beast that is very common in Poland. He, when full grown is of
an extraordinary size, with large black Horns, and somewhat turned inwards
toward the top. With these Horns he will commonly throw a Horse and its Rider
into the Air, and moreover root up Trees of no ordinary Magnitude. Between his
Horns two or three Men may sit abreast. His hide is exceeding bristly, and
under his Chin grow two or three very large Dew-laps. His Horns serve for use
to Hunters. I might describe other strange Beasts that are to be found in this
Country, but have omitted them by reason their descriptions are to be met with
at large in Gesner's History of Quadrupeds; only I may here observe farther,
that the Polish Bears will live a great while, especially in the Winter,
without Eating.

Rarities communicated to Dr. Connor.
Sir, Before I conclude this account of natural Knowledge, peculiar to Poland,
I must entertain you with some rarities communicated to Dr. Connor while he was
in that Kingdom. His Memoirs inform me, that two Friars whose Names were Father
Lewis, and Father Fulgentius, showed him a Horse-shooe changed into Brass, and
likewise gave him a piece of Iron turned into that Metal by Virtue of a Spring
in Hungary; likewise, that they showed him several pieces of natural Crystal
with running Water in the middle; And moreover, that the latter of these
Fathers presented him with two pieces of Crystal which he had off from the
Mountains of Savoye, and which he affirms to have been as white as Milk when he
first broke them off the Rock, but that they afterward became Diaphanous of
themselves.

Argentum Fulminans made by chance.
I am moreover informed by the same means, that this Father Fulgentius made
Argentum Fulminans by chance; the manner of which was this: He dissolved Silver
in Aqua Fortis, and afterward put crude Tartre pulverized into the
Dissolution, which likewise soon dissolved by the help of a little heat: After
that he evaporated the Humidity, almost to a degree of dryness, in an Earthen
Platter, and then increased the heat, when all of a sudden, without his
expecting any such thing, the Powder flew up into a flash, gave a strange
report, and filled and blackened all the Room where he was with Smoke. Of three
Ounces of the Powder which he had in the Platter, there was scarce three Drams
remained, but the Platter, notwithstanding, continued unbroke. His design in
making this Powder was to Silver something over, for it seems the mixing Liquid
Silver with Tartre will produce that Effect.

Other Experiments.
This Person likewise made an exquisite volatile Salt of little Centaury,
infused into fair Water with Yeast. Also he distilled Water from Roses which
would set Gunpowder on Fire.

Dr. Bernitz's Chs^t of Rarities.
I have now, Sir, but two things more to entertain you with before I come to
the Practice of Physic, etc. in Poland, and one is about Dr. Bernitz, King
John Casimir's Physician's Closet of Rarities, which Dr. Connor says, in his
Memoirs, was shown him by that Physician's Wife at Warsaw, who spoke good
Latin, in which Language he conversed with her. This Collection consisted of a
great number of petrefi'd Bodies of Raisins, Serpents, Wood, Toads, and the
like. It likewise contained a vast variety of Shells, Minerals, and Gums. There
was also a Thermometre, in form of a Serpentine of many degrees, computed by
Elevations upon the Glass, and the least heat of the Hand would cause the
Spirit of Wine to mount sensibly. There was moreover a Sea-Pigeon, or Fish like
to a Pigeon, which hung up by a String; and Doctor Connor says, Dr. Bernitz's
Wife assured him, that it would always turn to that quarter where the Wind sat,
as also that in moist Weather many drops of Water were wont to distill from it.
In this Closet there were moreover many huge Horns of Elks, and several
prodigious Bones of other Creatures. All sorts of Plants also were there well
preserved and pasted upon Paper. There were likewise a great many Designs
painted and drawn very neatly by Dr. Bernitz's own Hand.

Manner, of making Glass.
The other Thing I proposed to inform you of is the manner of making Glass in
Poland, with some circumstances relating thereunto. The Poles make their Glass
of Beech-Ashes and great Pebbles pounded; these they boil together for twelve
Hours, till such time as they begin to Vitrifie. When they have a mind to make
their Glass clearer than ordinary, they are accustomed to mix a particular sort
of Earth with it of the color and hardness of Tartre, which renders the Glass
of different Colors, according to the greater or lesser quantity of this Earth
mixed with it. I may observe that if Salt be mixed in the composition of this
Glass it makes it more fluid and easier to be wrought by the Workman.

Odd Method of Curing Wounds.
Sometimes the Laborers or their Children by treading about barefooted wound
themselves with the pieces of Glass that lie about the Furnace, when they are
accustomed to have recourse to this odd remedy, which is, to take out a
Ladleful of the red hot Metal, and clap it to the part afflicted, which
presently, it seems, draws forth the Splinters of the Glass out of the Flesh,
and afterward upon clapping on an Anodine Plaster, it is soon healed.

Practice of Physic, and Diseases in POLAND.
Practice of Physic.
AS for the Practice of Physic in Poland it is but very imperfect. The Doctors
there know nothing of the Modern Discoveries in Anatomy and Chemistry, nay, the
Materia Medica is hardly known to them, much less improved. The Medicines which
they use are altogether Galenical, and those always of the worser sort. They
are but little acquainted with Modern Authors, and particularly with those of
our Nation, though they have heard of their Names, and will allow that the
English Physicians have improved Physic beyond any other Nation whatever, but
this is still more by hearsay than out of any knowledge they have of us or our
Authors.

What Medicines used
They use all the means of curing Diseases that we do here, such as Mercury,
Steel, Antimony, Jesuits-Powder, Volatile Salts and Spirits, all which are
brought into Poland, chiefly to Warsaw, or else made there by German
Apothecaries. The late Queen's Apothecary was a German, and an expert Chemist.
Though the Poles use the same Medicines as we do, yet are they ignorant of the
Method of applying them. In their Consultations they advance but little reason,
though they quote Presidents and Authors for their Practice.

Diseases what?
As to Diseases they have the same in Poland that are in other Countries;
Venereal Distempers are very frequent, yet Salivation is not so much practiced
there as with us, for they pretend to cure the Lues by Sweating.

Venereal how Cured by a Quack.
Dr Connor says, that in his time there lived an illiterate Fellow in a Wood,
about six Miles from Warsaw, who undertook to Cure all Venereal Distempers in 7
or 8 Days at farthest, and that by a Bagnio, in which he boiled 3 or four sorts
of Plants, which he made a Secret of. The Doctor says, the Helleboraster, and
the Capillus Veneris, or Maiden Hair, as well as he could discover were the
chief. This Quack bathed his Patients in a hot decoction of these Herbs for
four days together, and made them drink of the same frequently while they were
in the Bath. The other four days he laid them over the Tub to receive the hot
Steams of the said Decoction, laying a Blanket over them to intercept any
evaporation, and to drive back the Steams upon the naked Body by way of
Revarberatory, through which means they sweat extremely. While they sweated he
made them Drink of the Decoction as before, so that by thus Sweating, Bathing
and Drinking, Dr. Connor says, it was credibly assured him that he wrought many
wonderful Cures in Venereal Cases* the Doctor says moreover, that it is certain
that a great number of People flocked frequently to him, and that for the whole
Cure he demanded no more than two Rixdollars.

Surprising particulars
For other Diseases the Poles seldom or never know any Scurveys, have rarely
any Malignant Fevers among them, and those never dangerous; and for Plurisies
and the rest of Distempers, they are not for the most part of such ill
consequence in Poland as in other Countries. Wounds and Ulcers in the Legs are
most commonly thought incurable there. Dr. Connor informs me that the Princess
Radzivil, the late King of Poland's Sister, had her Menses at 64 years of Age.
Also, that when he was at Warsaw, a Man having taken Physic, and lying with a
Woman before its Operation, she was forth with violently purged, and he never
so much as once went to Stool.

Diseases peculiar to the Poles, and first the Plica.
I must now come to the two Diseases that are peculiar to the Poles, and so I
will conclude. One of these is called by the Natives, Colton, and by us, Plica,
and the other is termed the Rose. The former is an odd kind of Distemper, and
frequently mentioned in Physick-Authors. Dr. Connor says it is one of the most
remarkable Maladies that he has Its Description.
ever met with, yet is nothing else but the Hair of the Head matted, entangled,
and in terwoven like to fulled Cloth. Sometimes all the Hair of the Head will
be thus Matted, so large that it covers the Shoulders, and so long that it
comes down to the very Wast, which makes them that have it put it into a Purse
that it may hang backwards; but generally speaking, it hangs in twisted Ropes,
and that most commonly on one side only. Others have only their Hair plaited
close to their Heads as little Children that are Scabby have; but however,
those that have the Plica never have any Scabs. Hauteville compares this
twisted Hair to the Ears of a Water-Spaniel. Dr. Connor says, that in his time
a Gentleman at Court had it to that Degree, that his Hair hung like a Mantle
about his Shoulders.

Unaccountableness.
The Hair will be thus entangled in one Nights time, though there be never so
much care taken to prevent it, for the Poles having their Hair always cut round
above their Ears, like to that of Monks, though it had never been combed, yet
were it impossible it should become thus woven all of a sudden out of
slovenlyness and carelessness, as a great many, and Dr. Connor himself says he
believed, before he came into that Country.

Symptoms.
The Symptoms of this Disease are not unlike those of the Lues Venerea, as
Rheumatick, and Arthritique pains, etc. but then they never occasion a Caries
in the Bones, nor any Ulcers in the Mouth or elsewhere. When the Hair is cut it
is commonly said that these Symptoms become more violent, and moreover produce
a cloudiness over the Eyes, and sometimes a total Blindness; also that it
causes Headaches, Pains in the Limbs, Vomitings, the Members all of a sudden
to become distorted and stiff, the Nails of the Fingers to have little white
spots on them, and Pimples and Pustules to come out all over the Body.

Neither Bleeds nor is painful.
Dr. Connor says, however, that Authors mistake when they attribute any such
Accidents to the cutting of Hair in the Plica, for he informs me that he has
cut it himself, and that there neither came Blood, nor was there any Sensation,
neither do the Natives affirm, that there is any upon such an occasion.
Hauteville likewise says he has known the Plica cut without these effects
beforementioned.

Said to be Contagious and Hereditary.
Some pretend that this Disease is contagious, and that if you lie with a Man
that has it, and receive the Sweat from him, you will infallibly have it your
self. Also there are those that are of Opinion that it is Hereditary, but
however, it is certain some have had it whose Parents never had; it is thought
therefore that it must needs proceed from the Nurse, but I shall not pretend to
determine whether it does or not. Some say likewise that it has not always been
in this Kingdom.

Common to Men and Beasts.
This Distemper is common both to Men and Beasts, for Horses, Dogs, etc. have
been frequently known to have had it. Strangers also get it when they have
resided in Poland for any time, but Hauteville says they never have it though
they continue there ever so long, and the reason he gives is, because as soon
as their Hair begins to entangle they cut it off, which he says the Poles dare
not do for fear of making themselves Blind.

Superstition concerning it, and other cases.
The People are so superstitious concerning this Distemper, that there are some
old Women among them that pretend to bring it out upon Children that are
troubled with any languishing Disease, by mixing and twisting their Hair, and
making their Mothers believe that they are only sick because the Plica cannot
break forth. The Poles are likewise very superstitious in other cases, for they
dare not kill a Stork for fear of some misfortune happening to them thereupon.
Besides, what I have mentioned before of their cutting off dead Peoples Heads
is so common a thing, that even the late Queen, upon information that her
Countrymen, the French, died in great numbers in their allotted station in the
City of Warsaw, called from thence Petit Paris, (Little Paris) caused the first
Person of those that died to be inquired out and dug up, and would have had his
Head cut off to prevent a farther Mortality among those People, had not a
Capuchin, her Confessor opposed it, and informed her it was against the Cannons
of the Church: He also was forced to threaten Excommunication against a
Dominican Friar that had Orders to see it done, or it would certainly have been
effected notwithstanding her Majesty was admonished to the contrary.

Where most common.
The Plica is to be met with more commonly in Lithuania than in any other part
of Poland. It is so entirely peculiar to this Kingdom, that none of the
bordering Countries have it, as Muscovy, Tartary, etc.

Its Cure by a Jew.
The Cure of this Distemper was often effected by one Dr. Jonas, a Jew, and
Physician to the late King of Poland, after this manner. He Salivated his
Patients by Friction and Unction, and afterward cut off the Hair without any
dangerous consequences. This Disease is often accompanied with the Alopecia, or
Falling off of the Hair.

Causes Asserted, but Questioned.
Of the cause of the Plica, the Poles give this Account. They say, that the
Tartars having made a great irruption into Poland in the Year 1279, and slain
great numbers of People there, ripped out their Hearts and poisoned them, and
afterward threw them into the Rivers, by which means the Waters became
infected, and those that have since drank of them afflicted with this loathsome
Disease. Notwithstanding this assertion, Dr. Connor says, the true cause
thereof continues yet a secret to Physicians. Strangers generally attribute the
cause of it to slovenliness, and they are confirmed in this opinion, because
they are seldom troubled with it for reasons given before.

Another account of the Plica.
Another Account of this Distemper I have met with in Dr. Connor's Memoirs,
asserted to him by the Bishop of Posnania. That Bishop, it seems, informed him,
that even while he was young he had the Plica, and that upon cutting it with
his own Hands he became dim-sighted for some considerable time, and withal felt
several pains and contorsions in his Limbs. He told him moreover, that he found
diverse seeming Incurvations of his Bones. Afterward the Hair growing again it
began to mat as before, but however, he was forbid, both by his Parents, and
his Tutor, to make use of the same remedy to get rid of it, during which time
his pains totally left him; but at length, being weary of so loathsome a
Companion, he secretly cut off his Hair again, when immediately the former
symptoms began to return with greater Violence than ever. Hereupon all the
Servants of the House were cautioned against letting him have either Knife or
Scissars for the future, to do himself so much injury as he had formerly done,
notwithstanding which, a Kinsman of his commiserating his deplorable condition,
privately conveyed a Knife to him, wherewith he cut off his Locks a third time,
when, he assured the Doctor, he felt a thousand racking pains, and had various
other symptoms of this Disease renewed upon him. He informed him moreover, that
in one Night the Hair will be thus Matted, even in those that take never so
much care in Combing of it. He told him likewise, that the Symptoms and Pains
were much greater when the Hair was often cut, than when it was let grow to any
length. He also said, that the first and second time that he cut his Locks, he
could sensibly perceive a vaporous and volatile matter pass in great abundance
through the Ducts of his Hair, which he said, in its Passage, very much frizled
and contracted his Locks. He moreover affirmed, that when he put a Cap upon his
Head it occasioned him intolerable heats and pain, by reason (said he) that the
pressure thereof repelled the eruption, and forced back the Humors of the
Disease upon his Head.

Hairs Canular.
From this Account of the Bishop of Posnania, besides what we know already by
Microscopes, it evidently appears that every Hair is a kind of a little Tube,
through which the nourishment, as well as those steams he mentioned, may be
reasonably supposed to pass to the utmost Extremities.

The Rose, and its Cure.
The other Disease peculiar to the Poles is the Rose, which Hauteville says is
a sort of Erysipelas, chiefly showing its self in the Face. They are accustomed
to cure this Distemper by applying Powder of white Chalk to the part affected,
without letting Blood, for they look upon that to be dangerous, if not Mortal
in this Case.

SIR,

What particulars have been here compiled for your Diversion, I hope, may be
favorably received, as they are tendered with all imaginable respect by,

SIR, Your Most Obedient Humble Servant, J. S.

LETTER X.
To the Honorable Mr. BRIDGES Eldest Son to my Lord CHANDOIS* and Fellow of
the Royal-Society.
Of the Duchy of Curland, its present State and Government; with an Account of
the Origin and Progress of the Livonian Order, comprehending the several
Successions of its Knights down to Gothotred Ketler, the first Duke of Curland;
As also a succinct Relation of the several Administrations of this Duke and his
Successors.

SIR,

I Hope the Addressing this following Letter to you needs no Apology, since you
were at first designed to bear a part in the Patronage of this History. What
your great Merits entitle you to I shall not pretend to determine here,
reserving that Honor for a more favorable Opportunity, and a better subject,
or at least a more correct Performance.

Sir, The following Account is only the product of a hasty Compilation,
gathered out of a confused Account of this Country, which I could only meet
with in Books. But however, if there be any Beautys discovered, they are to be
ascribed to the ingenious Baron Blomberg, his late Highness the Duke of
Curland's Minister, who, by means of Dr. Connor, has furnished me with some
short Account of the Present State of Affairs in that Duchy. His Authority, I
presume, will not be questioned by reason of his supposed Knowledge of those
matters. A much farther Account was promised by and expected from him, but the
urgency of time (a consideration too much regarded by Booksellers) required
this Abrupt Publication.

Present bounds and extent of Curland.
Sir, the Duchy of Curland, which comprehends the Provinces of Curland and
Semigallia, is bounded on the North and West by the Baltic Sea, on the East by
the Great Duchy of Lithuania, and on the South by the Duchy and Province of
Samogitia. In length it is about 50 great German Leagues, computing from Memel
in Prussia to Riga in Livonia, and reckoning at least six Prussian Leagues to a
Mile. The breadth is different from the Baltic to Lithuania and Samogitia,
being in some places 30, and in others but 24 Leagues broad, and moreover, in
some places less.

Its Soil and former State.
This Duchy is a Plain, Champion, Fruitful Country, and has always been well
Inhabited. It is a part of Livonia, and when under the Teutonic Knights was the
better half of it, but now its Limits are not a little Abridged. Some have
divided Livonia into Regal and Ducal, the former at present being under the
King of Sueden, and the latter under the Duke of Curland. Formerly about the
IXth. Century, this last was likewise Subject to Sueden, but then it paid only
a certain Tribute, for it was never entered upon by the Swedes. Some Authors
have affirmed it to be a Peninsula, but those are easily confuted.

When wholly Conquered.
Curland, as Baron Blomberg says, was not totally subdued till about the Year
1488, when it was conquered by Order of the Teutonic Knights, who for some time
before had been invited thither by Volquinus the II. Master of the Livonian
Order.

Converted to Christianity by degrees.
The first Efforts to convert Livonia to the Christian Faith were made by
Ansgarius the Danish and Suedish Apostle, as may appear by the Testimony of
Adam of Breme, in his Account of the Northern Nations. Afterward, toward the
end of the XIth Century, a certain Merchant, by Order of the King of Denmark
built a Church there, but which had little Effect till a succeeding King of
Denmark, Waldemar II. founded a Bishopric in this Country. However
Christianity gained but little ground in Livonia, till near the XIIth Century,
about the Year 1180, when

I Bishop in Livonia* 1180.
Meinhard de Segeberg of the City of Lubec made further advances therein, and
was first ordained Bishop of Livonia by the Archbishop of Breme.

II Bp and ABp. of Riga. 1194.
To him succeeded Berthold Abbot of Cisteaux in France, who began to build
Riga, and who was first styled Bishop, and afterward Archbishop thereof. This
Archbishop was killed the same Year he was Elected, in a Battle against the
Infidels.

III ABp. of Riga* 1194.
Next came one Albert to be chosen, in whose time the Order of Livonian Knights
was instituted by the Pope, to make a speedier Progress in planting the
Christian Religion here.

I Absolute Master of Livonian Order, 1205.
The first Master of this Order was Vinno, who built Wenda, Segenwald, and
Ascherod* In his time likewise Waldemar II. King of Denmark built Reval, Nerva,
and Wittenburg in Eastland and Pilten in Curland, where he had before
established a Bishopric. There goes a Story of the founding of this City,
which is this. When King Waldemar had resolved to build here, he demanded of
Ernemodus the Bishop which he had appointed over that Diocese, where he should
lay the Foundation? To which the Bishop replied, If your Majesty please, let it
be yonder, where that Boy stands. Hence it seems the City came to have the Name
of Pilten, that Word in the Idiom of this Country, as Pontanus affirms,
signifying a Boy, or Servant. Vinno, after 18 years Administration of this
Government resigned it to

II Absolute Master, 1223.
Volquinus, who, in the same Year built Felin in Eastland. Afterward this
Master in the Year 1234 requested of Herman a Salza, Great Master of the
Teutonic Knights in Prussia, that his Order might be admitted to have the same
Rules and Habit with theirs, but which was at that time refused; nevertheless,
after the Death of Volquinus, it was obtained in the Year 1238, and confirmed
soon after by Pope Gregory IX. and the Emperor Frederic II.

III Master, 1238.
Hereupon Herman Balke was dispatched from the Prussian Order to the Livonian
Knights to be their Provincial Master.

IV Master, 1240.
Next came Heinric ab Heimburg to be their Master, neither who, nor his
Predecessor Herman Balke, molested the Curlanders with Wars, who as yet
continued Pagans, as Volquinus and Vinno had done.

V Master, 1248.
After him Dietericus a Groningen was Elected and sent from Prussia for their
Provincial Master. He marched against the Curlanders with all his Force, and
took in several places that opposed him, and afterward built Goldingen in the
Province of Curland. Hereupon the Curlanders fearing that they might be obliged
to receive the Christian Doctrine against their Wills, submitted themselves to
the protection of Mindog then Duke of Lithuania, although the Lithuanian Writers
say, that Curland had long before that been under their Jurisdiction.

VI Master, 1250.
The Fourth Provincial Master of the Livonian Order was Andrew a Stuckland, who
managed his affairs so vigorously, that the Semigallian Pagans soon submitted
to pay Tribute and Obedience to the Teutonic Order, and afterward by the
persuasions of this Master, the aforesaid Mindog, having formally received the
Christian Faith, and been Crowned King of Lithuania by Henry Bishop of Culm,
and Albert Archbishop of Riga, by an Order from Pope Innocent IV. He, among
other Provinces, restored Curland to the Livonian Order, in the Year 1252.

Notwithstanding this voluntary Concession to these Knights, yet were not the
Curlanders to be so easily subjected, for we find in almost all the following
Masters Lives, that they had various Wars with these People.

VII Master.
The Fifth Provincial Master of this Order was Eberth, C. a Seine.

VIII Master,
The Sixth Provincial Master was Hanno de Sangerhausen.

IX Master.
The Seventh Provincial Master was Burghardus ab Hornhusen.

X Master.
The Eighth Provincial Master was Georgius ab Eikstet.

XI Master.
The Ninth Provincial Master was Vernerus a Breithusen.

XII Master.
The Tenth Provincial Master was Conrade a Mandern, who in the Year 1269 built
Mittaw in Semigallia.

XIII Master.
The Eleventh Provincial Master was Otho a Rodenstein.

XIV Master,
The Twelfth Provincial Master was Andrew, whose Surname is forgot.

XV Mast r,
The Thirteenth Provincial Master was Walter a Nordeck.

XVI Master.
The Fourteenth Provincial Master was Ernestus a Rasborg.

XVII Master.
The Fifteenth Provincial Master was Conrade a Feuchtwangen.

XVIII Master.
The Sixteenth Provincial Master was Willekenus a Schurborcg, slain in Battle.

XIX. Master. 1488.
The Seventeenth Provincial Master was Conrade Herzogenstein, under whose
Administration the sturdy Semigallians were totally subdued, although some say
they afterward gave frequent disturbances to this Order.

The rest of the Provincial Masters Names I do not find till we come to

III. Absclute Master. 1513.
Walter Plettenberg, who, upon Albert Marquess of Brandenburgh's resigning his
Order to Sigismundus Augustus King of Poland, obtained leave from that Great
Master to be freed from his subjection which happened about the Year 1513.

From that time the Livonian Masters were accustomed by consent of their
Chapter to nominate Assistants in their Office, such were

IV. Abso-Master.
William Fursteberg Assistant, or Coadjutor to Henry a Galen, the fourth
Absolute Master of the Livonian Order, and

V. Absolute Master.
Gothotred Ketler Coadjutor to William Plettenberg, the fifth Absolute Master
of this Order. Under this Master, Luther's Doctrine prevailed in several Cities
of Livonia, such as Riga, Reval, Dorpat, etc.

VI. Absolute Master. 1560.
The last Absolute Master of this Order was Gothotred Ketler, who was
afterward made Duke of Curland and Semigallia by Sigismundus Augustus King of
Poland.

Residence of this Order.
The Seat of this Order from the first Institution thereof has been at several
places, but however, generally was at Riga on the River Duna, but which they
were forced to quit about the Year 1558, when John Basilowitz, Tyrant of
Muscovy, came with a dreadful Army and destroyed the adjacent Countries,
threatening likewise to conquer Livonia. Hereupon the Livonian Knights
immediately Addressed themselves to the Emperor Charles V. for assistance, but
he being engaged in a War against Solomon Emperor of the Turks, told them they
must provide for their Security by other means, for he was not at leisure to
help them. This Answer occasioned them forthwith to divide themselves into two
parts, whereof those that were on the other side Duna submitted to the Suedes,
and those on this side to the King of Poland, Sigismundus Augustus, which last
to return the favor, erected Curland and Semigallia into Dutchies, and gave
them to Gothotred Ketler, then Master of the Livonian Order, and to his Heirs
for ever.

I. Duke of Curland, 1561.
This happening not long after Luthers Reformation, influenced Duke Gothotred
to become a Protestant, and to Marry, which none of his Order had ever done
before him. This Duke had two Sons Ferderic, and William, whereof the eldest,

II. Duke. 1587.
Frederic succeeded him in the Year 1587, but at length dying without issue
these Dukedoms came to his Brother

III. Duke. 1602.
William, who returning from banishment was received by the Curlanders with a
great deal of Applause. This Duke had but one only Son, who was Godson to our
King James I. After his Death his Son Duke

IV. Duke. 1639.
James came to inherit the two Dutchies of Curland and Semigallia.

Discovers Tobago, and enjoys it.
This Prince was much given to building of Ships, having every thing in his
Country proper for that purpose.

By means of Shipping he discovered the River Semigal in Guinea, and the Island
of Tobago one of the Caribbee Islands in America, which then was altogether
uninhabited. Here he built a Fort, calling it by his own Name, James-Fort, and
moreover was at vast expenses in Cultivating and Fortifying this Island, and
which he enjoyed without any interruption for many Years together.

Is deprived of it.
At length one Lambson a Zealander, and a very rich Man, as likewise one of the
States of Holland, getting into a corner of this Island, and after much
dispute, being suffered to Plant there upon paying a yearly Tribute to the
Duke, he at last took advantage of the War between the Suedes and Poles, and of
the Duke's Imprisonment by the former, to dispossess him of the said Island,
which he effected after this manner. He appeared with some Forces before the
aforesaid James-Fort, and persuading the Garrison that the Duke their
Protector, being carried away Prisoner by the Suedes, could not possibly
relieve them, and that therefore they must necessarily perish, unless they
forthwith delivered up the Fort and Island to him, the Soldiers began
immediately to Mutiny, chained their Governor, and forced him to capitulate and
comply with the said Lambson, who at the same time engaged himself, as soon as
the Duke was set at liberty, to restore the Island, and what was left there,
according to an Inventory then taken.

Proposes means to recover it.
The Dutch being thus got into possession of this Island, the Duke, after many
long and fruitless endeavors, with the Lambsons first, and afterward with the
States, sinding that neither of them were enclinable to Restitution, applied
himself to our King Charles II. for assistance in recovery of his Right,
submitting the Island altogether to the King's Protection, as being willing to
hold it Subtitulo Concessionis, or by a Grant from the Crown of England,
whereupon the ensuing Treaty was formally concluded, which for a greater
eclaircisement of the matter I have thought not improper to insert. The
Agreement was in these Words.

Agreement between the K. of England and D. of Curland.
BE it known unto all and singular Person and Persons to whom these Presents
shall come, That on the 17th of the Month of November, in the Year of Our Lord
1664. by a double Writing of the same Tenure and Language, it was Agreed,
between the most Serene and most Potent Prince, Charles II. by the Grace of
God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. of
the one part. And the most Illustrious Prince, James Duke in Livonia of Curland
and Semigallia on the other part; That the said Lord the King by these Presents
does give and grant to the said Lord, the Duke of Curland, his Heirs and
Successors, full liberty of Trade and Commerce, for such Ships as do properly
belong to him or them, but not such Ships as belong to any of his Subjects in
any Rivers or Havens within the Dominions of His Majesty, on Grant of Trade in
Africa.
the Coast of Africa, which is called by the Name of Guinea; as also in any
Merchandise not exceeding the value of Twelve thousand Pounds Sterling yearly,
according to the Prices the said Merchandises first were bought for, on those
Coasts and Places from whence they were exported, together with full liberty to
build one or more Warehouses or Storehouses, fit for laying up Merchandises,
under the Castles and Forts, which shall belong to his said Majesty or his
Subjects on those Coasts, to hold and enjoy the said Liberties as long as there
does continue Friendship, Amity, and good Understanding between the said King
and the said Duke, and upon due consideration of the Concession or Grant thus
made by His Majesty, the said Duke of Curland Grants and makes over unto His
said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the Fort of St. Andrews in Guinea, and
all other Forts, Fortifications, and Sconces there, belonging to the said Duke,
together with all Guns, Bullets, and Powder, and other Instruments of War
belonging to the same, or any of those Forts.

Upon what Conditions.
And the said Duke of Curland does Agree and Promise, for himself, his Heirs,
and Successors, that they shall respectively pay to the said Lord the King, his
Heirs, and Successors, three in the hundred for Customs of all Goods and
Merchandises in Specie, as well into the Ports of His said Majesty in Guinea,
or thence exported, as aforesaid, and that unto such Officer or Officers, whom
or which his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors shall establish or depute for
the recovering or receiving of the said Customs or Duties.

Grant of the Island Tabago.
And moreover, his said Majesty by these Presents does give and grant to the
said Duke of Curland, his Heirs, and Successors, all and every that Island
called Tobago, situate about 12 Degrees North-Latitude, and 316 Degrees of
Longitude, being one of those commonly called the Caribbee Islands, together
with all the Lands, Havens, Creeks, Rivers, and Profits to the same belonging,
to be held and enjoyed under the King's Protection.

Under what Considerations.
Provided always and under the Condition, that the said Duke of Curland, his
Heirs and Successors shall not suffer or permit any others whatsoever besides
his own Subjects, and the Subjects of the said Lord the King, his Heirs, and
Successors to abide in the said Island, to settle Plantations, or build Houses,
but the Subjects of the said Lord the King, his Heirs, and Successors shall be
always freely permitted to abide in the said Island, and to have Plantations
and Houses and to enjoy all such Privileges, Liberties, Immunities, and
Benefits as any of the Subjects of the said Duke, his Heirs, and Successors
shall or may have, hold, use, or enjoy, without any Contradiction or Opposition
whatsoever; neither shall they be compelled to pay any other Contributions or
Impositions whatsoever, saving such as are necessarily required for the defense
of the said Island, and equally in the same proportion paid by the Subjects of
the said Duke. Moreover, the said Lord Duke Agrees and Promises, that neither
himself, his Heirs, and Successors, nor any other for the use of him, them, or
his Subjects, shall Export, or Import, or suffer to be Exported or Imported any
Merchandises, Goods, or Provisions of the said Island of Tobago otherwise, then
out of, or into some Ports belonging to England and Curland, or the Ports of
the City of Dantzic.

Duke obliged to Aid the King in War.
Moreover, for the acknowledgment that the said Duke of Curland does hold and
enjoy the said Island of Tobago, from and under his said Majesty it is further
Provided and Agreed, that when, and as often as the said Lord the King, his
Heirs, or Successors shall so require it, or when he or they are engaged in a
War against another King, Prince or State, except only the King of Poland, the
Duke of Curland, his Heirs, and Successors, at their own proper Costs and
Charges from time to time, shall bring or cause to be brought one good Man of
War, furnished with 40 great Iron Guns, to such Ports, Station, or Place, which
his said Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors shall Name, into which Ship, his
Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors shall put Commanders and Seamen, and supply
them with Food and Wages, under the Conduct, and at the Expenses of the said
King, so long as the said Ship shall abide in his or their Service, which at
one time shall never exceed the limits of a Year.

For the Testimony and undoubted Confirmation whereof, the abovesaid Parties,
namely, the most Serene and most Potent King of Great Britain, and the most
Illustrious Duke of Curland, have set their Hands interchangeably to the mutual
Agreement, contained and explained in these Presents, and moreover have applied
their Great Seals for the Establishment thereof.

A Letter sent hereupon, but with little Effect.
Hereupon, at the Instance of the Duke of Curland's Minister, His Majesty King
Charles II. sent a Letter to the States General, to acquaint them with this his
Grant, and to recommend to their considerations the just Pretentions of the
said Duke to this Island; but notwithstanding, the States enclining to favor
the Lambson's Interest, who had the Impudence to call this a sham-Grant,
affirming, that his Majesty could not give that which was none of his to
dispose of; the said Royal Letter had little or no Effect, till it happened
that Count d' Etree the French Admiral took the Island, and made there a
miserable slaughter and Extirpation of the Dutch, but who thought fit to quit
the Possession of it soon after.

French beg the Island of their King.
Notwithstanding several of the French Gentry and Merchants having a Prospect
of Benefit before their Eyes, afterward Solicited their King to Grant the
said Conquered Island to them, but which he generously refused, declaring that
it belonged to a Neutral Prince who did no body any harm.

A second Letter from K. Charles.
Hereupon, the Duke, without further loss of time, prepared to send Ships to
take possession of his Right, and upon his Request King Charles was pleased to
favor him with his second Royal Letter to the Government of Barbados,
directed to the then Governor Sir Jonathan Atkins, and dated the 19th of
January 1680, whereby that Governor was ordered not only to permit and suffer
the Commanders and Officers of the said Ships to provide and furnish themselves
with what they might stand in need of, but likewise to be aiding and assisting
to them with his Authority, wherever there should be found occasion.

A Letter Intercepted.
The like Letter was some time before dispatched from King Charles to the said
Government by one of the Duke's Ships, called the Flower-Pot, but which,
together with the Ship was betrayed to the Pirates of Algiers by one Captain
Nagel the Commander.

The Duke sends Governors.
Upon the Governor of Berbadoes's Receipt of the aforesaid Royal Letter, the
Duke was encouraged to send a Governor to Tobago, and soon after several others
from time to time to keep possession thereof, till by assistance of the English
he might be able to establish a Colony there.

Makes a Contract with a Captain.
In 1681 the Duke entered into a Contract with Captain Pointz, granting 120000
Acres of the said Island to him and Company upon very advantageous terms.

Description of Tobago.
This Island lies very commodiously among the Caribbees or Antilles, having
many excellent Havens and Rivers, and affording diverse good Products, and would
be of very dangerous consequence to the English either in French or Dutch
Hands, for,

Why necessary to be English Hands.
First, when in the Years 1664, 1665, and 1666 it was in the possession of the
Dutch, they took in the Wars several hundred Sail of Ships belonging to the
Subjects of England, either going or coming from the Plantations, and brought
them to Tobago; but on the contrary, were it in the English Hands under the
Duke of Curland, their Allegiance would prevent for the future the like Damages.

Secondly, in the said Wars both French and Dutch made up their Fleets at the
said Island, and took and plundered St. Christopher's, Mountserat, Antegoa,
Berbudas, etc. to the great Damage of the English.

Thirdly, King Charles was at excessive Charge in fitting out a Fleet to
preserve Mevis from being taken by the Dutch in the said Wars.

And Fourthly, the said Island being accommodated with Harbors and Roads
beyond any other of the Caribbees, might probably shelter Enemies to the
English Crown, when if it were in their Hands that inconveniency would be
prevented.

Tobacco whence so called.
Much more might be added concerning this Island, but for brevity sake it is
omitted, only I may take notice, that a French Geographer supposes, that either
Tobacco has taken its Name from this Island, or this Island has been so called
from that Weed.

Duke James's Marriage and Issue.
This Duke James, upon his succeeding his Father in the Duchy of Curland, was
Married to Chariotte the Daughter of George William Elector of Brandenburg, the
last Elector Frederic William's Sister, who died in 1676, by whom he had the
late Duke Frederic Casimir, Prince Ferdinand, Lieutenant General in the Elector
of Brandenburgh's Army, and Prince Alexander, who was wounded by a Cannon-Ball
at the Siege of Buda, and who died in his way to Vienna, and three Princesses,
whereof Louis Elizabeth Married Frederic Landtgrave of Hesse, of the Line of
Hambourg. Mary Amalia Married May 21, 1673, Charles, Landtgrave of Hesse, of
the Line of Cassel. And the third, Charlotte, lives still unmarry'd in the King
of Sueden's Court.

Duke James was succeeded by his Eldest Son.

VI Duke. His Marriage and Issue. 1683.
Frederic Casimir, but now lately deceased, who, while he was Prince, served
under our present King in Holland in the first French War, bringing several
Regiments of Horse and Dragoons along with him, and there Married Princess
Sophia Amalia of Nassau-Siegen, who died in Childbed on the 25th of December
1688, By this Duchess he has three Princesses alive. He was a second time
Married at Berlin, in the Year 1691, to the Princess Elizabeth Sophia, the
present Elector of Brandenburgh's Sister, by whom he had two or more Sons. This
Duke died at Mittaw about the beginning of February, School, and is succeeded by
his Eldest Son

VII Duke, School.
Frederic Casimir II. the present Duke, being a Child, not above six years of
Age.

D. of Curland Vassal to Poland.
The Duke of Curland is Vassal to the Crown of Poland, in like manner as the
Electors are to the Emperor, for when any new King is Elected there, this Duke
is obliged to send his Envoy to receive investiture, by having a Standard
delivered with the Arms of Poland on one side, and those of Curland on the
other. After this the Envoy is permitted to sit down, to cover his Head, and
has great civilities paid him.

His Privilege and Power.
This Duke has all the Regalia that the German Sovereign Princes have. He Coins
Money in his own Name, and has high and low Justice over the Noblemen of his
Country, only in some extraordinary cases Appeals may be made to the Court of
Poland.

Revenue and Court.
He has great Demesns, of which his Revenue chiefly consists, and keeps a very
pretty Court, having all his great Officers as other Princes have. The chiefest
of which are,

Chief Officers.
The Landhoff-Meister, or chief Minister.

The High Chancellor.

The Supreme Marshal, and,

The Supreme Burgrave.

These are the Four great State Officers. The more inferior are,

The Counselors of State which are the Supreme Starostas, whereof two are for
Curland, viz.

The Supreme Starostas of Goldingen and Tuczkon;

And two for Semigallia, viz.

The Supreme Starostas of Mittaw and Selburg.

Qualifications of Supreme Stagostas.
These Sta^ostas ought all to be Noble, Natives, and Landed-Men.

Next follow the Governors of Places, Military-Officers, etc.

Conditions of Gentry.
The Gentry of this Country are very Ancient and very free, being exceedingly
Jealous of suffering any Upstart Nobleman to come among them, esteeming nothing
so much as Ancient Families and Creations.

Addition concerning Livonian Order.
Before I proceed to give a farther account of this Country, I must add a word
or two more concerning the Livonian Order, and which I could not have done
before, unless I had broke the Chain of the Connection.

Principal Master how and where chosen.
The Provincial Master of this Order, was wont to be chosen by the Great
Chapter of Prussia; whereupon, when in the Year 1439. the Livonian Knights had
Elected one Henry a Bukenode for their Master, they were forced to give a
reason for their having so done, and notwithstanding were afterward obliged to
submit to a new Election in Prussia.

Marshal of the Order. Number of Comendadors.
Next the Provincial Master of the Livonian Order, was the Marshal of the Order.

After whom came the several Commendadors and the Advocates. The Commendadors
were in number Eleven, whereof the two first were in Curland, and the third in
Semigallia.

Number of Advocates. Title Habit and Arms of this Order.
The Advocates were Nine, two having been of Curland, and one of Semigallia.

These Knights had the Title of the Order of Sword-Bearers, and their Habits
Arms were a White Mantle, with a Sword on the Breast in Pale, and a Star Gules
in Chief; but after their joining with the Teutonick Order, they had likewise
their Habit and Cross.

Geographical Description of Curland.
For a Geographical Description of this Country, I must acquaint you, Sir, that
the two Dutchies of Curland and Semigallia, have these several principal Cities
and Towns, for I cannot meet with any sub-division into Jalatinates or
Districts, as I have performed in Poland.

In the Duchy of Curland are the several Cities and Towns of
Goldingen, Cap. Vinda, Bish. Pilten. Liba. Erdwalen. Angermund. Grubin.
Tuczkon. Frawenburg. Vschwend. Talsen. Candaw. Durben. Hasenpot and Oendange.
Cities and Towns of Goldingen.
Of all which, the chief City, is

Goldingen, in Latin Goldinga, a City that stands on the Banks of the River
Wete, about seven German Miles from Vinda or Windaw to the West, and near
fifteen from Mittaw in Semigallia to the East, This City has a large
Jurisdiction.

Vinda.
Vinda or Windaw, called by the Poles, Kiescz, is a City and Palatinate: It has
a Castle Residence of Knights.
built on the Sea-shoar, and which was formerly Residence to the Livonian
Knights, as likewise the place where they convened their Parliament or General
Assemblies. Now it has usually a Garrison of Poles, but which are nevertheless
under command of the Duke of Curland. This City is one of the Seaports of
Curland, the other being Liba.

Pilten.
Pilten, is a Town and Palatinate of this Duchy, whose Gentry being
Protestants, and offering themselves to the King of Poland's Protection, he
endeavored to re-establish a Popish Bishop there (this having formerly been a
Catholic Bishopric) whose Lands they then possessed; whereupon they altered
their Resolutions, and forthwith submitted to the Duke of Curland.

Richest Gentry in Curland.
These are the richest Gentry in this Prince's Dominions, whereof the principal
Families are those of Maydel, Beher, Sacken, Mandevil, etc.

In the Duchy of Semigallia are the Cities and Towns of Mittaw Metropolis of
these Dominions.
Bauske. Doblin. Selburg. Radziwiliski. Nithaw. Birze. Pozwole. Lunka. Dalen.
Schudding. Pilkall. Beher. Nersten and Salatt.

Of all which the Capital of this Duchy and Metropolis of the Duke of
Curland's Dominions, is,

Mittaw.
Mittaw, in Latin, Mittavia or Mittovia, the usual place of Residence of the
Dukes of Curland. This City is built on the River Musza, and is a pretty large
place, containing about Twelve Thousand Inhabitants.

It has a weak Wall, though nevertheless a well Its Castle.
Fortified, and stately Castle with two Bastions, which are surrounded by
Marshes, and defended by a strong and numerous Garrison.

Streets and Houses.
The streets of this City are not Paved for want of Stone, and the Citizens
Houses are either of Brick or Timber, as in Poland.

How distant from other places
This place lies about seven Polish Miles from Riga, in Regal- Livonia, and
only four from the Prontiers of Samogitia.

How often Conquered.
It has been twice taken of late by the Swedes, but has been since regained,
and is at present wholly subject to its Duke.

Bauske.
Bauske, another strong City in this Duchy, which has a well Fortified Castle
and a numerous Garrison.

Religions in Curland.
The Religion of this Country is generally Lutheran, though there are some few
Roman Catholics and Calvinists there.

Two Roman Catholic Churches.
In favor of the first, the late Duke at the King of Poland's request, gave
leave for the building of two Roman Catholic Churches, one at Mittaw, and the
other at Goldingen. The Jesuits pretend to have bought this Cureteship of
Mittaw, and upon that account, to have settled there; but nevertheless they are
frequently oppressed, and their College was broke down not long since, yet
notwithstanding they still subsist.

Calvin^^ Church at Mittaw.
The Dutchesses of Curland having been all hitherto Calvinists, have always had
one Church at Mittaw, set a part for them and their Religion, where the
Calvinists and Protestants of Livonia, as likewise the English Merchants of
Riga, come to Exercise their Devotion, there being no liberty of Conscience
allowed throughout the King of Sweden's Dominions, except at Stockholm only,
where the French Huguenots have been permitted to build a Church.

Government of Curland.
As to the Government of Curland, there is first,

The Parliament.
The Parliament, or General Assembly of the States of this Duteby, which is
convened after this manner: The Duke, as often as any Urgencies of State so
require it, sends out his Letters of Summons to all the Starostas of his
Dominions, together with a Schedule of the Points proposed to be debated on,
requiring them, and every of them, to cause Deputies, or Representatives of the
Gentry, to be forth with Elected in their respective Jurisdictions; whereupon
they are soon Elected accordingly, and furnished with Instructions from their
Electors, how they shall behave themselves in like manner as in Poland. These
afterward meeting at Mittaw, together with the four Supreme Counselors,
consult about the good of the Public.

Court of Supreme Counselors.
Next the four Supreme Counselors, or Ministers of State, meet twice every
Year, that is, on the Epipbany and Trinity Monday at Mittaw, and sit at least
five Weeks to exercise and do Justice.

The First Week is usually spent in State-Counsels, where the Princes Presence
and Authority is likewise required.

The second is taken up in judging Appeals from inferior Courts.

The Third in determining Criminals Cases.

The Fourth in settling Ecclesiastical Affairs.

And the Fifth in hearing Complaints of, and receiving Petitions from the
Subjects.

Degrees of demanding Justice.
The degrees of demanding Justice in Cities in all extraordinay matters, are
these:

First, The Gentry apply themselves to the Supreme Starosta (for it must be
observed, that the inferior Starostas have little jurisdiction but in small
matters.)

Secondly, In Case of Appeals, they have recourse to the supreme Counselors
Court. In Criminal Cases, where the life of any Nobleman is concerned,
immediate Application is made to this Court, and the four Supreme Starostas are
obliged to assist there. If any of these Starostas happen to be absent, one
that is inferior may be deputed in his room.

Thirdly, Appeals may be made both in Criminal and Civil Cases, to the Court of
Poland, which the Curlanders term Judicia Post-Curialia.

Ecclesiastical Courts.
Ecclesiastical Courts are held by the four Supreme Counselors before
mentioned in conjunction with a Sur-intendant, and four Provosts.

City Courts
The Inferior City Courts belong to the City Magistracy, or to the
Neighboring Starostas, within whose Jurisdiction the Offender lives. Appeals
in these trivial Courts can be made no farther than to the Supreme Starostas,
whose Sentence is Final.

Ministerial Officers
The Executors of Justice in Curland are termed die Man-Richters, who in Civil
Cases, after a third Summons to satisfy the Plantiff, and upon Nonperformance,
or Non-Plea, levy the Debt or Demand by way of Distress.

Trade of Curland.
The Trade of Curland consists in much the same Commodities, as in Poland.

Corn in great request and wherefore.
The Corn of Curland and Livonia is fought after by the Dutch more than that of
Poland, by reason, that it is better prepared and cured here, than in other
Countries; for they are accustomed to dry their Corn in the Straw as we do
Malt, and afterward to thrash both together. But this consumes a great deal of
Wood, and therefore the King of Sweden has forbid it to be practiced any where
within his Dominions.

Where Curland is to revers to Poland.
I had almost forgot to acquaint you, Sir, that this Duchy of Curland,-in case
the Duke thereof wants Heirs-Males, is to revert to the Crown of Poland, in
like manner as Ducal-Prussia is to do from the Elector of Branden burg.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored to make what use I could of my short time and
imperfect helps to entertain you, but which I have a great deal of reason to
despair of accomplishing, unless I could have produced something more Accurate
in its kind; nevertheless, I hope you will dispense with my Inabilities, and
accept the Good Will of

SIR, Your very Humble and Obedient Servant, J. S.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
VOL. I.
A
ALexander (King) When Crowned, and how long Reigned, Page, 67. His Wars and
Death, 68. His Character, Ibid. Alexander (Prince) His Character, 189. Affected
by the Queen, ibid.
B
BOleslaus, I. His Wars, 26. Institutes XII. Senators, his Assistants, Ibid.
His Character and Death, ibid. II. How long Reigned, 29. His Wars, Marriages
and Vices, ibid. Flight out of the Kingdom and Death, 30. III. His Surname and
Wars, 31. etc. His Marriage, 32. Valor and Success, 33. Death, Issue and
Character, ibid. IV. When Elected, and how long Reigned, 35. His Wars, ibid.
His Death, 36. V. His Surname and Guardians, 43. When Elected, and how long
Reigned, ibid. His Marriage, ibid. His Troubles, 44. Retires into Hungary,
ibid. Returns, 45. Farther Troubles and Wars, ibid. His Death, ibid. Batori
vide Stephen. Bishop. Of Cracow, Lord over 13 Cities, 223. His Chapter, ibid.
Bresty, (City) Its Description, 234. Braclaw, (Pal.) Chief Cities and Towns,
277. Descriptions, ibid. Braclaw, (City) Its Description, 277. Belsko, (Pal.)
Description, 280. Division into Districts, ibid. Chief Cities and Towns, 281.
Their Descriptions, ibid. Belsko, (City) Its Description, 281. Byelsko, (Cap.
of Podlachia) Its Description, 297. Broscia, (Pal.) One district, 330. Chief
Cities and Towns, ibid. Descriptions, 331. Its Arms, 332. Brescia, (City) Its
Description, 331. Bears Nourish Children, 342. Story of one, ibid. Assertion
confirmed by the King, 343. Another account from the Dutch Ambassador, ibid,
etc. A third Account from Hartknock, 348.
C.
City. The First, 6. The Second, ibid. Cracus. His Death, 13. His Issue, ibid.
Cracow. When and by whom built, 12. University by whom Founded, 59. Taken by
Stratagem, 132. Where Situate and how distant from other Places, 238. Whence
its Name, ibid. Its Division, Castle, and Cathedral, 238, etc. When first made
a Metropolitan See, 240. How many Churches, ibid. Its University and
Professors, ibid. etc. Its Colleges, 241. Vice Chancellor, ibid. Monasteries
and Mendicants, 242. Its Houses, ib. Mayor of Cracow, 248. Government of the
Castle, 249. Chrobry vi. Boleslaus I. Casimir I. Queen Regent during Minority,
ibid. He becomes Monk, ibid. Recalled upon Agreement with the Pope, ibid. His
Marriage, Wars, Death, and Issue, 28. II. When Elected, and how long Reigned,
37. Surnamed the Just, and an Example, ibid. etc. Eases his Subjects of Taxes,
38. Conspiracy against him, ibid. Disappointed, 39. His Wars, ibid. Death and
Issue, ibid. III. Surnamed the Great, 50. When Elected, and how long Reigned,
ibid. Makes Peace with Teutonic Knights, ibid. His Conquests, ibid. Good Deeds,
ibid. Character, other Wars, and Death, 55. IV. When Elected, and how long
Reigned, 63. His Marriage, ibid. Assists the Prussians, 64. Routs Teutonic
Order, ibid. Obtains advantageous Peace, ibid. His Issue, 65. His Death and
Age. Curland and Semigallia. First Duke, 77. Enjoyed by his Posterity ever
since, ibid. Common Wealth (Jocular) of Babina, 79. Candidates for the Crown.
After the death of Sigismundus Augustus, 85. After the Abdication of Henry of
Valois, 87. After the death of Stephen Batori, 104. Two of these come into
Poland, 108. After Uladislaus VII. 125. After John Casimir, 140. After Michael
Wiesnowiski, 155. After John Sobieski, 235. Courts of Justice none, 90. Batori
erects two called Tribunals, ibid. Were to determine Civil Causes without
Appeal, ibid. Cosacks. How so termed, 94. Used to make Inroads, ibid. To whom
compared, ibid. Reduced to a Discipline, ibid. Whence their Name, ibid. Extent
of their first Dominions, 95. A Conjecture about this Country, ibid. Its
present Extent, 96. Their Buildings, ibid. Character, ibid. Religion, 97.
Fasts, ibid. Language, 98. Customs and Manners, ibid. Abundance of Flies and
Locusts, ibid. Their Customs and Manners in Peace and War, 99. Their Rebellion,
146. Are favored by the Turks, ibid. Produces a bad Peace, ibid. Conti,
(Prince of) Pretends to the Crown of Poland, 205. Proclaimed King by the
Primate, 206. Sent for into Poland, 207. Favored by Prince Sapieha, ibid.
Comes to Dantzic, ibid. Gives over his Pret^nsions, 208. etc. Cujavia,
(Territory.) Division into Palatinates, 234. Chief Cities and Towns, ibid.
Cracovia, (Palatinate.) Its division into Districts, 237. Cities and Towns,
ibid. Their several Descriptions, 238, etc. Castellan's Power, 248.
Czentochova, (a Town.) Famous for a Convent, 244. Cruswick, (City.) Its
Description, 235. Culm, (Pal.) Joined by the Territory of Michalovia, 260.
Chief Cities and Towns, ibid. Their several Descriptions, ibid. etc. Culm,
(City.) Its Description, 260. Caminiec, (City.) Its description, 275. Built,
320. Chelm, (Pal.) Division into Districts, 282. Chief Cities and Towns, ibid.
Their descriptions, ibid. etc. Chelm, (City.) Its description, 282. Crasnistaw,
(Town.) Its description, 282.
D.
Denmark. Its King taken Prisoner, II. Dantzic. Made a City, 39. Dantzickers
reduced, 89, etc. First allowed a Vote, 120. Deputies first admitted to the
Diet, 65. Diet. Convened, 85, 101, 119, 124, 140, 154, 205. Dobrina, (Pal.) In
what abounds, 289. Division into Districts, ibid. Chief Cities and Towns, 290.
Their Descriptions, ibid. etc. Dobrina, (City.). Its description, 290.
E.
Election. By Horse-race, 15. Peaceable, 118. Of Sigisimund de Vasa 106. Of
Uladislaus VII. 119. Of John Casimir, 124. Of Michael Wiesnowiski, 144. Of John
Sobieski, 155. Ambassadors. Admitted to Audience, 105, 120, 141, 159. Elbing,
(Town.) Its description, 263.
F.
Family of Lechus, 11, etc. Cracus, from 12 to 14. Leschus II. from 15 to 17.
Piastus, from 21 to 57. Jagello, from 58 to 82. Factions. Lutheran and
Catholic, 102. Not to be United, 103. The former Mutiny, ibid. Suppressed,
ibid. Three Factions, 103. Lutheran's Policy, 105. Frederic August (King.)
Elected, 207. Takes possession of Cracow, ibid. Crown*d, ibid. Reasons why he
is likely to restore Poland, 209. First German Prince that has been King, ibid.
G.
Great Poland, (Province.) Its Division, 220. Palatinates, 221. Their several
Cities and Towns, ibid. etc. Their Arms, 226, etc. Gnesna, (City.) Its
description, 223. Great Dukes of Lithuania. Their several Lives, from 310 to
324. Grodno, (City.) Its description, 329.
H.
Henry I. Elected and Dethroned, 48. Appoints a Successor in vain, ibid.
Hedwigis, (Queen) comes into Poland, 58, Is Crowned, and how long Reigned,
ibid. Has several Suitors, ibid. Marries Jagello, 59. Dies, ibid. Henry of
Valois, (King) Sent for by the Diet, 85. Agrees to Articles and takes an Oath,
ibid. etc. Is Crowned, 86. Abdicates Poland, 87. Embassies sent after him in
vain, ibid. House of Austria Jealous of Sigismund I's. greatness, 71. Raises
Enemies against him, ibid. How came by Hungary, Bohemia, and Silesia, ibid.
Habit of the Poles, 177. Heilsberg, (City.) Its description, 263. Halicz,
(Town.) Its description, 271.
I.
Jagello, Great Duke of Lithuania Becomes Christian, 59. Crowned King of
Poland, and how long Reigned, ibid. Converts the Lithuanians, ibid. Founds the
University of Cracow, ibid. His Wars, ibid. Death and Issue, 60. John Albert,
(King.) His Character, 66. Policy and Army defeated, ibid, Makes Peace with the
Valachians and Turks, 67. His Death, ibid. John Casimir, (King.) Led a
Religious Life, and made Cardinal, 124. His Character and Travels, 126. Like to
be excluded, ibid. etc. Elected, 128. His Marriage, ibid. His Wars, ibid. etc.
Suedish King invades Poland, 139. Wherefore, 131. Motives and means of
Casimir's Abdication, 134. His Death, 135. His Epitaph, 136. John Basilowitz,
Czar of Muscovy, Is a great Tyrant, and his variety of Tortures, 78. John III.
(Sobieski.) Elected in the Year 1674, 163. His Father and Mother, ibid, His
Travels, 164. His Marriage, ibid. His Generosity, 165. Zeal to Arms
discouraged, 166. War with the Turks and Tartars, 167, etc. A Battle, 169. His
Coronation, 172. He relieves Vienna, 173. Defeats the Turks, 174. His entry
through the Breach, 175. Pursues the Enemy, ibid, Takes Zytehin in Hungary, 176.
Enters into a League against the Turks, 177. Is immoderately covetous, ibid.
His Person and Dress, ibid. His Character, 179. Engages Dr. Connor in a
Dispute, ibid. His Buildings, 184. Care of his Children, 185. His great Riches,
ibid. Fortune formerly, and gradual Promotion, 150, His Sister, 198, What Issue
she left, 200. Account of the King's Distemper from the Bishop of Plosko, 201,
etc. The King's Death, 204. Reflections on his Disease, ibid. Inter Regnum
before the present King's Election, 205. Inowlocz, (Pal.) Division into
Districts, 235. Chief Cities and Towns, ibid.
K.
King Of Poland; his Policy, 8. The first, 9, 25. Four classes of Kings, 10.
Title ceases, 30. Restored, 48. King of Sueden enters into a League with the
Elector of Brandenburg, 132. Koningsberg in Regal- Prussia built, 45. Its
description, 264. Kalisch, (City.) Its description 226. Kalisch, (Pal.) Its
Arms, 227. Kiovia, (Pal.) How bounded, 277. Chief Cities and Towns, 278. Their
descriptions, ib. etc. Kiow, (City.) Its Description, 278.
L.
Laws. What formerly in Poland, 5. Lechus I. 10. Founds Poland, 5. Builds
Posnan and Gnesna, 6. Occasions Poland the Name of Lechia, ib. His Posterity
how long Reigned, 11, 12. II. His Banishment and Death, 13. Lescus I. 14.
Elected by a Stratagem, ib. Reign and Death uncertain, 15. II. How Elected, 14.
His Death, 15. III. His death uncertain, 16. IV. His Character and Death, 23.
V. Surnamed the White, 39. Under Guardians, ib. His Wars, 40. Is dethroned, ib.
Restored, ib. Dethroned again, 41, Put by an Election, ib. etc. Reestablished,
42. Murdered in a Bath, ib. VI. When Elected and how long Reigned, 46. His
Wars, ib. Insurrection against him, ib. Retires into Hungary, 47. Returns with
success, ib. His death, ib. Leaves his Kingdom in distraction, ib. Lascon^gus:
Vide Uladislaus III. Locticus, vide Uladislaus IV. Lewis King of Hungary, When
Crowned, and how long Reigned, 56. Obliged to take an Oath, ib: Returns into
Hungary, ib. His Wars, Death, and Issue, 57. Commendable Example of his, ib.
Leopol, (City) whence so called, 46. Its description, 267. Luther's Doctrine
when first known here, 70. Very much propagated, 78. The occasion, ib. First
Person of Note that embraced it, ib. Lutherans* Contend for share in the
Government, 101. Obtain perpetual Liberty of Conscience, ib, etc. Lutheran
party Dissents, 107. Elects and Proclaims Maximilian of Austria, (...) 2*
Pronounced Traitors by the Diet, 108. Lithuanid. Tends toward a Civil War,
160. How called by the Inhabitants, 302. Present Bounds, ib. Ancient Extent,
ib. Soil and Products, ib. etc Union with Poland, and Privileges, 303.
Division, ib. Its Arms, ib. Different Opinions about its Name, 304. Its Dukes,
from 305 to 310. Division into Palatinates, 324. Lithuanid Proper, (Province.)
325. Lesser-Poland, (Province.) Its Bounds, 236. Its Division into Pal. ib.
etc. Their several Arms, 249, 254, 257. Lowitz, (City) Its description, 231.
Lanschet, (Pal.) Its division into Districts, 232: Chief Cities and Towns, ib.
Lanschet, (City) Its Description, 232. Lublin, (Pal.) Joined by the Territory
of Lukovia, 254. Chief Cities and Towns, 255. Their several Descriptions, ib.
etc. Lublin, (City.) Its Description, 255. Lutzk* (City.) Its Description, 295.
M.
Mi^ceslaus I. 24. His Christian Wife, ib. His Wars, 25. II. His Wars, 26.
Character and Death, 27. III. When Elected, and how long Reigned, 36. Whence
surnamed the Old, ibid. Is Dethroned, 37. Endeavors to get restored, 38. Is
restored, 40. Dethroned again, ibid. Reinthron'd, 41. His Death, ibid. Michael
Wiesnowiski. Refuses the Crown, 144. Accepts it, ibid. Proclaimed, Crowned, and
how long Reigned, 145. His Marriage, ibid. His Death, 149. Leaves no Issue,
ibid. Buried, 171. Marienburg, (City) built, 51. Its Description, 262.
Maximilian the Emperor (King Elect) Acquainted that he was chosen, 87.
Prevented invading Poland by Death, 88. Maximilian of Austria. Routed by the
Polish General, 109. Beaten again, and made Prisoner, 110. Offered Liberty on
honorable terms, 111. Dissents, ib. Consents, ib. Mines, 245. Of Cracaw, 246.
Description of them, ib. etc. Manna. Particular sort, and eaten for Sauce, 248.
Michalevia (Territory) Its Description, 262. Marienburg, (Pal.) Its chief
Cities and Towns, 262. Their several Descriptions, ib. etc. Masovia, (Province)
Its Bounds, 283. Inhabitants, 284. Division into Palatinates, ib. Their several
Arms, 288. 289. 290. Masovia (Pal.) Division into Districts, 284. Chief Cities
and Towns, 285. Their Descriptions, ib. etc. Mindog Duke of Lithuania
Acknowledged King, 308. Murdered, 309. Mscislaw, (Pal.) Description, 333,
Division into Districts ib. etc. Chief Cities and Towns, 334. Descriptions, ib.
etc. Its Arms, 335. Mscislaw, (City.) Its Description, 334. Minski, (Pal.)
Division into Districts, 337. Chief Cities and Towns, ib. Descriptions, ib.
etc. Its Arms, 338. Minski, (City.) Its description, 337.
N.
Number of Polish Princes, 9. Of Towns and Villages in Poland, 217, etc.
Novogrodec, (Pal.) Division into Districts, 332. Chief Cities and Towns, ib.
Their descriptions, ib. etc. Its Arms, 333. Novogrodec, (City.) Its
description, 332.
O.
Oliva, Treaty there, 133.
P.
Poland, Its Origin, 3. Whence so called, 5. What by the Inhabitants, ib. By
whom Founded, ib. Its Policy, 7. Made a Figure in the IXth Century, 20. Its
Ancient Extent, 213. Increase by Conquests, ib. By Policy, 214. Present Extent,
225. Its Bounds and Soil, 216. Its Products, 217. Cilmate, 218. Rivers, ib.
Their several Courses, ib. etc. Its Lakes, 220. Poles, when first Christians,
24. March to recover Podolia, 148. Conquer, but fail in their design, ib. etc.
Popiel I. 16. His Vices and Death, ib. II. ib. Judgment upon him, 17. Piastus,
21. Cause of his Election, ib. His Virtues and Death, 22. How long his Family
Reigned, ib. Gives the Name of Piasto, 23. Patron of Poland, 30. Premislus,
when Crowned, 48. Murdered, ib. Prophecy (Comical) 108. Posts when first
settled in Poland, 123. Peace concluded with the Turks, 173. How long lasted,
ib. Prince James, his Character, 188. Intended Marriage disappointed, ib.
Married to another, 189. Weak and Sickly, ib. Officiates as Ambassador, 192.
Resigns his Interests to the Elector of Saxony, 206. Princess, (John III's
Daughter) Her Character, 190. Her Marriage, ib. Portion, 191. Ceremony of her
Marriage, ib. Equipage for her Journey to Brussels, 193. Reception at Berlin,
195. Is met by the Elector, 196. Proceeds on her Journey, 197. Arrival at
Brussels, 198. Physicians, A Consultation of them, 199. Posnan, (City) Its
Description, 221. Posnania (Palatinate) Its Arms, 226. Prussia, (Province) Its
Bounds, 257. Products, ib. Rivers, 258. Lakes, ib. Division, 259. Officers that
belong to the Great Council, ib. Its Arms, 265. Prussia (Royal) Division into
Palatinates, 259. Prussia (Dueal) Its Chief Cities and Towns, 264. Pomerania,
(Pal.) 260. Premislaw, (City) Its Description, 269. Podolia, (Pal) Wherefore
famous, 274. Division into Districts, ib. Chief Cities and Towns, ib. Their
several Descriptions, 175, etc. Plosko, (Pal.) Division into Districts, 288.
Chief Cities and Towns, ib. Their Descriptions, ib. etc. Plosko, (City) Its
Description, 288. Podlachia, (Province) Its Bounds, 296. Division into
Districts, ib. Chief Cities and Towns (...) Their Descriptions, 297, etc. Arms
of the Pro^ovince, 298. Pinsko, (City) Its Description, 331. Polocz, (Pal.)
Division into Districts, 338. Chief Cities and Towns, ib. Descriptions, ib.
etc. Its Arms, 339. Polocz, (City) Its Description, 338.
Q.
Queen-Dowager's Zeal, 156. King Michael Assigned a Jointure, 166. Queen's
(John III's) first Coming into Poland, 186. Her first Marriage, ib. Age, and
Qualifications, ib. etc. Her Address in disposing of Employments, 187.
R.
Rochester (Lord) His Embassy into Poland, 172. Had Audience of the Queen at
Dantzick, ib. Made a Present to the Princess, ib. Received by the King in his
Camp, 173. Had Public Audience at Zolkiew, ib. Manner thereof, ib. His Return
home, ib. Respect, Little paid to the King's Children, 189. Rava, (Pal.)
Division into Districts, 230. Its Cities and Towns, ib. etc. Rava, (City) Its
Description, 230, etc. Russia, (Province) Division and Description, 266.
Division into Palatinates, ib. Arms, 276, 280, 281, 283. Russia, (Pal.)
Division into Districts, 267. Their several Arms, 269, 271. Chief Cities and
Towns, ib. Rosienia, (Capital of Samogitia.) Its Description, 293. Religion,
Ancient and Present, of Lithuania, 339, etc.
S
Stratagem, Succeeds, 14. Defeated, 15. Sigismund I. When Elected, and how long
Reigned, 69. Defeats a Conspiracy and Army, ib. Other Wars, ib. etc. His
Marriage, 70. War with the Teutonic Order, ib. Grants Liberty of Conscience to
Dantzickers, ib. War with Knights, ended by Mediation, 71. Forces other
Invaders to retire, ib. His Death and Age, 72. His Character, Marriages and
Issue, ib. II. Surnamed Augustus. When Crowned, and how long Reigned, 75. His
Marriage displeases the Diet, 76. Unites Livonia to Poland, 77. His Wars with
the Moscovites, ib. Forces the Czar to a Peace, 78. Sends an Army to support
Bogdan in Valachia, ib. Obliged to return home, ib. Rather favored than
disturbed the Lutherans, 79. Hears several of their Preachers, ib. Enclines
most Bishops to that Persuasion, ib. A great Escape he had, ib. His Death and
Issue, ib. Stephen Batori, (King) Received, and Crowned, 88. Primate submits,
ib. Who greatly Assisting to him in his Election, ib. His Rise, 89. His
Marriage, ib. More severe in Punishments than Laws allowed, 90. Encouraged
Speaking Latin, 91. A Wonder to the French, ib. His Wars, ib. Is refused to
name a Successor, 100. His Character, ib. His Death and Epitaph, ib. etc.
Sigismund de Vasa, (King) Ambassadors sent to acquaint him, 107. Is Crowned in
Poland, 109. His Marriage, 111. Crowned King of Sweden, 112. Deposed there, ib.
Cause of his War with the Moscovites, 113. His War with the Turks, 115.
Invasion by Gustavus Adolthus, 116. Sigismund's Death, ib. His Character, ib.
Speech of the Bishop of Premislaw, 119. Another Appeases Heats, 143. Another,
by the Palatin of Russia, 160. Byasses Poland, and part of Lithuania, 161.
Senators of Great Poland, 225, 227, 229, 232, 233, 236. Of Lesser Poland, 248,
254, 256. Of Prussia, 265. Of Russia, 274, 276, 277, 280, 281, 283. Of Masovia,
287, 289, 290. Of Samogitia, 294. Of Volhynia, 296. Of Podlachia, 298. Of
Lithuania-Proper, 328, 330, 331. Of Lithuanic-Russia, 333, 335, 336, 338, 339.
Severia, (City) Belongs to the Bishop of Cracow, 243. Siradia, (Pal.) Its Arms,
230. Sendomir, (Pal.) Its Division into Districts, 249. Chief Cities and Towns,
251. Their several Descriptions, ib. etc. Sendomir, (City) Its Description*
250. Sanoch, (Town) Its Description, 273. S^^^gi^ta (Province) 290. Its Bounds,
291. Manners of People, ib. Their Superstition, 292. Manner of Sacrificing, ib.
etc. Division into Districts, 293. Principal Towns, ib. Descriptions, ib. etc.
T
Teutonic Order. Called into Poland, 43. Established in Prussia, 51. Proves
troublesome to the Poles, ib. Therefore Excommunicated by the Pope, 52. Routs
the Prussians, and Casimir IV. 64. Tartars, First Inroad, 44. Second
Incursions, 61. Third Incursion, with the Moscovites and Moldavians, 71. Turks,
Take Podhais, 170. Thorn, (City) Its Description, 261. Its Arms, ib. Native
Town of Copernicus, ib. etc. Troki, (City) Built, 315. Its Description, 329.
Troki, (Pal.) Division into Districts, 328. Chief Cities and Towns, 329.
Descriptions, ib. etc. Its Arms, 330.
U.
Visimirus, 10. His Conquests, 11. His Death, ibid. Venda, 13. Her Death, ib.
Uladislaus I. 30. His Wars, ib. His Marriage, and Death, 31. II. When Elected,
and how long Reigned, 33. Persecutes his Brothers, 34. A Severe Revenge, ib.
His Flight out of the Kingdom, and Death, 35. III. Uladislaus Lasconogus, 42.
Surrenders his Crown, ib. IV. Whence so called, 48. When began his Reign, and
how long Reigned, 49. His Wars, and Vices, ib. Is Dethroned, ib Restored, 50.
Meets with Difficulties, ib. etc. His Speech to his Army, 52. Overthrows the
Teutonic Order, 53. Is Crowned with his Queen, ib. His Death, ib. Uladislaus V.
Vide Jagello. VI. When Elected, and how long Reigned, 60. Regents during
Minority, 61. Crowned King of Hungary, ib. His Wars with the Turks, ib. etc. Is
Complimented on a Victory, 62. Killed and Routed by the Turks, 63. Epitaph upon
him, ib. His Perfidy awakens the Turks, ib. VII. Elected, Proclaimed and
Crowned, 121. His Marriage, and Wars, ib. With the Cosacks, 122. His Death,
123. Ukraina, (Country of the Cosacks) Whence so called, 93. How divided, ib.
To whom anciently belonged, ib. Its Inhabitants: Vide Cosacks. Vielunia,
(Territory) Its Division, 229. Principal Towns, ibid. Arms, 230. Uladislaw,
(City) Its Description, 234. Varmia, (Bishopric and Pal.) Exempt from Regal
Jurisdiction, 263. Its Chief Cities and Towns, ib. their several Descriptions,
ib. etc. Vinnicza, (City) Its Description, 277. Volhynia, (Province) Division
into Districts, 294. Chief Cities and Towns, ib. etc. Its Arms, 296. Vilna,
(City) Built, 316. Its Description, 325. Its Arms, 328. Vilna, (Pal.) Division
into Districts, 325. Its Chief Cities and Towns, ib. Descriptions, ib. etc. Its
Arms, 328. Vitebsko: Vide Witebsko.
W.
Woievods, XII. Their Government, 12, 14. Deposed, ib. Wenceslaus, King of
Bohemia, Crowned King of Poland, and how long Reigned, 49. Goes into Bohemia,
ib. Loses his Kingdom of Poland, and dies, 50. Warsaw, (City) Its Description,
285, etc. Witebsko, (Pal.) Has but one District, 335. Chief Cities and Towns,
ib. Their Descriptions, ib. etc. Its Arms, 336. Witebsko, (City) Its
Description, 335.
Z.
Ziemovitus, 23. His Wars, Character and Death, ib. Ziemovistus, ib. His
Character and Death, ib. etc. Zulava, (Island) Its Division, 263. Zamoisk,
(City) Its Description, 283.
TABLE II.
Note This Second Volume having been put to two Printing-Houses, a Second
Alphabet was necessary to be made use of: Therefore, to avoid Mistakes, the
Reader is desired to take notice of this Asterism * after the Folio's, for the
Distinction of the Second Part.

A.
ARmenians, (in Poland) Where Inhabit, 49. Have peculiar Prelates, etc. ib.
Service, in what Language, ibid. Acknowledge the Sea of Rome, ib. Associates to
Judges, 77. Army, (Polish) Its Division, 9, *. Of the Horse, ib. etc. *. Of the
Foot, 11, *. Manner of Paying the Army, 20, *. Inferior Officers of the Army,
31, etc. *. Auxiliaries, What, 16, *. Example, ib. *.
B.
Bishoprics, (Polish) How many, 36, etc. Their several Diocesses, 37. Peculiar
Jurisdictions, ib. Bishops, (Polish) Each has a kind of little Court, 46. Have
also Suffragans, ib. Contest with Lay-Senators for Precedence, ib. Have, most
of them, large Revenues, 47. Bishop, (Greek) In Premislaw, 44. In Kiovia, being
formerly Primate of Moscovy, 45. Burgraves, Their Office, 80. Baths, (in
Poland) Private and Public, with their Effects, 199. Burials, Order of
Procession at them, 206. Other Proceedings, 207. Particulars of the King and
Queen's Interrments, ib.
C.
Commonalty, (Polish) Their Condition, 5. Wherefore Enslaved, ib. Incapable of
Preferment, except some few, 167. How first Enslaved, 182. Live Satisfied
notwithstanding, 183. Their present Condition, 184. Enrich their Lords, ibid.
etc. How fixed in a Farm, 185. Cosacks: A further Account of them, 11, etc. *.
Their Councils of War, 12, *. Way of Fortifying their Camps and Boats, ib. *.
Their Power, 13, *. Crown, (of Poland) Means to continue it in one Family, 26.
Vacant four Ways, 126. Customs, (Polish) Way of Hunting Wild Oxen, 209. Manner
of Taking Bears, 211. Way of Ordering Cabbage, 212. Poles eat but little Bread,
215. Customs at Feasts, Vide Feasts. Manners at Table, 217. Way of Taking
Tobacco, 218. Customs in Traveling, Vide Traveling. Manners of peculiar
Countries, 224. Customs in Grinding Corn, 227. Rusticks Employments within and
without Doors, 229. Manners in Husbandry, 233. Way of Pruning Trees, ib. Manner
of Sowing, ib. etc. Way of Securing and Ordering Corn, 234. Peculiar Customs in
Prussia, ib. Manner of Fishing in Poland, 40, *. Manner of Electing and
Ordaining Priests in Dantzic, 47, *. Counselors, (Privy) Who in Poland, 31.
Four Senators particularly Assigned, 31, 35. Castellans: What, and whence so
called, 35. Names and Precedence, from 61, to 67. Their Duty, 60. Their
Division, Qualifications, Office and Titles, ib. etc. Name in Polish, 68.
Cracow, (Bishop of) His Residence and Precedence, 42. Bishopric and Power, ib.
How Addressed to, 43 Cracow, (Palatin of) Wherefore Preferred, 55. Cujavia,
(Bishop of) His See, Precedence and Authority, 43. Has several Places of
Residence, ib. Culm, (Bishop of) His Precedence, and See, 45. Chelm, (Bishop
of) His See Translated; and wherefore, 45. Caminiec, (Bishop of) Honorary;
being under the Turk, 46. Churches, (Greek) Two Sorts, 47. Priests, how called,
and Wherefore, ib. Calvinists, In what Part of Poland, 48. King obliged to
protect them, ib. Name in Polish, ibid. First Nobleman that became Calvinist,
ibid. etc. Clergy, (Regular) Their Privileges, 51. Dissolute Lives, ib. Clergy,
(Secular) Their Manners, 52. Division, ib. Churches, (Polish) Fine, and well
adorned, 53. A rich Cope at Leopel, ib. Chancellors, (Great and Vice)
Qualifications of those of the Kingdom, 70. Both have Seals, and equal
Authority, 71. Their Office and Power, ib. Succeed each other, 72. How ought to
be qualified, ib. Cavalry, (Polish) What required in vain of them, 7, *. Great
Force with Examples, 24, etc. *. Cup-bearers, Carvers, etc. 77. Custom-house
Commissioners, 78. Chamberlain, (Vice of District) His Office, 78. Chamberlains
under him, ib. Convocation, (General of the Clergy) How often, and where
Convened, 115. Minor Clergy admitted by Deputies, ib. Courts (of Justice,) The
Kaptur, what, and its Power, 115. Ecclesiastical, 116. Of Nunciature, ib. High
Tribunals, ib. etc. Senate and Green-Cloth, 117. Exchequer-Courts, ib. Of
Land-Judicature, with its Judges, 118. Of the Vice-Chamberlains, ib. Gentry's
Criminal Courts, 119. Commonalty-Courts in Cities, ib. In Villages, 120. Where
Courts of Justice cease, 129. Exception, ib. Relating to Courts of Justice in
Lithuania, 224 Former Judges there, 225. Candidate (for Election,) What
Qualifications required in him, 140, etc. Ceremony Of the King's Swearing to
the Pacta Conventa, 149, etc. Of his Entering Cracow, 154. The Interrment of a
deceased King, 155. Obsequies and Procession, 154. Procession at the
Coronation, 156. Ceremony thereat, ib. Farther Particulars, ib. etc.
Coronation Oath, 157. Words at Kissing the Book, 159. Unction, etc. ib. etc.
How pronounced King, 161. Feasts thereupon, ibid. Ceremony of Creation of
Teutonic Knights, 71. *. Coronation. King appoints the Day, 153. Place, fixed,
ib. Exceptions, ib. By whom performed, 155. Manner of Crowning, 160.
Enthroning, ibid. Curland (Bishop of,) Vide Samogitia, (Bishop of.) Curland,
(Duchy) Its Bounds, and Extent, 99, *. Soil, and former State, ib. etc. *.
When wholly conquered, 100, *. Converted by degrees, ib. *. Its Dukes, 105,
etc. *. Duke Vassal to Poland, 115, *. His Privilege and Power, 116, *. Revenue
and Court, ibid. *. Chief Officers, ibid. *. Condition of Gentry, ib. 117, *.
Geographical Description, 118, *. Government, 121, *. Degrees of Demanding
Justice, 122, *. Ecclesiastical Courts, 123, *. City-Courts, ibid. *.
Ministerial Officers, ibid. *. Trade of Curland, ibid. *. Corn in great
Request, ibid. *. When Curland is to revert to Poland, ibid. *.
D.
Diet (Grand of Poland) How resembles the English Parliament, 5. What it is, 6,
83. Its Power, ib. By whom called, and where, and how often meets, ib. Manner
of calling it, and proceedings thereupon, 84. Divides into three Nations, 91.
Proceedings at the opening, 95. After the choice of a Speaker, ib. Proceedings
in the Lower House, 96. Conferences between the two Houses, 95. Upper House how
employed, 96. Committees, ib. Manner of breaking up Session in the lower House,
ib. Both Houses joined, ib. Diets Session limited, and wherefore, 98, etc.
Matters generally treated of, 99. Great concourse there, 101. Provisions not
scarce, ib. Dangerous to be out a Nights, 102. Visits unacceptable, ib. Order
of Session in the Diet, ibid. etc. Causes of disunion here, 105. By whom
somented, ib. Great freedom of Speech, 108. Policy of concluding matters by an
unanimous consent, 110. Diet (of Convocation) How summoned, 126. Proceeding in
little Diets, ib. First proceedings in this Diet, 128. Diet (of Election) Where
held, etc. 131, etc. First proceedings there, 133. Exorbitancies examined, 135.
Diet proceeds to Election, 137, etc. Farther particulars thereof, 138, etc.
Great concourse there, and Policy to bias them, 139, etc. Rules observed in
Elections, 141. Poland why preserved Elective, 142, etc. Diets, (Little) Where
meet, 84. Qualifications for, and Manner of Voting there, 89. Proceedings, 90.
Deputies, (Representatives of the Gentry) Elected only by the Gentry, 6. Assume
great Liberty in the Diet, 34, etc. Who, and how many chosen; with their
Instructions, 90. How chosen, 91. Their Number, ib. Cannot be Senators, ib.
Their Salaries, ib. When first sent, ib. Their Power, 95. Confirmed and
encouraged ib. Their Privileges, 95, etc. How long sit, 96. Have great Guards
at the Diet, 102. Awe the King and Senate, 104. Their Business after Diet of
Convocation, 131. Dantzic: Privileges, 23, *. Where situate, by whom built, and
whence so called, 42, *. How distant from other Places, ib. etc. *. Division
and Strength, 43, *. One of the Hanse-Towns, ib. *. Parishes, Buildings,
Streets and Gardens, 44, *. Inhabitants, their Number and Religion, ib. *.
Churches and Townhouse, ib. *. Magazines, College, Exchange, etc. 45. *.
Jurisdiction and Government, ib. *. Senators, and their Division, ib. *.
Scabins, Syndic and Burgrave, 46, *. Centum-viri, and their Power, ib. etc. *.
City's Power and Privileges, 48, *. Force by Land and Sea, 49, *. How often
Taken, and Regained, 50, *. Admitted to Vote in Election of Polish Kings, 51,
*. Dutchies: What in Poland, 174. Descents: Nature of them in Poland, 180.
Children support their Families however, 181. Divines, (Polish) How far their
Learning extends, 78. *. Their Divinity, 79. *.
E.
Escheator: His Power, 77. Ambassadors, Sent to the Diet of Election, 129.
Notify their Arrival, and how are received, ib. etc. 135, etc. Others sent
from the Republic, 130. Caution to Foreign Ministers, ib. etc. What requisite
in Foreign Ministers, 136. What Foreign Ambassadors are obliged to, 179.
Election, (Decree of) Presented the King, 150. Exercises: What practiced in
Poland, 202. Edibles: What Sorts used among the Poles, 209. Odd Dainties, 210.
Pottage and Sauces, 215. Crachat, what, and how made, 216. Edibles among the
Rusticks of Lithuania, 227. Meat and Drink of the Peasants in Prussia, 235.
F.
Fasts (in Poland,) How observed, 51. Poles retain a rigid Custom, and
wherefore, 52. Factions, (Foreign) What promotes them, 106. Fashions: Present
in Poland, 196. What Furrs used, ib. Some follow the French Mode, 197. Women's
former and late Fashions, ib. etc. Families, (Polish) What, 202. Fowl: Sorts in
Poland, 211, etc. Fish: What Kinds the Poles have, 212. Feasts: Customs
thereat, 216. Banquetting-Halls, ib. etc. Particulars of Servants there, 217.
Feasts made by Turns, 218. Foot, (Polish) What, and how employed, 13, *. Hired,
and their Condition, ib. etc. *. Why so much used, and Arms, and Liveries, 14,
*. Hungarians, when first hired, 16, *. Force, (Polish) Causes that weaken it,
18, etc. *. Other Inconveniences that suppress it, 21, etc. *. Means to avoid
these, but overruled, 24, *.
G.
Gentry, (Polish) Courted by European Princes, 3. Resolves thereupon, 4.
Equally Noble, 5. Seldom intermarry with Commonalty, ibid. Only capable of
Preferment, 20, 167. Have not equal Claim to every Preferment, ib. etc. How
kept in Dependence on the King, 22. What proves Equality among them, 103. No
Disgrace to be chastis'd, 123. Their Power and Privileges, 168. Cannot be
Apprehended till Convicted, 168, etc. Exception, 169. Cannot be Executed
without the King's Consent, 170. Need not Quarter Soldiers, ib. etc. Other
Privileges, 171. Need not pay Taxes till obliged by Diet, ib. Have Pre-emption,
172. Have one Grievance, ib. How came by their Privileges, 172. Value no
Honor, and why, 173. Despise Title of Prince, ib. Assume Titles when they
travel, 174. Further Power, 175. What makes them so great, ib. etc. Their
Excessive Grandeur and Magnificence, 176. Gentry and Citizens in Lithuania,
225. Gentry, how far obliged to March, 15, *. Gentlemen, (Polish) Who, 5.
Gentlemen-Pensioners, 29. A Gentleman, how made, 188. Government, (Mixed)
Established in Poland; by what Motives, 6, etc. Unhappy State of Polish
Government, 109. A Wonder how it can subsist, 110. Must always flourish, for
several Reasons, 111. Guards, (Horse) 29. Chief Commander of Guards in the
Camp, 79. Captain of the Guards against the Incursions, 76. Gnesna, (Archbishop
of) Vide Primate. Genius (of Polish Government,) To what bent, 31. Generals,
(Great) Power and Authority, 74. Duty, 75. Present Great Generals, ibid.
Dignity Successive, ibid. Their Power and Duration, 29, etc. *. Generals,
(Lieutenant) Their Office, 75. Titles and Power, 30, etc. *. Other
General-Officers, 31, *. Governors of Mines, 78. Of the Mint, ibid. Gun
Founders, Foreign, 28, *. Glass, (Polish) Manner of making it, 88, *. Gardens
and Orchards, Seldom any in Poland, 199.
H.
Head-Collector of a District, 79. High-Podolia: Vide in P. Houses (in Poland,)
Their Description, 198. Furniture, 199. Houses of the Rusticks in Lithuania,
197. Habitations and Furniture of the Peasants in Prussia, 234. Horses: Why
little in Lithuania, 229, etc. Hairs: Canular, 96, *.
I.
Jews, (in Poland) Enjoy their Religion and Privileges, 49. Restrained from
Trading, ib. Their Number, ibid. Idolaters, Where to be found, 50. Retain
Superstitions, ib. Example, ib. Judge and Assistant of a District, 78.
Jurisdiction, (Military) Wholly in the King's, or his General's Hands, 121.
Palatins and Castellans likewise exercise their Authority, ib. Inns, How called
in Polish, 219. Have few Conveniences, 220. J^^ Belli, (Polish) Some few
Particulars thereof, 32, *.
K.
King (of Poland,) Former Power, 2. Advantages thereby, 3. Abridg'd by the
Gentry, 4. King's Happiness, 11. Unhappiness, ib. etc. Modern Power, 13. Abroad
and at home, 14. What his Subjects term him, ib. Great respect paid him, ib.
etc. His Titles and Prerogatives, 15, etc. Pension, Household-Officers and
Guards, 16. Patrimonial Estate and Perquisites, ib. (late) His Riches, 17.
Power limited in diverse respects, 19, etc. Other Limitations, 21.
Inconveniences thereby, ib. Occasion of Respect, 22. Cities present their Keys,
23. Why he can make no Levies without consent of the Diet, ib. Must not go out
of the Kingdom, 24. His Legitimate Issue much respected, ib. Titles of his
Eldest, and other Sons and Daughters, ib. How lost, 25. Examples of the Poles
Affection to the Royal Family, ib. Illegitimate Issue slighted, 26. Impossible
to reduce his Subjects to an Arbitrary Power, ib. etc. King not unhappy because
not able to secure Succession to his Family, 28. His Interest to Head his Army,
75. Where the King suspends his Opinion, 97. Ought not to be present at Trials
for Treason, 99. Has no Regal Authority till Crowned, 153. Goes to receive
Homage, and Knights Citizens, 161, etc. Is Proclaimed, 162, etc. What follows,
163. His Power and Revenues in Dantzic, 48, *. Kiovia, (Bishopric of)
Honorary, 45. Kiovia, (Palatinate of) Honorary, 56.
L.
Leopol, (City) Whence so named, 40. Is the Residence of three Bishops, ib.
Luceoria, (Bishop of) His Diocese, 44. Lutherans: Abundance in Poland, 48.
Tolerated and Protected, ib. Name in Polish, ib. How the Prussians became so,
ib. Lay-Senators, Their Division and Sub-division, 54. Laws. What required to
Establish them, 97, Where cannot be Printed, 98. Their Origin, Progress, and
present State, 121. Lawdifferences decided by the Sword, 179. Example, 180.
Lawyers, Their Number, and Study, 79, etc. *. Who seldom go to Law, 80, *.
Supposed judgment on a Lawyer, ib. *. Lending and borrowing in Poland. The
manner of 195. Lithuania, Particulars relating thereunto, 224. Learning Former,
75, *. What discourages Learning, 81, *. Languages, Oriental dis-regarded, 76,
*. Present in Poland, ib. etc. *. Hard to Pronounce, 77, *. Latin, Reasons why
the Poles affect to speak it, 77, *. Livonia, Its first Bishop, 100, *.
Livonian Order, Its several Masters, from 101 to 105, *. Residence of the
Order, 105, *. Addition concerning this Order, 117, *.
M.
Marienburg, (Pal. a City of) Formerly Seat of Teutonic Knights, 58. Built, 55,
*. Marshal (Great) of Poland: His Office, Power and Authority, 69. Duty and
Privilege, ibid. His Perquisites, ibid. etc. Who officiate in his Absence, 70.
Marshal (Great) of Lithuania: His Office, 70. Marshals, (Little) Contend for
Precedence, 73. Mines: Their Officers, called Zuppars, 80. Meetings (General of
Senators and Deputies,) 90. Members (of the Diet,) How habited, 103. Not to
give Reason for Dissent to any Bill, 106. Magistrates and Officers of Plebeian
Courts, 120. Their Profits, 121. Marriages: Description, and Duration, 203.
Court-Marriages, 204. Customs thereat, ib. Presents made the Bride, 205.
Espousals and Ceremonies, ib. etc. Who cannot be Married without Dispensation,
206. Qualification for Marriage among the Peasants, 230. Mourning: The manner
in Poland, 208. Money, Little in Poland, and how occasioned, 36, *. What Coin
most current there, ibid. etc. *. Contributes to Poverty, 37, *. Other Coins,
ib. etc. *. First Coin in Prussia, 49, *. Present in Dantzic, ib. etc. *.
Mittaw, (City of Curland) Its Castle, Streets and Houses, 120, *. How often
conquered, and regained, 120, *. Calvinist-Church there, 121, *.
N.
Nuncio's: Vide Deputies. Nobility: Vide Gentry. Notaries, (Chief) 77.
Notaries, (Camp) 76. Nuncio-Marshal: Vide Speaker. Naturalization, and Manner
of Making Noble, 100. How far qualified thereby, ibid. etc. Nobility, how
acquired, 188. A Third Way of becoming Noble, 189. Ways of Forfeiting Nobility,
ib. Where restored, ib. Names, (Polish) What formerly, and now, 203.
O.
Officers, (Crown and Court) 28. (Court,) In Lithuania, 29. In several
Provinces, ib. etc. Some rather Honorary than Beneficial, 30. Ten
Crown-Officers, where placed in the Diet, 68. Who they are, ibid. Those of the
Kingdom precede, ib. Extra-Senatorial Officers, 74. Great Officers in the Army,
76. Of Districts, 78. Some, why so called, 79. Military Officers of Districts,
ib. Offices: By whom Plurality can be held, 67. Exceptions, ib. Order of
Knighthood, Instituted in Poland, but undervalu'd, 179, etc. Vide Teutonic
Order.
P.
Poland: Undergone several Changes, 2. How exposed to Inconveniences, 12.
Physic: Practice in Poland, 89, *. Medicines used, ib. *. What Diseases, 91,
*. Venereal, how cured by a Quack, 90, *. Odd Method of curing Wounds, 88, *.
Surprising Particulars, 91. *. Plica, (Disease) its Description, ibid. etc. *.
Unaccountableness, and Symptoms, 92, *. Said to be Contagious, and Hereditary,
93, *. Common to Men and Beasts, ibid. *. Superstition concerning it, ibid.
etc. *. Where most common, and how cured by a Jew, 94, *. Causes asserted, but
questioned, ibid, etc. *. Another Account of the Plica, 95, etc. *. Poles:
Their Division, 4. Love for their Kings, 12. To Extravagance, 13. Behavior at
Church, 53. Their good Temper, and its Effect, 181. How occasioned, 182. Their
Character, 189. Complexion, Constitution, etc. 191. Their Manners, ibid.
Further Character, 192. Education and Learning, ibid. To what they generally
apply themselves, 193. Worst part of their Character, ibid, etc. Genius, how
inclined, 194. Greedy of Money, 195. Love to make a Show, ibid. Their great
Extravagance, 198. Great Admirers of Show, 200. How Attended, ib. Not very
Rich, and why, 38, *. Primate: His Court-Officers, as Inter-Rex and
Archbishop, 30. What peculiar to him, 31. His Power and State, 38. Power as
Inter-Rex, 39. Why he is entrusted so much, 40. His See, ibid. Who officiates
where no Inter-Rex, 127. Inter-Rex resigns, 162. Physicians, (Polish) Their
Abilities, 81, *. Not allowed to study, till qualified, ib. *. Palatins, What,
35. Their Number and Precedence, from 55, to 59. Duty and Office, 59. Palatins,
(Vice) How they must be qualified, 59, etc. Posnan, (Bishop of) Extent of his
Diocese, 43, etc. Plosko, (Bishop of) His Jurisdiction and See, 44. Premislaw,
(Bishop of) 44. Premislaw, (City) A Greek-Bishop here, 44. Here first
Maintained that Priests might marry, ib. etc. High- Podolia, (Palatinate of)
Honorary, 57. Protho-Notary of a District, 78. Projects in the Diet easily
annulled, 107. Punishments, (in Poland) Various, and how differ, 122. Manner of
Chastising Servants, ib. etc. Pacta-Conventa, (Articles of Election) 144. When
taken by Ambassadors, 145. By whom drawn, and how administered, 146. The Form,
ib. Occasional Articles, 149. The Oath taken by the King, 150. Peasants,
(Polish) Their Condition, 5, 184. Wherefore enslaved, 5. Incapable of
Preferment, except a few, 167. How first enslaved, 182. Live satisfied
notwithstanding, 183. Enrich their Lords, 184. How fixed in a Farm, 185. Their
Service annexed thereto, ibid. Meet to Reap their Lords Corn, 186. Their
Customs at Bed and Board, 186. Children, how taught to go, 187. Habits of both
Men and Women, ibid. Peasants Condition in Lithuania, 226. Work on Sundays,
ibid. etc. Pay rigid Duties, 227. Their Habits and Carriages, 228. Description
of the last, by a Poet, ib. Character of these Rusticks, 230. Potables: Sorts
used in Poland, 212. Beer, of what Quality, 213. Mead and Wine, ib. What
Strong Water, 214 Brimmers much practiced, 219. Sturdy Drinkers rewarded, 231.
Drink among the Rusticks of Prussia, 235. Prussia: Peculiar Customs there. Vide
Customs. Pospolite. What, 2, *. Who obliged to serve in the Horse, ib. *. Who
in the Foot, 3, *. Penalty for Default, ib. *. Who excused, ib. *. Number
(great) formerly, and now, 5, *. Manner of Raising and Mustering them, 6, *.
Meet at General-Rendezvouz, 8, *. Pay, (of Soldiers) From what it arises, and
how is raised, 26, etc. *. Provisions and Ammunitions, What in the Army, 27, *.
Q.
Queen, (Consort) Her Court, how maintained, 16. Artifice, 17. Revenues, 18. To
what Amount, ibid. Her Court-Officers, 30. Where Crowned, and where not, 163,
etc. Place of her Coronation, 164. What required to confirm it, ib. Cause of J.
Casimir's Queen's Death, 207. Queen, (Dowager) Revenue Conditional, 18.
Excludes Queen Consort, while she enjoys it, ib. Quartarians, What, and whence
so called, 17, *.
R.
Republic of Poland, Wherefore instituted, 4. Its Division, 10. Means to
support it for ever, 177. Revenues, (Crown) What, 17. Russian (Bishops) Why
cannot Marry, 40, etc. Their Tenets, Ceremonies and Ornaments, 41. Religion, (in
Poland and Lithuania) Conversion and Persuasions, 47. Former Religions, ibid,
etc. Roman Catholic, how long continued, 50. Zeal and Bigotry, ib. None but
Roman Catholics admitted of Senate, etc. except in Prussia, ib. Bishops
preside, wherefore, 51. Other Clergy preferred, ib. Four Roman Catholic
Churches in Dantzic, 47, *. Religions in Curland, 126, *. Russia, (Palatin of)
Why has the Title of the Province, 57. Referendaries, (Masters of Requests)
Their Office, Power and Qualifications, 77. Registers in Chancery, 77.
Reflection of Hauteville, 95, etc. Rokosz, What, and its Proceedings, 21, *.
Example, ibid. *. Rarities and Observables, (in Poland) Of Wood and Earth, 82,
*. Strange Waters, and their Effects, 83, *. Monstrous Fish, 84, *. Fowls of
odd Qualities, ibid. etc. *. Beasts of strange Kinds, 85, *. Rarities
communicated, 86, *. Closet of Rarities, 87, *. Rose, (Disease) What, and its
Cure, 96, *. Riga: Bishop and Archbishop thereof, 100 *.
S.
Senators, (Polish) Who, and their Number, 5. Sit, by what Authority, 5, etc.
By whom made, and their Oath, 34. To what further bound, 35. Not suffered to
travel, ibid. Title annexed to Dignities, ibid. Their Office, 36. Who
immediately becomes so, ibid. Despise other Honors, ibid. Their Division, and
Sub-division, ibid. Senate, (Polish) What, and its Office, 34. Samogitia,
(Duchy) Wherein differs from Lithuania, 231. Proof of great Age here, 232.
Inhabitants more robust, ibid. Samogitia, (Bishop of) Likewise Bishop of
Curland, 45. Has no See, ibid. Samogitia, (Starosta of) Why preferred, and how
chosen, 56. Smolensko, (Bishop of) Formerly subject to Lithuania, and now
Honorary, 46. Smolensko, (Palatin of) Honorary, 57. Socinians: When, and how
often expelled, 48. Steward (Great:) Vide Marshal (Great.) Secretaries, (Great)
Their Qualifications and Authority, 76, etc. Starosta's, With Jurisdiction, 79.
Without, 80. Vice-Starosta's, 79. Jurisdiction of Starosta's, ib. Power and
Office, 119. Starostaships Revenue, from what arises, 80. Have been sometimes
mortgaged, ibid. Speaker (of the Diet,) How chosen, and Heats thereupon, 94.
Must treat the Gentry, ibid. Reason of stickling in his Election, ibid. Last
Speaker officiates till a new one be chosen, 95. Speaker-Elect goes to kiss the
King's Hand, ibid. His Request for the Deputies, 96. His Authority, ibid. His
Power devolves to Great-Marshal, 97. Synods, (Provincial) Awed by the Pope, 15.
That of Leopol subject to the Archbishop of Gnesna, ib. Successor, (Election of
a) Interest of Foreign Princes to oppose it, 151, etc. Reasons for and against
it, 152, etc. State: Four Things required to defend it, 19, etc. *. Salt:
Farther Particulars thereof, 39, *.
T.
Titles, (Polish) Annexed to Employments, 5. Tartars (in Lithuania) Their
Number, and Religion, 49. How long continued there, ib. Upon what Conditions,
ibid. Troki, (Castellan of) Wherefore preferred, 56. Treasurers, (Great) Their
Office and Authority, 72. Remarkable Breach of Trust in one of them, 73.
Treasurer (of Prussia,) His Office, 77. Traveling: Customs in Traveling, 219.
Travelers obliged to carry Provisions, etc. 221. Traveling cheap in other
respects. ibid. etc. Manner of Traveling, 222. Incommodities in Travel, how
remedied, ibid. etc. Disturbed a Winter-Nights by Boors, 223. Danger of losing
Noses, ib. etc. Trade: Poles not much inclined thereto, 35 *. Commodities
Exported and Imported, 35, etc. *. Particulars of Trade, 39, *. No Fulling nor
Paper-Mills, ibid. *. Concerning Leather and Fish, 40, *. Honey, and its
Produce, ibid. etc. *. Former Trade of Prussia, 41, *. Teutonic Order: Its
Origin, 53, *. Who built their Hospital at Jerusalem, 54, *. Order confirmed,
and by what Title, ibid. *. Their Removal into Germany and Prussia, ibid. etc.
*. Forsake Prussia, and wherefore, 55, *. Their Statutes, Habit, Number and
Manners, ibid. etc. *. Are much favored by several Princes, 56, *. Lives of
their Great Masters, from 56, to 71, *. Its Present State, 72, *. Tobago,
(Island) Discovered by the Duke of Curland, 106, *. Is deprived of it, ibid, *.
Proposes to recover it, 107, *. A Grant from King Charles the Second, 108, *.
French beg the Island, 112. *. A Second Letter from King Charles, ibid. *.
Intercepted, ibid. *. Duke sends Governors, 113, *. Makes a Contract, ib. *.
Description of the Island, ibid. *. Necessary to be in English Hands, ibid. *.
Whence had its Name, 114, *.
U.
Vilna, (Bishop of) His Diocese, 43. Vilna, (Castellan of) Preferred;
wherefore, 55. Varmia, (Bishop of) His Jurisdiction and See, 44. Votes:
Intended Limitation like to produce a bad Effect, 104. Who have them in
Election of a King, 144. Volunteers: What in Poland, 17, *. Examples, ib. etc.
*. Selected out of the Gentry, 18, *. Universities: Two in Poland and
Lithuania, 75, *. Chief Studies there, ibid. *. Have no solid Learning, 78, *.
W.
Women, (Polish) Their former and late Fashions, 197. Very modest, 200.
Exception, 201. Their Liberty restrained, ibid. War: Two Qualities necessary
there, 26, *.
Z.
Zuppars, What, 80. Vide Mines.
FINIS.

