Let this be Printed,

Sunderland P.
WHITE HALL, December. 21st. 1687.
A Vindication OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF His Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, Against the Bishop of London and the Fellows of Magdalen-
College.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, and Published by Richard Janeway in
Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row. MDCLXXXVIII.

A Vindication OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF His Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, etc.
The Introduction.
THE Proceedings of His MAJESTY's Ecclesiastical Commissioners, being Made the
Common Talk of the Town, especially since the Fellows of Magdalen College have
been suspended, and Expelled for their Disobedience, and Contempt to His
MAJESTY, it is become Necessary to give the World a Just and Naked State of this
whole Affair, to the end they may see, what Manner of Men Our Censorious
Clergy, and their Creatures are; For, on an Impartial Disquisition into the
Whole of this Matter, 'twill appear, that His MAJESTY has taken special Care,
that His Commissioners do not Exercise the Regal Power in that severe Way, the
Church of ENGLAND has done against Protestant Dissenters.

The KING Remembers the Promise He has made of Protecting the Church of
England, as by Law Established, and hitherto has done Nothing that Contradicts
it; but has been so very Tender in this Point, as not to go so Far, as Justly
He might; and whoever will but Consult the Sense Our Church of England Divines,
and Lawyers have had of His MAJESTY's Ecclesiastic Supremacy will soon see,
that it is not easy for the Church of England to Speak against the Authority of
His MAJESTY's Commissioners, or the Legality of their Proceedings, without
Condemning Themselves, for what they have done against the Puritans. The Case,
in short, will be brought to this; Either the Church of England has most
Unjustly Deprived the Old Puritans; Or, the KING has very Righteously Suspended
the Bishop of London, and Expelled the Fellows of Magdalen College.

The Agreement between what the KING has done, and the Church of England-Law,
is so Exact and Full, that it is impossible for Our Churchmen to Vindicate the
Practices of their Bishop, and Magdalen Gentlemen, without Tearing up the very
Foundations of Their Own Ecclesiastic Constitution. And notwithstanding the
Clamor these Men make, the Court Held by the KING's Commissioners, and
Visitors, will appear to be Grounded on the Church of England-Law, and so are
the Proceedings in the Instances before Us.

Section I. The Legality of the Court, Held by His MAJESTY'S Ecclesiastical
Commissioners.
AS for the COURT, Held by the KING's Ecclesiastical Commissioners, though it is
Said to be Contrary to the Express Words of a Law lately Made, yet, on a
Considerate Examination of the Whole Matter; the Case plainly is thus: Before
the 1st. Eliz. it is Agreed, That all Ordinaries, and Ecclesiastical Judges
whatsoever, Ought in all Ecclesiastical Causes to have Proceeded according to
the Censures of the Church, and could not in any Case have Punished any
Delinquent by Fines, or Imprisonments, unless they had Authority so to do by
Act of Parliament. The Papal Authority did never Fine or Imprison in any Case,
but ever Proceeded Only by Ecclesiastical Censures. But in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners Proceeded to Fine, and Imprison; and
that by Force, as was then Suggested, of the Statute 1st. Elizabeth. This Act
was therefore Consulted, and the Common-Lawyers Differed from the Civilians,
the Former Holding, that This Law gave no Countenance to the Opinion of those,
who said that it Empowered the Ecclesiastic Commissioners to Fine, and
Imprison. And My Ld. Part 4. c. 74.
Chapter Justice Coke, in his Institutes, does with the greatest Clearness
Demonstrate, That the Express Letter and Meaning of 1st. Eliz. is to Restore to
the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, and no Commissioner by Force
of that Ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction could impose Fine, and
Imprisonment; that these Commissioners, having their Force from this Act of
Restitution, cannot Inflict any such Punishments. However, the Commissioners
did Proceed in all Cases to Fine, and Imprison, and, exceeding the Bounds of
Ecclesiastical Censure, did Oppress, and Ruin so many thousand Families, that
the Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of CHARLES the First, 17. Car. 1. c. 11.
took Notice of it, and Declared in the Preamble of that Statute,

That Whereas, by Color of Some WORDS in the Aforesaid Branch of First Eliz.
whereby Commissioners are Authorized to Execute their Commission according to
the Tenor, and Effect of the KING's Letters Patents, and by Letters Patents
Grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have to the Great and Insufferable
Wrong and Oppression of the KING's Subjects, used to Fine, and Imprison, and to
Exercise Other Authority not Belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Restored
by that Act, and diverse other Great Mischiefs, and Inconveniences have also
Ensued to the KING's Subjects by Reason of the said Branch, and Commissions
Issuing thereupon, and the Executions thereof; Therefore for the Repressing and
Preventing of the foresaid Abuses, Mischiefs, and Inconveniences for Time to
come, Be it Enacted, etc.

Here it must be Noted, that the Ecclesiastic Commissioners taking the Branch
of 1st. Eliz. in another Sense than the Common Lawyers did, and that by Color
of some Words in it, the Parliament Repealed this Branch, thus Understood,
Forbidding all Ecclesiastical Judges to Proceed to Fine, or Imprison the KING's
Subjects, or tender the Oath Ex Officio.

This Branch of 1st. Elizabeth being thus Repealed, and the
High-Commission-Court put down, and Care taken, that No such Court be for the
future Erected: 'Twas Generally Concluded,

That all Ordinary Jurisdiction was Taken from the Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicar-Generals, Or any other person, or persons whatsoever Exercising
Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction by any Grant,
License, or Commission of the KING's Majesty. But on the contrary it was
Declared and Enacted, 13 Car. 2. c. 12. That neither the said Act of 17 Car. 1.
nor any thing therein Contained Does, or Shall take away any Ordinary Power, or
Authority from any Person, or Persons Named as Aforesaid, That is, no
Authority, or Jurisdiction is, or shall be taken from the Archbishops,
Bishops, VICAR-GENERALS, or any Person, or Persons Exercising Ecclesiastical
Authority by any COMMISSION of the KING's Majesty, But that They, and every of
Them Exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may Proceed, Determine, Sentence,
Execute and Exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all
Censures, and Coercions appertaining, and belonging to the same, before the
making of the Act, 17 Car. 1. in all Causes, and Matters belonging to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the KING's Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Laws, used and practiced in this Realm, in as ample Manner, and Form as they
did, and might lawfully have done before the making of the said Act.

Thus much is Express in this Statute, 13 Car. 2. c. 12. whereby all Power, and
Ecclesiastical Authority, which belonged to Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicar-Generals, or any other Persons, exercising Authority by Commission of the
KING's Majesty before the making of the 17 Car. 1. is Recognized to belong unto
the abovenamed Persons notwithstanding any thing in the said Statute to the
contrary; and that therefore whatever is said touching the
High-Commission-Court, in the following Branch, must be understood of their
Fining, and Imprisoning. Thus much may be also inferred from the last Clause,
13 Car. 2. where it is provided, That this Act, or any thing therein contained
shall not Extend, or be construed to Extend to give unto any Archbishop,
Bishop, or any other person, or persons aforesaid, any Power or Authority to
exercise, execute, inflict, or determine, any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
Censure, or Coercion, which they might not by Law have done before the Year of
our LORD, 1639. Nor to Abridge, or Diminish, the KING's Majesty's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs.

Whence I infer, that there is no other Power taken from the Ecclesiastic
Commissioners, than that of Fining, Imprisoning, or Tendering the OATH Ex
Officio. Thus much was suppressed by 17 Car. 1. and no more. An Ecclesiastical
COURT exercising this Power was put down, and the Erecting the like for Time to
come strictly forbidden. But the COURT Now set up, is not like unto This, for
it pretends not to Fine, or Imprison, or tender the Oath Ex Officio; it keeps
within the bounds of Ecclesiastic Censures, and is no more like the
High-Commission-Court, than The Court Held by His MAJESTY'S Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, is more Legal than the Bishops Courts; This is in the KING's
Name, Theirs in their Own Names only.
Doctors Commons is; for Vicar-Generals, or other Persons exerciseing Authority
by His Majesty's Commission, have as much Power left them, as Archbishops, or
Bishops have.

So much Touching the Legality of the COURT.

The next Thing to be Considered, is, Their Process against Dr. SHARP, and the
BISHOP of LONDON.

Section II. The Bishop of LONDON's CASE fairly Stated, and Examined.
THE State of the Bishop's CASE I will give You in the Answer, his Lordship
Made to the Commissioners, when he was Asked by the Court, Why He had not
Obeyed his MAJESTY's Command for Suspending Dr. Sharp, which is as follows.
To the Question, that was Proposed to Me by Your Lordships, viz. Why did You
not obey the KING's Command in his Letter concerning the Suspending Dr. Sharp.

I Henry Bishop of London Do Answer, That immediately upon the Receipt of His
MAJESTY'S Letter from my Lord President, the Tenor whereof follows, viz.

James R.

RIGHT Reverend Father in God, WE Greet You well. Whereas, WE have been
Informed, and are fully satisfied, that Dr. John Sharp, Rectour of the
Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, and your
Diocese, notwithstanding Our Late Letter to the most Reverend Fathers in GOD,
the Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, and Our Directions concerning
Preachers Given at Our Court at White Hall, the Fifth of March, 1685. in the
Second Year of Our Reign; yet He the said Dr. Sharp, in Contempt of the said
Orders, has in some of the Sermons he has since Preached, Presumed to make
unbecoming Reflections, and to Utter such Expressions as were not Fit, or
Proper for Him; endeavoring thereby to beget in the Minds of his Hearers, an
evil Opinion of US, and Our Government, by Insinuating Fears, and Jealousies to
dispose them to Discontent, and to lead them into Disobedience, Schism, and
Rebellion. These are therefore to Require, and Command you immediately upon
receipt hereof, forthwith to Suspend Him from further Preaching in any
Parish Church or Chapel in your Diocese, until he shall give Us Satisfaction,
and Our further Pleasure be Known herein. And for so doing, this shall be Your
Warrant. And so WE bid You heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, the Fourteenth Day of June, 1686. in the Second
Year of Our Reign. By His MAJESTY'S Command, SUNDERLAND, P.


I Took the best Advice I could get, concerning the Suspension of Dr. Sharp,
and was Informed, That the Letter being Directed to Me as Bishop of London, to
Suspend a Person under my Jurisdiction, I was therein to Act as a Judge; it
being a Judicial Act, and that no Person could by Law, be punished by
Suspension, before he was Called, or without being Admitted to make his
Defense; I thought it therefore my Duty, forthwith Humbly to Represent so much
to my Lord President, that so I might Receive His MAJESTY'S Farther Pleasure in
that Matter. Nevertheless, that I might Obey His MAJESTY's Commands, as far as
by Law I could, I did then send for Dr. Sharp, and Acquainted Him with His
MAJESTY's Displeasure, and the Occasion of it, by showing him His MAJESTY's
Letter; But he having never been Called to Answer any such Matter, or make his
Defense, and he Protesting his Innocence, and likewise Declaring himself most
Ready to give His MAJESTY full Satisfaction therein, in Order thereto, I
Advised him to forbear Preaching, until he had Applied himself to His MAJESTY;
and at his Request, I made him the Bearer of a Letter to my Lord President,
Waiting for His MAJESTY's further Orders to Proceed against him Judicially, in
case, he should not at that Time give His MAJESTY the Satisfaction Required,
and the said Doctor has not since Preached within my Diocese.

H. London.


That we may Rightly Understand the whole of this Case, it must be observed,
That His MAJESTY received such Evidence against Dr. Sharp, as did fully satisfy
Him of the Truth of the Charge; That the Charge it self is of a very high
Nature, containing in it, not only Contempt of His MAJESTY's Letter, sent the
two Archbishops, and Orders, prescribing Directions concerning Preachers; But,
That by his Preaching, he endeavored to beget in the Minds of his Hearers, an
evil Opinion of His MAJESTY, and Government, by insinuating Fears, and
Jealousies to dispose them to Discontent, and lead them into Disobedience,
Schism, and Rebellion: A Crime, which most undoubtedly deserves an Ipso Facto
Suspension, and according to the Opinion of all the Judges, in the Second Year
of JAMES the First, is an Offense Fineable at Discretion, and very near to
Treason, and Felony in the Punishment. Thus it was Resolved in the Puritans
Case, who intimated in a Petition to the KING, That if He denied their Suit,
many Thousands of His Subjects would be Discontented; and the Reason why they
thus Resolved was, Crookes Reports an. 2 Jac. 1.
Because such Petitions tended to the Raising of Sedition, Rebellion, and
Discontent amongst the People. Whereby these Justices sufficiently Declare,
That what tends to the Raising Sedition, Rebellion, and Discontent, is an
Offense Fineable at Discretion, and very near to Treason, and Felony in the
Punishment: And if His MAJESTY would have proceeding against Doctor Sharp
according to the Method these Church of England Judges have directed unto
against Puritans, the Doctors Offense must have been made a Matter Criminal
worthy of open Shame; and in which Case His MAJESTY, to express a tender
Respect unto the Clergy, must have found it necessary to See Dr. Ridle^'s View,
p. 2. c. 2. sect. 3.
Degrade the Doctor, whereupon, a Deprivation from his Ecclesiastical Benefice
would have followed. But his MAJETY, to show the Extraordinariness of His
Compassion to his Divines of the Church of England, takes a milder Course,
Commanding the Bishop of London, only to Suspend him: And yet the Bishop and
his Learned Counsel think it, not only Hard, but Illegal. For says the Bishop,
I was informed, That the Letter being Directed unto me, as Bishop of London, I
was therein to Act as a Judge, it being a Judicial Act, and that no Person
could by Law be Punished by Suspension before he was Called, or without being
Admitted to make his Defense.

Here then lies the Stress of His Lordships Plea, which will be found to lean
on a very manifest Mistake. For the Bishop, observing in the KING's Letter a
Command to Suspend the Doctor for a Crime so very great, as this mentioned in
the said Letter (Of the Truth of which, the KING assures him He is fully
satisfied) ought to have taken it for granted, that Doctor Sharp had incurred
an Ipso Facto Suspension, and that 'twas his MAJETY's Pleasure, that he should
Denounce him Suspended; which the Bishop, not as a Judge, but as a Party
engaged in Defense of the Canon, was bound to do.

The Doctor's Offense then (thus presumed) is very great, and His MAJESTY
confines Himself within the Circle of Clemency, in that He deals with him in an
Ecclesiastical Way, and proceeded no further than to consider him to be Ipso
Facto Suspended; and if Ipso Facto Suspensions be, according to Our Church of
England-Laws Valid, the Bishop's insisting on the necessity of his Acting as a
Judge in a judicial way cannot help him. It has been my part therefore to
examine, Whether Ipso Facto Suspensions be agreeable to the Ecclesiastic
Canons, now in force; and what manner of Process must be Observed where they
are Incurred: And on Enquiry, I find, that as the Canonists generally, so
Lindwood in particular distinguishes those Censures that are a Jure from what
are ab Homine, and the Sentence a Jure lata from what is ab Homine ferenda,
concluding, that a Judicial Process is not necessary, when the Delinquent is
fallen under the Sentence a Jure; and that therefore he Ordinary, Chancellor, or
Archdeacon, whose work it is to declare such as are ipso facto Excommunicated,
or Suspended to be so, do not then act as Judges, but as Parties engaged in the
Defense of Ecclesiastic Laws.

Amongst the Constitutions of Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, it is ordained,
That Decernimus ne Archidiaconi vel Officiales eorum Sententias
Excommunicationis, Suspensionis, vel interdicti in aliquem audeant promulgare,
ubi excessus non est Manifestus, nisi monitione Canonica praecedente. Lindwood
constit. Provin. de Sentent. Excom. c. ut Archidiac.
no Archdeacons, nor their Officials presume to publish the Sentences of
Excommunication or Suspension, or Interdict, on any without previous
Admonition: But where the Crime is Manifest, they may pronounce these
Sentences: And it must be observed, That by Hic scias quod Manifestum est
publica seu famosa insinuatio vel proclamatio and communis ex certa scientia,
and a certis Auctoribus proveniens, nondum judicialiter discussa. Lindwood ubi
supr. in verb. Manifestum.
Manifest, We are to understand what is clear, antecedently to a Judicial
Process.

Besides, Lindwood expressly affirms, That where the Vbi Superior fert
sententiam Excommunicationis in vim Statuti, non est aliqua monitio necessaria.
Ubi supr.
Superior declares the Sentence in Force of the Canon, there is no need of a
previous Admonition.

Again, where the Excommunication Vbi Excommunicatio fertur in vim sententioe
and Excommunicans procedit ut pars, quae jura sua defendit muerone Spirituali,
quod satis licet, non est necessarea monitio. Ubi supr.
is pronounced in Force of the Statute, and he that does Excommunicate, acts as
a Party, who with the Spiritual Sword defends the Laws of the Church, which is
Lawful enough for him to do, Admonition is not necessary. But, when the
Superior acts as a Judge, then indeed he is obliged to observe a Legal Process.

But the thing I would inculcate, is this, That by the Canon Law, a Penalty may
be inflicted without a Hearing Parties; and that, Because it is Decreed a Jure,
and the Delinquent incurs it Ipso Facto. This is the meaning of the many Ipso
Facto Excommunications and Suspensions, that are Decreed by those very Canons
embraced by the Church of England; at which time the Bishop is not to act as a
Judge, but as a Part, Quae Jura sua defendit Mucrone Spirituali.

Whether, what Duct. Dubit. lib 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 14.
Dr. Tailor Affirms, when he assures us, That he who incurs a Penalty Ipso
Facto, is bound to be his own Executioner (Seeing whatever their Obligation may
be, none are so forward, as to Execute it on themselves) be true, or no; yet
according to Church of England-Principles, we may aver, That when any do incur
Excommunication, or Suspension Ipso Facto, the Ordinary, Archdeacon, or his
Officials may, without Hearing Parties, pronounce it, and take care to see,
that it be done; and if the Ordinary Command, the Archdeacon, who is Sworn to
render Canonical Obedience, must do it. That when the Sentence is a Jure lata
in some Cases it is requisite, that either the Ordinary, or some other do also
Pronounce it I grant; for in the Constitution made by Boniface, Arcbhishop of
Canterbury, those who were Ipso Facto Excommunicated, must by the Per locorum
Ordinarios public Excommunicati nuncientur. Lindw^^d provin. constit. de foro
compel. c. contingit. aliquando.
Ordinaries of the place be declared to be so; but then it is Non opus est
monitione in hoc casu sed sola citatione ut veniant allegaturi causam
rationabilem, quare declarari non debeant incidisse in dictam sententiam. Ubi
supr. in verb. Nuntiatur.
without any previous Admonition, it is only needful that the Delinquent be
cited to Appear, and show Cause why he should not be declared Excommunicate;
and no more can be said of ipso facto Suspensions, where the Sentence is a Jure
seu Canone; and the utmost that is necessary, is only, That these Nec etiam
Excommunicare potest and hoc verum in eo, qui est suspensus ab Homine, vel
etiam a Canone, si sit public denunciatus, alioquin in suspenso a Canone non
denuntiato, quamdiu toleratur in suo statu valet quod per eum agitur. Lindw.
prove. l. 1. tit. 2. de constit. c. Quia in.
Suspensions be publicly Denounced: For, as Lindwood, if an Ordinary be
Suspended a Canone, he cannot Excommunicate, if it be Denounced; but otherwise
he may.

This may suffice to prove, That to Command a Bishop to Suspend; that is, To
pronounce one Suspended without a Judicial Process, is conform to the
Constitutions embraced by the Church of England; and in this Case the Bishop is
bound to Obey, if Commanded by the Supreme Ordinary. And although some very
boldly Affirm, That these Suspensions are contrary to the Laws of GOD, of
Nature, and of Nations: yet nothing has been more commonly practiced by the
Church of England in their prosecuting Dissenters than Ipso Facto
Excommunications, which are of a like kind with Ipso Facto Suspensions, for
both are without a Judicial Process; and at this very time Ipso Facto
Deprivations, which are more than Suspensions ab Officio, are established by
our Laws.

By the Statute of 21 Hen. 8. If an Incumbent, having a Benefice with Cure of
Souls, value Eight Pound per Annum, take another with Cure, immediately after
Induction thereunto, the former is void, even without any Declaratory Sentence
of Deprivation in the Ecclesiastical Court. And whoever neglects to Read The
Articles of Religion within two Months next after Induction, he is deprived
Ipso Facto; and upon such Avoidance, there is no need of a Sentence
Declaratory. And if this be not contrary to the Laws of GOD, nor of our Land,
How comes it to pass, that an Ipso Facto Suspension should be such a hideous
thing in the esteem of a Church of England-Man, who has been so accustomed to
treat the Dissenters after this very way and manner?

On the whole then, I hope it is sufficiently cleared, That the Bishop of
London, in the present case, was bound to Obey His MAJESTY, and Suspend the
Doctor; That the Capitulation he entered into with his Prince, and the Contempt
of His Authority, deserved no less than a Suspension ab Officio.

Section III. A Just Account of the Proceedings of the Commissioners Appointed
by His MAJESTY under the Great Seal for Visiting St. Mary Magdalen College in
Oxford.
ON the Death of Dr. Clark, President of St. Mary Magdalen in Oxford; before
the day of Election the KING sends down a Mandamus for the Electing another;
and whereas, the Fellows were Sworn to observe the College Statutes, which
obliged them to Choose one of their Own, or of New College, His MAJESTY sends
down a Dispensation with His Mandatory Letter; notwithstanding which, the
Fellows pretending, that they were bound in Conscience to observe the Statute,
because of their Oaths, regard not the Mandatory Letter, nor Royal
Dispensation; They make not a Choice as the KING Commanded, and when cited
before His MAJESTY's Commissioners, and Visitours, to Answer for their
Disobedience, they in a most Contemptuous Manner protest against the
Proceedings.

The Great Points therefore to be Discussed, may be Reduced to these two Heads.

I. Whether the KING by His Prerogative may not Dispense with the College
Statutes? II. Whether, when there is a Dispensation Granted, the Fellows are by
their Oath Obliged to Act according to those very Statutes, that are Dispensed
with?
A Solution to These Questions will be Sufficient to Clear the Truth in this
Affair; for if the Dispensation according to the Church of England-Law be
valid, and the Fellows are not by their Oaths Bound to observe the Statutes
after such a Dispensation, 'twill unavoidably follow, That the Magdalen-Fellows
have been most justly Suspended and Expelled. And thus much will be with much
clearness evinced.

I. Touching the Dispensing Power.
The KING's Power in Matters Ecclesiastical is so very ample, and extensive,
that it is not easy for any one to set bounds, or limits to it; By our Common
Lawyers it has been often affirmed, That whatever the Pope de facto formerly
did within this Realm by the Canon Law, that of Right belongs to our KINGS.

And on this Ground it has been adjudged, That the Legislative Power in Matters
Ecclesiastical is lodged in the KING. The Pope made Laws for the Government of
the Clergy; and so may the KING: And thus much Q. Elizabeth, as supreme Head of
the Church of England, on the Request of Archbishop Whitgift exercised, when
she imposed a Subscription to the three Articles, and deprived those who would
not Obey. The Statute of 13 Eliz. c. 12. required Subscription to the Articles
of Faith, and the Doctrines of the Sacraments only; and with this, those, who
preached against Ceremonies, and the Hierarchick Government, complied.

Whitgift therefore, and the Ecclesiastical Commissioners go further, and by
the Regal Power ordained Subscription to the Ceremonies and Government of the
Church, and deprived such as refused to Subscribe. In the First of K. James I.
these Articles are Established by the Canons, without an Act of Parliament,
made in that Year, on which occasion Deprivations were very Common, and the
Puritanick We complain, That we are put out from our Benefices, which are a
Freehold by the bare and sole Sentence of a Bishop; whereas the Liberty of an
Englishman is this, To be put from his Freehold by none but by the Verdict of
Twelve Men. Parker on the Cross, Part 2. Chapter 8. Sect. 3. P. 108.
Clamours as great, yea, so great, that the Clergy judged it necessary to
beseech His MAJESTY to command all the Justices of England to confer together
of this thing, and give in their opinion, which accordingly they did; For it
being demanded by the Lord Chancellor, See Crokes Reports, an. 2. Jacob 1.
Whether the Deprivation of the Puritan Ministers for refusing to conform
themselves to the Ceremonies appointed by the last Canons, was Lawful? They all
answered, That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be Lawful,
because the KING has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power. -- And they held it
clear, that the KING, without a Parliament, might make Orders and Constitutions
for the Government of the Clergy, and might deprive them, if they Obey not.

The Civilians go higher, affirming, That the KING, as Supreme, is Himself
instead of the Whole Law; yea, that he is the Law it Self, and the Only Chief
Interpreter thereof, as in whose Breast resides the whole Knowledge of the
same. And that His MAJESTY, by communicating His Authority to His Judges, to
Expound the Laws, does not thereby abdicate the same from Himself. These, with
Borellus, do hold, Dr. Ridley view, p. 2. c. 1. sect. 7.
That Principum placita legis habent vigorem.

And as the KING, by the Fullness of His Ecclesiastical Power can, without a
Parliament, make what Laws He Please for the Government of the Clergy; in like
manner, The Power of the KING, in Matters Ecclesiastical, is too ample to be
limited by an Act of Parliament.

Thus much has been cleared up by my Lord part. 4.
Coke, in his Institutes, where he tells us, That albeit the Acts of 24 Hen. 8.
and 25 Hen. 8. do, upon certain Appeals, make the sentence Definitive, as to
any Appeal; for the Words be [shall be Definitive] and that no further Appeal
should be had, yet the KING, after such a Definitive Sentence, as Supreme Head,
may grant a Commission of Review, ad Revidendum, etc. -- for that after a
Definitive Sentence, the Pope, as Supreme Head, by the Canon Law, used to grant
a Commission ad Revidendum. -- And such Authority as the Pope had, claiming as
Supreme Head, does of Right belong to the Crown, and is annexed thereunto by
the Statutes of the 26 Hen. 8. c. 1. and 1. Eliz. c. 1. And so it was Resolved
in the King's Bench, Trin. 39 Eliz. where the Case was, That Sentence being
given in an Ecclesiastical Cause in the Country, the Party grieved appealed
according to the said Act of 25 Hen. 8. to the Archbishop, before whom the
first Sentence was affirmed: Whereupon, according to the Statute of 25 Hen. 8.
he appealed to the Delegates. And upon this matter a Prohibition was prayed in
the King's Bench, pretending that the Commission of Review was against Law, for
that the Sentence before the Delegates was Definitive by the Statute of 25 Hen.
8. But upon Mature Deliberation and Debate, the Prohibition was denied; for
that the Commission for the Causes abovesaid was resolved to be lawfully
granted. In this Case, I being then (says Sir Edward Coke) the Queens
Attorney, was of Counsel to maintain the Queens Power. And Presidents were
cited in this Court in Michelot's Case, Anno. 29 Eliz. and in Goodman's Case,
and in Hewet's in 29 Eliz. also. So far Sir Edw. Coke.

From whence it is most manifest, That an Act of Parliament can be no Bar to the
Exercise of the Regal Power, that is established by the Common Law, as the
KING's Supremacy in Matters Ecclesiastical is. But further,

The Grant of Dispensations is a Peculiar and very Considerable Part of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which is eminently Seated in the CROWN. That the
same Power the Pope claimed in this Land, as Supreme Head, does of Right belong
to our KINGS, has been abundantly proved; and in the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. c.
22. it is affirmed, That the Pope claimed full Power to Dispense with all
Humane Laws of all Realms in all Causes, which he called Spiritual. And my Lord
Chief Justice Hobart, delivering his Opinion about the Power of Dispensing in
general, holds it clear, Colt and Glover, ver, Bishop of Leitchfield.
That though the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. c. 21. says, That all Dispensations,
etc. shall be Granted in manner and form following, and not otherwise; that yet
the KING is not thereby restrained, but his Power remains full and perfect as
before, and He may still Grant them as KING; for all Acts of Justice and Grace
flow from Him, as 4 Eliz. Dier. 211. The Commission of Trial of Piracy upon the
Statute of 28 Hen. 8 c. 13. is good, though the Chancellor do not nominate the
Commissioners, as that Statute appoints, and yet it is a New Law. And Mich. 5.
and 6. Eliz. Dier. 225. The Queen made Sheriffs without the Judges,
notwithstanding the Ninth of Edward 2. And Mich. 13. and 14. Eliz. Dier. 303.
The Office of Alnager granted by the Queen, without the Bill of the Treasurer,
it is good with a non obstante, against the Statute of 31 Hen. 6. c. 5. For
these Statutes, and the like, were made to put things in Ordinary Form, and to
case the SOVEREIGN of Labor, but not to Deprive Him of Power.

Besides, the Learned of the Law do with much Plainness aver, and clear up thus
much to Us, That the KING can Grant out what ever Dispensations the Pope did,
so long as the things Dispensed with are not Mala in se. In Ecclesiasticals the
KING can Dispense not only with Canons, but with Acts of Parliament, yea, with
any thing that is but Malum prohibitum; and seeing the Universities are for the
Maintenance of Religion, and fall under the Care of the Supreme HEAD, as other
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Corporations do, the KING can in like manner
Dispense with their Statutes. If with the Greater, no doubt with the Lesser. If
an Act of Parliament may be Dispensed with, it is not to be questioned, but a
Provincial Canon may be so too; and if Acts of Parliament and Provincial Canons
cannot limit, or confine, or stand before the Dispensing Power, How is it
possible, that a Colledge-Statute should do it? To suppose that it can, is to
ascribe greater Power to One Man, or to a little Corporation, than to the
greatest Body of the Nation; than which, nothing can be more absurd. Besides,
the Laws enacted by the Founder of a College, can have no more Strength than
they receive from the KING. Nor can a College be erected without His Leave.

Time would fail to produce all the Authorities, by which (according to Church
of England-Doctrine) the Truth hereof may be Confirmed. And this is so well
done by other Hands, that I will stay no longer on it, but will go on to
Consider,

Whether, notwithstanding a Dispensation, those who have been Sworn to Observe
the Statutes of a College, cannot Act contrary thereunto, without violating
their Oath? For here lies the stress of what the Magdalen Gentlemen have to say
for themselves; and yet We can no sooner Explicate the Nature of a
Dispensation, but may see how feeble the Foundation is, on which these Men lean
in Defense of their contemptuous Disobedience to the Royal Mandate.

The Nature then of a Dispensation (as it was agreed in the case of Jones
Reports, fol. 158, etc.
Evan and Kiffin against Askwith) is to derogate, and make void a Statute,
Canon, and Constitutions as to that, which it prohibits the Parties, to whom
it is Given. It is an Exception (as to them) out of the Statute, or
Constitution. The Obligatory Power of the Statute or Canon, is taken away, as
to that Person, who has the Dispensation. Dispensatio est mali prohibiti
provida relaxatio.
It is as to him in a manner vacated. Though the Canon, Statute, or
Constitution be not made simply void and null; yet in some Respects it is made
void. As to this, or the other Person, for this time the Obligation Ceases.
Here then lies the Difference between the Dispensing with a Law, and the
Repealing it. A Repeal vacates the Law to all Intents and Purposes, but a
Dispensation does only in some respect vacate it. By a Repeal the Law is
abolished, but where there is a Dispensation only, though the Law obliges not
the Person for such a time, yet it remains a Law still. A Repeal kills it, but
a Dispensation only binds it up, or stands between the Obligation of it, and
this or the other Party; but still as to the Party to whom the Dispensation is
given, the Law is made void, and to him it is as if there had been no such Law
for that time.

So much touching the Nature of a Dispensation; from whence it clearly follows,
That the Magdalen-Gentlemen stood not bound by Oath to Choose according to
their Statutes, for to them there remained no such Statute as obliged them to
choose one of their own Society; and they might, notwithstanding their Oath,
act as if no such thing had been. For the KING sent 'em his Dispensation, which
took away the strength of their Statute; it laid the very Statute aside for
that season: And this Bar being taken out of the Fellows way, His Majesty
commands them to choose another, and all were bound to Obey the Royal Mandate:
For, they were sworn only to the Statutes, that were in force; but the
Dispensation taking away the force of the Statute, the Oath obliged them not to
keep it.

To illustrate this, I will suppose, that by an Act of Parliament this
College-Statute had been made utterly void and null, as those relating to the
Mass have been: Will any say, that the Fellows, because of their Oath are with
a Non Obstante to this Act of Parliament, still bound to keep to the vacated
Statute? I presume not, for Statutes made by a particular Man, or Corporation,
cannot be of greater Force than an Act of Parliament; and the College-Statute
being vacated, the Oath obliges them not to keep it; and for the same reason, I
may boldly affirm, that seeing, according to Church of England-Law, the Royal
Dispensation does as effectually make void the Statute to these Men for that
time, they are not obliged by their Oath to observe it.

Furthermore, we find, that in process of time, some Laws never Repealed wear
out of date, and become useless; and though never Repealed, yet must be
considered as void and null, or the whole Kingdom must be brought under the
Guilt of Perjury. I will instance in one Law, which was Made Anno 3 Hen. 8. c.
3. Requiring Every Man, being the KING's Subject, not Lame, Decrepit, nor
Maimed, nor having any other Lawful, or Reasonable Cause, or Impediment, being
within the Age of Forty Years, except Spiritual Men, Justices of the One Bench,
and of the Other, Justices of Assize, and Barons of the Exchequer, to use, and
exercise Shooting in Long-Bows, and also to have a Bow and Arrow ready
continually in his House to use, and do use himself in Shooting: Also, that the
Father, Governors, and Rulers of such as are of tender Age, do teach and bring
up them in the Knowledge of the same Shooting, etc. I say, there is a Law
requiring thus much, not yet Repealed, that I can find; and all Constables
still Swear, That they will have a Care for the Maintenance of Archery,
according to the Statute. But yet it is Notorious, that this Statute is not
Observed, nor does the Constable regard this part of his Oath. And why, But
because the Statute is Obsolete, and by a general Consent grown out of use, and
must be esteemed as if it had been vacate and null. And it is most manifest,
that a Dispensation can as effectually, at least so far vacate a Statute, that
the Person, who is otherwise Sworn to keep it, may without Perjury forbear it is
Observance.

And that this is manifest, where there is a Dispensation, appears from the
Practices of our Judges, See that new little Book Entitled, The Justices Case;
which, if it had come out time enough, might perhaps have kept some of these
Magdalen-Scholars in their Places, supposing any of them purely Conscientious,
that went out merely for want of Light, about the Obligation of an Oath, which
is the business of that Case.
and Justices of the Peace, throughout the Whole Kingdom, who, though Sworn to
Execute the Laws, do esteem themselves Discharged from the Execution of those
lately Dispensed with by His Sacred MAJESTY. But,

To come Closer to our Magdalen-Gentlemen, I would propose to their
Consideration the Churchwardens Oath, which runs in these Words, [ You shall
swear Truly and Faithfully to Execute the Office of a Churchwarden, within
your Parish, and according to the best of your skill, and Knowledge, Present
such Things, and Persons, as to your Knowledge are Presentable by the Laws
Ecclesiastical of this Realm.] This is the Oath, and whatever is contrary to
any one Canon, is Presentable by the Laws Ecclesiastical. And if a Dispensation
be not sufficient to excuse the Churchwardens from Perjury, for not Presenting
the Transgressors of the Canons, This sort of People will not be only
Perjured, for not Presenting the Dissenters at this time, but for not
Presenting some of the Fattest amongst their own Clergymen. For as the
Civilians assure Us, the Ecclesiastic Law is, That every Spiritual Person is
Visitable by the Ordinary, and yet the KING exempts Multitudes from the
Ordinary's Visitations. Thus formerly many Abbeys have been, and now all
Donatives are exempt, and the Ecclesiastical Law is Dispensed with; and, Must
all those who are in Donatives, and receive not Institution nor Induction from
the Bishop, nor will submit to the Ordinary's Visitation, be presented; or are
the Churchwardens Perjured?

Again, All Pluralities are contrary to the Canon; but if His MAJESTY gives a
Dispensation, a Priest may hold two Benefices; and nothing more Common. There
is also a Canon, That a Bastard shall not be a Priest; however, if the KING
Dispenses with this Canon, the Bastard may enter into Holy Orders. But must the
Churchwarden present Every Bastard-Priest, and all that hold Pluralities, or
else be Forsworn?

But the Case is too plain to need further Proof. All know, That when an Oath
is taken to Observe the Laws, it is no longer than they are in Force; If he Law
be repealed, the Oath obliges not any to Observe it; and as to the Person
Dispensed with, the Law for that time so far ceases, that to him, there is no
such Law, and therefore his Oath binds him not in this case to Regard it.
Effectus enim Dispensationis est auferre a particulari Persona simpliciter, vel
in tali tempore aut occasion, Obligationem ad Opus, vel Omissionem, vel
poenam, vel auferre irritationem, aut inhabilitatem, quam lex ipsa efficiebat.
So Salas.

Thus you see, That if it be in the Power of the KING to suspend the
Colledge-Statutes, the Pretense of Conscience about keeping to their Oath, is
vain and ludicrous: For which Reason, I will only add one Consideration more,
to show that the Dispensing Power leans on a Foundation that cannot be moved,
but to the Endangering the Whole Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, as Exercised by
the Bishops.

It Is well known, That what Power is Strong enough to Dispense with an Act of
Parliament about Civils, wants not Strength to Dispense with Parliamentary
Laws, touching Ecclesiastical Affairs; nor with Church-Canons, nor
Colledge-Statutes. And that the KING can Dispense with Acts of Parliament,
relating unto Civil Affairs, is a Matter grounded on the same Bottom with the
Bishop's Jurisdiction; and that is, On the Opinion of the Church-of-England-
Judges.

That it is the Opinion of our Judges, That the KING can Dispense in Matters
Civil, is Notorious, the Matter of Fact is very Lately become too Obvious to
admit of a Denial; and that the Bishop's Jurisdiction has no other ground for
its Support, is easily proved. For by the First of Edw. 6. it is declared, that
It Is contrary to Common Law for any to Hold Courts in any other than the KING's
Name. So that, whatever becomes of this Statute, whether Repealed, or in Force,
seeing the Common Law remains the same, the Bishops must have a Commission from
the KING, and Hold Courts in His MAJESTY'S Name, or be affirmed to make an
Invasion on the Common Law, which is no less than a Praemunire. However, the
Bishops have held Courts in their own Names ever since King Edward's Days; and,
as the Old Puritans did imagine, their Courts were Illegal, their Bishops
Premunir'd, and several Demurred to their Jurisdiction. For which Reason,
Charles the First called all his Judges together, commanding them to give in
their Opinion touching this Matter, which they did in these Words:

According to Your Lordships Order, made in His MAJESTY'S Court of Star Chamber
the 12th. of May last, We have taken Consideration of the Particulars, wherein
our Opinions are required by the said Order; and We have All agreed, That
Processes may Issue out of Ecclesiastical Courts, in the Names of Bishops; and
that a Patent under the Great Seal is not necessary, etc.

By this it appears, That the Whole Power of the Bishop's Jurisdiction
depends upon the Opinion of these Judges; and if these Judges Opinion be not
more prevalent than the Common Law, the Jurisdiction of Bishops is gone. If it
be, the Dispensing-Power, grounded on the Late Opinion of the Judges, is Valid:
So that the last Result will be this, the Bishop's Power must be Destroyed, or
the KING's Dispensing-Power must be Recognized.

But although the Matter is so fully cleared up, in Defense of His MAJESYT's
Commissioners and Visitors, yet the Insolence of the Magdalen-Fellows, and
their Contempt of the Regal Authority, exceeded all Bounds; For as they,
contrary to the Royal Mandate, proceed to Elect Dr. John Hough, and although
his Election was made null and void by the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical
Causes, yet the Dr. refused to submit thereunto, whereby he put the
Commissioners under a necessity of Expelling him the House; which being done,
the Doctor makes his Protestation against their Proceedings, as Illegal, and
Unjust, and Null; and this Protestation accompanied with a Tumultuous Humm or
Acclamation, as if the Whole House had been engaged in a Conspiracy against His
MAJESTY, and had designed the Depriving the CROWN of One of its Richest Jewels,
viz. The Ecclesiastical Supremacy. The Fellows also at first refused to submit
unto the Bishop of Oxford, who was by His MAJESTY made their President; but at
last gave in this Answer, in Writing, viz.

Whereas His MAJESTY has been Pleased by His Royal Authority, to cause the
Right Reverend Father in GOD, Samuel Lord Bishop of Oxford, to be Installed
President of this College, We, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do Submit
as far as is Lawful and Agreeable to the Statutes of the said College.

The Chaplains, and all the Members of the Society, except the Under-Porter,
gave in a Paper to the same Effect.

But Dr. Farefax, who would not Submit unto the Suspension he had incurred,
Disowned the Jurisdiction of the Court, for which Reason he was Deprived of his
Fellowship. And, notwithstanding the abovementioned Submission, these same
Fellows, within three Days, brought in a Paper with all their Hands Subscribed,
of the Tenor following.

May it Please Your Lordships,
WE have Endeavored in all Our Actions to Express Our Selves with all
Humility to His MAJESTY, and being Conscious to Our Selves, That in the whole
Conduct of this Business before Your Lordships, We have done nothing, but what
Our Oaths and Statutes Indispensably obliged Us to; We cannot make any
Declaration, whereby We acknowledge that We have done Amiss, as having Acted
according to the Principles of Loyalty and Obedience to His Sacred MAJESTY, as
far as We could, without doing Violence to Our Consciences, or Prejudice to Our
Rights (one of which We humbly Conceive that of Electing a President to be),
from which We are Sworn, upon no Account whatsoever, to depart. We therefore
humbly Beg your Lordships to represent this Favorably, with Our Utmost Duty,
to His MAJESTY; Whom GOD grant Long and Happily to Reign over Us.


On the Tuesday, October 25. 1687. they Submit; but on the Friday following,
October 28. they cannot in Conscience do it. A very sudden, but a prodigious
Change. Their Submission was as much as the Visitours expected; for as it was
to the Bishop of Oxford, their President, Installed by His MAJESTY's Royal
Authority, as far as is Lawful and Agreeable to the Statute of the said
College, this was enough; For according to Church of England-Law, the KING can
Dispense with their Statutes. To talk of an Indispensable Statute, is to
suppose it designed for the Limitation of the KING's Power in Ecclesiastical
Causes, whereby it becomes Ipso Facto, void and null; but there being no such
Statute, the Method His MAJESTY took, was such as capacitated the Fellows to
Obey His Authority, without laying their Consciences under a Violence. 'Twas
all Fair and Legal, and their Complying so far satisfied the KING's Visitors.

But, as we may well conjecture, the Fellows having consulted the Under-Porter,
who had either more Sense, or Honesty than the Doctors, for he refused to
submit so far, perhaps knowing, that this was a full Submission, they tack
about, and presume to justify all that they had done in this Affair: Though
they had declared, That they denied the Jurisdiction of the Court, and thereby
endeavored to Ravish from the KING a peculiar Part of His Supreme Authority;
Though they applauded Dr. Hough, for his Protesting against the Proceedings, as
Illegal, Void, and Null: Yet they arrive to the Boldness of Averring, That in
the Whole Conduct of this Business they did nothing but what their Oaths and
Statutes Indispensably obliged them to; and therefore cannot declare, That they
have done any thing Amiss, and make Use of what they have often called the Old
Seditious Cant of Regulating the Principles of their Loyalty to the KING, by
the Conscience of an Oath to the Statutes of the College, and with a Salvo to
their own Rights.

Though the poor Dissenters did Plead Conscience of Duty unto GOD Only, as what
they Judged sufficient to exempt them from Obeying their Prince in those
Instances, which Interfer'd with the KING's Command; yet 'twas enough to
provoke the Prelatists to censure them Seditious, Factious, and Rebellious: But
these Gentlemen plead Conscience; not that they are bound by an Heavenly
Decree, they can go no higher, than to insist on the Obligation of a little
Colledge-Statute, that has been Dispensed with, and the Sacredness of their
University-Rights, as if greater Regard must be had to the Pretended Rights of
the Church of England-Clergy and Schoolmen, than to those of the CROWN; and a
greater Deference must be paid to the Vacated Statutes of their College, than
the Puritans might give to the Commands of Jesus Christ.

Thus these Magdalen-Gentlemen go on with a Confidence that bears some
proportion to the Badness of their Cause, and are not afraid to cast the
Greatest Contempt on His MAJESTY's Commissioners and Visitors, and consequently
on His MAJESTY Himself, whose Person they represent, and instead of Humbling
themselves for their many Insolences, or instead of acting according to their
Quondam avowed Doctrine of Passive Obedience, they fly in the Face of
Authority, charging it with no less Guilt than the Injuring a Whole Society;
and, as if they had still to do with their Dissenting Brethren, they close up
the Scene with an Insulting Threat: For, after their Expulsion, they severally
gave in Papers to the Effect following.

May it Please Your Lordships,
I Do profess all Duty to His MAJESTY, and Respect to Your Lordships, but beg
Leave to declare, I think my Self Injured in Your Lordships Proceedings, and
therefore Protest against them, and will use all Just and Legal means of being
relieved.


Here you see they complain of Injuries done 'em, and are resolved to use all
Just and Legal Means (they say) for their own Relief. But who can imagine what
they will understand by Just and Legal Means?

The Whole of these Proceedings depend on the Dispensing Power: If His MAJESTY
had not Dispensed with their Colledge-Statutes, the Case would have been
another thing; but the Dispensation makes it manifest, That no Pretense of an
Oath can be sufficient to excuse their Disobedience. Let us then compare the
late Actings of these Gentlemen with a Notion we find in an Admired A Letter
containing Reflections on His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience.
Pamphlet, Written by one of their own Communion, and we may see Cause justly
to conclude, that they esteem the Exercise of the Dispensing Power to be a
Subversion of the Whole Government, Which (to use the Author's own Words) being
so contrary to the Trust that is given to the PRINCE, who ought to Execute it,
will put Men upon Uneasy and Dangerous Enquiries, which will turn Little to
the Advantage of those who are driving Matters to such a Doubtful and Desperate
Issue. To which let us add, That this is mentioned in Contradistinction to the
Nonresisting Doctrine; and then consider, Whether any rational Man (who is
acquainted with what these very men do, to fill the Minds of His MAJESTY's
Subjects with Discontent,) can think, that by Just and Legal they mean any
thing less than some Methods, better indeed silenced than expressed.

When the Protestant Dissenters went not half so far in their Disobedience to
the Regal Authority, they could not escape the Censure of being Enemies to the
Government, and were immediately made incapable of any Ecclesiastical Benefice.
They only refused to Subscribe unto two of the three Articles, and this was
interpreted a Renouncing the KING's Supreme Authority in Matters
Ecclesiastical, and without the Aid of an Act of Parliament they were deprived.

And whoever carefully observes the Ecclesiastic Proceedings, will find, That
when the Ecclesiastical Judges deal with Delinquents, they never give over till
there be either a Submission, or a running the Offender to the Last Punishment.

Thus, if a Man did but absent himself from the Sacrament, and was admonished,
he must Conform, or be run to an Excommunication, and at last to the Writ de
Excommunicato capiendo. In like manner, if any of the Clergy fell under the
Censure of Suspension ab Officio, unless there had been a Submission, it went
on to a Suspension a Beneficio; yea, and to a Deprivation: Which, if done in
one Diocese, was to be regarded by every Diocesan throughout the whole Kingdom.
And the Reason our Clergy give for this, is not the Ruin of the Offenders, but
a Reducing 'em to the Knowledge of themselves, and a due Submission to their
Superiors; whose Part it is to secure the Great Ends of Government; as also,
for the discouraging Others from the like Miscarriages. And on this account it
is, that the making the Magdalen-Fellows incapable of Ecclesiastical Benefices,
Dignities, or Promotions, became Necessary, it being no more than what is
included in every Deprivation of the Clergy. And for this Reason the KING's
Ecclesiastical Commissioners have made the ensuing Decree.

By His MAJESTY's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, and for Visiting the
Universities, and all and every Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, Colleges,
Grammar-Schools, and other the like Incorporations, or Foundations, and
Societies.
WHereas, We thought Fit by Our Order, of the 22d. of June last, to Declare,
and Decree, That the Pretended Election of Mr. John Hough ( now Dr. John Tough)
to the Presidentship of St. Mary Magdalen College in the University of Oxon,
was Void, and therefore did amove the said Mr. Hough from the Place of
President of the said College; And whereas the Fellows of the same were
likewise convened before Us for their Disobedience to, and Contempt of His
MAJESTY's Authority, by making the said Pretended Election, and it now
appearing unto Us, That the said Dr. John Tough, Dr. Charles Aldeworth, Dr.
Henry Fairfax, Dr. Alexander Pudsey, Dr. John Smith, Dr. Thomas Bayley, Dr.
Hhomas Stafford, Mr. Robert Almont, Mr. Mainwaring Hammond, Mr. John Rogers,
Mr. Richard Strickland, Mr. Henry Dobson, Mr. James Bayley, Mr. John Davies,
Mr. Francis Bagshaw, Mr. James Fayrer, Mr. Joseph Harwar, Mr. Thomas Bateman,
Mr. George Hunt, Mr. William Cradock, Mr. John Gillman, Mr. George Fulham, Mr.
Charles Penyston, Mr. Robert Hyde, Mr. Edward Yerbury, Mr. Henry Holden, and
Mr. Stephen Weelks, Lately Fellows of the said College, do persist in their
Disobedience and Contempt; We have thought Fit, upon Mature Consideration of
the Matter, to Declare, Decree, and Pronounce, And We do accordingly Declare,
Decree, and Pronounce, That the said Dr. John Hough, etc. and every of Them,
shall be, and from henceforth they are hereby declared and adjudged Incapable
of Receiving, or being Admitted to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, Benefice, or
Promotion; and that such, and every of them, who are not as yet in Holy Orders,
shall be, and are hereby Declared and Adjudged incapable of Receiving, or being
Admitted into the same; And all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
Officers and Ministers within the Realm of England, are hereby required to take
Notice of This Our Sentence, Order, and Decree, and to yield Obedience
thereunto.

Given under Our Seal the 10th. of December, 1687.
The Conclusion.
THUS You have a Just Account given You of the Proceedings of His MAJESTY's
Commissioners, and Visitors, with the KING's Power in Matters Ecclesiastical;
How, according to Church of England-Law, His MAJESTY can Dispense, not only
with College-Statutes, but with Provincial Canons, and Acts of Parliament; And
yet how Unjustly the Fellows Opposed the KING's Supremacy, to which they are
All Sworn, and which, they should have Regarded after another manner than they
did; As also with what Contempt, and Scorn, they Carried it toward His
MAJESTY's Visitors; Giving them Opprobrious Language, and making False Reports
of Matter of Fact, intending to fill the Minds of the KING's Subjects with
Fears, Jealousies, and Discontent: so that, on the whole, an Ordinary Capacity
may with much clearness perceive, That His MAJESTY's Commissioners, have in
their Proceedings against the Magdalen-Fellows kept within the Bounds of
Justice.

And, notwithstanding any thing the Commissioners have done, either against the
Bishop of London, or Magdalen College, His MAJESTY's Clemency toward the Church
of England is surprising, and cannot but appear so to any that do but mind what
I have already mentioned about the Opinion of the Judges, which was, That the
KING without a Parliament can make Ordinances and Constitutions for the
Government of the Clergy, and Deprive them if they Obey not. To which, let us
Add, That this was the very End, for which the Judges Opinion was desired, viz.
The Justifying the Church of Englands Depriving the Old Puritans for not
Subscribing to the Ceremonies enjoined by the Canon; thereby plainly showing,
that the KING without a Parliament may appoint what Ceremonies He please.

Now it is not to be doubted, That if His MAJESTY would but Exercise this Power
in Matters Ecclesiastical, he might Appoint and Ordain so many Ceremonies, and
Require Subscription to them, as would make the Church of England look exactly
like that of Rome, and Deprive all those that dare Disobey.

Let us but Consider then, with what Severity the Church of England-Clergy
express themselves against Popery: and again, Observe how easily the KING might
by their own Law, impose a very great Part of It on them, and deprive them, if
they Obey not; and 'twill not be difficult to conclude, what would be the
condition of these Present Sticklers against Popery. To the Sign of the Cross
in Baptism, the KING might enjoin Exsufflation, Salt, and Spittle; and to
Kneeling at the Sacrament, the Deacons Kissing of the Hand, or Right Shoulder
of the Priest, and the Men's Kissing each other; besides Holy Water, and it is
Consecration, as well as the Consecration of Churches; and a hundred such
things more might His MAJESTY, enjoin the Clergy, and thereby make it necessary
for Our Clergy to Subscribe unto all these, to the Opening the Mouths of
Dissenters against them, or to Feel what a Deprivation is.

But His MAJESTY, to the end He may convince the most Obstinate Enemies to His
Government, is Resolved to Proceed in the calmest Way; and therefore,
notwithstanding the most Undutiful, and Disloyal Reflections Cast on MAJESTY It
self, by some of the Church of England; It Is His Royal Purpose, That His
Commissioners shall not Exercise that Severity against them, which they have
against Protestant-Dissenters; Nor will His MAJESTY take those Advantages
against their Clergy, which He might: He is rather for the more Peaceable and
Christian Methods, and therefore will do the Church of England no more Hurt,
than to give Ease unto Others: And nothing but a most Violent Provocation, can
Overcome Him to Alter this Method.

FINIS.

