EXCELLENT Contemplations, Divine and Moral.

Written by the Magnanimous and truly Loyal Arthur Lord Capel, Baron of Hadham.

Together with some Account of his Life, and his Letters to several Persons,
whilst he was Prisoner in the Tower vigorously asserting the Royal Cause
against all the Enemies thereof.

Likewise his Affectionate Letters to his Lady, the Day before his Death, and
his Courageous Behavior, and last Speech at his Suffering, March 9. 1648.

With his Pious Advice to his Son the late Earl of ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.
1683.

portrait

Some Account of the Life of the Pious and Virtuous Arthur Lord Capel, Baron of
Hadham.
THis Honorable Person ought to be eternized for his Endeavors, Constancy and
Perseverance in the Royal Cause, first to the parting with his vast Estate,
being sequestered for his Loyalty, and afterward with his life, so that he may
be rightly termed, The Flower of English Fidelity, and his name ought to be
ever honorably mentioned according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm* 112. 6. The
Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

He was Son and Heir to Sir Arthur Capel of Hadham Hall in Hertfordshire, a
Gentleman* of a great Estate, one who followed the Old Mode of our Nation, kept
a bountiful house, and showed forth his Faith by his works, extending his
charity in such abundant manner to the poor that he was bread to the hungry,
drink to the thirsty, eyes to the blind, and legs to the lame, and might be
justly styled Great Almoner to the King of Kings. Concerning the humility of
this worthy Knight (though it be too sudden a diversion) I shall presume to
insert a story, which I have heard delivered by some well acquainted with his
Worship; that he being one time at his Gate all alone, in a plain but decent
habit, a Serving-man who had plumed himself with his Masters cast Feathers came
riding to him, and asked him if Sir Arthur Capel were within, Sir, replied the
knight, he was there not long ago, and if you please to walk in you may hear
further of his Servants; Old Father, said the Serving-man, here take my horse
and walk him; and therewithal gave him a small piece of Silver, it being the
first money he ever received in that kind; Sir Arthur agreed to the motion, and
with a smile received from him a single penny, took his horse, and walked him,
whilst the finical spruce Serving-man strutted with convenient boldness into
the house; But being informed by the Servants, that their Master was at the
Gate, he replying that he was not there, one of them to justify himself went
with him to the Gate to see, where they found Sir Arthur very industrious in
his Employment; the Serving-man very much ashamed of his mistake, craved
pardon, and with humble obeisance, with his hat in his hand, with many cringes,
would have received the horse from the knight, Nay stay, says Sir Arthur, you
paid me my hire, get up as soon as you will, for I am resolved to see you on
Horseback. Then the old Knight putting his hand into his purse gave him half a
piece, which he said was for taking so much care of his Masters Horse, being
purposely thus liberal to encourage his own Servants to imitate his careful
example.

But to return to his son, he was very well educated, attaining to some
perfection in learning; his Father dying, as he inherited his Estate so he did
his virtues. The Privacy of this noble Lord before the war was passed with as
much popularity in the Country, as his more public appearance in it was with
valor and Fidelity in the Field. In our too happy time of peace none was more
Pious, Charitable, and Munificent; In our unhappy differences none more
resolved, Loyal and active; The People loved him so well that they chose him
one of their Representatives and the King esteemed him so much, that he made
him one of his Peers in Parliament; the King and People agreeing in this one
thing, to have a just kindness for the Lord Capel; He was one of those
excellent Gentlemen whose gravity and discretion the King said, He hoped would
allay and fix the faction to a due Temperament; guiding some men's well meaning
zeal by such rules of Moderation as are best both to preserve and restore the
health of all States and kingdoms, keeping to the dictates of his Conscience,
rather than yielding to the importunities of the People, to what was just,
rather than what was safe, save only in the Earl of Straffords case, wherein he
yielded to the public necessity with his Royal Master, but repented with him
too, sealing his Contrition for that miscarriage with his blood, when he was
more troubled for his forced consent to that brave Persons death than for
losing his own life; he ventured through the first war, and by his Engagement
in the second, for after the surender of Oxford he retired to his own house but
could not rest there until the King was brought home to his, which all England
endeavoring as one man my Lord adventured himself at Colchester to Extremity,
yiedling himself upon Condition of Quarter, which he urged by the Law of Arms,
that Law that governs the World; Yet (as he said,) against the Law of God and
man, for keeping the first Commandment he was sacrificed on a Scaffold at
Westminster, with a courage that became a clear Conscience, and a resolution
befitting a good Christian, expressing that same Judicious Piety at his death,
which he did in this Incomparable Book of his Meditations in his life, A Piety
that (as it appeared by his dismission of his Chaplains, and the formalities of
that times Devotions, before he came to the Scaffold,) was rather his inward
frame and habit, than outward Ostentation or Pomp, from the Noble sentiment
whereof, the Poet not unhappily alluding to his Arms, A Lion Rampant in Field
Gules, between two Crosses thus expresses it:

Our Lyon-like Capel undaunted stood
Beset with Crosses in a Field of Blood.
As one that affrighted death rather than affrighted by it. It being very
observable, That a learned Dr. of Physic present at the opening and Embalming
of this Lord, and the Duke Hamilton delivered at a public Lecture; That the
Lord Capels was the least heart, and the Dukes the greatest that ever he saw;
Agreeable to that Observation in Philosophy, That the Spirits contracted within
the least compass are the cause of the greatest courage.

Two things are considerable in this Incomparable Person. 1. His uninterrupted*
Loyalty keeping pace with his life* (...) last breath was spent in proclaiming
K. Charles the second in the very face of his Enemies, as known to him to be
Virtuous, Noble, Gentle, Just, and a great Prince; 2* His Great merit and
modesty, whereof King Charles the first writes* thus to her Majesty the Queen,
There is one that does not yet pretend, who deserves as well as any, I mean
Capel; Therefore I desire thy assistance to find out something for him before
he ask.

He was a Religious man, who used to say, that when he had kept the Sabbath
well, he found the greater blessing upon all he did afterward; He was as good
in all his private Relations as in his several public Capacities, especially
in that of a husband of which State he says, that it doubled his joys, divided
his grief, and created new and unthought of Contentment: A Sober man who loved
not to hear a man talk of things irrationally; He used Recreations only for
refreshing his Body and mind; He made his Servants and Dependants almost as
familiar as his friends, none was more strict in the Discipline of his Family,
nor more obliging in the sweetness of his converse. He said he observed that
the disobedience of man to us was no other then the punishment of our
disobedience to God. He was the meekest man living, that had the Art as well as
the grace by yielding to pacify wrath; He was a discreet Person, who would not
suffer the Infelicity of one of his affairs to distemper him so, as to lose all
Consideration to guide him in the rest, always retaining the decency of his own
natural evenness, saying, That he was a wise man that was able to make wise men
his Instruments; He was a good Father that to procure a Blessing in the
Education of his Children, daily offered up Prayers for them; He was a good
Christian that set apart half an hour every day for his retirement to think of
Eternity; He was a Nobleman that resolved to be happy in two things: A moderate
using of the present, and an indifferent expectation of what is to come. He had
a good expression and elegant style as his own Letters here inserted do be s ^
delineate.

In those great differences betwixt the King and Parliament he constantly and
faithfully adhered to his Majesty, contributing very much to his aid both in
Purse and Person, and declaring openly in the House of Lords, That the Kings
Majesty had granted so much for the security and Peace of the Kingdom, that
they who asked more intended the disturbance of it. He followed His Majesty to
York, and with other Lords attested the Integrity of his Majesty's Proceedings
there in order to Peace; and promising to asist him with his life and Fortunes
against all other pretended Authority in case it came to a War; notwithstanding
he had a Summons from Westminster, to which he and others made a civil return;
And likewise an Impeachment of High Treason, for going from Westminster to York
at the Kings command, whereof he took no notice settling his Estate in Sir
Edward Capel and other Trustees, who I find compounded for 4706l. 7s. 11d. He
advanced to his Majesty between eight and nine hundred Horse, and Twelve
Thousand pound in money and Plate, and if he had had the happiness of being
employed in his own Country (the fatal Error of that time) as he was in the
borders of Wales, we had heard more of him; However we find him subscribing the
Declaration of the Parliament at Oxford in 1643. and the Messages of Peace from
the Army in the Field; attending his present Majesty to Cornwall, where he was
hurt in two or three several Engagements once ventring himself very far to save
the Foot. In 1644. he was nominated one of the Commissioners for his Majesty to
manage the Treaty at Uxbridge; corresponding with the Members at Westminster. in
order to an Accommodation, with great caution against their subtle design, who
would divide the Princes Interest and his Fathers; writing a Letter in
December, 1645* in answer to that of Sir Tho. Fairfax to the Prince, signifying
the Princes desires of Peace, but that he would not quit his Piety and Loyalty
to the King.

In March, 1645. The Prince, the Lord Capel and others put to sea in three
Ships from Pendennis Castle. In April, 1646. The Prince sent a Trumpet with an
Answer to the Parliaments incitation of him, desiring a pass for the Lord Capel
to go to the King to make him some overtures from the Prince, and that the Lord
Primate of Armagh might come to him. In September following the Estates of the
Lord Capel, Lord Cottington, Marquess of Winchester Earl of Worcester, and Sir
Charles Smith, were by the Members at Westminster voted to be sold to raise
money for Ireland. In 1648. when the King was secured in the Isle of Wight,
some hopes being given of his Restoration to his former Dignity by the coming
in of Duke Hamiliton from Scotland with a potent Army, as also of Langhorns;
Powels, and Poyers declaring themselves for his Majesty* together with the
rising of the Counties in several places to the same purpose the Lord Capel
with a selected number of his Friends Associats and servants* joined himself
with the Lord Goring, Sr. Charles Lucas and others, who with a great Party were
up in Arms in Essex, and having valiantly defended Colchester for the space of
three months against a potent enemy, flusht with success, were at length for
want of Provisions (having eaten all the Horses, Dogs, Cats, and whatsoever was
most reluctant to Nature) were forced to yield both it, and themselves, the
Superior Officers to mercy, the common Soldiers with the loss of their flying
Garments. In this Siege the Lord Capel wonderfully encouraged the Soldiers by
his own Example, going with an H^lbert on his shoulder to the Watch, and
keeping Guard in his turn, paying six pence, or twelve pence a shot for all the
Enemies Bullets the Soldiers could pick up, charging the first day of the
Siege at Headgate, where the Enemy was most pressing with a Pike till the Gate
could be shut, which at last was but pinned with his Cane.

By the Articles of Agreement with the General Fairfax, the Royalists could not
but imagine, but that they had ascertained their Lives; yet Sir Charles Lucas,
and Sir George Lisk were shot to death, which to all discerning men, must seem
strange and unusual. The Lord Capel, Lord Goring. and others, were sent to the
Tower, and taking notice soon after of an Order of the House of Commons for
Impeaching them of High Treason, they sent Letters to inform them, that Quarter
was given them by the General, who had writ to the House to that purpose;
whereupon the General explained himself, That the Quarter given did not extend
to any other but the Military Power, and that they were notwithstanding liable
to Trial and Judgment by the Civil Power; But of this Learning, and mischievous
distinction* I hope none of this Nation will ever have use hereafter;

After this a pretended High Court of Justice was erected, where the Lord Capel
among others was brought, but he never minded nor looked upon the Court, but
cast an austere look upon the People on all sides, pleading, That he was a
Prisoner to the Lord General, and had Conditions given him, and his life
promised him, that if all the Magistrates in Christendom were combined together
they could not call him in Question. After a short formal Trial, he was
condemned, he only saying, That however he was dealt with here he hoped for a
better resurrection hereafter.

March. 9. 1648. was the fatal day appointed for the Execution of the sentence
of death upon Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridg, the Earl of Holland and the Lord
Capel, where this Lord behaved himself like a stout Roman, with that Courage
and resolution as was to be admired; But as to his Carriage and Speech, and
likewise how excellently, he bestowed his time in the Tower, employing his
thoughts more for the safety of his Majesty's life than his own, the following
Contemplations and Letters published by a Reverend Divine intimately conversant
with him (and with whom he spent his last hours) do sufficiently demonstrate.

EXCELLENT Meditations, Divine and Moral.
I. IF we religiously observe the Sabbath unto God we may with assured hope
expect a plentiful increase, (by our honest labor) to our ensuing enterprises.

II. If Man in innocence needed a help, solace, and comfort; and Marriage was
all these, how deficient were our (now miserable) lives without it* For
besides, that it doubles joys, and divides griefs, it creates new and unthought
of contentments. And yet I have observed many that unwisely lose the blessings
of wedlock: nay worse, that of good Wine, have made the sharpest Vinegar. Not
much unlike an ignorant Artificer, that having a most curious piece of marble
to work on, yet through unskilfulness has framed so misshapen a statue, that
himself loathed the sight of it: whereas a good Artist would out of materials
not altogether so complete, frame a work not unpleasant.

III. Garrulity is so irksome to society, that we seldom find it welcomed. For
as it betrays the parties weakness, who cannot possibly, strongly ratiocinate
such variety of propositions: so he cannot but many times fall into those
discourses, which men's particular affairs or studies indear them to; or upon
those persons (though absent, (whom the present company are interested in,
either by affinity, or (which is more) by Amity.

IV. There is no difficulty greater, than to remove another man's affections
from those persons, that either his present use, or a crafty dissimulation of
goodness has gained* For if his present use had caused it, then they think
those that dissuade, would persuade their prejudice. If a subtle
counterfeiting of Virtue, then the more honest the party is that is to be
dissuaded, the adventure of effecting it will be the greater, and the more
hazard of losing your own reputation with him. For so the opinion he has of
the others goodness, will endanger in him a suspect of your malice; and
therefore in this must be used great circumspection.

V. Recreations have their due place in our life, and not without good profit
both to the mind and body. To the body for health, to the mind for refreshing.
Yet we may observe many that perpetually live in them, not using, but serving
them, and so over-mastered by them, that their best fortunes are not employed
so willingly, to the advantage of any necessary or good occasion, as to be
ingulfed in idle pastime. This is too frequent a vanity.

VI. In a State necessitous and hungry, those men are happiest that content
themselves with a moderate wealth. For the fattest Deer are most shot at, and
the leanest live longest.

VII. In Oeconomical Government, as it is discretion in the master of a Family
not to neglect severe discipline toward the insolent and wilful faults of his
Servants, so it is not less wisdom favorably to receive an ingenuous
acknowledgment from them, of those slips which humane frailty, or inevitable
chance may cast them upon. For their Hire commands but the hands service, but
it is gentle goodness invites the hearts affection: And a wise man would
willingly have his servants (as I may call them) his servile friends.

VIII. The breach of a facile command does most justly aggravate the
punishment. For Adams disobedience in Paradise was so much the more extreme, as
the precept was easy, and therefore most justly rewarded with a weighty
punishment. For where the punishment of the breach of obedience was so great,
and the precept so easily kept: who can at full relate the guilt of that sin
that brake it, standing neither in awe of the Commanders Majesty, nor fear of
the terrible affliction following the breach? And we may very fitly observe,
that our disobedience to God is punished with disobedience. For what is man's
misery but his own disobedience to himself? the Flesh daily warring against the
Spirit, and innumerable impossible desires daily fighting against Reason.

IX There are dispositions that will be displeased, either for the omitting, or
acting the self same things. If we be tied to these either by natural or civil
respects, we must carry our selves with great caution: And one of the best ways
is (if conveniently it may be done) to pretend an ignorance of the thing, or of
their will. If this fall not happily in our way, then it is best to let them
ventilate their own absurd humor, without our contestation: for Arguing kindles
the fire more inward.

X. The assaults of impudent liars are frequent and endless, and though most
manifestly detected, yet their shameless wickedness will seldom be quelled. But
yet we may often observe their contrary reports to fight one against another
(like Cadmus earth-bornchildren) to their own destruction.

XI. Few there are but do love knowledge, but the reason why there are so few
that are knowing is, because the entrance of all Arts and Sciences is
difficult: and though most are delighted with the amiable parts of learning or
wisdom in other men, and desire to be like qualified; yet they imitate not
their indefatigable industry, by which they ascended to that eminent height.

XII. In presentiments it is great Generosity to bestow that which will deserve
acceptance: But if friends desire those things which are of inferior value,
then it is not unworthily done to satisfy them in those courtesies, which we
our selves would think too slight for them. But I observe many of rich
fortunes, that with much circumlocution and instance, will press poor and
slender presents upon those that no whit affect them. As if one should go into
the fields and gather a handful of common flowers, and with great formality and
importunity should make present of them to one who has a curious garden of
Tulips.

XIII. The conditions of men in society are diverse: but three are most
observable. The Open, the Concealed, lastly, the Well-tempered, betwixt these.
The first are of so thin a composition, that a man may by a little converse see
as easily through them, as if they were made of glass; for in every discourse
they unlock to you their most inward secrets. The second sort are so tenacious
and closely molded, that they seem like those Coffers that are shut fast, and
no discovery can be made where they are to be opened. These, as they are of
less delight for society, so of less hazard to be trusted. But the last and
best composed are like those Cabinets, that are not with difficulty unclosed;
and they discover to you many things pleasant and profitable: but yet so
cunningly devised, that there will be some secret box that neither your eye nor
wit can take notice of wherein is deposited their proper and incommunicable
treasure.

XIV. It is as great a misery to be tied to the converse of a contradicting
spirit, as to be shut up in an infectious house. For I have observed as calm
and quiet natures as can be, by continual commerce with those tempestuous
dispositions, much altered and infected. And there may be a transition of
qualities from one disposition to another by converse, as well as of water from
the fountain to the cistern by Pipes.

XV. If God should have demanded of Man how many days of seven he would give to
his service, three I am persuaded, would have been the fewest, as being but the
lesser part of seven. And what good nature can willingly deny half to him that
gave all? But God dealing so graciously as to separate but one, how greatly
should his goodness incite us not to deprive Him of the least minute of it; nay
not to cast a thought toward our worldly business or pleasures on that day?

XVI. I observe diverse, who have many affairs, that by the infelicity of one
are so distempered, that they lose all consideration to guide themselves in the
rest. Nay the loss of a trifle shall nullify all the contentments of millions
of enjoyed blessings; like that Master of a Ship that should neglect the
Compass, Main Mast and Stern of the Ship, because some slight Flag is lost.

XVII. No man can live in this world, and not be interested in the affairs of
this world. The best way of guidance in them is, to walk with the advice of
wise and cordial friends. And if it happens (as many times it does) that in the
same affair his judgment approves not the same courses that mine does, yet in
following my own liking I would ever incline and lean toward his advice.

XVIII. Biting jests, the more truth they carry with them, the broader scarred
memory they leave behind them. Many times they are like the wounds of chewed
bullets,where the ruggedness causes almost incurable hurts.

XIX. I have seen many, who have much labored themselves to imitate other men's
plausible humors. But it was seldom or never without a flatness, if not
absurdity, For it rarely happens, that one man's clothes fit completely upon
another, for all proportions seldom concur. Neither can any assume another
humor, but there will appear either some defect or redundancy, which will miss
that natural evenness that renders men pleasant.

XX. It cannot be denied but that Education has a considerable power to
qualify, but never to nullify the proper nature of any thing. For set the
eggs of diverse fouls under one hen, and when they are disclosed the kite will
be ravenous, the duck will love the water, and every one will prosecute its
natural conditions. But use this example as more expressive. Take the youngest
wolf-whelp, employ the greatest art to make it gentle and loving, and you will
find it altogether impossible: it will neither be forced nor entreated from its
natural curstness and cruelty. I shall therefore earnestly pray, that God would
infuse a soul into my child, endued with sweet conditions: and if it be
otherwise, I will not neglect all fit means to temper the worst, but never hope
to effect an absolute extirpation, but by the miraculous power of Him, who can
make from bitter fountains to deflow sweet-waters.

XXI. Propinquity in blood challenges a natural affection: and none but
monsters are insensible of its secret efficacy. But it forces us not to repose
the confidence of our most secret affairs upon them. For that I will advise my
self of the virtue of the Person, not of the Alliance: and yet a well qualified
kinsman should more willingly be entertained then an acquaintance.

XXII. Our life is but a moment of time between two Eternities of infinite
beginning and never ending. It is the middle point of a perpendicular line, and
but a punctum, a thing of no sensible being, but imaginary, from which if we
ascend by holy meditations, Faith, and good works, we shall attain to a
never-ending beatitude; but if from it we descend by carnal thoughts, sensual
appetites, and evil actions, we shall be perpetuated in everlasting torments.
Great therefore is the consequence of this minutes disposure. God, I beseech
him even for my Christ his sake, often incite me in this meditation.

XXIII. In Monarchies, if the Times be unfortunate, the clamours are all thrown
against the supreme Magistrate. But if a moderate wise man consider of it, he
will find that from the negligent and corrupt execution of justice in
subordinate Ministers, proceed the most mischiefs of the Commonwealth. But the
reasons, why the highest Magistrates undergo the calumnies, are three. First,
Because greatness is the Object of envy. Secondly, Because the number of
inferior Magistrates exceeds, and they, willing to excuse their own faults,
make the greater noise. Thirdly, As in the body we chiefly fix our eye upon the
highest part, the face, and a mole or scar there more discontents the sight,
then a greater deformity in any other member of the body: so in a Body politic
we do more heedfully observe the faults of the eminentest personages.

XXIV. An impudent liars calumniation (though detected) yet the person to whom
such report is made, howbeit satisfied for the time, yet his mind is shaken,
which will appear upon any probable occasion (tho not real) which shall
resemble such false reports, as have been made of the party falsely accused. And
therefore subtle Liars are bold and confident; for something (they think) will
stick.

XXV. I observe many, who think to gain much of men's affections by interesting
themselves in their businesses, and are so pragmatick, that they will never be
wanting of projects. But these commonly miss much of their aim. For of
undertakings, not one of ten is perfectly achieved; and commonly men do oftener
blame their Agents, than the unavoidable casualties of humane affairs. And so
this sort of Business-mongers either receive cold thanks for their labor, or
else quite lose the esteem they expected. But the wisest way is, hardly to be
entreated; except we go almost upon infallible ground to accomplish.

XXVI. Nemo nascitur sapiens: and certainly he who has not tried both
fortunes, is a child, and but weakly understands either. For who knows the
sweetness of rest, but he who has been over-toyled? Nay, a man cannot be
virtuous without adversity. Where were patience without crosses? where
fortitude without resistance? and so all the rest have their opposites for
their exercise. Never was excellent piece of work made without cuttings, nor
wise man without afflictions. Therefore it were folly to fear them, and (no
paradox to say) unhappy to want them; but wisdom it is to profit by them.

XXVII. I observe, that nothing has broken friendly society more than much
arguing and though amongst men of judgment, and good temper, profit may be made
by it, yet the inherent pride that is in all men, much disdains to suffer their
opinion to be contradicted: never considering how- imperfect our knowledge is in
the most easy matters. And it happens to Argumentators, as it does to
Wrestlers; though they begin for sport, yet he that receives the foil, never
will leave till he has a foul fall; and then ever after bears a secret malice.
But some have that facility, that they will wisely guide their opposites
arguments, and not directly contradict them. These come off fairly.

XXVIII. Many entire friendships have been put out of joint by the decision of
Meum andTuum. And when both have casualtiesfaln beyond their expectation, yet
both swell so big with inordinate desire of more,that it bursts all their
former amity. And it is the hardest thing in the world to preserve and continue
love with those friends that question it.

XXIX. My Dear Savior, inspire me with the true apprehension of thy infinite
love toward me who descendedst from the top of Majesty to the lowest degree of
Servility, did debase thy self to exalt me, cloathedst thy self with
mortality to invest me with immortality, were poor to enrich me, enduredst the
reproach of thine enemies, to reconcile me to thy most justly incensed Father.
Could I but truly conceive any part of this immense love, I could not but
return more to Thee; to thine: I should then forget injuries from my weak
Brethren, love my most malicious enemies, hate none but those that undervalue
this great goodness whereas now mine affections are guided by my personal
interests.

XXX. In this tempestuous world, no line holds the Anchor of contentment so
fast, as a good Conscience. Man's favor is but a fine thread, that will
scarcely hold one tug of a crafty talebearer. Honor slips the noose, when
vulgar breath, wearyed with constant virtue, is more affected to novelty.
Riches are gnawn asunder by the greedy teeth of devouring Leviathans, cruel
Tyrants. But this Cable is so strong and well compact, that when force is
offered to it, the straining rather strengthens, by uniting the parts more
close.

XXXI. Unhappy is that man, that steers the comfort of his life by the pleasing
of others. But let us make honesty the mark we sail by, and so steadily let it
be, that we neither advance forwarder for vain applause; nor retire for fear of
detraction. But let our course be like the Sun, that neither hastens nor slacks
for all our entreaties. But most men live according to opinion or fashion,
which is full of variety and therefore of perturbation, leaving the direct rule
of wisdom, which renders us tranquil.

XXXII. He that loves play, and yet can govern himself in it, will hardly be
moved to passion in more serious and necessary occasions. For that which
vexes, is the miss of expectation; and play is nothing. But a frequent
expectation of hazard, and those that use it have continually cursed assaults by
it.

XXXIII. The wearied man desires the bed, the discontented man, the grave: Both
would fain be at Rest.

XXXIV. Two sorts of enemies most dangerous, and both inseparable from the
miserable condition almost of all men; but altogether of men of great fortunes,
the Flatterer, the Liar: one strikes before, the other behind; both insensibly,
both dangerously.

XXXV. A mean freedom is more naturally affected, than a golden servitude. The
poor birds prefer their liberty, though in a hard frost, before full feeding
and warm being in a close cage. This is the reason who many quite good
services, and betake themselves to a more laborious yet freer condition.

XXXVI. If the Deity humbled it self so much as to join with humanity; nay
more, so as to suffer the most servile condition of our nature; what
commendation is it of Humility, that to be like him, (who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God) is to be humble? Lord make me poor, so I may be but rich
in humility. Debase me in all other respects, so I may be honored with this
Grace. O let me be indigent in all other things, so I may superabound in this.
Go yet further along with me, my meek Savior, that this Meditation may not be
transient, but often serious and effectual.

XXXVII. In heat of argument men are commonly like those that are tied back to
back, close joined, and yet they cannot see one another.

XXXVIII. Many there are that affect an hyperbolizing kind of discourse, and
had rather be thought large talkers, than moderate speakers. This Rhetoric
takes children and fools, but is ridiculous to knowing men.

XXXIX. Some there are that use a foppish kind of subtlety, and under a fools
cap exercise a knaves wit, making simplicity the excuse of their impudence: and
impudence is the engine they hook in their profit with, when indeed none are
such fools as those that are caught by their stale.

XL. Unhappy condition of man that daily hunts abroad for felicity, and never
finds it. If he could but reflect his meditation upon himself, he might in a
good measure possess it, by a moderate using of the present, and an indifferent
expectation of what he loves and desires. But our longings are importune, and
the use of the present inordinate, and thus we are defrauded of all
substantial delight.

XLI. It is humanity to use Servants gently, and not slavishly: but on the
other side, to give any one too much superiority, is the way to discourage the
rest, make him insolent, and your self contemptible.

XLII. In business with other men, it is good to prosecute our own desires
(though most reasonable) with moderation, and not with distrust or opposition,
for that will incite spleen: and men are apt enough to continue what they have
in their hands, be it either command, or wealth. And if they be violently
assaulted, though we gain our desires, yet it is not without knocks. Certainly
he is a great crafts-master, that can shadow the opposition that businesses
have one against another.

XLIII. It is admirable that the reward of our imperfect and finite service
here, shall be perfect and infinite glory hereafter. But it is impossible to be
otherwise, (yet not in respect of us, or our desert, but of God) because his
mercy being boundless and infinite, should else be terminate, and Gods greatest
attribute should suffer. Lord* that I may often contemplate this with
admiration! admire with gratefulness! be thankful with love! love with
obedience! and obey with cheerfulness!

XLIV. Among all the conditions that men are sorted into, there is none that
renders us perfectly happy. Crowns are set with thorns: with Riches desires
increase: Honor is envied, often blasted: Poverty pincheth. And in my
observation the meaner-esteemed fortunes are really to be valued the better,
but especially those that least incite inordinate affects.

XLV. That which wise liberality bestows, is not lost, but may happily prove
the best Interest. For so various is the world, that those, who now want our
bounty, may recompense us in the like misery. For this there are many examples.

XLVI. Those that have an imperfect speech, it is great discretion in them to
esteem silence wisdom: Yet to addict themselves to an active form of complement
without affection, and a serene countenance.

XLVII. Wise and happy is that man that will not be drawn to commit either an
indecent or dishonest Act, for love, hatred or gain.

XLVIII. Many in gaming are like drunken men, so heated with ill fortune, that
the civil carriage of others, can hardly safeguard them from their quarrelsom
distemper. These should correct themselves from this poor humor, which if they
cannot, they must fly from play as from a Basilisk.

XLIX. Those that behave themselves with an uneven and captious conversation
toward others, are but tell-tales of their own unpeaceable and miserable
unsettled minds within themselves.

L. Lord, Thou have heaped Blessings upon me, if thou make them true Blessings
by guiding me in the use of them. The Philistines had once thy Ark amongst
them, but it was a sensible curse to them: but to thy Israel, thy great mercy.
O make me thine, otherwise these blessings will be insensible maledictions;
great occasions to draw me on to sordid, base affections.

LI. Expense is not the only thing that craks men's estates, but the
regardlesness of what and how we spend. For men of great fortunes I have seen
enjoy no more, neither in substance nor show, than those of less who have sided
with them in the same courses; yet the greater have perished, and the less held
up. For the most provident may spend most.

LII. Few have the wisdom in adverse things to use prevoyance before them,
circumspection in them, and patience after them: but are commonly improvident,
negligent, and perturbated in the undue seasons. But in remediless occurrences
it is the best wisdom of man to be insensible.

LIII. Instable are the resolutions of women, and as their flexible natures may
be instruments of great good, if their happiness be to affect honesty and
discreet friends: so there is no folly so great, but they will confidently
prosecute it, if they either rest upon their own feeble judgment, or
unfortunately repose themselves on such men, that respect their own commodity
beyond the value of their reputation.

LIVE. To those that are wilfully bent against any good conceit of us, it will
prove but trouble without success, to endeavor by servile obsequiousness to
gain them. The better way is, by a constant fair carriage to expect that time
may ripen the fruit, which have cannot: and too hasty shaking throws down the
sour with the sweet.

LV. Complement may be used, but not usually like sweetmeats, (entertainment
for strangers, or great personages) which keep their taste, if rarely served,
but if commonly, prove nauseous.

LVI. I would take reports, but especially those of servants, with diverse
Queries. For many times they are the bane of undiscreet credulous persons.

LVII. The true Christian man looks not backward, but forward; not
Pharisaically prides himself to see those that are worse than himself, but
encourages himself to reach the perfection of the best; stands not still, like
milposts, that rot in the places where they were set. All his life is a race, a
progression.

LVIII. Vain attempts, as they are the loss of labor and time; so they are the
discredit and infamy of the undertakers.

LIX. In all the unhappy actions of our life, there is a destined
precipitation, where our will and self-conceit out-goes our consideration and
judgment.

LX. Those whose desires and expectations are moderate, have their afflictions
and troubles not intolerable.

LXI. I have seen many, that desiring to make themselves pleasant companions,
have fallen into the habit of most ridiculous actions and discourses.

LXII. Sharp and bitter jests are blunted more by neglecting, than by
responding; except they be suddenly and wittily retorted. But it is no
imputation to a man's wisdom to use a silent scorn.

LXIII. There is much delight in the society of men of witty and pleasant
discourse: But if they be not qualified with true honesty, we shall pay dear
for our sport, if we entertain them into any strict familiarity.

LXIV. The life of a Christian, though it be the highest profession, yet none
are so excelent or perfect, but that even by them much is to be learnt and
unlearnt. And here in this world we are always Disciples, that is, learners. A
good lesson to take down our natural pride, which puffs us up with so much
self-conceit, that we think our selves rich and clothed when we are miserable
and naked.

LXV. It requires a good temper to endure contradicting spirits: but they are
best silenced by silence.

LXVI. It is hard for human frailty always to keep so sure a guard of words
and actions but that sometimes by them it will fall into inconvenience* if not
mischief. Therefore it is more ingenuous by gentle acknowledgment to confess a
fault, than with an unblushing impudence to maintain it. And inhumane it is
with proud arrogance to insult over a penitent delinquent.

LXVII. No decent fashion is unlawful. And if fashions be but a diversified
decency without question it is but a Cynical singularity either to exclaim
against, or not sociably to use them.

LXVIII. Wealth without friends, is like life without health. The one an
uncomfortable fortune, the other a miserable being.

LXIX. I have observed a malicious kin do Flattery; not only to please, or
gain from the party flattered; but to circumvent, or mischief a third person.
As it is rarest, so worst: For it as much exceeds common flattery, as Adultery,
Fornication.

LXX. It is a hard thing to be a true friend. For many times in acting the part
of a true friend to one we love, we not only lose familiarity, but procure
hatred. And I scarce know a man that is capable of a true friend.

LXXI. Let our thoughts and actions toward God be pious, to our neighbor
charitable, toward our selves sober: and our present life will be peaceable,
our memory praised, and our happiness eternal.

LXXII. The depraved nature of Man affects what he should not, though more
laborious than that which is required.

LXXIII. Industry to get, and Frugality to keep, are the infallible worldly
means to raise great Fortunes.

LXXIV. In the heat of Summer we easily believe there will come a season of
Frost and Snow; yet in our prosperity we consider not of adversity; yet the one
is as successive as the other.

LXXV. The idle man is more perplexed what to do, than the laborious in doing
what he ought.

LXXVI. God deliver me from the society of those, who fear not the infamy of an
evil action.

LVII. It is a quality commendable, not to pretermit things of moment, which
may instruct the judgment. But it is a note of a vain mind, to hunt after every
trivial garish pomp, or show.

LXXVIII. Though children to our common apprehension proceed from the
conjunction of man and woman, and usually we look no further, yet even for
their bodies (the baser part) we must account our selves but the less principal
agents. For how comes it to pass that one is lame, another blind? one
defective, another redundant? If we make them, why are they not then perfect?
if a limb afterward perish, why do we not restore it?

LXXIX. Great men ought to be most careful how they give public disgrace to
the meanest persons upon light occasions. For as their greatness is able to
defend them from others injuries; so the offenses given by them make a deeper
impress, than those of mean or equal persons; because we hope and desire credit
and countenance from them. Besides, the most exalted fortunes have little
contentment without some popular good will.

LXXX. Most men that affect sports account them a principal part of their life:
and that I conceive to be the reason, why they prosecute them with so much
affection; and if crossed in them, demonstrate too much passion. But to consider
truly of them they are but pastime, little removed from lost time. And if their
insinuating delight to steal us from our more necessary occasions, yet it is
absurd to suffer any perplexity for them, when they fall out crosly,, or to be
dandled by them at their best.

LXXXI. Great respect it is to inform a friend wisely and fully of his error:
but if one perceive him immovable, then it is better to content our self with
the integrity of our intention and faithful respect, than to proceed further.
For it will be without profit to both, it may be with inconvenience to our
friend. For the Smith's Anvil is the harder for blows.

LXXXII. I will sometimes conceal a secret from my most entire friend, or at
least for some space. For otherwise he may think I have delivered the rest more
out of facility, than confidence in him: nay, I will do it to make trial of my
self.

LXXXIII. I never saw men that crowd themselves into business, happy. For if
they proceed luckily, it prides them (for we cannot carry our selves evenly in
the prosperity of those things we affect;) and then they are envied: If
unfortunately or unwisely, it dejects them, and then they are scorned.

LXXXIV. Moderation in diet, sleep and exercise, are especial means to prolong
and make healthful our days.

LXXXV. The true Christian is the most valiant, the most wise man that is.
Valiant he is, for his whole life is a warfare against the world, the flesh,
and the Devil: Wise and most prudent he is, for he so well expends his minute
of time here, that he may live eternally happy hereafter.

LXXXVI. Many, who are Dunces in their own professions, will undertake to
dispute like Doctors in every other Art. But I know not a greater probate of
folly than this: for besides that it manifests an unsettled mind, to pursue such
diversity; he cannot choose but betray his own ignorance in every thing, who is
so ill skilled in his own Art.

LXXXVII. If I intend to give, I will not so long delay, as to suffer
importunity: for then I rather sell than give: for what is got by prayers,
entreaties, submissions, is ever accompanied with shame; and it is a dear
purchase that is so bought. Yet many there are that never give without it, and
have neither the skill nor generousness to find out fitting objects for their
liberality.

LXXXVIII. Nothing is unsuperable to diligence and patience. But they shall be
things of high excellence or value that shall put me to that exercise. For
otherwise the life of a Gally-slave were to be preferred.

LXXXIX. Goods hastily gotten keep like summer fruit, little distance between
their generation and corruption.

XC. A wise man will not speak the truth at all times: nor an honest speak an
untruth at any time.

XCI. The conscience that is stained but with one self-knowing dishonest
action, is with much labor restored, either to peace or purity. For when we
waver between dishonest commodity and probity, and are corrupted by the worse,
if our nature be ingenuous, shame and infamy will like a thorn, never suffer us
to stir without pricking; or else the vile disposition of the ill act will so
defile us, that it will render us impudent.

XCII. There are three things requisite in a Christian; Purity of heart, verity
of speech and goodness of action.

XCIII. Quarrels are easily begun, hardly avoided, and difficultly ended. For
what one has done, either cannot undo, but mutual consent must make the
accord perfect.

XCIV. In sickness our distemper makes us, loath the most natural meat: In
anger our fury makes us vilify the most wholesome advices.

XCV. Obstinacy is advantage to our enemies, trouble to our friends, and the
assured overthrow of our selves.

XCVI. Speedy prosecution crowns a preconsidered action: yet after consultation
there must be a season of rumination before execution.

XCVII. It is frequent with many, upon every slight and trivial demand to pawn
their reputation. A most inconsiderate thing. For what is so often lent, and
passes so many hands upon every occasion, cannot but lose much of its luster,
and receive soil.

XCVIII. The ear is as much dulled and blunted with a tedious discourse, as an
instrument is with much using.

XCIX. Is pain, sickness and loss so contrary to us? and health, wealth, and
pleasure, so amiable to our nature? Here on earth we cannot have one sort
without the other. O my God make me therefore wise unto salvation: that I may
have always pleasure and never pain, health without danger of sickness, an
abyss of wealth without fear of loss.

C. The delight, that news gives to the ear is like that of smelling to the
nose. We gather a flower, smell to it, and throw it away; we ask, what news?
hear it, and consider no more of it.

CI. Difficulty of achievement stupifiesthe sluggard, advises the prudent,
terrifiesthe fearful, animates the courageous.

CII. I will obey my parents, houonr my superiors, love my equals, respect my
inferiors, wife and children shall be dearer to me than my self. But none of
all these, nay, nor all these shall be prized by me like Truth. Nay, what are
all these if truth be wanting, which is the ligament that binds all these
together?

CIII. Even to a considerate man, that has preconsulted the little pleasure,
the great hazard, it is hard to deny himself his own desires. The gowty man
will drink wine though it cost him a fit. And this may be the difference
between a sapient and, a prudent man: That knows as much, if not more then
this; but this guides himself by his knowledge, that is governed by his
appetite.

CIV. No man is born to so unhappy a condition, that he must lie to live: and
therefore base is that spirit that will flatter to augment a competency; and
little wit serves to flatter with. For how easily do they work that go with the
grain?

CV. As Light not only discovers the gross substances of things, but their
figures and colors; so wisdom not only perceives the actions themselves, but
the affections with which, and intents to which they were done.

CVI. The eye only sees, and yet sees not alone: for separated from the rest
of the members it is deprived of that faculty: so the Grace of Faith only
justifies, yet it is dead if severed from good works.

CVII. Rarity deceives the judgment. For what we have not formerly seen, we
admire as excellent, before we consider. But wisdom first consults the nature
and uses, and often finds sterility in those things which others wonder at; and
contrarily, in those things which frequency makes despicable, wisdom discovers
good profit; in many things this age examples this: For new and incommodious
fashions of building, diet, clothes, are more sought after than the despised,
yet wise customs of our Forefathers.

CVIII. As a cursed and churlish entertainment is hateful to every Guest, so a
cogging and too obsequious one to a free noble nature is loathsome.

CIX. Perturbation to the mind is as smoke to the eyes. The one troubles the
intellectual, the other the sensitive sight. In both there is pain and
encumbrance.

CX. Surely it is the property of wisdom to be slow of belief: for if by the
observatition of those that we are well acquainted with, we see such impudent
forging; it is warning enough to a discreet man to be of temperate belief in
common intercourse, yet without the spirit of contradiction.

CXI. Of great vainglory, but small virtue is that man that steals the praise
of other men's actions, by relating them as his own. But these beggarly
borrowers always prove ignominious Bankrupts at last.

CXII. He that loves not honesty solely because of its self, and the goodness
and beauty that is in it; but partly for its self, and as much, if not more,
because it holds a reputation in the world, will be found often intermitting.

CXIII. No religious duty does so purify the heart, as the often receiving of
the Sacrament; if we do it with serious examination. For That house that is
oftnest swept, is cleanest.

CXIV. If the question were asked me, what were the most beautiful thing in the
world? I would answer, Honesty.

CXV. A sick man distasts those meats which in health he delighted in: so those
that have formerly loved and delighted in us, and are now displeased with us,
even our best duties do disgust.

CXVI. Nothing more common and general than death: and yet because it happens
to particulars but once, and there is no knowing it twice, nothing more rare
and strange. But since it is so certain, wise is the man that will not
pretermit any occasion that may familiarize it to him; which will both take
away the strangeness, and mitigate the terror of it.

CXVII. Busybodies are like monkies, so full of meddling, that at last they do
themselves some shrewd turn.

CXVIII. If there be any way to preserve ones self from the inconveniences
humane frailty is apt to fall into, it is often to consider those actions and
persons we love. For though our affections may carry us awry, and do, and their
importunities will answer a single or slight consideration; yet it will hardly
answer a serious and reiterated one, which will admit nothing that is either
unprofitable or dishonest for our selves, or prejudicial to our friend, or
neighbor. This rule serves only for those that are of honest dispositions. As
for others, it is their study, either profit to themselves, or mischief to
others.

CXIX. It is seldom or never that a peremptory man either rises to honor, or
increases in wealth. For eminency in either of both these is attained unto by
many circumstances, and many assistant helps and counsels. For one man's labor
will do no great work.

CXX. Sin when it tempts us with profit, it speaks like the Silversmith that
made shrines for Diana; Sirs, ye know that by this trade we get our living; If
with pleasure, then like the blind watchmen Esaias inveigheth against; Come, I
will fetch strong wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant.

CXXI. The transitory being of all worldly things teaches us, not to hope for
a perpetuated delight from them.

CXXII. Nothing torments a loving heart more than the loss of his favor he
loved, and has been benefited by, yet least feared would fail.

CXXIII. There is an Art, which I may call the Civil Art: that is, to be free
in courtesy, and loving in society; yet that neither of these shall encumber
our own proper fortunes, for the advantage or pleasure of those who are no more
than familiar Acquaintances.

CXXIV. Heedless men have many times great advantages toward the attainment of
wisdom, yet lose the kernel, because they will not crack the shell. But
observing Judgments not only look at the action, (whose outside may be
profitable, though not pleasant;) but consider the circumstances, what was
defective, what was well: so that they learn of wise men to be wiser than they,
and have the after-wit (which they say is best) from others examples. And this
is cheapest, though I confess not so impressive.

CXXV. Too much to applaud a man to his face, though for a good action, is
little removed from flattery: but to smooth ones imperfections is the very
Quintessence of baseness.

CXXVI. Servants, that have credit either with Master or Mistress, if they have
honesty and discretion, may be profitable to both. Yet is not the commodity so
great, as the mischiefs will be, if they have malicious and crafty heads for
their proper ends.

CXXVII. It is to a Christian consideration one of Gods greatest mercies, that
this world is full of troubles. For if we so much court her now she is foul,
what would we do if she were beautiful? if we take such pains to gather thorns
and thistles, what would we do for figs and grapes?

CXXVIII. If we tender our own peace, we must not entertain those into our
society and friendship that are of suspicious natures. For as it is a torment
unto themselves, so will they never leave urging those they have familiarity
with, with their idle and troublesome apprehensions.

CXXIX. True love pardons and suffers many imperfections.But not to take notice
of scandalous crimes is not love but stupidity.

CXXX. It is observable to see how absurdly men will force and strain all their
wit to the maintaining of a ridiculous affection, by striving to make every
good thing appliable to the commendation of it, and for the most part, most
improperly.

CXXXI. A gentle acceptance of courtesies, is as material to maintain friendly
neighborhood, as bountiful presents.

CXXXII. It is good to suffer twice, before one complain once: for those that
often, though justly complain, come with disadvantage; especially if it be to a
party that is not very favorable to them.

CXXXIII. He that desires but what he may, may have what he desires: and
therefore he that is scant in his desires, has plenty even in a moderate
estate.

CXXXIV. To bear crosses and afflictions is the part of Christian resolution,
yet heathen morality can act it. But to suffer them, and be thankful to God for
them, is the sole and peculiar property of admirable Christian Faith.

CXXXV. Few there are that will part with their affections to purchase Truth.
For we easily credit the tale of a slanderer, whom we love, against an
indifferent person; when we will scarcely endure the true relation of honest
lips, in the true information of the vices and villainies of those we favor.

CXXXVI. The inconveniences of promises are so many and dangerous, that it were
better to be liable to the censure of being of a tenacious disposition (which
nevertheless one may by wisdom avoid) than to be enthralled by fetters of our
own making; whereby we are enforced many times to purchase our own liberty with
the great discommodity of our own affairs; or else to break those shackles with
that violence, that our reputation must suffer sore bruises.

CXXXVII. Eminent evils are by providence diverted;those that are fatal, by
patience endured, and all by wisdom profitably used.

CXXXVIII. When the greatest, and those that should be the gravest Councils and
Courts in a Common wealth are ordered tumultuously and contentiously, it is an
apparent symptom of a sick and languishing State. For when the chief and those
that are the first-moving wheels keep not true time, all the rest are misled.

CXXXIX. Those that hastily censure other men's good or ill conduct of their
affairs are commonly far off from the right judgment. For though prosperous
event be the happiness of endeavor, yet circumstances are considerable parts
of every undertaking: and he that is ignorant of these, barely and grossly knows
the action, but not the nature of it. And especially those businesses, which
have many agents and patients, cannot rightly be censured, but by those that
well understand the parties.

CXL. He that desires to gain and preserve a repute either of honesty,
magnanimity, learning, or any other praiseworthy quality, must only consort
himself with men like affected: and by no means admit the society of men of
debauched conditions. For though happily he may preserve himself from
accompanying their foul acts, (which is difficult to do;) yet men of judgment
do not discern a man's dispositions by any way better than by observing his
consortship: and by that means he shall be reputed such a one.

CXLI. To fear death, is always to live in the pangs of death. For most true
it is, Fear is more pain than pain.

CXLII. It is worth the observation, to hear the poor man sing to his plow, and
the rich man fret in his palace, and torment himself. This shows it is the
mind, not the fortune, that makes us happy.

CXLIII. The over laboring our thoughts in our affairs does not enlighten, but
thicken the judgment.

CXLIV. The life of life is society; of society;, freedom; of freedom, the
discreet and moderate using it.

CXLV. The greatest wisdom of speech is to know when, and what, and where to
speak the time, matter, manner. The next to it is silence. For though silence
seldom helps, yet sometimes it has its advantage, but at the least it is
innocent, and leaves us a perfect liberty without encumbrance; when men of many
words are entangled.

CXLVI. None so inferior, but the variety of occasion makes them often
necessary: And therefore: it is good discretion so to manage all sorts of men by
our courtesy and affability, that they may with alacrity offer themselves to
our purposes.

CXLVII. It much conduces to our tranquillity not to animate expectation: for
it both augments pain, and diminishes pleasure. For if we fearfully expect
evils, though unavoidable, we are then hurt before we be hit: If longingly we
expect good things, then is the pleasure of the instant of enjoying defloured;
which is so much the greater, by how much the more unlooked for. Yet I deny not
providence in our actions and lives; but I would qualify the injury that
expectation will bring.

CXLVIII. If we did as certainly believe, as we do often discourse of Gods
providence in every action, it would give us courage in our enterprises, and
patience in our sufferings. For if God have the over- ruling hand, and I make
him my friend, when the undertaking is for my good, I fear not the power of any
adversary; for nothing is able to stand before him. But when my weak and sinful
apprehension desires and endeavors that which I think good for me, but his
most clear wisdom knows is hurtful; if I miss my desire, there is not only
cause of patience, but of thanksgiving.

CXLIX. Those actions that are directed by reiterated considerations are not
unlike things that are double-guilded; not only more beautiful, but more
durable. And indeed time ever advantageth those courses: whereas hasty
undertakings are like meteors, that amaze at first, but in time grow
contemptible and vanish.

CL. Many free dispositions have overthrown great fortunes; not altogether by
their mere liberality, but through their ignorant dispensing their bounties,
not considering the extent of their gifts; which if they had advisedly thought
on, might have been done in such a due measure, as their own undoing might have
been saved, at least moderated. And giving untold handfulls, is rather
profuseness than Bounty.

CLI. The common practice is, to vilify other men's favors to magnify our
own: but better it is to antipractise this. For where men see their bounties
augmented by the receiver, it is their encouragement to bestow more: And men
will more gently be manacled with our benefits, when they can walk easily with
them.

CLII. It is an unpleasant sight, to see men follow their sports and
recreations with fretting and cha^ing: Like the leak of a Ship, the water that
should carry it, drowns it; so that, which should recreate, torments.

CLIII. Those that are froward, and unwilling to receive replies, are double
unhappy: because they are indigent of knowledge, and abhor the means to attain
it.

CLIV. How mad are men in their mis-conceits: and commonly in those they are
more stubborn, than constant in Truth.

CLV. A Christian of all others must necessarily be the most merciful man. For
he considering the great debt of his sins, and his little ability of
satisfaction, and how freely these were satisfied for by another; how can he be
backward in forgiving others that are culpable to him? Nay more the condition
of his pardon stands but by the exercise of his mercy toward others. Mat. 18.
33.

CLVI. It Is a great curse for a man to be given over to that blindness, that he
loves flatterers, and hates friends.

CLVII. A tedious condition it is, to be obliged to those, whose frowardness is
more irksom, than their bounties pleasant or advantageous.

CLVIII. We shall receive more satisfaction from a modest man's discourse, than
from a confident speaker, For that fears the detection either of folly, or
untruth; this neither fears, nor declines any thing that should temper his
forwardness.

CLIX. Necessity was the parent of Industry:And if we enquire the original of
greatand admirable actions, we shall find that great wits necessitated were
their founders.

CLX. The knowledge even of the meanest things is not to be slighted, for it
may conduce to the conceiving of higher matters. For most of those things that
are excellent, are of themselves, of so exalted a reach, that we cannot look
upon them, except we raise our selves, higher than our selves, by standing upon
things of inferior account.

CLXI. It is good for our peculiar content, strictly to examine our own natural
imperfections (and with as little reservation as may be:) for I doubt not, but
we shall observe so much, as will make us better bear with the perverse
injuries of others toward our selves.

CLXII. Those, who look for perfect happiness any where but in God, who is the
plenitude of all good things, are like the blind Sodomites, who groped for the
door of Lots house, but could not find it.

CLXIII. Those, who have no other ways to preserve their reputation but by
lying, are like them that assist the decayed natural heat of the stomach; are
for the present refreshed, yet not preserved; but precipitated to their
destruction.

CLXIV. It is difficult to conceal either Love or Hatred. For there will be
many emergent occasions, wherein the Heart cannot resist the discovery of its
Affect.

CLXV. Our passions are like the Seas, that of their own nature will swell and
boil, but more if they be agitated by the winds: and passions are outrageous,
if moved by external occasions. But as God has set bounds to those, so we by
his assistance should to these. So far they shall go, and no farther.

CLXVI. To be direct and just in our dealing is a virtue most precellent: yet
this alone is not enough to gain love. But this with a loving disposition never
fails. But the most immediate mean of winning, is to be loving.

CLXVII. For those sharp jests, which we can as sharply and suddenly retort, we
think our selves well enough revenged. But if we fail in that, then commonly we
boil with hatred and revenge, and hold our selves engaged to answer that with
cruelty, that we could not wittily: which perhaps was spoken but merrily,
though undiscreetly.

CLXVIII. Till silence be enjoined to contentious persons there will never be
end of quarrels. For what has been cured by wise composition, will be freshly
wounded by undiscreet language.

CLXIX. It is a good Christian rule not to think the worse of our brethren for
the malevolent report of the wicked, nor to flatter our selves for their
commendations. For (commonly) to be praised by a wicked person, is to be
praised for a wicked action.

CLXX. Contentious persons are always busied in making nets for others. And it
seldom fails, but in some they are caught themselves: and then none more
unskilful how to untangle themselves.

CLXXI. Even enemies to a wise man are in some sort friends, in many things
more commodious. For in some faults, tender friends are loath to control us,
and our imperfections they are those that our enemies hunt for. And a wise man
will amend his faults, though an enemy reproach him with them; but a fool will
be incensed to a more ^ottish peremptoriness.

CLXXII. How ignorant are the most learned, that their best wits cannot decide
what to credit! in some things too credulous, in others too incredulous; in
some things denying the power of nature and natural means, in others too much
advancing it. And the most intelligent are liable to error.

CLXXIII. The observation in what a circle all things turn, (this man now in
disgrace, afterward in favor, now happy, anon miserable*) should prepare our
minds, that no ill might come impetuously upon us, nor the flattery of
prosperous fortune effeminate our resolutions.

CLXXIV. Inconsiderate rashness may lessen the evil of a mischance done by us,
but it cannot fully absolve us from it. For Reason is given unto us, that in
all our actions we should govern our selves by advice of it.

CLXXV. Moderation of passions, judgment in counsel, dexterity in affairs, are
the most eminent parts of wisdom: yet a wise man may be discerned in things of
less consequence, as in apparel, servants, and sports. His apparel rather
decent than costly; not hunting after novelties, nor cynick in what is obsolete.
His servants enough for his use and quality; and those rather numbered by their
fit places of service, than by their names. His sports sufficient to recreate,
not satiate; and those generous, not rustic.

CLXXVI. A godly man, that endeavors to be thoroughly acquainted with the
corruptions of his own heart, will censure more favorably of an injury done to
himself, than to another: because he fears the violence of his own depraved
affection will be too rigorous in its own interests.

CLXXVII. We seldom see a man so tempered, that he is free either from base
Sycophantizing, or cursed Satyrizing.

CLXXVIII. When we are persuaded (or rather convinced) that the opinion of
many, and it may be the most wise, is contrary, or at least not the same as
ours is; it should move us to these two things: First a more serious and
weighty consideration, and then if our reasons cannot be satisfied with their
arguments, yet in the second place it should impose silence upon our selves.

CLXXIX. Honesty is silently commended even by the practice of the most wicked:
for their deceit is under the color of honesty. And simply considered, honesty
is the best thing; but wisely managed, it is the most profitable.

CLXXX. It is not easy to impose the tongues silence upon the hearts
grievance. But yet I would constrain it, though there were no prejudice, and
indifferent occasion to disclose it: because till the importunity of affection
were qualified, it would rather relish of passion than reason.

CLXXXI. It is incredible how much one unquiet perverse disposition distempers
the peace, prosperity and unity of a whole family or society. For they seldom
stand alone, the matter, if they did so, were not great. But they having begun,
then partaking and contrarieties arise; and the contagion spreads like a strong
herb in pottage, every man's mess savours of it.

CLXXXII. Those Fractions amongst friends that have not been timely composed,
are like those joints that were not presently set: both more difficult to be
set, and more painful sufferings in the setting.

CLXXXIII. When Princes and great Magistrates commit heinous and crying sins,
such as God punishes a whole nation for, we must think Gods hand is in this
sin, but not in the pravity of it; for that is against his liking: but permits
it for a punishment for the people. The evil of the sin is theirs, the evil of
punishment for sin is Gods.

CLXXXIV. The common people like brute beasts, if one foolishly rush into
danger or tumult, all the rest follow: observing who leads, not whither.

CLXXXV. Let us but wisely observe our selves, and we shall see how strongly
affection will plead against reason, for a matter of no account: Nay, where our
persons and estates shall suffer much, and our affection enjoy but a momentary
satisfaction. Neither does affection always press us peremptorily by absolute
command, but often adventures to attach our reason by discourse, as it were
rationally, but yet subtly. Therefore by our selves we may easily conceive
how advantageous a circumstance it is to gain their affection with whom we
have, or may have business.

CLXXXVI. There is a base-conditioned sort of creatures, whose affections are
bought and sold by Hopes.

CLXXXVII. It is an example of a deplorable nature, and of the worst aspect,
both in a public state, and private family, to see detestable faults, not only
not punished, but the perpetrating persons grow greater in favor, and more
insolent in conditions.

CLXXXVIII. A condemned person not legally put to death, is murdered, not
executed: and to judge ill of any unheard, is not bare injury,but high
injustice.

CLXXXIX. Fowlers set not the same sort of grinsfor the same kinds of fowls at
all seasonsof the year, but vary: neither do the crafts-masters of subtility
deceive, though the most ignorant Gulls, by one only trick.For a very dog will
abhor that room whence he is often beaten.

CXC. Guic^iardin incites his contrymen to their pristine virtue by
remembering them, That to be a Roman is a most glorious name, if accompanied
with virtue; and their shame is doubled, if they forget the honor and renown
of their Ancestors. But Christians have more reasons to inflame their hearts
to zeal and piety; since their comportment is not only exposed to the view of
men and Angels; but to almost pure essence, and strict observer, God himself.
And what profession was ever honored with better examples then ours, Christ
and his Apostles?

CXCI. That Master is never well served, that does not carry an esteem with his
servants who should be readier to believe their masters commandments are wise,
than dispute it amongst themselves. And above all things, a master must be
careful that his servants be not eyewitnesses of any base or absurd action.

CXCII. Pleasures moderately used are pleasant, but immodestly and too
frequently, prove scurrilous and nauseous. So while, we too greedily pursue
them, we overrun and lose them.

CXCIII. What is the advantage of men greatly learned? they labor to be
unsatisfied, to know how ignorant they are; and increase of knowledge is but
increase of appetite to have more.

CXCIV. Rely not upon men whose predominant humor is covetousness. For they
love nothing so well as wealth, nor fear nothing so much as poverty. Therefore
if their gain and your good be opposed, and they have power to make choice of
either, imagine the sequel, though against their promise to you, and your
former obligations upon them. Either choose a man that loves you above all
things, or which is better, Honesty.

CXCV. The same shoe fits not all men's feet, nor the same reason weighs with
every man.

CXCVI. He is far from a wise man* that the many examples of this age have not
tutoured to a safe and wary carriage in his speech.

CXCVII. Often to consider that Christ by his passion has not only gained
remission of our sins, and absolved our great debt to God and his Law, but has
purchased all our right to our worldly blessings and to heaven itself; will
make our hearts tender and pliable, not only to forgive our brethren, but to
behave our selves with all Christian bounty toward them.

CXCVIII. Him that is a Baud to ones lust we account base, and why not as well
him that Flatters? For this incites the mind to ill, that but the body: and
therefore this the worse.

CXCIX. The froward peevish disposition is like the wind: no man knows whence
the cause of it is, nor whither it goes, nor how long it will last: but while
it is all are troubled with the fearful noise and rumbling it makes.

CC. Though in a necessary denial, yet I would express a grief to be unable,
rather than an unwillingness to satisfy, except it be to those that are
importune and impudent; and their resolute answers should rid me of further
trouble.

CCI. Those that are wise neglect not to weigh old and common precepts, and to
govern themselves by them; whilst Novelists reject them as threadbare: and
looking for fresher accept of worser.

CCII. To judge a man without anger, because we never saw him moved, is to say
the flint is without fire, which indeed struck against wood or many other
things, discovers not its property; but against steel shows its nature. And no
man is tempered against all occasions, though against many, and it may be, most.

CCIII. The Indies have not made the Spaniard rich, neither is any man made
wealthy by abundant comings in but by the few occasions of spending.

CCIV. In Physic the relapse into a former disease is cured by the same
medicines that were first used: yet because the relapse is more dangerous and
difficult, there is added to the former medicines more operative virtue and
oftener application. Contrition and Confession are the medicines of a sick
sinful soul; and for a relapse into a former sin, we must use these medicines,
both with more fervency and frequency.

CCV. Observe we those that are cleanly and neat, yet without curiosity; and
commonly they are thriving: for with it there goes a disposition of industry.
Whereas those that are slovenly, are commonly lazy, and that is the road to
poverty.

CCVI. Unkindness among friends is like a brack in a garment; unless timely
stopped, ravels from top to bottom.

CCVII. As the Soul is the form and excellency of every creature; so is modesty
the very life and being of a beautiful woman's commendation.

CCVIII. A wise parent more patiently suffers the death of his children than
their wicked or debauched actions.

CCIX. Those, whose dispositions are retired, are commonly wiser than those
that are jovial. The reason is excess of joy dilates the spirits: whereas the
other disposition unites them, and adapts for consideration; which is the
parent of wisdom.

CCX. There is an odious spirit in many men, who are better pleased to detect a
fault, than commend a virtue.

CCXI. Those trees that grow wild in our fields we neglect, but for those that
grow in our garden we observe the due times of pruning and cutting. If we be
planted in Gods Garden, we shall be cut and pruned by afflictions: For God
chastises every Son whom he loves.

CCXII. These four are the chief ways of perpetuating our memory: Books, which
require a good Head; Valiant acts, which require a courageous Heart; Children,
which require an ability of Body; and Building, which requires a replenished
Purse.

CCXIII. Such a man is to be imitated and admired, that had rather suffer
injury, than do it: and that not out of a sluggishness and dullness of nature,
but out of good moralityand strong oppositions against affections.

CCXIV. How agreeable are those courtesies which we wished, and are conferred
upon us before we could ask!

CCXV. There are a sort of men that find fault with other men for those very
faults, wherein themselves are most faulty. Surely hoping to divert other men's
observations from their lives. These men think to hide themselves behind a
thread.

CCXVI. It is as bootless to endeavor to win some men by gentle usage as to
hope to tame a wolf by stroaking.

CCXVII. It is a help to tranquillity lightly to esteem ill reports, that are
falsely cast upon us, and those that are deservedly, to make them admonitions
to us for our reformation; and not to be incensed to a wilful prosecution, for
that will multiply our vexation.

CCXVIII. O Lord, how great is thy mercy to mankind that thou oftentimes
withdrawest thy blessing from strong means* and so make them ineffectuall:
and again thou inspirest weak helps to effect great matters! This thou do,
knowing our wicked natures would adore thy blessings, not thee, if the ordinary
best means should be infallible. And if thou should never go along with the
means, how lazy should we be! and so become loathsome drones in thy sight.

CCXIX. It is a most unfit time either to undertake or consult of any weighty
business, when our minds have newly been stirred with any violence of passion;
let it be either of anger, grief, or fear. For a man may as well consult
fighting, as then.

CCXX. None more in patiently suffer injuries, than those that are most forward
in doing them.

CCXXI. I have seen men discommend those things, which have been spoken by one,
whom they have not much affected, and commend the self- same things delivered
from another mouth, whom they love. These, methinks, resemble those that
praise the same liquor out of a glass, and dispraise it out of a bowl.

CCXXII. In War, when every man seeks to save one, all is lost. In a Common
wealth, when every one greedily applies himself to his own profit, the public
suffers. So in a Family, when every one endeavors mastership, all are
disordered.

CCXXIII. In a State nothing is more requisite than to preserve to every
office, yea to the meanest, a good refute. For the first step to disorder is
the contempt of Magistracy: and that as well of the lowest degrees, as the more
exalted.

CCXXIV. I would endeavor to strangle all ill conceits of a parent, even at
their first beginning, though there were too much occasion for them. But to
aggravate any upon never so just grounds, is a degree of Parricide.

CCXXV. That Religion, which principally intends internal integrity, and is
exercised with external decency, is far more holy than that, which by external
glory and pomp, incites more ocular admiration than inward sanctity.

CCXXVI. If I could I would labor and if not able to labor, the law of nature
would allow me to beg: but rather than steal, I would dye.

CCXXVII. A man may be a good practical Moralist, and no Christian, but a man
cannot be a good Christian, and an ill Moralist.

CCXXVIII. Those women, that desire to marry such doults as they hope to govern
and rule as they list, are like those that spend all their life time in leading
of the blind.

CCXXIX. A fault opportunely rebuked is like a cure timely taken: then both
alike easily cured; but when time has given strength and growth, they both
pass from dangerous to deadly.

CCXXX. The life of a little sick Infant is as hazardous and hopeless, as the
safety of a small Bark in the Sea, (...)allanced,, and without a steers-man.
Every wave, though not rough, tosseth and endangereth the safety of it. So
these little ones wanting strength, as the ballast, and reason as the
steers-man, by which they might either help themselves, or direct others for
their help, small infirmity dissolves them. But God manifests himself most
where there are least natural means, and by his goodness they are preserved.

CCXXXI. Wisely used, it may be a discreet course, when our friends are
afflicted with the calamity of some great loss, to amuse them with the danger
of a greater dependent misfortune, if their wisdom and patience do not well
provide for it: so whilst their minds are busied with the consideration of a
greater matter, the other will be swallowed up, and the happy safety of what
was most feared, will annihilate the sorrow of the other.

CCXXXII. Many times when we are in heavy affliction, and are desperate of all
outward means, our Faith is more strong then afterward, when God has
mercifully delivered. Yea, how far does the Devil prevail to make us (when
escaped) even worship the virtue of those means, which in our calamity were but
either cold, or no comforters.

CCXXXIII. It is the wisdom of a man to be always armed against casualties, and
the advantage of a Christian man to be best armed. Our little moment of time is
obvious to many dangers and afflictions, and these such, as one stroke of them
is able to kill us: as the loss of wife the greatest, of children the next, of
estate and fame, and many the like. In how many, if not in all places do we lie
open! But Faith in Gods providence that he orders all for the best, is a
complete armor of defense: therefore let us never be unharnessed.

CCXXXIV. How disconsolate a thing is it to journey alone, and to (...)
^enighted in fearful darkness, and in (...) passage! And how are we re(...)
meet with well-known acquaintance that will accompany us! Such like, but far
exceeding is the comfort of cordial friends in affliction.

CCXXXV. Those disputations are fruitless and contentious, where the
Authorities of learned men are objected, and not Reason.

CCXXXVI. That State is happiest and prospers best, where the people rather
obey the authority of the ancient and fundamental Laws, than dispute the wisdom
and policy of the first Institutors.

CCXXXVII. Those, who govern themselves by the examples of others, and not by
the rule of reason and judgment, are like those, who to the appearance have
clear eyes, yet are blind, and cannot walk, but as they are led.

CCXXXVIII. Friendship is the chiefest comfort of life, but to multiply
friendships, and for one man to join himself in many, is levity and danger. For
no man that is wise, will give many keys of that Cabinet where his chiefest
wealth lies.

CCXXXIX. The first step of that ladder, by which a Christian man ascends to
Heaven* is humility: and he who means (...) that, and so ascend by the rest,
(...) them, and tumbles back with (...)ption.

CCXL. Those are far from ingenuous dispositions, who for their own ends will
comply with ignominious and base persons.

CCXLI. To servants I would give all lawful liberty; as upon just occasions to
be absent from my service. But I would not suffer them to take it: for if they
find a remiss hand upon them in one thing, it will engender insolence in all.

CCXLII. It Is not the plenty of meat that nourishes, but a good digestion.
Neither is it abundance of wealth that makes us happy, but the discreet using
it.

CCXLIII. The interchanging courtesies of Friends is somewhat like the
Philosophers tenet, that though things may cease from their present being, yet
nothing is lost, for it is resolved into the first matter; and so again will be
produced into other forms: so what is transferred from one friend to another is
not annihilated and lost, but is deposited there, and in apt season will
resuscitate to as behoveful uses.

CCXLIV. Discreet patience gives us great advantage. For when our have makes us
discover our selves, we warn our enemies to arm themselves before we mean to
strike: when on the contrary, we might with ease have hit in what part we would.

CCXLV. The very book of the Creatures does manifestly teach us that there is a
God. If we come into a family, and see a decent order, we easily resolve our
selves that there is a wife master that governs. Behold the whole world, (which
we may call Gods Family) and observe the variety of creatures; nay, further,
their variety of natures, preservations and uses. Could all these frame
themselves or others? could they direct themselves to their proper uses and
ends, that we see God has disposed them to? Sure, let but humane reason
discourse it, and it will be evident that there must be a God. How then is it
that infidelity is so general? Certainly it is the curse of Adam's
disobedience, that he who had so great a measure of knowledge, and sinned
against it, should be punished both in himself and posterity with Atheism and
ignorance. And as infidelity is the greatest sin, so for God to give a man over
to it, is the greatest punishment.

CCXLVI. It is more honor for a woman to deny the undue desires of a wanton
lover, than to have thousands enamoured with her beauty, or other her natural
graces.

CCXLVII. A man has two ears, and but one tongue, they say it is, because he
should hear twice before he speak once. A man has likewise two eyes given him
to look on both sides, before he go forward in any enterprise.

CCXLVIII. There are many that have sold away their own proper names, which
they have received from a long succession of Ancestors, and bought others with
the additaments of greater fortunes. In may apprehension a parricide of the
largest extent, not of one parent (which all esteem horrible) but of a whole
line. And more unpardonable it is in the eldest, or Heir of the House, than in
any of the rest; because both the name and wealth of the family is entrusted to
Him: and what God has done to diverse families for a punishment of sin, (that
is, to blot out a name) he willingly and covetously pulls upon himself. Besides
he calls himself by an improper name, which given by another, he would esteem
to be an ignominious nickname.

CCXLIX. It is seldom that any man does hurt himself by patience or silence;
but by hasty revenge many have undone themselves. What if there be just
occasion to be angry? yet ever it is best to stay till the heat of our passion
be over, because we may err in the measure: and there is no time lost; we may,
if there be just occasion, be angry afterward.

CCL. A good name is as a percious ointment; and he, that lives without it,
stinks above ground.

CCLI. In a man of Affairs these things are required. Honesty, not to wish or
desire any thing but what is just. Sound judgment, to discern what is
profitable, what inconvenient. Dexterity, to use opportunities that result in
all affairs. A friend (to advise with) that is secret, who may confirm him in a
well-chosen course, and inform him if he mistake. Constancy, to proceed in what
he has undertaken upon good grounds. Lastly, patience, to endure all the
mishaps that could not be foreseen, nor humane wisdom prevent.

CCLII. Both the wicked and the godly fear Gods judgments, and by them are
deterred from evil actions. But the latter (as much, if not more) live
sanctifiedly out of consideration and sense of Gods manifold and Fatherly
mercies toward them: the other never respect them at all.

CCLIII. In true morality it is better to love than to be beloved. The one is
of more fame, this of more substance: that is the concurrent act of others, this
my own probity.

CCLIV. It is wisdom in a man so far to inquire of other men's businesses, as
may instruct and enable him for his own: yet by no means to intermeddle or
interest himself, no not by others entreaty, but upon very good occasion; as
for public benefit, or private charity, or nearness of alliance, or dearness
of amity; and in all these with good caution too.

CCLV. As in dispute the falling into one absurdity produces many more: so in
businesses one miscarriage links it self presently with many inconveniences.

CCLVI. There is no fire so small, but would burn up all the combustible matter
of the world: nor no man's desire so feeble, but if he continually seek to
please it, would at last ingross all that could be had, and never extinguish,
till nothing more could be found.

CCLVII. Men, who chiefly intend applause in their actions, commonly miss it;
but those seldom do that principally intend their action. For he that will win
the game, must look more upon the mark than the money. If he hits the one, he
takes the other.

CCLVIII. A man of a froward disposition is like a hedg-hog, set so round with
prickles, one knows not where to stroke him.

CCLIX. The first beginning of a good Christian is to desire to have good
desires to be implanted in him: and this little grain through Gods blessing
will grow to be a great tree.

CCLX.. He is a man of feeble mind, that shall torment himself for the perverse
frowardness of others.

CCLXI. There is not any thing does more mischief in marriage, than when the
one makes much of any who has injured the other.

CCLXII. Much is the knowledge that is gotten by discreet arguing and opposing
of reasons: but when it grows to contradiction, there is not a greater ill.

CCLXIII. The aequanimity of the mind, (in which consists the happiness of man)
being once lost, is with much difficulty redeemed. As sleep being broken by
disorder, is with much ado recovered; so our quiet being distempered by
passion, is hardly resetled.

CCLXIV. That man that often weighs his own actions toward others, and with
what affections he did them, will enable himself the better to conceive of
other men's intentions toward himself in their affairs; whereas those men that
expect that all others should court their interests, never consider how they
behave themselves to others.

CCLXV. The lazy man's life is the most tedious, and most perplexed of all men's.
For industrious men have both the comfort of effecting their purposes, and by
their providence have prevented those calamities (either in part, or
altogether) which humane condition is liable to; and which fall impetuously
upon the sluggard.

CCLXVI. It is the part of a discreet man not to enter upon an affair of
consequence hastily or inconsiderately, and of a religious man, not to do any
holy action without preparation. For the meditations of the heart should
precede the words of the mouth. Therefore no way commendable is the course of
those, who in prayer and preaching follow (as they call it) the present dictate
of the Spirit, but rather indeed of their own fancy; and is to be accounted
vain presumption, and not spiritual excellency, as they would have it.

CCXLVII. There are many who are much disturbed at other men's buffoneries: a
great defect of judgment, to envy that which we should rather scorn or pity.

CCLXVIII. Unhappy they are, who never know their friends but when they are
gone; First, in losing the comfort of them, when they may have it; next, in
desiring and wanting them, when they are past hope of having them.

CCLXIX. It is as absurd and weak to endeavor ones self to a sweet converse
with those that are froward, and to be sharp with those that are gentle; as to
give to an importune beggar, and deny bounty to a modest man that wants.

CCLXX. The sluggard if he could truly apprehend the sweet content that
endeavor brings, would loath his nest; who to avoid labor lingers out a
tedious life.

CCLXXI. It is not the garment that is graceful, but the inward proportion that
sets it forth: nor it is abundance that is our blessing, but a mind fitly
disposed to our condition.

CCLXXII. If I go the right way my self, it were absurd to deviate upon any
occasion. And sure, he that composeth his life to a regular honest course,
needs not care for the exception of any. For those that are likewise honest I
shall meet; and those that are not, I desire not to find.

CCLXXII. Religious love is like Solomon's sword: it tries whether our love be
like the natural mothers, that would not have a division made, or the false
mothers, that would have the child divided. The pious heart wholly devotes it
self to God; but the carnal and hypocritical parts it with God, and its own
pleasures and advantages. This scrutiny Religion makes.

CCLXXIV. That which in inconvenient times may be convenient, in convenient
times is often inconvenient.

CCLXXV. If it be with obedience to the chief Magistrate, a man ought to carry
an honest and faithful heart to the common right, and his private inheritance.
And it is to be granted, where there is no offense committed against the law,
there is no guilt or desert of punishment.

CCLXXVI. The wisdom of those young men is excellent, who by providence and
discourse of reason do so order their affairs, that they stay not till
necessity or experience force them to use that order, which wise foresight
would much sooner have taken.

CCLXXVII. They are much deceived who conceive that by their own abilities they
are able to act in every affair. But the truth is, that he is the wise man,
that knows to make able men his Instruments.

These two Meditations following, with the Verses, were written by him not long
before his Suffering.
GOds secret Will is unknown. Whatsoever it be, his name be magnified. My duty
it to walk by the revealed and acknowledged rules of his Truth, and the
received precepts of virtue. Which though through my frailty I have not
practiced so well as I should, and as I wish I had; yet never shall the fear of
death (by his divine and gracious assistance) no not in the ugliest shapes
attired, daunt me from asserting them.

I know my cause is good, and that my sufferings answer not the value and
worthiness of it. I know that my Redeemer lives that died for me. Most
willingly I die for his Truth, and for acting my duty to his servant, the King;
whom he had placed here upon his terrestrial throne amongst us. I know and
believe that to dye is gain, the gaining of an immortal and incorruptible life,
with eternal felicity in the sight of God my Savior, and his blessed Angels.

My Savior ^he Cross sanctified,
My King the Block has dignified.
Crosses nor Blocks I do not fear,
Sanctified, Dignified they are.
Gloria Deo in excelsis.
CERTAIN LETTERS Written to several PERSONS.

BY Arthur Lord* Capel, Baron of Hadham.

LONDON Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.
1683.

SIR,
THe sad and desperate condition His Majesty's Sacred person is in, has filled
me with much greater anxiety and disquietness, than has been usual to me since
these unhappy times: And it is not often that I think of any thing else, but
what may or ought to be done in order to the preservation of it, as a
Christian, as a Subject: For I believe both duties are inseparably conjoined in
this occasion. The inquisition after this led me into the consideration of Gods
dispensation, of times and seasons: and that as those are not to be neglected,
wherein there is freedom for our active duty; so neither these, wherein there
is appearance of little else remaining, save only for others to be encouraged
and revived by the passive. (And truly I doubt not but the divine goodness,
will act for our good ends, by our Christian readiness for sufferings.) And as
it is thus with times, so also it is with persons: some are rather, or more
decently qualified for this than that, at least to give example and authority
to it.

These cogitations drew from me the considerations herein enclosed; which I
have addressed to -- because I assure my self much of your gentelness. I have
already communicated them to a very learned, reverend and pious -- but I will
not adventure much further in it, until I have also your sense of the
expediency of the thing. For neither to the reputation of the matter, until it
be maturely considered of, nor to any person, would I because of inconvenience.
And indeed, if it be so well encouraged by your self, and such others of like
reputation, as it is by Him, it will become me afterward to be silent (as I
conceive,) for I have a better Heart than a Head for this business. I profess I
have a jealous eye upon the Scots and Presbyterians; who I doubt not, would
make malicious advantages upon any colorable defect of our Clergy. I shall add
this, that those of my profession are not idle, but are confident and vigilant.
And truly it were a vile shame for us of all qualifications, if this excellent
Prince should be lost, and we not able to excuse our selves, that no means was
left unattempted for his preservation; Whom I beseech God to comfort and
defend. To whose protection I also leave you, etc.

Feb. 11. 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
I Think it gives weight and encouragement to this proceeding, both His
Majesty's late excellent Declaration to his Subjects; as also the Resolution of
the Houses to exhibit theirs to the people, I heartily wish this were timely
fitted for this conjuncture.

The Considerations enclosed.

THe straight durance his Majesty's sacred person is held under, the late
Declaration of the Army, (with which the Commons have concurred) to act without
and against the King, puts it past all scruple, that the flagitious and
execrable resolution of these men has engaged them past retiring; and (which
is yet worse) that they cannot but proceed to the deepest and utmost Villainies
and Impieties.

There is not less question of this, than of what ought to succeed it; which
is, that their impudence must be encountered with a Christian Courage, Zeal, and
Resolution Superior to it; otherwise it is a doubt not to be slighted, that
these Men, and too many others seduced by them, will have a seeming Cause to
believe themselves, that Theological Truths are more controversal, than those
Astronomical or Astrological, wherein Lines and Images are only fictioned, to
make Schemes for Sciences and Discourse. I am not altogether free of this
Scruple, though it looks so stupendiously Irreligious.

Will not the whole Frame of Christian Verity be shaken (if not subverted) in
this Nation, when this so great a Truth in it shall not be vigorously averred;
That an Established Magistracy is God's immediate Minister; and ought not,
cannot, with Christian Profession, be deposed by those that owe Obedience and
Allegiance to it? I am fully persuaded, that it is so necessary a Truth, that
were it tied to the Stake, and the Flames about it, even there ought we to
offer our selves to vindicate it, and contend for it; or else adieu
Christian-Protestant Profession.

The Seed of the Church was Suffering: And shall it be lost for want of
Suffering, after it is grown to such a Perfection? The Ancient Patterns must be
imitated, if we expect the same Benediction should preserve to us, what was so
piously and gloriously planted by them. I think, I mistake not my Measure; this
Error amongst Men lies not in the Brain, but in the Heart: Therefore
Instructions want not, but strenuous Examples of Christian Zeal; which (I
persuade my self) will most daunt them. For those believe, what they want of us
in Truth, they supply in Pertinacity.

All this considered, it is not now seasonable (I believe it was not so till
now; but because the Reasons are so obvious, I will not trouble you with them)
for a considerable number of our learned, gravest, and most pious Divines,
(though they exceed not the number of twenty, they will be enough) in a grave
and sober manner (for those tart Reprehensions, of which every day there wants
not store, suit not the weight of this Business, being rather Movings of Spleen
than Sanctity) to present unto the Houses, That a Government established, is
God's immediate Minister; and, That an Attempt to depose it, is an high Impiety
against God, and his known Truth plainly and expressly taught us in the Holy
Scriptures; That His Majesty is indubitably God's Vicegerent over us, and that
this Allegiance we owe unto Him, we have attested by the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; That not any of his Subjects can stretch forth their Hands against
Him, and be Guiltless; That they demand (according to the Practice of the
Holiest Christians, in all Ages) a Time and Place to prove this great Truth
they now assert, by Evidence out of the Scripture; and if this be not allowed
them, then to declare, they refuse not to seal it by Martyrdom?

I do very readily acknowledge, that the Qualifications for so great an
Engagement ought to be weighty and serious; and that to rush into Martyrdom,
(as long as God has left us any justifiable human Means) may want as much of
true Christian Piety, as it may seem of Prudence. God has engaged our Nature
to many and several Duties and Functions; and each has its several Laws and
Rules proper, whereby they are so set on work, that each may attain their due
and proper Ends. Nor is the greatest Means always best, when there are others,
though yet fitter. But if I mistake not, Ventum est usque ad Triarios; We must
bring up the Reserve. God has in his just Judgments, (upon our Estates and
Persons) permitted all our Temporal Endeavors to be dissipated and frustrated;
we may say, Our Van and our Battle are routed: But if the Courage of this our
Reserve fails us not, I hope we shall rally our selves again about it; and, by
the Divine Goodness, have a fair day of it. This will awaken all, encourage the
half-spirited, corroborate all honest and sincere Minds. Methinks, I have
Reason too on my side, when I believe it will easily fall into this
Consequence. All the Clergy of England (with very little Exception) will second
so Christian an Example. Besides, most entire Families will be engaged; and
scarce will there be One, but will have a share in it. For to this Point the
Presbyterians will frankly concur; diverse reputed Independents (of whom I know
some much valued by themselves) will be joined unto you; and even in the Army,
the Impression of it will be notable. Nor can their present Power prevent the
Expression of so universal a Sense, so piously incited, and so well warranted.

Whereby will appear their Paucity. Upon good Advertisement I am assured, that
they believe they have the Hearts of the greater number of the People; so much
has their Prosperity dazzled them: But of nothing am I more certain, than that
they have not the Fortieth Man. And an Expedient like to this, to let both the
People and Them into a View one of another, I know not. And yet also would this
be further prosecuted: This Attestation would be sent into Scotland, and all
the Protestant Churches, and States of Europe, (for with the Others we
communicate not.) And for it I know an Expedient proper, and of Reputation.

If this Progress of it should fail, though improbably, which has such a
politic Seemingness in it; yet in my Opinion, it does not at all vitiate the
Pious Part of it: The means and end being throughout truly Christian, I say, if
it should fail, yet I see not that any thing we can do or suffer, can more than
answer the Importunity of the Occasion, and the Necessity that lies upon us as
Christians, to do the utmost of our Duty. How long, and with how many Arts and
Subtilties have these Men abused and deluded the People with the Pretensions of
their candid Intentions, only to preserve the Laws of the Nation, and the
Protestant Profession? But now that they are possessed of so great Power, with
what Impitdence do they confound those, and with what Impiety do they subvert
this? But since in this case both those do so well accord, were it not best to
set this last named in the Front, and to draw up the Civil Affair to it: and
though we contend for both, yet to fight under the Banner of this, in some such
manner as I have stated it, and by your Wisdom will be disposed into the best
Order.

I shall add such a Consideration more, that if it stood singly, yet in my
Opinion would justify and quit the Cost of any Endeavor or Indurance: That
is, The unparalled Sufferings of this Great Prince: to which I know nothing
superior, but his Incomparable Virtues. Believe me, Multitudes of Men are
mistaken, if in the Point of his Temporal Affairs, he had not been in a much
better condition, (though I profess not in a good one) had he timely relaxed
much of his constancy and sincerity toward the Rights, Preheminencies and
Patrimony of the Church. Neither is our Obligation but very great to him; his
Sufferings being for our Laws; so unquestionable is our Prosperity mixed with
His Dignity. Now, shall this Great Personage suffer Imprisonment, Deprivation
of Majesty, Absence of all Worldly Comforts, and minutely Hazards of Life, for
his Magnanimous stedfastness to your and our Advantages; and we not struggle
for Him with our utmost Endeavors? Life were inseparable from much Infamy,
with such Ingratitude. And truly, in Human Reason, (the utmost Employment
whereof, God (I doubt not) expects at our Hands) I know no Guard for his Life,
but by some means or other to make it manifest, how dear he is to his People,
and their readiness to testify how inseparably united God's Truth is with the
Cause of His Majesty. This only next under God, must awe Them, preserve Him.

I cannot refuse to believe, that this Cause, as to the Crown, will rise again;
because I see not a Bottom or Foundation, in Human Reason, for this
surreptitious Power to establish it self in the Order it seems now to point at.
Though I do also very fully confess, that great mischiefs are easily under
their Power. But if these only were prevented, amongst which the safety of this
sacred Person is of highest Importance, we had no cause to repent of such Pious
Endeavors. And should the Cause of the Crown (with which God's Truth is so
firmly combined) refuscitate without such Christian Aides, little were it to
the Honor of the present Clergy, and those that now serve at the Altar: And if
Redempt^on come ^ingly some other way, their share could be little looked after
(of which, truly none is more passionately tender, than my self) nor were the
Protestant Profession well vindicated; which (I doubt not to say) has received
a deep wound (but I hope not mortal) by the Unchristian Proceedings of these
vile and detestable Men amongst us.

This I have offered to your Candor, Prudence, and Piety, which truly I hold
in great Reverence; otherwise I would not thus have exposed my self to the
censure of it. The Weakness of the Advice, at least the unskilful Digest of it,
I shall readily acknowledge; but the Sincerity and Zeal of my Heart for the
Cause to which it is directed, I shall never be ashamed of.

But after all this, I shall make this Conclusion, and I pray believe I am
serious and sincere in it: Let me not be mistaken, that I should seem to
reprove a Slackness in those, whom I think proper to take up in this matter of
themselves. Indeed, I am not at all guilty of it. I doubt not, but great
numbers have been long since ready for this Encounter; and perhaps, disposing
themselves to it, in a much better manner than I have proposed. I have only
offered my Opinion. Receive it, I pray, as it is; I may affirm, in the weakest
part of it, not wanting some measure of a pious Jealousy, (as a Son of this
Church) for this great Verity taught and professed in it, and as a Transport of
that duty and care I have for the safety of this Gracious Prince, my Master. To
which I shall add, That I have had too much Experience in this World, to be
ignorant of this frequent Truth in Affairs; That in Good Men there is always a
modesty accompanying them, that oftentimes they begin over-late: And it is
almost proper to them neither to machinate, nor to be overhasty to encounter
wicked Designs.

But, if I erred not, this is that Point, and Article of Time, wherein your
Order are to manifest their full Persuasion of this Verity in Christian
Religion; Vindicate it as it is professed by the Church of England; Answer the
Kindness and Stedfastness of the King to the Clergy; Protect that Life, which
was our Protection, and is in such imminent Hazard for it. By all which
(through God's Blessing) you may lay a Foundation of reviving both in Church
and State, that which now looks so Cadaverously.



MY LORD,
IT joys me not a little, that in the late refusal of the Lords concurrence
with the Commons House concerning the Trial of his Majesty, you were there, and
had an eminent share in it. The blood of our Families being mixed, it is a
grief to me, I could not bear a part with you in so virtuous and commendable an
Action, yet a large part of contentment in it cannot be denied me.

You are (unquestionably) on firm ground. If you stir an inch from it, you
fall. If you keep your station confidently, magnanimously, you are safe,
undoubtedly safest; if coldly and with trepidation, you are ruined, lost. Are
the dangers great? the occasion is much greater: and the whole affair is
therefore great, because greatned by hazards of the highest nature to the
public, to your particular. I have bought experience at a dear rate: but into
the bargain I have no very imperfect knowledge of these men. Let them but meet
a well-grounded and justifiable zeal greater than their mis-guided fury, you
shall render them recollected: and you have begun a conquest upon them, when
they perceive an engaged resolution. Let them but see there is a generosity and
incredible courage prepared to stem the torrent of their fury, they must,
they will yield way to it.

The case of the whole Kingdom has long been a sad and a heavy one; but now at
length it is a plain one too. Though your Lordships seem at present to appear
most upon the stage; the Eclipse of the King has very sensibly obscured the
luster and brightness of the Centry also: And therefore it may be the easilier
believed, that, although the King at present has very little attendance, and
solemnity about his Person, his Interment must be accompanied with the
considerablest part of the Nobility and Gentry, and with the demolition of
Kingship; and the mutation of Monarchy in this Commonweal, together with that
of Nobility and Gentility, will be attended with that of the civil and sober
distinction of all degrees.

It is not uneasy to be discerned (as elated as these men are with their
Victories) that yet there is a kind of hesitation, and stop in their carriere.
For now the time being come, that they are to consider how they shall retain
and rule what they seem to have gained, they begin to perceive that there is a
wide difference between making a Conquest over their fellow Citizens, (of which
their own unhappy differences will lay claim to the greatest share) and
governing them contrary to their own appetites by so small a part of
themselves: And that means are easilier found, and readier at hand to
discompose and disorder a State, than such as shall compose and rule it,
especially when so differing to long-ingraffed customs, and the inclinations
of the people. Attack them in this musing mood, though they do use an
artificial confidence that they act the sense of the people. It Is true, they
are in some present awe of their power, or rather in a kind of present
amazement at their boldness: And expedient must be used for the people to
resume courage, and to declare their inclinations. I need scarce name who are
the fittest to contrive the way, and give the onset. It can be none but your
Lordships, none will begin before you, and there is none but will follow you.
Make then a Declaration (by a competent number of you that are readiest at hand
(for some have must be used considering the Kings danger) the rest will
speedily follow you) of your horror and detestation to such a proceeding
against your anointed King, and lawful Sovereign, (your Lordships will best
order it:) Invite all the Clergy, all the Professors of the Law to make their
several subscriptions under their several qualifications. Those in London are
ready at hand, and will speedily follow you. Then the Countries and Cities will
undoubtedly hasten their testimonies. This occasion is so large, it incloses,
comprehends all opinions, whatsoever owns humanity, will be joined to you. The
paucity of these prodigious Regicides, Parricides will quickly appear as
Monsters, not contained within the terms and limits of humane nature. Nor can
the power and vigilance of the Army hinder the progress of this: Or if they
attempt it, they do half-work, it destroys their pretensions, and will irritate
the people to a revenge. Send such a Declaration to the General and the Council
of War. Let them see there is a noble Confidence and Resolution that will back
it, and not be refused. Demand a stop of the proceedings, until the people have
delivered their suffrages by their subscriptions. They will own you as
regardful of them for preserving them from the imputation of so high a guilt of
so unspeakable a crime, as these would impose upon them.

This proceeding (I acknowledge) is not ordinary, not exampled: but the
occasion is altogether new, and so unimaginable, That (all the circumstances
weighed) all histories are silent, that the like thing ever entered into the
heart of man, as this intended enterprise of these men of the Army: That a King
and a free Monarch, the Protector of our Municipal Laws, should, contrary to
all Laws, to our own Laws, but yet with the impudent semblance of a packed Jury
be submitted unto Trial for his Life. To encounter this horrid novelty a way
altogether new must be excogitated, and seconded with a courage and confidence
above ordinary. Why may not your Lordships find it convenient to remonstrate to
all Kings, Princes, States, Potentates and Nobility your disclaimure of so foul
a matter; and desire their assistance, if it may be timely had, for the
preservation of his sacred Majesty's Life? For if that were but in a reasonable
security, you need not doubt, but that the Kingdom has more than means enough
to struggle for it self, and recover its ancient Laws and Government from such
a vertiginous and giddy Generation; who have the impudence to derive a Title
and Authority for their proceedings from Visions and Revelations* Give but the
people an honorable example, they will follow you, and vindicate both you and
themselves from being considered as such a silly Generation, that they should
suffer themselves to be couzned out of their good, known, and established Laws;
and in the place of them, to be imposed upon by Imaginations and Dreams.

I despair not of Gods wonderful Providence over his Sacred Majesty's Person
and Life: but that suspends not our Endeavors. He expects we should work with
Him by those Humane means he has left us. It grieves me, I can do nothing else
but rub my fingers upon paper: an employment that fits not my Genius. Perforce
I must do it, or nothing. And because I would not be guilty of leaving any
thing undone that I can do, I have applied my self to it, and directed it to
your Lordship. To whom I wish that all the advantages, that ever happened to any
Noble Endeavor, may succeed, and rest

Tower, Jan. 9. 1648. Yours, etc.

SIR,
THE conjectures of men are strangely various (yea, of the same persons)
concerning the safety or danger of the King, my Master: Sometimes their hopes,
other times their fears prevail most. I should be much ashamed if I were the
least guilty of so universal an inquietude, in so justifiable an occasion, and
arising from so good a ground, as a Kindness and Reverence they owe to their
Lawful Prince. I frankly give you leave to think (nor do I value the
inconvenience it could draw along with it) that there is not that honest
expedient in the world to serve Him by, that I would not hazard my self in, to
employ for Him: nor do I know what Earthly felicity it is, could be so welcome
to me, as to advance a step, beyond any other in my duty toward Him. But my
present condition refuses me the ability of any thing else, but that of
invocating the favor of God for Him; and making my addresses to you, whom I
take to be the figure that gives the denomination to the sequence of a great
many Ciphers that follow you: And therefore I do the rather believe that a
person, that signifies so much, will the better apprehend what weight and
signification Reason and Religion have in all Humane and Christian Actions; and
that these at last will make a Conquest upon all those, that act without their
Commission.

I can hardly persuade my self into (I think) the too common opinion, that the
extraordinary success and felicity that has constantly followed your attempts
(who as the saying is, seem to have hired fortune to serve you at day-wages)
has dazzled that light of understanding that formerly was usual to you. You
cannot forget the advantages on the House's part, and the Infirmities and wants
on the Kings part, at the beginning of the War; and that the complication of
many favorable accidents on the part of your Affairs, will challenge a share
in the success, yet is there a large room too left for your merit in Martial
Conduct; and you have cause enough to value your self upon a better foundation,
than the event of Battles, and successes in War. Proverbial Wisdom is not the
worse, because easiliest learnt; It seldom happens that the same man is Happy
and Wise together. And if that lesson also be good, That Affliction makes men
understand; it is the Academy in which I have been strictly disciplined for
seven years; so that I must either be an egregious Dunce, or no ill Counselor
for you; there being a Person scarce to be found, that lies under so dangerous
a temptation of seeming prosperity, and therefore fittest to be advised and
counseled to Sobriety and Wisdom. Of this I do assure you I do so little
repine at your Prosperity, and easy opportunities of fixing your self securely
in it, that if you do as much justify your love to the tranquillity of the
Nation by a discreet uniting the King and his People, as you have been
instrumental in their long separation. I shall prize your prudence, courage,
industry, and sobriety, at as high an estimate, as the sufficientest wit can
deliver it in Language.

I doubt not, but both of us are easily agreed in this point, That success
legitimates not a quarrel, nor the power which supports it, Neither are the
Instruments of the Calamity of a Nation thereby justified. We cannot but
remember and observe, that it is no more than the filthiest and imperfectest
Creatures have heretofore effected, which have driven people out of their
Countries, made desert Islands extremely fertile. Have not Frogs and Locusts
desolated Empires? and other Vermin ruined great Cities, and large
Territories? By these means God magnifies his own Power and Justice: the
Instruments remain but what they were, their Nature and Quality not changed.
But in the Acts of Gods Grace and Favor to those; who have been instrumental
in destructive practices, there is a mutation of Qualities; an ejection of
those vicious, and an infusion of contrary Graces, and those Affects and
Appetites, which are necessary and connatural, but misguided, are by his
goodness guided to good ends. And thus was Saul from a furious Persecutor
transformed to a zealous Professor; from a Destroyer of the Church, to a
Master Builder up of it. No doubt but God in both had his ends, by and upon
Saint Paul: and from my Soul I wish it, that your case may have a similitude
with his; that of him in the Spiritual Affair, (which was the Function to which
he was separated) you may be a resemblance in the Temporal; and from a
Destroyer (by God's goodness) rendered a Restorer. This in passage to those
other considerations I intended to you.

That which weighs most, and lies heaviest upon men's hearts, is, the fear of
the King's Person; that the whole Kingdom may lie under the imputation of the
guilt of violence offered to it; and that a mutation of the form of Government
shall succeed it. If this be the End aimed at, then my present endeavor is to
demonstrate to you, how humanely impossible it is to attain unto it. First
there is no example (the necessary circumstances observed) that encourages
such an endeavor. For examine all the Stories of all States, and you will not
find so much as one instance (I pray observe how I propose it) that ever any
people within the fifth degree (I might double the proportion) as we of England
are, or in the same degree so spacious a Territory, were ever transformed from
a Monarchy, to an Aristocracy, or Democracy. Some Cities and petty
Principalities have sometimes suffered a change to those Forms; and from
thence have arrived (yet not without desperate intestine Seditions and
Vexations) to a great Puissance: The people growing up and increasing with the
widening of the State, the Governing by multitudinous Councils, through
constant habit and practice, has not always ill succeeded. But to attempt to
introduce such a form (which is so vitrious and brittle, and so easily carried
into Distemper, Tumult and Multitude, being scarce separable) upon such a huge
mass of people as we of this Nation are, and altogether unexpect and undesirous
of it, the matter it self in reason will be found manifestly repugnant to, and
not susceptible of such forms; nor is there a pattern to be found, to give any
light of direction for the managing of such a design. Reasons may be seduced
from the Accidents happening this Parliament, which well weighed and pondered,
will afford matter more than enough to clear this question. Something like an
example may be produced (though rarely too) that large Monarchies have been
cantonized. But that (I think) few have any jealousy that this is intended.

The next considerable is, That the change from the ancient and
long-established rule of Governing will demolish all the received rules of
Property. And if that inconvenience be with difficulty provided for; yet the
people will not expect other, but that with new Lords they must have new Laws:
And more than probable it is that the people will be shaken into such an
apprehension of it, that they may fall upon the Heads of the Enterprisers. We
frequently see that people are hardly reclaimed from customs barbarous and
unreasonable; how much less can our best Nation (the best civilized the world
has known) be withdrawn from the love of Laws, so prudently constituted, and
under which they have so long continued, that the very desires of the People
are assimilated into the Nature of their Laws. The People and the Laws will
always be alike. Are their Laws Monarchical, so will be the Affections of the
people? Custom is a second Nature, and in many things goes beyond it.

Upon what Principle, upon what Authority must such a proceeding be founded? It
can be no other, but that the people have the right and power to depose an
Established Government, erect a new Form, arraign the supreme Magistrate, and
execute Him. Herein is History silent: and it will not only be disclaimed by
all those you call Cavaliers and Presbyterians, but also by a considerable
number of Independents: The remainder then will amount to a slender body of
people. So that whereas the pretense is, that the sense of the people is acted,
nothing will prove to be a grosser mistake. But this embroilment in the State,
especially upon this principle, will make all Kings Parties to the quarrel:
Yea, all States that administer Aristocratically, will be thoroughly engaged to
defend their right of ruling. So that there is little question, but that the
greatest calamity that can befall a Nation, will inevitably be drawn upon us,
that is, a Foreign Invasion. And Trade (which Nature seems to have designed our
Nation most properly for) will be embarred by all Kings and those States. Nor
can it be expected that permission will be given to those of our Nation to
Trafick, who derive themselves from a State, from whence they shall bring the
contagion of so destructive a maxim to those rules of Governing, where they
expect Commerce. Yea, even popular States will abhor so prodigious a Principle
and Proceeding: they having been urged by necessity to use a supreme
Magistrate, though for time limited, yet exempt from Question and Trial:
whereof the ancient State of Rome gives us frequent Examples. No man sure is so
mad as to search our Chronicles for a president of this Nature.

The consideration of Scotland will have a large share in this Affair: for the
Regal Rule can receive no diminution, much less alteration here, but that it
must make a notable impression on that State; and can have no other event but a
disunion of the Nations; the union of which has ever been so much considered
and vehemently desired by all our prudentest Princes, and by the most fortunate
Martialists of them, (with so much fruitless loss of blood) often attempted,
yet afterward by Gods providence so happily effected, and in a most peacable
manner, to the universal contentment of all sorts in both Nations. It Is not
possible there can be an Union of Nations, where there is a dissimilitude in
the Nature and Form of Government; for they will perpetually strive one with
another. Nor can a violence upon the person of the King but prepare a way to
let Scotland into a Quarrel undeniably just, and unavoidably necessary, for the
loss of their Liege Lord and Lawful Sovereign, and unconsulted with. To this
Consideration of Scotland, i will join that of Ireland. It Is apparent that the
Army will have more than their hands full (if Scotland) slept with the
vexations and difficulties that will arise here at home. For of the Commons
house (which you call) the representative of the people, an eighth part remains
not, with any countenance for the Army; nor those neither does the awe of the
Army retain united to one sense; Take also into the reckoning those, who have
been expelled the House for adhering to the King in this War, which at least
will be four or five parts more: the remaining part of the Lords have
disclaimed to have any share in such proceeding. So that by this Index of this
Nation you may see the Spirit of the whole body of it, the Nobility, Gentry,
all persons of distinction, and all of any competent subsistence: and I am
persuaded, (besides the unsuccessful Trial that has been made of some persons
practiced and learned in the Laws,) even those of your late selected Jury or
Judges for the Kings Trial, will fail the Promoters of it. Indeed all things
refuse them; and doubtless so will you too, when calmly and recollectedly you
shall cast your eye upon so horrible a spectacle, you cannot let it long rest
there. We then thus turmoil'd and disquieted, Ireland will be left to it self;
or rather worse, a prey to a Foreign Nation: a large Kingdom, the fertilest
soil of the Northern parts of Europe, happy beyond England for number and
convenience of Ports and Havens: so that inevitably with it the destruction of
the Empire of this Nation over the Seas, and the cessation of Trade must ensue;
and after it, unspeakable Misery and Poverty to our Nation, and Eternal infamy
to the causers of it.

Very considerable also is the fashion and shape of the proceeding, which (they
say) is intended against his Majesty; so ugly, monstrous, and deformed, that
when it appears upon the stage to act, the horror of it will irritate the whole
Nation to revenge. What? (for it is not otherwise apprehended) that a Council
of War of that Army, that profess to act under, and by the Authority of the two
Houses, should impose Rules to judge by, and Judges for those rules too upon
those whom they have professed to be their Legislators; and that for the Trial
(by their own acknowledgment) of the dignifiedst Person of the Kingdom;
therefore not more than any other submittable to an Arbitrary Power, and
Extrajudicial Proceeding. Who is it that after this can expect security of
Life, or quiet possesion of any thing he has? It is said (but who almost can
believe it?) that a Title is derived from Revelation and Inspiration: If it
were but talk, it were but ridiculous, and would be thought so simple, that it
would not be condemned as guilty of malice: but to act under such a notion,
were a plain confession that all other Titles are insufficient. Nay, if it be
but mingled with any other pretensions, the pestilent quality of it would
poison all the rest: and, believe it, the dropping of such expressions, by the
unsobrest of those that call themselves of your Party, has incredibly
discredited those who are indeed well-advised. Away with it then, as that which
will bring the certainest and suddenest destruction; as that which will enrage
the whole Nation to a furious vindication of themselves, from being considered
as such a silly generation of people, that should be cousened out of their
good, knowu, and established Laws; and in the place of them, suffer themselves
to be imposed upon by Imaginations and Dreams, which every morning must be
declared to the foregoing nights legislative power. The people do already take
themselves to be scornful mocked, that they must be stigmatized with the
defamation of so impiom an act, as a violence offered to the Life of their
Sacred and Anointed King; and that the Act of so slight a part of their
Trustees must redound to their shame; who shunning the light of Established
Rules, which would have guided them, (the paths they expected they should have
walked in) do in this so palpably wander from their trust, and the sense of
those who trusted them; and that so inconsiderable a part of them should set up
a figment of fancy to be idolized. Consider the Commons House (if yet it may be
so called) allow (which cannot be refused) the Knights to be the
Representatives of the Shires, which truly is the main of the people, you shall
not find Knights for the tenth County in England, I am persuaded, not a far
smaller proportion: Is it then possible that men shall believe against sense
and evident demonstration, that the people incline to you; nay, that they are
not diametrically opposite and bent against you? We read that God, as an
expression of his gracious favor to his Church, has promised, that Kings and
Queens shall be nursing Fathers and Mothers of his Church; But that his Church
should set up new forms or any forms of Trial, to execute their own Kings and
Queens, is monstrous and unknown to Religion, is less than an idle dream, it is
the fiction of a dream, and so it will be esteemed not deducible out of the
sacred Scriptures; defamatory to the Christian profession, and the nearest way
to introduce Paganism or Mahumetanisme, their Prophet practicing such
delusions. So that hereby, as Christians, is all Europe engaged, as
Protestants, all of our belief, either in this or other Nations.

The last consideration that impedes the mutation of the Government is the
person of the King: which we find does unavoidably mix it self with all the
former considerations; so that the discourse of the one, will not be without
the aid of the other. Yet this following has somewhat more in it. It Is This
King, such a King, so conspicuously virtuous and sufficient; therefore (it must
be acknowledged) that has a right apprehension and clear vision of the true
Interest of Kingship, which is the peace and prosperity of his people; A Prince
of undaunted resolution and clear courage, therefore not vindicative, and far
above base Revengers. Example me in any one person, of any vindication, or
disrespect, that the King can be charged with.

I Will give you many instances of his placability and readiness to be reconciled
(let me in a short parenthesis give you this advertisement; Revenge is to be
doubted from the people, not from the King; He alone must be, can be your
security; upon such a Prince you may rely:) A Prince of exemplary devotion and
sobriety, therefore dear to all persons so qualified. It Is This King during
whose happy days, (no less than 17 years) in which he quietly possessed and
ruled the Scepter, such an inward tranquillity was joined to such a security
from without, and both accompanied with such an opulency* that no period of
like time, with the like felicity, have the former ages delivered over to us.
And it is no impertinent question to ask; whether ever any other Nation ever
enjoyed the like. I am persuaded (and that upon no ill grounds of conjecture,)
were it in the power of the Nation to elect out of the Catalogue of all their
Kings, the Spirit of which of them they would have rest upon this; if they
wished Him the fortune of Henry the Fifth, yet they would not refuse his own
virtues, for the most signal of any of the former: So notable an impression
does the memory of the peaceable part of his Reign make upon the affections of
his people: And such an horror and aversion has the disquiet thereof wrought
in them to any other form of rule, that they look upon their tormentours as
Salamanders, that only live and are cherished by the flames, that have scorched
them. Is it not now high time then to stop and make a halt? Is there not enough
done to satiate the vanity, and quench the thirst after military renown, when
you have vanquished your Compatriots and fellow Citizens, and under such a
Prince: Look upon the brink of what a dreadful precipice you are; and let this
last, and those other considerations be seriously revolved by you: To which
being added those weights, which your own judgment can cast into the scales,
undoubtedly you will see that there is a wide distance between making a
conquest over a people, (of which their own differences will lay claim to the
greatest share, and governing them contrary to their own appetites by so small
a part of themselves; and that means are easilier found and readier at hand to
desolate and disorder States, than such as shall compose and rule them, various
to long ingrafted customs, and their own inclinaons. Invisa Imperia nunquam
retinentur diu. Hated rule is never long lived. Methinks you cannot well avoid
the observation that the most perspicacious and sagacious persons of your
party, who with a wonderful stedfastness and undismayedness have kept company
with you in your counsels and affairs, and in the greatest hazards (for you
have not always been without such,) do herein, and in this action, and in this
highest time of your power and prosperity, not only make a stop, but avowedly
withdraw themselves, and declare against it, no doubt but very evidently
foreseeing the fatality of such an enormous and unparalleled attempt. But the
imagination that some have, that this design will be carried on by dispatching
the King out of the way, excluding the Prince and Duke of York, (both now out
of the Realm) and setting up the Duke of Gloucester, until the people are
better seasoned by this new fashion of Government, is such a mockery, that it
cannot be believed, but the most purblind understanding will see all the shapes
of the design, when it stands but behind so slender a thread. This will not do
the feat, nor will the people of this age be so deluded: wherein there are but
too many (for the public peace,) that understand Arts and Policies of State,
or, at least, would have it so thought.

Upon the prospect of these foregoing considerations, (and there want not
others important) draw a short state of the whole affair; and it will be thus,
or little otherwise. At the present, you of the Army stand high, but naked,
unloved; the bulk of the people that assists you, small; they are, to speak of,
all in one cluster, the Army; and that not all ripe for such designs: through
the Kingdom they are so thinly disseminated, that the appearance of them by the
eye is scarcely discernable; and lastly, to deal frankly with you, (because
their temper in your affair, will make a notable impression,) for the greater
number a vertiginous and giddy generation, that will never suffer quiet to
themselves, you, nor others. The opposites to these, are the most prudent
constituted form of Rules the World has known; a vast number of people wedded
to it, the matter therefore irreconcilable, no example friendly to you, all
Potentates made Parties against you; the certain disunion of Scotland with
England; the damage and infamy for the loss of Ireland; the Defamation of
Christian Religion, more especially of the Protestant Professors; and lastly,
the Person of a most Excellent Prince, loved, reverenced, and desired by the
Generality of his People. Besides all these, and others that are obvious to the
commonest Understandings; trust me, no mortal Man can have a Prevision of the
future vexations, which such a Regicide, such a Parricide will bring to the
persons, affairs, and designments of the Army; if a Prognostic may be made by
the Rules of Reason, by the constant course of Human Actions, by the
Conjunction of the present Affairs of this Kingdom. It is the certain
Expectation of all sober Men, that Jacob followed not Esau closer by the Heel,
than the Armies Destruction will that of such an Inhuman Act of Violence upon
the Sacred Person of the King. What then, in the Name of God, is it, that
hinders you, answerable to Reason, suitable to Duty, and agreeable to Piety,
from making haste to join your self to the Law, and to agnize that Prince, whom
the Laws and Ordinance of God have set over you? Obey then the Municipal Law,
under which you were born, that has nourished and cherished you; restore it,
promote it all you can; reverence that Prince, into whose Custody God has
committed both the Laws, and your self; who, I doubt not, will find it most
Convenient to employ your self, and the sobrest of your Party, in the
eminentest Administrations under Him: And verily, I wish it. Nor do I think it
in any degree reprehensible for you, or any other, to observe the Physicians
Rule, Accipe dum dolet: Take this Opportunity of the present anguish of the
King and Kingdom; restore it to its former Habit of Quiet and Peace. There is
none that will grudge you such sober commodity, as may arrive to you by it. But
with such manner of Discourses I will not detain you, lest I should thereby
mis-lead you into a false Opinion of Me.

My Principles, according to the Temper of these Times, are very remote from
Self-safety; or to employ ungenerous Flatteries for it. Know this assuredly,
that I firmly believe, that an Established Magistracy is God's immediate
Minister; nor can it be deposed by those that owe Obedience and Subjection to
it, without the highest Guilt of Impiety: And that this is a Verity so plainly
held forth to us by the sacred Scriptures, (as an Ordinance employed by God,
for the Manifestation of his Power and Goodness, in the Conservation of Human
Communion and Society) that the conscientious Sufferers for it, may expect a
Crown of Martyrdom by it. That this Government is a Monarchy, and His Majesty
the Right and Lawful King, has not a colorable Objection to gainsay it. Read
the Act of Recognition, 1 Jac. calmly done by the whole Parliament, and
unanimously pursued by the whole Nation, at a Season and Opportunity that might
have encouraged Pretenses, if any could have been found. How happens it, that
the Lawfulness of Regal Rule is questioned? Search the Scriptures. God it is,
that owns their Charter: He it is, that gave it them. Per me Reges regnant,
(Prove. 8. 15.) not Per nos. It Is no Plurality they hold by. Where Solomon
speaks in the Person of the Eternal Wisdom; thereby to advertise us of (no
doubt) greater Reverence and Circumspection. God himself appoints Moses the
first Prince of the Politic State of the Jews; after him Joshua, etc. Is it
the Title and Hereditary Succession of Kings you look for? See then, God
himself chooses Saul; afterward guides the Lot; lastly, follows the
Publication and Acknowledgment of the People. Afterward God rejects that
Dynasty, and by especial Command fixes David; whom, by like Appointment,
Solomon succeeds: And from him continued that Family in the Rule, in the Eldest
Son of that Family. Yet is the Person so sacred, so delicate, that no violent
Hand must come near to approach it. Wherein are the Scriptures more plain and
express, than in this Particular, Touch not mine Anointed? David, before he was
a King, and persecuted by a King, Who can (says he) stretch forth his Hand
against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 24. 5, 6. Multitude of
Texts there are, that both justify the Dignity, and enjoin Reverence to the
Person. And conformably it has been the avowed Doctrine and Practice of the
Church in all Ages, even under Heathen Princes.

It Is an Argument too copious, for a Paper to contain the Reasons and Instances
for it; rather indeed is it too manifest, to be disputed. Has not God coupled
the Fear due to Himself, with the Duty of Reverence toward the King? Prove. 24.
21, 22. My Son, Fear thou the Lord, and the King, (in conjunction) meddle not
with them that are given to Change. Mix not with such Machinators; for a like
end shall be to the Offenders against both, Destruction.

Sir, My Conclusion shall be very plain, because you may thereby be the better
assured of my sincerity in all the rest. The ancient Constitutions and present
Laws of this Kingdom, are my Inheritance and Birthright: If any shall think to
impose upon me that which is worse than Death, which is the profane and
dastardly parting from these Laws, I will choose the less Evil, which is Death.
I have also a Right in Kingship, that Protector of those Laws: This is also, by
a Necessity and Conjunction with that other, dearer to me than Life. And
lastly, in This King is my present Right; and also Obligations of inestimable
Favors received from him. I would to God, my Life could be a Sacrifice, to
preserve His. Could you make it an Expedient to serve That End, truly I would
pay you more Thanks for it, than you will allow your self for all your other
Merits, from those you have most obliged; and dye

Your most Affectionate Friend,

Postscript.
SIR,
I Add this Postscript. When with the most unheard of, and highest Violation
of all Laws, Human and Divine, of Morality and Sanctity, both upon the Person
of the King, and Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, so execrable an Act is
perpetrated, let the profit of it to the Actors be summed up, it amounts to
nothing more than this, That a King is escaped out of their present Possession;
But the succeeding King obliged by all the Ties of Religion, Nature, Duty, and
Honor, encouraged with all the Irritations of this Nation, Scotland, and
Ireland; fortified by the Interests of all Christian Princes and States to
animate and aid him, for his Revenge upon the Actors. I am not guilty of so
implacable and inveterate Malice, as to wish that the Contrivers of this
Villainy might pursue a Counsel, that shall draw such sharp Revenges, and
infallible Destruction upon themselves. But truly I think that those, who have
been, or are their veriest Friends, and who have any Light of Understanding, or
Motions of Conscience, will never forgive them so outrageous a Folly, Madness,
and Wickedness.

I must confess, the present Proceedings torment me with terrible
Apprehensions: But truly, I cannot make my self believe, that God will permit
the Devil to draw Christian Protestant Professors unto the Consummation of so
detestable and impious a Fait. God of his infinite Mercy prevent it.

Enclosed in a Letter, thus:
SIR,
THis short Letter has no other Errand, but to excuse that longer, which is
enclosed. I pray read it over, though it comes from a Person that is not proper
to apply himself to You; and using an Instrument (a Pen) not suitable to my
Genius. But believe it, it is the extremity of this present Occasion extorts it
from me. God guide you, and recall you, if you are engaged in this horrid
Proceeding. I rest,

Tower, Jan. 15. 1648. SIR, Your humble Servant.

A Letter written to his Lady the Day before his Suffering.
My dearest Life,
MY greatest Care in relation to the World, is for thy dear self: But I beseech
thee, that as thou have never refused my Advice hitherto, do thou now
consummate all in this One. And indeed, it is so important both for Thee, Me,
and all our Children, that I presume Passion shall not overruled thy Reason,
nor my Request. I beseech Thee again and again, moderate thy Apprehension and
sorrows for me; and preserve thy self to the Benefit of our dear Children; whom
God, out of his love to us in Christ Jesus, has given us: And our dear Mall,
(in the Case she is in) and our Comforts in that Family depend entirely upon
thy preservation. I pray remember, that the Occasion of my Death will give Thee
more cause to celebrate my Memory with praise, rather than to consider it with
sadness. God has commanded my Obedience to the Fifth Commandment; and for
acting that Duty I am condemned. God multiply all comforts to Thee. I shall
leave Thee my dear Children: In them I live with Thee; and leave Thee to the
protection of a most gracious God. And I rest

Thy, etc.

Another written the same Day he suffered.
My dearest Life,
MY Eternal Life is in Christ Jesus, My Worldly Considerations in the highest
Degree Thou have deserved. Let me live long here in thy dear Memory, to the
Comfort of my Family, our dear Children, whom God out of Mercy in Christ has
bestowed upon us. I beseech Thee, take care of thy Health. Sorrow not
unsoberly, unusually. God be unto Thee better than an Husband; and to my
Children, better than a Father. I am sure, He is able to be so; I am confident,
He is graciously pleased to be so. God be with Thee, my most virtuous Wife: God
multiply many comforts to Thee, and my Children, is the fervent Prayer of

Thy, etc.

A Letter to Mr. E. S. from a Reverend and Grave Divine.
SIR,
I Hope this Paper will find you upon your Recovery: You have my daily and
hearty Prayers for it; not so much for your own sake, (for I doubt not, but it
would be much better for you, in regard of your self, to be dissolved, and be
with Christ) but in the behalf of the Church, your Friends, and poor Family; to
which notwithstanding be assured, God will be merciful, howsoever he disposes
of you, either for this Life, or for a better. But if you live, (as I pray, and
hope you will) you shall do very well to write the Life and Death of that Noble
Lord, and Blessed Martyr, who professed at his Death, That he died for the
Fifth Commandment: And to die in the Defense, and for the Testimony of any
Divine Truth, is truly and properly to be a Martyr.

That which I can contribute toward this Work is, to communicate some few
Observations I made of him, and from him, before and after his Condemnation. I
was several times with him, and always found him in a very cheerful and
well-composed Temper of Mind; proceeding from true Christian Grounds, and not
from a Roman Resolution only (as his Enemies are pleased to speak of him.) He
told me often, It was the Good God he served, and the Good Cause he had served
for, that made him not to fear Death: Adding, He had never had the Temptation
of so much as a thought, to check him for his Engagement in this Quarrel; for
he took it for his Crown and Glory; and wished he had a greater Ability, and
better Fortune to engage in it.

After his Condemnation, and the Afternoon before his suffering, we were a
great while in private together; when, bewailing with that Sense which became a
true (and not despairing) Penitent, the sins of his Life past, the greatest he
could remember was his Voting my Lord of Strafford's Death: which though (as he
said) he did without any Malice at all, yet he confessed it to be a very great
sin; and that he had done it out of a base Fear (they were his own words) of a
prevailing party: Adding, That he had very often, and very heartily repented of
it; and was confident of God's Pardon for it.

Then he told me, He had a great desire to receive the Blessed Sacrament (so he
called it) before he died the next Morning; asking, What Divine of the King's
Party I would recommend to him? I replied, That (though many were more worthy,
yet) none would be more willing to do him that Service than my self. Which he
accepting very kindly, told me, He durst not desire it; for fear it might be
some danger to me. After this, and some Conference in order to his preparation,
both for his Viaticum, and his Voyage, the Sacrament and his Death; he desired
me to pray with him. Which after I had performed, and promised to be with him
by seven the next Morning, I left him for that time to his own Devotions.

The next Day I was there at the time assigned; and after some short Conference
in order to the present Occasion) he desired me to hear him pray: which he did
for half an hour in an excellent Method, very apt Expressions, and most strong,
hearty, and passionate Affections: First, Confessing and bewailing his sins
with strong Cries and Tears: Then humbly and most earnestly desiring God's
Mercy, through the Merits of Christ only. Secondly, For his dear Wife and
Children, with some passion; but for her especially, with most ardent
Affections: recommending them to the Divine Providence with great Confidence
and Assurance; and desiring for them rather the Blessings of a Better Life,
than of This. Thirdly, For the King, Church, and State. And lastly, For his
Enemies, with almost the same Ardour and Affection.

After this sending for my Lord of Norwich, and Sir John Owen, I read the whole
Office of the Church for Good Friday: and then, after a short Homily I used for
the present Occasion, we received the Sacrament. In which Action he behaved
himself with great Humility, Zeal, and Devotion. And being demanded after we
had done, how he found himself; he replied, Very much better, stronger, and
cheerfuller for that Heavenly Repast; and that he doubted not to walk like a
Christian through the Vale of Death, in the Strength of it. But he was to have
an Agony before his Passion; and that was the parting with his Wife, Eldest
Son, Son-in-Law, two of his Uncles, and Sir T. C. especially the parting with
his most dear Lady; which indeed was the saddest spectacle that ever I beheld.
In which Occasion he could not choose but confess a little of Humane Frailty;
yet even then he did not forget both to comfort and counsel her, and the rest
of his Friends; particularly, in blessing the young Lord, he commanded him
never to revenge his Death, though it should be in his Power: The like he said
unto his Lady. He told his Son, He would leave him a Legacy out of David's
Psalms, and that was this; Lord, lead me in a plain Path. For, Boy, (said he) I
would have you a plain honest Man, and hate Dissimulation.

After this, with much ado I persuaded his Wife, and the rest to be gone: and
then being all alone with me, he said, Doctor, the hardest part of my Work in
this World, is now past; meaning the parting with his Wife.

Then he desired me to pray preparatively to his Death, that in the last Action
he might so behave himself, as might be most for God's Glory, for the endearing
of his Dead Master's Memory, his Present Master's Service; and that he might
avoid the doing or saying of any thing, which might favor either of vanity, or
sullenness.

This being done, they were all carried to Sir Robert Cotton's House; where I
was with him, till he was called unto the Scaffold, and would have gone up with
him; but the Guard of Soldiers would not suffer me.

AT the same time with the Lord Capel, there suffered (as is aforementioned,
James Hamilton (who was likewise Earl of Cambridge) and Henry Earl of Holland,
who were both condemned by the same pretended High Court of Justice, together
with George Lord Goring, and Sir John Owen, who were pardoned; The Names of
which pretended High Court were as follows,
A List of the Names of the Judges of the High Court of Justice, for the Trial
of James Earl of Cambridge, Henry Earl of Holland, George Lord Goring, Arthur
Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen, Knight.
Appointed by an Act of the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.
John Bradshaw Serj. at Law. Rich. Keable Serj. at Law. Jo. Pulliston Serj. at
Law. Matthew Shepherd. Will. Underwood. Jo. Hayes. Geo. Langham. George
Manley. Jo. Langley. Sam. Moys. Morris Tompson. Richard Shute. Mark Hildersley.
Thomas Allen. Daniel Tailor. Edmund Warring. Nathanael Lacey. Jo. Stone.
Cornelius Cook. William Wybeard. Jo. Blackwell Esquire James Prince. Nathanael
Whettam. Silvanus Tailor. Thomas Airs. Edward Cresset. William Penoyre Esquire Sir
Edward Barkham Barrester. Ralph Harrison. Maximillian Beard. Sir William Roe.
Fra. Hacker Esquire Jo. Whitby. John Harrison. Richard Downs. Sparrow. William
Webb. Thomas Cook. Robert Titchbourn. George Cooper. Owen Roe. Thomas Pride.
Jo. Huson. Thomas Sanders Esquire Thomas Titchbourn Esquire Thomas Anarews Alder^.
William Spence. Nicholas Martin. Josias Barnars. Hardwick. Robert Norwood.
Stevin Estwick. Thomas Nowell. Thomas Arnold. Thomas Brown Esquire Thomas Air.
William Barlet Esquire Sir Jo. Throughgood Knight. Vincent Potter. William Parker.
Solomon Smith. Hubberd Esquire; Sir Rich. Saltingstall Knight. Sampson Sheffeild. Esquire
You and every of you are required to appear upon Monday the fifth of this
instant Febr. in the morning by nine of the Clock in the Painted Chamber at
Westminster, for the putting into Execution an Act of Parliament, for the
erecting of an High Court of Justice for the trying and adjudging of James Earl
of Cambridge, Henry Earl of Holland, George Lord Goring, Arthur Lord Capel, and
Sir John Owen, Knight. Hereof the Subscribers are ordered to give notice, and
therefore desire you not to fail herein.

Given under our hands this third day of Feb. Anno Dom. 1648. Luke Robinson.
Nicho. Love. J. Sarland.


The several Speeches of Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of Holland,
and the Lord Capell, immediately before their Execution upon the Scaffold in
the Palaceyard Westminster, on Friday March 9. 1649.
Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, his Speech on the Scaffold, March 9, 1649.
UPon Friday the ninth of this instant, being the day appointed for the
Execution of the sentence of Death upon the Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of
Holland, and the Lord Capel, about ten of the Clock that morning, L. Col.
Beecher came with his Order to the several Prisoners at St. James's, requiring
them to come away; according to which Order they were carried in Sedans, with a
Guard to Sir Thomas Cottons House at Westminster, where they continued about
the space of two hours, passing away most of that time in Religious and
seasonable conferences with the Ministers, there present with them. After
which, being called away to the Scaffold, it was desired, that before they
went, they might have the opportunity of commending their Souls to God by
prayer, which being readily granted, and the room voided, Mr. Bolton was
desired by the Lord of Holland to take that pains with them, which was
accordingly done with great appearance of solemn Affections among them. Prayer
being concluded, and hearty thanks returned by them all to the Ministers who
performed, as also to the rest who were their Assistants in this sad time of
trouble; The Earl of Cambridge prepared first to go toward the place of
Execution; and after mutual Embraces, and some short Ejaculatory Expressions
to, and for his Fellow Sufferers, he took his leave of them all, and went along
with the Officers, attended upon by Dr. Sibbald, whom he had chosen for his
Comforter in this his sad Condition.

The Scaffold being erected in the new Palace-yard at Westminster over against
the great Hall-Gate, in the sight of the place where the High-Court of Justice
formerly sat (the Hall-doors being open;) there was his excellencies Regiment
of Horse commanded by Capt. Disher, and several Companies of Col. Hewsons and
Col. Prides Regiments of Foot drawn up in the place: When the Earl came from
Westminster Hall near the Scaffold, he was met by the Undersheriff of
Middlesex, and a Guard of his Men, who took the charge of him from Lient. Col.
Beecher, and the Partisans that were his Guard; The Sheriff of London being
also, according to command from the High Court of Justice, present, to see the
Execution performed.

The Earl of Cambridge being come upon the Scaffold, and two of his own
Servants waiting upon him, he first spoke to the Doctor as follows,

E. of Camb. Whether shall I pray first?


Dr. Sibbald. As your Lordship pleases.


E. of Camb. My Lord of Denbigh has sent to speak with me.

I know not the fashion, I may ask you Sir; Do those Gentlemen expect I should
say any thing to them, or no? They cannot hear.


Dr. Sibbald. There will be a greater silence by and by. It will not be amiss
if your Lordship defer your speaking till you hear from his Lordship.


Camb. There is something in it. He was with the House.


Dr. Sibbald. I suppose he would give no interruption to your Lordship, at this
time, were there not something of concernment in it.


Camb. He is my Brother, and has been a very faithful Servant to the State, and
he was in great esteem and reputation with them.

He is in the Hall, and sent to speak with a servant of mine to send something
to me.


Sibbald. It will not lengthen the time much if you stay while you have a
return from him. My Lord, you should do well to bestow your time now in
meditating upon, and imploring of the free mercy of God in Christ for your
Eternal Salvation, and look upon that everstreaming Fountain of his precious
Blood, that purges us from all our sins, even the sins of the deepest die: the
Blood of Jesus Christ washes away all our sins, and that Blood of Christ is
poured forth upon all such as by a lively faith lay hold upon him: God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; that is now, my
Lord, the Rock upon which you must chiefly rest, and labor to fix your self in
the free mercy of God through Christ Jesus, whose mercies are from Everlasting
to Everlasting, unto all such, as with the eye of Faith behold him; behold
Jesus the Author and Finisher of your Salvation, who has satisfied the Justice
of God by that all sufficiency of his Sacrifice, which once for all he offered
upon the Cross for the sins of the whole world, so that the sting of Death is
taken away from all Believers, and he has sanctified it as a passage to
Everlasting Blessedness: It is true, the Waters of Jordan run somewhat rough
and surly betwixt the Wilderness and our passage into Canaan, but let us rest
upon the Ark (my Lord) the Ark Christ Jesus, that will carry us through, and
above all those Waves to that Rock of Ages, which no Flood nor Waves can reach
unto; and to him who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, against whom
the Powers and Principalities, the Gates of Hell shall never be able to
prevail; lift up and fasten your eyes now upon Christ crucified, and labor to
behold Jesus stand at the right hand of his Father, (as the Protomartyr
Stephen) ready to receive your Soul, when it shall be separated from this frail
and mortal Body: Alas, no man would desire Life, if he knew beforehand what it
were to live, it is nothing but sorrow, vexation and trouble, grief and
discontent that waits upon every condition, whether public or private; in
every station and calling there are several miseries and troubles that are
inseparable from them; therefore what a blessed thing it is to have a speedy
and comfortable passage out of this raging Sea, into the Port of Everlasting
Happiness. We must pass through a Sea, but it is the Sea of Christ's Blood, in
which never Soul suffered Shipwreck, in which we must be blown with Winds and
Tempests, but they are the gales of Gods Spirit upon us, which blow away all
contrary Winds of diffidence in his mercy.


Here one acquainting the Earl, his Servant was coming, he answered, So Sir;
And turning to the under-Sheriffs Son, said,

Cambridge. Sir, you have a Warrant here?


Sheriff. Yes, My Lord, we have a Command.


Cambridge. A Command.

I take this time, Sir, of staying, in regard of the Earl of Denbighs sending
to speak with me, I know not for what it is he desires me to stay.


Dr. Sibbald. I presume Mr. Sheriff will not grudge your Lordship a few minutes
time, when so great a work as this is in hand.


His Lordships Servant being returned, and having delivered his message to the
Earl of Cambridge privately, he said; So; it is done now: and then turning to
the front of the Scaffold, before which (as in all the rest of the places)
there was a great concourse of people, he said;

Cambridg. I think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much, there
are many Gentlemen and Soldiers there that see me, but my voice truly is so
weak, so low that they cannot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any time so
much in love with speaking, or with any thing I had to express, that I took
delight in it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a divine
Providence of Almighty God, who has brought me to this end justly for my sins;
I shall to you Sir, Mr. Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter that I am
now to suffer for, which is as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of England:
Truly, Sir, it was a Country that I equally loved with my own, I made no
difference; I never intended either the generality of its prejudice, or any
particular man's in it: what I did was by the Command of the Parliament of the
Country where I was born, whose Commands I could not disobey, without running
into the same hazard there of that condition that I am now in: The ends, Sir,
of that Engagement is public, they are in Print, and so I shall not need to
specify them.


Dr. Sibbald. The Sun perhaps will be too much in your Lordships face, as you
speak.


Cambridge: No Sir, it will not burn it. I hope I shall see a brighter Sun than
this, Sir, very speedily.


Dr. Sibbald. The Sun of Righteousness my Lord.


Cambridg. (But to that which I was saying Sir.) It pleased God so to dispose
that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and I, as their General clothed
with a Commission, stand here now ready to dye; I shall not trouble you with
repeating of my Plea; what I said in my own Defense at the Court of JUSTICE, my
self being satisfied with the Commands that is laid upon me, and they satisfied
with the Justness of their procedure; according to the Laws of this Land. God
is just, and howsoever I shall not say any thing as to the matter of the
sentence, but that I do willingly submit to his Divine Providence, and I
acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a worldly punishment, as well as
hereafter; for we are all sinful, Sir, and I a great one: yet for my comfort, I
know there is a God in Heaven that is exceeding merciful; I know my Redeemer
sits at his Right Hand, and am confident, (clapping his hand to his Breast) is
Mediating for me at this instant; I am hopeful through his Free Grace, and
allsufficient merits, to be pardoned of my sins, and to be received into his
mercy; upon that I rely, trusting to nothing but the Free Grace of God through
Jesus Christ: I have not been tainted with my Religion, I thank God for it,
since my infancy, it has been such as has been professed in the Land, and
established; and now it is not this Religion, or that Religion, or this or that
Fancy of men that is to be built upon; it is but one that is right, one that is
sure, and that comes from God. Sir, and in the Free Grace of our Savior. Sir,
there is truly something that ( Observing the Writers.
had I thought my Speech would have been thus taken) I would have digested it
into some better method than now I can, and shall desire these Gentlemen that
do write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that it may not in this
manner be published to my disadvantage, for truly I did not intend to have
spoken thus when I came here.

There is, sirs, terrible aspersions has been laid upon my self, truly such as
I thank God, I am very free from; as if my actions and intentions had not been
such as they were pretended for; but that notwithstanding what I pretended it
was for the King, there was nothing less intended than to serve him in it. I
was bred with him for many years, I was his Domestic Servant, and there was
nothing declared by the Parliament, that was not really intended by me; and
truly in it I ventured my Life one way, and now I lose it another way; and that
was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that; because the rest has
many particulars, and to clear my self from so horrid an aspersion as is laid
upon me: neither was there any other design known to me by the incoming of the
Army, then what is really in the Declaration published. His person, I do
profess, I had reason to love, as he was my King, and as he had been my Master,
it has pleased God now to dispose of him, so as it cannot be thought flattery
to have said this; or any end in me for the saying of it, but to free my self
from that calumny which lay upon me: I cannot gain by it; yet Truth is that
which we shall gain by for ever.

There has been much spoken Sir, of an invitation into this Kingdom: it is
mentioned in that Declaration; and truly to that I did and do remit my self:
and I have been very much labored for discoveries of these Inviters, It Is no
time to dissemble. How willingly I was to have served this Nation in any thing
that was in my power, is known to very many honest, pious, and religious men;
and how ready I would have been to have done what I could to have served them,
if it had pleased them to have preserved my Life, in whose hands there was a
power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unuseful in that which
willingly I would have done. As I said at first, (Sir) so I say now concerning
that point; I wish the Kingdoms happiness, I wish it peace; and truly Sir, I
wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn; and howsoever I may
perhaps have some reluctance with my self, as to the matter of my Fact, for my
suffering for my Fact, yet I freely forgive all; Sir, I earry no rancour along
with me to my Grave; His Will be done that has created both Heaven and Earth,
and me a poor miserable sinful Creature now speaking before him. For me to
speak (Sir) to you of State-business, and the Government of the Kingdom, or my
opinion in that, or for any thing in that nature, truly it is to no end, it
contributes nothing; My own inclination has been to peace, from the beginning;
and it is known to many that I never was an ill instrument betwixt the King and
his people: I never acted to the prejudice of the Parliament; I bore no Arms, I
meddled not with it: I was not wanting by my Prayers to God Almighty for the
Happiness of the King; and truly I shall pray still that God may so direct him,
as that may be done which shall tend to his Glory, and the Peace and Happiness
of the Kingdom.

I have not much more to say that I remember of; I think I have spoken of my
Religion.


D. Sibbald. Your Lordship has not so fully said it.


Camb. Truly, I do believe I did say something


D. Sibbald. I know you did, it is pleasing to hear it from your Lordship again.


Camb. Truly, Sir, for the profession of my Religion, that which I said was the
established Religion, and that which I have practiced in my own Kingdom where I
was born and bred, my Tenants they need not to be expressed, they are known to
all, and I am not of a rigid Opinion, many Godly men there is that may have
scruples, which do not concern me at all at no time; they may differ in
Opinion, and now more than at any time, differing in Opinion does not move me
(not any man's) my own is clear. Sir, The Lord forgive me my sins, and I forgive
freely all those that even I might (as a worldly man) have the greatest
animosity against; We are bidden to forgive, Sir, It Is a command laid upon us
(and there mentioned,) Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.


D. Sibbald. It Is our Saviors rule, Love your Enemies, Bless them that curse
you, pray for them that persecute you, do good to them that despightfully use
you.


Camb. Sir, it is high time for me to make an end of this; and truly I remember
no more that I have to say, but to pray to God Almighty a few words, and then I
have done.


Then kneeling down with D. Sibbald, he prayed thus:

MOst Blessed Lord, I thy poor and most unworthy servant come unto thee,
presuming in thy infinite Mercy, and the Merits of Jesus Christ, who sits upon
the Throne; I come flying from that of Justice, to that of Mercy and
Tenderness, for his sake which shed his Blood for sinners, that he would take
compassion upon me, that he would look upon me as one that graciously hears me,
that he would look upon me as one that has Redeemed me, that he would look
upon me as one that has shed his Blood for me, that he would look upon me as
one who now calls and hopes to be saved by his all-sufficient merits For his
sake (glorious God) have compassion upon me in the freeness of thy infinite
mercy, that when this sinful soul of mine shall depart out of this frail
carcass of clay I may be carried into thy Everlasting Glory; O Lord, by thy
free Grace, and out of thy infinite mercy, hear me, and look down, and have
compassion upon me; and thou Lord Jesus, thou my Lord, and thou my God, and
thou my Redeemer, hear me, take pity upon me, take pity upon me, Gracious God,
and so deal with my soul, that by thy precious merits I may attain to thy joy
and bliss; O Lord, remember me, so miserable and sinful a Creature; now thou, O
Lord, thou (O Lord) that dyedst for me, receive me, and receive me into thine
own bound of mercy; O Lord, I trust in thee, suffer me not now to be
confounded; Satan has had too long possession of this soul, O let him not now
prevail against it, but let me (O Lord) from henceforth dwell with thee for
evermore.

Now, Lord, it is thy time to hear me, hear me Gracious Jesus, even for thy own
Goodness, Mercy and Truth; O Glorious God, O Blessed Father, O Holy Redeemer, O
Gracious Comforter, O Holy and Blessed Trinity, I do render up my soul into thy
hands, and commit it with the Mediation of my Redeemer; Praising thee for all
thy Dispensation, that it has pleased thee to confer upon me; and even for
this, Praise, and Honor, and Thanks, from this time forth, for evermore.

D. Sibbald. My Lord, I trust, you now behold with the Eye of Faith, the Son of
Righteousness shining upon your Soul, and will cheerfully submit unto Him who
has Redeemed us through his Blood, even the Blood of Jesus Christ; that you
may appear at the Tribunal of God, clothed with the White Robe of his
Unspotted Righteousness: The Lord grant, that with the Eye of Faith, you may
now see the Heavens opened, and Jesus Christ standing at the Right Hand of God,
ready to receive you into his Arms of Mercy.


Camb. Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Shall I put on another
Cap? Must this Hair be turned up from my Neck? There are Three of my Servants
to give Satisfaction.


D. Sibbald. My Lord, I hope you are able to give all that are about you
Satisfaction, you are assured that God is reconciled unto you through the Blood
of Christ Jesus, and the Spirit of the Lord witnesses to you, that Christ is
become now a Jesus unto you. My Lord, fasten the Eyes of your Faith upon Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of your Salvation, who himself was brought to a violent
Death for the Redemption of Mankind: He cheerfully submitted to his Father's
good Pleasure, in it, and for us. Blessed and Holy is he that has part (my
Lord) in the first Resurrection; that is, in the first Riser Jesus Christ, who
is both the Resurrection and the Life; Over him the Second Death shall have no
Power. It Is the unspeakable Joy of a Believer, that at the Hour of Death his
Soul has an immediate Passage from this earthly Tabernacle to that Region of
endless Glory; yea, to the Presence of God himself, in whose Presence is
fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.


Then the Earl of Cambridge turning to the Executioner, said, Which way is it
that you would have me lie, Sir?

Execut. The Executioner pointing to the Front of the Scaffold; the Earl
replied, What, my Head this way? Then the Undersheriffs Son said, My Lord, the
Order is, That you should lay your Head toward the High Court of Justice.


The Earl of Cambridge, after a little Discourse in private with some of his
Servants, kneeled down on the Side of the Scaffold, and prayed a while to
himself.

When he had finished his Prayer, D. Sibbald spoke to him thus:

My Lord, I humbly beseech God, that you may now with an Holy and Christian
Courage give up your Soul to the Hand of your faithful Creator, and gracious
Redeemer; and not be dismayed with any sad Apprehension of the Terrors of this
Death: And what a blessed and glorious Exchange you shall make within a very
few Minutes!


Then with a cheefful and smiling Countenance, the Earl embracing the Doctor in
his Arms, said:

Camb. Truly, Sir, I do take you in mine Arms; and truly, I bless God for it, I
do not fear: I have an Assurance, that is grounded here (laying his Hand upon
his Heart) now, that gives me more true Joy than ever I had. I pass out of a
miserable World, to go into an Eternal and Glorious Kingdom. And, Sir, though I
have been a most sinful Creature, yet God's Mercy I know is infinite; and I
bless my God for it, I go with so clear a Conscience, that I know not the Man
that I have personally injured.


D. Sibbald. My Lord, it is a mavelous great Satisfaction, that at this last
Hour you can say so; I beseech the Lord for his Eternal Mercy, strengthen your
Faith; that in the very moment of your Dissolution, you may see the Arms of the
Lord Jesus stretched out ready to receive your Soul.


Then the Earl of Cambridge embracing those his Servants which were there
present, said to each of them, You have been very faithful to me, and the Lord
bless you.

Camb. Then turning to the Executioner, said: I shall say a very short Prayer
to my God, while I lie down there; and when I stretch out my Hand (my Right
Hand) then, Sir, do your Duty: And I do freely forgive you; and so I do all the
World.


D. Sibbald. The Lord in great Mercy go along with You, and bring You to the
Possession of Everlasting Life, strengthening Your Faith in Jesus Christ. This
is a Passage, My Lord, a short Passage unto Eternal Glory. I hope, through the
Free Grace of Your gracious God, You are now able to say, O Death, where is thy
Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? And to make this comfortable Answer;
Blessed be God, blessed be God, who has given me an Assurance of Victory,
through Christ Jesus.


Then the Earl of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must I lie all along?

Execut. Yes, and't please your Lordship.


Camb. When I stretch out my Hands, -- But I will fit my Head; first tell me if
I be right, and how you would have me lie?


Execut. Your shirt must be pinned back, for it lies too high upon your
Shoulders. (Which was done accordingly.)


D. Sibbald. My Lord, Now, now lift up Your Eyes unto Jesus Christ; and cast
Your self now into the Everlasting Arms of Your gracious Redeemer.


Then the Earl having laid his Head over the Block, said; Is this right?

D. Sibbald. Jesus the Son of David, have Mercy upon You.


Execut. Lie a little lower, Sir.


Camb. Well, Stay then till I give you the Sign.


And so having lain a short space devoutly praying to himself, he stretched out
his Right Hand, whereupon the Executioner at one Blow severed his Head from his
Body; which was received by two of his Servants then kneeling by him, into a
Crimson Taffety Scarff, and that with the Body immediately put into a Coffin
brought upon the Scaffold for that purpose; and from thence conveyed to the
House that was Sir John Hamilton's, at the Mews.

This Execution being done, the Sheriffs Guard went immediately to meet the
Earl of Holland, which they did in the Midway between the Scaffold and
Westminster Hall; and the Under-Sheriffs Son having received him into his
Charge, conducted him to the Scaffold; he taking Mr. Balton all the way in his
Hand, passed all along to the Scaffold discoursing together: Upon which being
come, observing his Voice would not reach to the People, in regard the Guard
compassed the Scaffold, he said:

Henry Lord Rich, Earl of Holland, His Speech on the Scaffold, immediately
before his Death, March. 9. 1649.
Holland. IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here. Which way must
I speak? And then being directed to the front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over
the Rayls) said; I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me
to this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my Breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has ever
been faithful to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred,
in the which I have lived, and in the which by Gods Grace and Mercy I shall
dye. I have not lived according to that Education I had in that Family where I
was born and bred. I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive it is
very much his pleasure to bring me to this place, for the sins that I have
committed. The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been
much mistaken. They have conceived that I have had ill Designs to the State,
and to the Kingdom; Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment of
God, not but I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had no extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. For those Actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been ever very faithful to the Public, and very particularly to
Parliaments. My Affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them.
The dispositions of Affairs now have put things in another posture than they
were when I was engaged with the Parliament. I have never gone off from those
Principles that ever I have professed; I have lived in them, and by God's Grace
will die in them.

There may be Alterations and Changes that may carry them further than I
thought reasonable, and truly there I left them: But there has been nothing
that I have said; or done, or professed, either by Covenant or Declaration,
which has not been very constant, and very clear, upon the principles that I
ever have gone upon; which was, to serve the King, the Parliament, Religion, (I
should have said in the first place) the Commonwealth, and to seek the Peace of
the Kingdom; That made me think it no improper time, being pressed out by
Accidents and Circumstances, to seek the Peace of the Kingdom, which I thought
was proper, since there was something then in Agitation, but nothing agreed on
for sending Propositions to the King; that was the furthest aim that I had, and
truly beyond that I had no intention, none at all.

And God be praised, although my blood comes to be shed here, there was I think
scarce a drop of blood shed in that Action that I was engaged in. For the
present Affairs as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them; and truly they
are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of them;
and therefore I must make use of Prayers, rather than of my Opinion; which are,
That God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that he would
settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has been happily governed
under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons; a Government that I conceive it
has flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring not rather a
prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, than the contrary. I look upon the
Posterity of the King, and truly my Conscience directs me to it, to desire,
that if God, be pleased, that these people may look upon them with that
affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not
through blood, nor through disorder admitted again into that Power, and to that
Glory, that God in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my Soul
for the Happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the blood which is here
spilt, may even be the last that may fall among us; and truly I should lay down
my life with as much cheerfulness as ever Person did, if I conceived that there
would be no more blood follow us; for a State, or Affairs that are built upon
blood, is a Foundation for the most part that does not prosper.

After the Blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to the
Parliament, I do wish with all my Heart, Happiness, and a Blessing to all those
that have been Authors in this business; and truly, that have been Authors in
this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them, but I pray
heartily and really for them, as God will forgive my sins, so I desire God may
forgive them.

I have a particular relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge, and truly I
must here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University
may go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to
plant those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the souls of
the people may receive a great benefit, and a great advantage by them, and (I
hope) God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I have
found from them. Looking toward M. Bolton.
I have said what Religion I have been bred in, what Religion I have been born
in, what Religion I have practiced, I began with it, and I must end with it. I
told you that my Actions and my Life have not been agreeable to my Breeding. I
have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred, has been an Exemplary
Family (I may say so, I hope, without vanity) of much Affection to Religion,
and of much faithfulness to this Kingdom, and to this State, I have endeavored
to do those Actions that became an honest Man, and a good English man, and
which became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige those that have
been in trouble* those that have been in persecution, and truly, I find a great
reward of it; for I have found their Prayers, and their Kindness now in this
distress, and in this condition, and I think it a great reward, I pray God
reward them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my Prayers, to
give me faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an Eternal Life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
Execution, and the last Blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side-rayl, he prayed for a good space of time; after which Mr.
Bolton said:

My Lord, Now look upon him whom you have trusted. My Lord, I hope that here is
your last prayer, there will no more prayers remain, but praises; and I hope
that after this day is over, there will a day begin that shall never have end;
and I look upon this (my Lord) the morning of it, the morning of that day. My
Lord, You know where your fullness lies, where your riches lie, where is your
only rock to anchor on; you know there is fullness in Christ: If the Lord comes
not in with fullness of comfort to you, yet resolve to wait upon him while you
live, and to trust in him when you die; and then say, I will dye here, I will
perish at thy feet, I will be found dead at the feet of Jesus Christ.
Certainly, he that came to seek and save lost sinners, will not reject lost
sinners when they come to seek him; He that entreats us to come, will not
slight us when we come to entreat him. My Lord, there is enough there, and fix
your heart there, and fix your eyes there, that eye of Faith, and that eye of
Hope; exercise these Graces now, there will be no exercise hereafter.

As your Lordship said here take an end of Faith, and take an end of Hope, and
take a farewell of Repentance, and all these; and welcome God, and welcome
Christ, and welcome Glory, and welcome Happiness to all Eternity; and so it
will be an happy passage then, if it be a passage here from Misery to
Happiness. And though it be but a sad way, yet if it will bring you into the
presence of joy, although it be a Valley of Tears, although it be a Shadow of
Death, yet if God will please to bring you, and make it a passage to that
Happiness, welcome Lord. And I doubt not but God will give you an heart to
taste some sweetness and love in this bitter Potion, and to see something of
mercy and goodness to you, and show you some sign and token of good, so that
your soul may see that which we have had already of experience of (blessed be
God for it) many experiences, many expressions, not only in words, nor tears;
God has not left us without much comfort and evidence, and I hope (my Lord)
You that have given so many Evidences to us, I hope you want none Your self,
but that the Lord will be pleased to support You, and bear up your Spirit, and
if there want Evidence, there is reliance, my security lies not in my knowing
that I shall come to Heaven, and come to Glory but in my resting and relying
upon him, when the Anchor of Faith is thrown out, there may be shakings and
tossings, but there is safety; nothing shall interrupt safety, although
something may interrupt security: my safety is sure, although I apprehend it
not: and what if I go to God in the dark? What if I come to him, as Nicodemus
did, staggering in the night? It is a night of trouble, a night of darkness,
though I come trembling and staggering in this night, yet I shall be sure to
find comfort and fixedness in him. And the Lord of Heaven be the strength,
stay, and support of Your soul, and the Lord furnish you with all those Graces
which may carry You into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, that when You expire this
Life, You may be able to expire it into him, in whom You may begin to live to
all Eternity, and that is my humble prayer.


Holland. M. Bolton, God has given me long time in this World; he has carried
me through many great Accidents of Fortune, he has at last brought me down
into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a disaffection to
this State, to this Parliament, that (as I said before) I did believe no body
in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that cause; I look
upon it as a great judgment of God for my sins.

And truly, Sir, since that the Death is violent, I am the less troubled with
it, because of those violent deaths that I have seen before; principally my
Savior that has showed us the way, how and in what manner he has done it,
and for what cause, I am the more comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not
long since the King my Master passed in the same manner; and truly I hope that
his purposes and intentions were such, as a man may not be ashamed not only to
follow him in the way that was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his
purposes, if God had given him Life.

I have often disputed with him concerning many things of this kind, and I
conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge, and better understanding (if
God had spared him Life) might have made him a Prince very happy toward
himself, and very happy toward this Kingdom, I have seen and known that those
blessed Souls in Heaven have passed thither by the gate of sorrow, and many by
the gate of violence; and since it is Gods pleasure to dispose me this way, I
submit my Soul to him, with all comfort, and with all hope, that he has made
this my end, and this my conclusion, that though I be low in death, yet
nevertheless this lowness shall raise me to the highest glory for ever.

Truly, I have not said much in public to the people, concerning the
particular Actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdom,
I conceive they are well known, it were something of vanity (methinks,) to take
notice of them here: I Will rather die with them, with the comfort of them in my
own bosom, and that I never intended in this action, or any action that ever I
did in my Life, either Malice or Bloodshed, or prejudice to any Creature that
lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession before of it,
how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that was looked upon
to be no little notorious in opposition to some Liberties they have conceived
then to be taken; and truly, there was some mark upon me, as if I had some
taint of it, even throughout my whole way that I have taken: every body knows
what my Affections have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been
in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to relieve them, I endeavored to
oblige them, I thought I was tied so by my Conscience, I thought it by my
Charity, and truly, very much by my Breeding; God has now brought me to the
last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I can adhere unto, is
this; That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great Savior; that as he has
given me here a Fortune to come publicly in a show of shame in the way of this
Suffering (truly I understand it not to be so) I understand it to be a Glory; a
Glory, when I consider who has gone before me, and a Glory, when I consider I
had no end in it; but what I conceive to be the service of God, the King and
the Kingdom, and therefore my Heart is not charged much with any thing in that
particular, since I conceive God will accept of the intention, whatsoever the
action seems to be. I am going to dye, and the Lord receive my Soul; I have no
relyance but upon Christ: for my self, I do acknowledge that I am the
unworthiest of sinners; my Life has been a vanity, and a continued sin, and
God may justly bring me to this end, for the sins I have committed against him,
and were there nothing else but the iniquities that I have committed in the way
of my Life, I look upon this as a great Justice of God, to bring me to this
Suffering, and to bring me to this Punishment; And those Hands that have been
most active in it, if any such there has been, I pray God forgive them; I pray
God that there may not be many such Trophies of their Victories, but that this
may be (as I said before) the last Show, that this People shall see, of the
Blood of Persons of Condition, of Persons of Honor: I might say something of
the Way of our Trial, which certainly has been as extraordinary, as any thing
I think has ever been seen in this Kingdom; but because that I would not seem
as if I made some complaint, I will not so much as mention it, because no body
shall believe I repine at their Actions, that I repine at my Fortune; it is the
Will of God, it is the hand of God under whom I fall; I take it entirely from
him, I submit my self to him, I shall desire to roll my self into the Arms of
my Blessed Savior; and when I come to this Pointing to the Bl(...)k.
place, when I bow down my self there, I hope God will raise me up; and when I
bid farewell, as I must now to Hope and to Faith, that Love will abide; I know
nothing to accompany the Soul out of this World, but Love: and I hope that Love
will bring me to the Fountain of Glory in Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation,
and the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord help my
Unbelief.


Hodges. The Lord make over unto You the Righteousness of his own Son, it is
that Treasury that he has bestowed upon You; and the Lord show You the Light
of his Countenance, and fill You full with his joy and kindness. O my dear
Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth be with You, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth bring You to that Safety.


Holland. I shall make as much have as I can to come that Glory, and the Lord
of Heaven and Earth take my soul; I look upon my self entirely in Him, and hope
to find Mercy through Him, I expect it, and through that Fountain that is
opened for Sin and for Uncleanness, my Soul must receive it; for did I rest in
any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me: I have nothing but
that, which in stead of being carried up into the Arms of God, and of Glory, I
have nothing but may throw me down into Hell.


Bolton. But my Lord, when you are clothed with the Righteousness of another*
you will appear glorious, though now sinful in your self: The Apostle says, I
desire not to be found in my own righteousness, and when you are clothed with
another, the Lord will own you, and I shall say but thus much: Doubt not that
ever God will deny salvation to sinners, that come to him, when the end of all
his Death and Sufferings was the Salvation of Sinners, when as I say, the whole
end, and the whole design, and the great work, that God had to do in the world,
by the death of Christ, wherein he laid out all his counsels, and infinite
wisdom, and mercy, and goodness, beyond which there was a Non ultra in Gods
thoughts, when this was the great design, and great end, the salvation of
sinners, that poor Souls should come over to him and live: certainly when
sinners come he will not reject, he will not refuse.

And my Lord, do but think of this, the greatest work that ever was done in the
World, was the Blood of Christ that was shed, never any thing like it. And this
blood of Christ that was shed, never any thing like it: And this Blood of
Christ that was shed, was shed for them that come, if not for them, for none,
it was in vain else: you see the Devils they are out of capacity of good by it,
the Angels they have no need of it, wicked men will not come, and there are but
a few that come over, but a few that come over and should be deny them, there
were no end nor fruit of the Blood and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus: and had
your Lordship been with Christ in that bloody agony, when he was in that bloody
sweat, sweating drops of blood, if you had asked him, Lord, what art thou now a
doing, art thou not now reconciling an angry God and me together, art thou not
pacifying the Wrath of God? Art not thou interposing thy self between the
Justice of God, and my Soul? Would he not have said, yea? And surely then he
will not deny it now.

My Lord, His passions are over, his compassions still remain, and the larger
and greater, because he is gone up into a higher place, that he may throw down
more abundance of his mercy and grace upon you, and my Lord, think of that
infinite Love, that abundance of riches in Christ: I am lost, I am empty, I
have nothing, I am poor, I am sinful: be it so, as bad as God will make me, and
as vile as I possibly can conceive my self, I am willing to be: but when I have
said all, the more I advance that Riches, and Honor that Grace of God. And why
should I doubt, when by this he puts me into a capacity, into a disposition for
him to show me mercy, that by this I may the better advance the Riches of his
Grace, and say, Grace, Grace, to the Lord, to all Eternity, that God should own
such a Creature, that deserves nothing; and the less I deserve, the more
conspicuous is his Grace: and this is certain, the Riches of his Grace he
throws amongst men, that the Glory of his Grace might be given to himself, if
we can give him but the Glory of his Grace, we shall never doubt to partake of
the Riches of it, and that Fullness: My Lord, that Fullness be your Comfort, that
Fullness of Mercy, that Fullness of Love, that Fullness of Righteousness and Power
be now your Riches, and your only Stay, and the Lord interpose himself between
God and you, as your Faith has endeavored to interpose him between God and
your soul; so I doubt not there he stands (my Lord) to plead for you, and when
you are not able to do any thing your self, yet lie down at the Feet of him
that is a Merciful Savior, and knows what you would desire* and wait upon him
while you live, trust in him when you die, there is Riches enough, and Mercy
enough, if he open not, yet die at his door, say there i will die, there is mercy
enough.


Holland. And here is the place where I lie die down before him, from whence I
hope he will raise me to an Eternal Glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely,
from whom only I can expect mercy: into his Arms I commend my Spirit, into his
bleeding Arms, that when I leave this bleeding Body that must lie upon this
place, he will receive that Soul that arises out of it, and receive it into
his Eternal Mercy, through the Merits, through the Worthiness, through the
Mediation of Christ that has purchased it with his own most precious Blood.


Bolton. My Lord, Though you conclude here, I hope you begin above; and though
you put an End here, I hope there will never be an End of the Mercy and
Goodness of God: And if this be the Morning of Eternity, if this be the Rise of
Glory, if God pleases to throw you down here, to raise you up for ever; say:
Welcome Lord! Welcome that Death that shall make way for Life! and welcome any
Condition that shall throw me down here, to bring me into the Possession of
Jesus Christ.


Hodges. My Lord, if you have made a Deed of Gift of your self to Jesus Christ,
to be found only in Him; I am confident, you shall stand at the Day of Christ:
My dear Lord, we shall meet in Happiness.


Holland. Christ Jesus receive my Soul, my Soul hungers and thirsts after him;
Clouds are gathering, and I trust in God through all my Heaviness, and I hope
through all Impediments, he will settle my Interest in Him, and throw off all
the Claim that Satan can make unto it; and that he will carry my Soul in
despite of all the Callumnies, and all that the Devil and Satan can invent,
will carry it into Eternal Mercy, there to receive the Blessedness of his
Presence to all Eternity.


Hodges. My Lord, It was his own by Creation; it is his own now by Redemption
and Purchase; and it is likewise his own by Resignation. O my Lord, look
therefore up to the Lamb of God, that sits at the Right Hand of God, to take
away the Sins of the World: O that Lamb of God!


Holland. That Lamb of God, into his Hands I commit my Soul: And that Lamb of
God, that sits upon the Throne to judge those Twenty Four that fall down before
Him, I hope he will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with Mercy that
fall down before Him, and that adore Him, that only trusts upon his Mercy, for
his Compassion; and that as he has purchased me, he would lay his Claim unto
me now, and receive me.


Bolton. My Lord, Think of this, There is no Condemnation to them who are in
Christ. Who is it that can condemn? It is Christ that justifies: And therefore
look now upon this, (My Lord) upon this Christ, upon this Christ that
justifies: Hell, Death, Sin, Satan; nothing shall be able to condemn: It is
Christ that justifies you.


Holland. Indeed if Christ justify, no Body can condemn; and I trust in God,
in his Justification: Though there is a Confusion here without us, and though
there are Wonders and Staring that now disquiet; yet I trust that I shall be
carried into that Mercy, that God will receive my Soul.


Bolton. I doubt not, my Lord, but as you are a Spectacles of Pity here, so you
are an Object of God's Mercy above.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the People, pointing to a
Soldier, said; This honest Man took me a Prisoner: You little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon Conditions. And
espying Captain Watson on Horseback, putting off his Hat, said to him, God be
with you, Sir; God reward you, Sir.


Bolton. My Lord, Throw your self into the Arms of Mercy; and say, There I will
anchor, and there I will die: He is a Savior for us in all Conditions; Whither
should we go? He has the Words of Eternal Life: And upon Him do you rest; wait
while you live, and even trust in Death.


Holland. Here must now be my Anchor; a great Storm makes me find my Anchor;
and but in Storms no Body trusts to his Anchor: And therefore I must trust upon
my Anchor. (Upon that God, said Mr. Bolton, upon whom your Anchor trusts.) Yea,
God, I hope, will anchor my Soul fast upon Christ Jesus: And if I die not with
that Clearness, and that Heartiness that you speak of, truly, I will trust in
God; though he kill me, I will rely upon Him, and in the Mercy of my Savior.


Bolton. There is Mercy enough, my Lord, and to spare, you shall not need to
doubt; they shall never go begging to another Door, (My Lord) that come to Him.


Then the Earl of Holland speaking to Mr. Hodges, said; I pray God reward you
for all your Kindness; and pray, as you have done, instruct my Family, that
they may serve God with Faithfulness and Holiness, with more Diligence, than
truly I have been careful to press them unto. You have the Charge of the same
Place, you may do much for them; and I recommend them to your Kindness, and the
Goodness of your Conscience.

Dr. Sibbald standing upon the Scaffold, in his Passage to Colonel Beecher,
expressed himself thus to his Lordship.

Dr. Sibbald. The Lord lift up the Light of his Countenance upon you, and you
shall be safe.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland embraced Lieutenant Colonel Beecher, and
took his Leave of him: After which, he came to Mr. Bolton, and having embraced
him, and returned him many Thanks for his great Pains and Affections to his
Soul, desiring God to reward him, and return his Love into his Bosom.

Mr. Bolton said to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great
Extremity: The Lord reveal and discover himself to you; and make your Death the
Passage unto Eternal Life --


Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said; Here, my Friend,
let my Clothes, and my Body alone; there is Ten Pounds for thee, that is better
than my Clothes, I am sure of it.

Executioner. Will your Lordship please to give me a Sign when I shall strike?


And then his Lordship said, You have Room enough here, have you not?

And the Executioner said, Yes.

Bolton. The Lord be your Strength, there is Riches in him: The Lord of Heaven
impart himself to you; he is able to save to the uttermost. We cannot fall so
low, as to fall below the everlasting Arms of God; and therefore, the Lord be a
Support and Stay to you, in your low Condition, that he will be pleased to make
this an Advantage to that Life and Glory, that will make amends for all.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said; Friend, do
you hear me? If you take up my Head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to
his Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an Honest Fellow; and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an Honest Man. And then said, Stay, I will
kneel down, and ask God Forgiveness: And then prayed for a pretty space, with
seeming Earnestness.


Bolton. The Lord grant you may find Life in Death.


Holland. Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him.) And then going to
the Front of the Scaffold, he said to the People; God bless you all, and God
deliver you from any such Accident as may bring you to any such Death as is
violent, either by War, or by these Accidents; but that there may be Peace
among you, and you may find that these Accidents that have happened to us, may
be the last that may happen in this Kingdom: It is that I desire, it is that I
beg of God, next the saving of my Soul. I pray God give all Happiness to this
Kingdom, to this People, and this Nation. And then turning to the Executioner,
said, How must I lie? I know not.


Executioner. Lie down flat upon your Belly.

And then having laid himself down, he said, Must I lie closer?


Executioner. Yes, and backwarder.


Holland. I will tell you when you shall strike.

And then as he lay, seemed to pray with much Affection for a short space; and
then, lifting up his Head, said, Where is the Man? And seeing the Executioner
by him, he said, Stay while I give the Sign. And presently after stretching out
his Hand, and the Executioner being not fully ready, he said, Now, now. And
just as the Words were coming out of his Mouth, the Executioner at one Blow
severed his Head from his Body.


Arthur Lord Capel, his Speech on the Scaffold, immediately before his Death,
March 9. 1649.
The Execution of the Lord of Holland being thus performed, the Lord Capel was
brought to the Scaffold, as the former; and in the way to the Scaffold, he put
off his Hat to the People on both sides, looking very austerely about him: And
being come upon the Scaffold, Lieutenant Colonel Beecher said to him, Is your
Chaplain here?
Capel. NO, I have taken my Leave of him. And perceiving some of his Servants
to weep, he said; Gentlemen, refrain your selves, refrain your selves. And
turning to Lieutenant Colonel Beecher, he said; What? did the Lords speak with
their Hats off, or no?


Coll. Beech. With their Hats off.


And then coming to the Front of the Scaffold, he said, I shall hardly be
understood here I think. And then began his Speech as follows.

Capel. The Conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the
Cause of this violent Death of mine, shall be the Beginning of what I shall say
to you: When I made an Address to them, (which was the last) I told them with
much Sincerity, That I would pray to the God of all Mercies, that they might be
Partakers of his inestimable and boundless Mercies in Jesus Christ; and truly,
I still pray that Prayer: And I beseech the God of Heaven, forgive any Injury
they have done to me, from my Soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian.

But it is necessary I should tell you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant:
And truly, I am a Protestant, and very much in love with the Profession of it,
after the manner as it was established in England, by the thirty nine Articles*
A blessed way of Profession; and such an one as truly, I never knew none so
good.

I am so far from being a Papist, which some Body have (truly) very unworthily
at some time charged me withal, that truly, I profess to you, that though I
love Good Works, and commend Good Works; yet I hold they have nothing at all to
do in the matter of Salvation. My Anchor-hold is this; That Christ loved me,
and gave Himself for me: That is that that I rest upon.

And truly, something I shall say to you as a Citizen of the whole World; and
in that Consideration I am here condemned to die, truly contrary to the Law
that governs all the World; that is, the Law of the Sword: I had the Protection
of that for my Life, and the Honor of it: But truly, I will not trouble you
much with that, because in another Place I have spoken very largely and
liberally about it. I believe you will hear by other means, what Arguments I
used in that Case. But truly, that that is stranger, you that are Englishmen
behold here an Englishman here before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not
condemned to die by any Law of England, not by any Law of England: nay, shall I
tell you more? (which is strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws of England,
that I know of. And truly, I will tell you, in the matter of the Civil Part of
my Death, and the Cause that I have maintained, I die (I take it) for
maintaining the Fifth Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which enjoins
Reverence and Obedience to Parents: All Divines on all Hands, though they
contradict one another in many several Opinions; yet all Divines, on all Hands,
do acknowledge, that here is intended Magistracy and Order: And certainly, I
have obeyed that Magistracy, and that Order, under which I have lived, which I
was bound to obey. And truly, I do say very confidently, That I do die here for
keeping, for obeying that Fifth Commandment given by God himself, and written
with his own Finger.

And now, Gentlemen, I will take this Opportunity to tell you, That I cannot
imitate a better, nor a greater Ingenuity, than his, that said of himself, For
suffering an unjust Judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by an
unjust Judgment. Truly, Gentlemen, that God may may be glorified, that all Men
that are concerned in it, may take the Occasion of it, of humble Repentance to
God Almighty for it, I do here profess to you, That I did give my Vote to that
Bill against the Earl of Strafford: I doubt not, but God Almighty has washed
that away with a more precious Blood, the Blood of his own Son, and my dear
Savior Jesus Christ: And I hope he will wash it away from all those that are
guilty of it. Truly, this I may say, I had not the least part nor degree of
Malice in doing of it. But I must confess again to God's Glory, and the
Accusation of mine own Frailty, and the Frailty of my Nature, that truly it was
unworthy Cowardice, not to resist so great a Torrent, as carried that Business
at that time. And truly, this I think I am most guilty of, of not Courage
enough in it; but Malice I had none. But whatsoever it was, God I am sure has
pardoned it, has given me the Assurance of it, that Christ Jesus his Blood
has washed it away. And truly, I do from my Soul wish, That all Men that have
any Stain by it, may seriously repent, and receive a Remission and Pardon from
God for it.

And now, Gentlemen, we have had an Occasion by this Intimation, to remember
His Majesty, our King that last was; and I cannot speak of Him, nor think of
it, but truly I must needs say, That in my Opinion, that have had time to
consider all the Images of all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the
World; and truly, in my Opinion, there was not a more virtuous, and more
sufficient Prince known in the World, than our gracious King Charles that died
last. God Almighty preserve our King, that now is, his Son; God send him more
Fortunate, and longer days: God Almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both
the Virtues and Sufficiences of his Father. For certainly, I that have been a
Councellor to him; and have lived long with him, and in a time when Discovery
is easily enough made; for he was young, (he was about thirteen, fourteen,
fifteen, or sixteen Years of Age) those Years I was with him: Truly, I never
saw greater Hopes of Virtue in any young Person, than in him; great Judgment,
great Understanding, great Apprehension, much Honor in his Nature; and truly,
a very perfect Englishman in his Inclination: And I pray God restore him to
this Kingdom, and unite the Kingdoms one unto another, and send a great
Happiness both to You, and to Him; that he may long live and reign among you,
and that that Family may reign till thy Kingdom come; that is, while all
Temporal Power is consummated. I beseech God of his Mercy, give much Happiness
to this your King, and to You that in it shall be his Subjects by the Grace of
Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my Beginning so well, that I will make my Conclusion with it;
that is, That God Almighty would confer, of his infinite and inestimable Grace
and Mercy, to those that are the Causers of my coming hither; I pray God give
them as much Mercy as their Hearts can wish: And truly, for my part, I will not
accuse any one of them of Malice; truly, I will not: Nay, I will not think
there was any Malice in them; what other Ends there is, I know not, nor will I
examine: But let it be what it will, from my very Soul I forgive them every one.

And so the Lord of Heaven bless you all; God Almighty be infinite in Goodness
and Mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of Obedience to his Commands to
His Majesty, that this Kingdom may be an happy and glorious Nation again, and
that your King may be an happy King in so good and so obedient People. God
Almighty keep you all; God Almighty preserve this Kingdom; God Almighty
preserve you all.


Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner, (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? which is the Man? Answer was made, He
is coming. He then said, Stay; I must pull off my Doublet first, and my
Wastcoat.And then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord
Capelsaid; O Friend! prithee come hither.Then the Executioner kneeling down,
the Lord Capel said, I forgive thee from my Soul; and not only forgive thee,
but I shall pray to God to give all Grace for a better Life. There is Five
Pounds for thee; and truly, for my Clothes, and those things, if there be any
thing due to you for it, you shall be fully recompensed: But I desire my Body
may not be stripped here, and no Body to take notice of my Body, but my own
Servants. Look you Friend, this I shall desire of you, That when I lie down,
you would give me a time for a particular short Prayer.

Lieut. Coll. Beecher. Make your own Sign, my Lord.


Capel. Stay a little; which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the
Executioner) Stay, I think, I should lay my Hands forward that way, (pointing
fore-right;) and Answer being made, Yes; he stood still a little while, and
then said; God Almighty bless all this People; God Almighty stench this Blood;
God Almighty stench, stench, stench this Issue of Blood: This will not do the
business; God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one
of his Servants, said; Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my Wife;
but I must desire thee, and beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ; to be
contented, and fully satisfied. And then speaking to his Servants, he said, God
keep you; and, Gentlemen, let me now do a Business quickly, privately; and pray
let me have your Prayers at the moment of Death, That God would receive my Soul.


Lieut. Coll. Beecher. I wish it.


Capel. Pray at the moment of striking join your Prayers; but make no noise
(turning to his Servants) it is inconvenient at this time.


Servant. My Lord, put on your Cap.


Capel. Should I? what will that do me good? Stay a little, it is well as it is
now.As he was putting up his Hair.


And then turning to the Executioner, he said; Honest Man, I have forgiven
thee, therefore strike boldly; from my Soul I do it.

Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said; Nay, prithee be contented; be quiet
good Mr. -- be quiet.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said; Well, you are ready when I am ready,
are you not? And then stretching out his Hands, he said; Then pray stand off,
Gentlemen. Then going to the Front of the Scaffold, he said to the People:
Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of
you, That you would all join in Prayers with me, ThatGod would mercifully
receive my Soul; and that for his alone Mercies in Christ Jesus. God Almighty
keep you all!

Executioner. My Lord, shall put up your Hair?


Capel. I, I, prithee do. And then as he stood, lifting up his Hands and Eyes;
he said; O God, I do with a perfect and a willing Heart, submit to thy Will: O
God, I do most willingly humble my self. And then, kneeling down, said; I will
try first how I can lie: And laying his Head over the Block, said; Am I well
now?


Executioner. Yes.


And then as he lay with both his Hands stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lie both my Hands out; when I lift up my Hands thus, [lifting
up his Right Hand] then you may strike.

And then after he had said a short Prayer, he lifted up his Right Hand; and
the Executioner, at one Blow, severed his Head from his Body; which was taken
up by his Servants, and put (with his Body) into a Coffin.

These following Epitaphs were written upon the Suffering of this Courageous
and Noble LORD.
HEre Virtue, Valor, Charity, and all
Those rare Endowments we Celestial call,
Included are: Nor wonder at the Story;
Capel lies here, Loyalty's chiefest Glory.
Another.
DIsturb me not, my Soul is mounting high,
To Pyramide great Capel's Memory.
I Will range my Thoughts; it is a World that shall
be ruled by Capel's Echo; hallow all
Ye Sacred Muses, and conspire to bring
Materials for this Work; and learn to sing:
For should you weep, your Eyes might undertake
To drown the World, which I intend to make,
Forbear, your Tears are useless; you must now
Gaze upon Earth with an undaunted Brow.
Capel has taught us how to entertain
The Pallid Looks of Fate; by him we gain
The Art of Dying, and from him we have,
The Definition of a Deathless Grave.
Rare Soul, I say, thy ever Active Fame
Shall build a World unto thy pregnant Name;
And every Letter of thy Stem shall raise
A spacious Kingdom, where thy ample Praise
Shall be recorded: Every listening Ear
Shall prove Ambitious, be intranc'd to hear.
'Twill be a Glory, when the World shall say,
'Twas bravely done, His Sovereign led the way:
And he, as Valiant Soldiers ought to do,
Marched boldly after, and was always true
To Sacred Majesty; His Hero'd Breath
Disdained to fear, he rather courted Death:
Death added Life unto his Thoughts; for he
Contemned a Death he bought with Victory.
The very Birds shall learn to prate and sing,
How Capel suffered for his Royal King,
FINIS.
There are Lately Published Ten very useful, pleasant, and necessary Books, all
fold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
I. TWO Journies to Jerusalem, containing first, A strange and True Account of
the Travels of two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable
Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc. With the wonderful manner of hatching many Thousand Chickens at once in
Ovens. Secondly, The Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669 from Scandaroon, to
Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the
Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah and back again to Aleppo, By T. B. With the rare
Antiquities, Monuments, and memorable places and things, mentioned in the Holy
Scripture, and an exact description of the Old and New Jerusalem, to which is
added, a Relation of the great Council of the Jews Assembled in the Plains of
Ajayday in Hungaria, 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S.
B. an Englishman there present; With the notorious Delusion of the Jews by a
Counterfeit Messiah, or false Christ at Smyrna in 1666. and the Event thereof.
Lastly, the fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews throughout
the Kingdom of Persia, whereby many Thousands of all Qualities and Ages were
cut off in 1666. and the Remarkable occasion thereof. Beautified with Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

II. UNparrallel'd Varieties, Or the Marchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
Dispeyald in near four hundred notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage, and Fidelity, 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility; And on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures.

Price One Shilling.

III. SUrprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an account of the most famous
Comets and other Prodigies since the Birth of our Blessed Savior; particularly
the dreadful Apparitions before the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple;
The terrible presages during the Wars and Desolations in Germany, as several
Suns appearing at once, the water in Ponds and Conduits turned to blood, and
blood rained from Heaven; Armies of Crows, Dogs, and other Creatures, fighting
and destroying each other. Intermixed with Remarks on the Life of the renowned
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden. Also a particular Description of the five
Blazing Stars seen in England, since 1663. A Relation of the burning of Mount
Aetna, with the horrid River of Fire and Brimstone which issued thence in 1669.
burning near 20 Towns and Villages, with abundance of other unaccountable
Accidents and Productions of all kinds, to 1682. Likewise a true Account of the
Groaning Board. II. The Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent
Buildings, and other curious Inventions in all Ages, as the Seven Wonders of
the World, and many other excellent structures and rarities throughout the
Earth. Beautified with sculptures.

Price One Shilling.

IV. EXtraordinary Adve^^^^^^ of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a Multitude of S^upe^^ious
Revolutions, Accidents and Observable (...) in States, and Provinces throughout
the whole world, Namely, the Adventures of Christo. Columbus, and the manner of
his Discovery of America or the New World: The Cruelties used by the Turks upon
the Christians at Argiers, their manner of selling Slaves, etc. The dreadful
Mutiny in the City of Naples in 1647. and how Massanello a Fisher-boy ruled
there for 10 days, with greater Power than any King or Emperor. An Account of
several Nations destroyed, or driven from their Habitations by Gnats, Moles,
Pismires, Sparrows, Locusts, Hares, Conies, Fleas, Frogs, Mice, Grasshoppers,
Serpents, Worms, and other inconsiderable Creatures; The Tragical Deaths of
John and Cornelius de Wit, at the Hague in Holland. Remarks on the Life and
Death of Sir W. Rawleigh, with his last Speech and Behavior on the Scaffold;
with Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

V. ADmirable curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or an account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable occurences, and accidents
for many hundred years past: and among others, the Battle of Bosworth, and the
miserable death of Crookbackt Richard. The beheading of the Lord Cromwell, and
the Earl of Essex, with their last Speeches. The Rebellion under Ket the
Tanner, and his Laws and Ordinances in the Oak of Reformation near Norwich. The
Lady riding naked through Coventry. Together with the natural and artificial
rarities in every County in England, with several curious Sculptures.

Prince One Shilling.

VI. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, perjured Villains, etc. As of several forsworn wretches carried
away by the Devil, and how an horrid Blasphemer was turned into a black dog,
etc. 2. The miserable ends of many Magitians, Witches, Conjurers, etc. with
diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the Devil; 3. Remarkable
predictions, and presages of approaching death, and how the event has been
answerable, 4. The wicked lives, and woeful deaths of several Popes, with the
manner how King Henry 2. was whipped by the Popes Order by the Monks of
Canterbury; and how the Queen of Bohemia was swallowed up in the Earth alive,
with all her followers, etc. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants,
Murderers, etc. also how Popiel, King of Polana, (a Cruel Tyrant) his Queen and
Children were devoured by Rats; and how a Town near Tripoly in Barbary, with
the Men, Women, Children, Beasts, Trees, Walls, Rooms, Cats, Dogs, Mice, and
all that belonged to the place were turned into perfect Stone, (to be seen at
this day) for the Horrid Crimes of the Inhabitants, etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbellished with diverse
Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

VII. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present state of
London and Westminster; showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; and
among other particulars, the Rebellion of Wat Tylor, who was slain by the Lord
Mayor in Smithfield, and the Speech of Jack Straw at his Execution. The Murder
of King Hen. 6. and likewise of Edw. 5. and his Brother, by Richard 3. called
Crook-back. The Insurrection in London in King Henry 8. time, and how 411 Men
and Women went through the City in their shifts, and Ropes about their Necks to
Westiminster-Halt, where they were pardoned by the King; with several other
Remarks to this Year 1681. and a description of the manner of the Trial of the
late Lord Strafford in Westminster Hall; Illustrated with Pictures, with the
Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating.

Prince One Shilling.

VIII. THe Fourth Edition of the Wars in Engand, Scotland, and Ireland, being
near a third part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the First, 1625. to His Majesty's Happy
Restoration, 1660. And among other particulars, the Debates and Proceedings in
the Four first Parliaments of King Charles 1. The Murder of the Duke of
Buckingham by Felton. The Tumults at Edinburgh in Scotland, The Insurrection of
the Apprentices and Seamen, and their assaulting of A. B. Lauds House at
Lambeth. Remarks on the Life of the E. of Strafford, and his last Speech. The
Death of Archbishop Laud, Duke Hamilton, Lord Capel, Mr. Love, Dr. Hewet, and
others. The illegal Trial of King Charles ^^at large, with his last Speech, at
his Suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. with
Pictures of several remarkable Accidents.

Price One Shilling.

IX. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue, and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac, and
Joseph in their youth, On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother; and of
Romanus a young Nobleman, with the invincible courage of a Child of seven years
old, who was martyred. On the Martyrdom of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On
the Life of that blessed Prince, King. Edw. 6. with his ingenious Letter to his
Godfather A. B. Cranmer, when but 8 years old, and his last words and Prayer.
On the Life and Death of Queen Jane, as her learned Dispute with Fecknam a
Priest, about the Sacrament, her Letters to her Father the Duke of Suffolk, to
her Sister, and others, On the Life of Queen Elizabeth in her Youth, with her
many Sufferings and Dangers from bloody Bonner and Gardener, and her joyful
Reception to the Crown. On the Religious Life and Death of the most Noble and
Heroic Prince, Henry, eldest Son to King James; And also of the young Lord
Harrington; etc. with 12 curious Pictures; illustrating the several Histories.

Price Eighteen Pence.

X. A Guide to Eternal Glory, or brief Directons to all Christians, how to
attain Everlasting Salvation; to which is added, A Dialogue between a Divine
and a Beggar; Questions for daily self-Examination; Spiritual Hymns upon the
Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Beams of the Spirit, or Cordial
Meditations enlivening and enlightening the Soul, recommended by Joseph Caryl.

Price Six Pence.

All Ten sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside. 1683.

FINIS.

