A PERSUASIVE TO AN Ingenuous Trial OF OPINIONS IN RELIGION.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George near St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1685.

A PERSUASIVE TO AN Ingenuous TRIAL OF Opinions in Religion.
1.
THE great reason why they are few in comparison who come to a right
understanding and a well-grounded Persuasion in matters of Religion, is because
they are not many who make a due inquiry into them. Were this done more
generally, there would not be so much ignorance and error in the world, nor so
great a variety of Opinions and Sects, as there is, and for the most part has
been in the world.

And there are three sorts of men who fail of knowing the truth, for want of
due endeavors to find it out. Some there are who want ability or opportunity
to inquire; others, who wanting neither, do utterly neglect it, and will not
apply their minds to it at all; a third sort make but a very imperfect search
after truth. And so all ignorance or mistake in things of moment, that concern
the salvation of*men, or the peace of the Church* may be attributed either to
want of power and means to inquire after truth, or to unwillingness and perfect
negligence, where it may be sought and attained to; or to laziness, inactivity,
and partiality in seeking it.

To the first sort, we are not only to reckon Idiots, who want a competent
measure of Reason and Understanding wherewith to judge, but those also that
having the same common natural gifts of the mind with others, are yet by reason
of their outward circumstances, kept almost invincibly ignorant, having very
little or no occasion given them to inquire into things, that they might know
them better. And thousands who sit in Pagan, or Mahumetan, or Popish darkness,
are thus detained in gross errors and remediless ignorance, as the case at
present stands with them. But blessed be God this is not our case, who live in
such a time and place as put no man under circumstances of incurable ignorance.

As for the second sort of men* who have plentiful means and fair opportunities
of being better informed, but utterly neglect to use them, they are either such
who remain under the power of those false Principles which were instilled into
them in their Education, or who blindly follow erring Guides, whose persons
they have in admiration, resolving never to trouble themselves with a free and
impartial use of their own reason concerning those Doctrines which they have in
their own opinion wisely and safely taken upon trust. It happens likewise very
often*that men are led away by lofty conceits of their own judgment; and the
extravagant opinion they have of themselves, will not suffer them to attempt
such an ingenuous examination of things, as implies a possibility of their
being deceived. But I believe they are more who take up Opinions and engage in
Parties for worldly ends and carnal interests; and these, of all others, are
farthest from inquiring and conviction, because it is a great uneasiness to a
man's mind, to find himself mistaken in those opinions which are for his profit
or pleasure in this world. And mostly the power of custom strengthens all these
causes of obstinacy in neglecting to inquire. Men are not willing to quit the
Persuasions they have for a long time entertained, but had rather keep where
they are, without troubling themselves to begin all anew, and to inquire
whether they have not been all along deceived. And where most of these
obstructions meet together, as they often do, in the same person, if he be not
succored mightily by the grace of God, his mind is barred up for ever against
the knowledge of the truth.

A third sort miss of the truth, not that they make no inquiry, but because
they do this very imperfectly and superficially, and that either through sloth
and laziness, being not willing to take that pains and care which is requisite
for the discovery of truth; or through partiality *whence it comes to pass that
they examine and (...) only or chiesly what is offered in favor of their own
side, and make it the great end of their search not to follow what shall appear
to be true upon inquiry, but to be confirmed in their present Persuasion. And
because diligence and honesty are very necessary dispositions in order to the
right understanding of a great many things in Religion, no wonder that they who
inquire without these advantages, are rather hardened in Error than convinced
of the Truth.

Now these being the common causes of ignorance and error amongst us at this
day, and since they all center in want of due inquiry, I shall set my self to
excite all sorts of people, who are not made incapable by natural weakness of
understanding, to prove and examine things which concern their own Souls and
the peace of Christians, with that diligence and ingenuity which becomes
reasonable creatures. And though I know it is a hard task that I am undertaking,
by reason of the prejudices and corrupt interests of men which I must
encounter; yet I am sure no advice can be more rational than this, that we
would be persuaded to use our Reason, which if we do not, we lay up the common
Talent of our natures in a Napkin.

For God has endued us with Faculties whereby we can discern between Truth and
Error; and moreover, with a natural desire to know the truth: so that the use
of these Faculties is inexcusably neglected, and this desire is foully
corrupted and debased, if we are easily imposed upon in things of great moment.
God in our creation has enabled and inclined us to seek the knowledge of
Truth, and to inquire into the grounds of our Belief and Practice. And
therefore to neglect this, is to abuse the first Gifts of God, and to sin
against Nature.

And it should be every man's care to find out that truth which concerns
Religion and another life, (...) this is every man's greatest interest; we
should (...) most diligence there, where to be deceived is of most dangerous
consequence.

But because there are some plausible Pretenses against a due and impartial
enquiry in matters of Religion, I shall prepare my way by endeavoring to
remove those Prejudices that lie against it; and in order hereunto, I shall
consider these three Questions.

1. Whether it be dangerous to private men to leave them to use their own
judgment, and to be led by it in matters of Faith and Religion?

2. Whether a general liberty of examining and judging in those things, does
mischief in the Church, and be the cause of Schisms and Heresies?

3. Whether if every one have a just Right to examine for himself, this be not
a good reason for Toleration, or the universal liberty of practicing according
to a man's Conscience or Persuasion, after examination.

2.
1. Whether it be dangerous to private men to allow them the use of their own
judgment in matters of Religion.

Now to leave men wholly to themselves in this business, without directing them
to use the best helps they can to find out the truth, is very dangerous indeed;
and no wise man will contend for this liberty of judgment in behalf of
Christian people, or of any sort of men whatsoever: for this were not so much
to advise them to judge for themselves, as to conclude for themselves before
they had taken any pains to judge. For I do not see how men can be said to
judge, who refuse the means without which they can make no trial. Now the
assistance of men of greater knowledge and ability than themselves have, is one
very necessary means by which private and unlearned persons are to examine and
judge in matters of Religion. And God has not only given us ability to find
out some truths by our selves, but also to weigh and consider what others offer
to us: And therefore he has appointed Governors and Guides of Souls, that are
to feed the Flock, and to instruct Christian people in the way to Heaven. And
one part of their work is to enable them to give an answer to every one that
asks a reason of the hope that is in them, I Pet. 3. 15. which I conceive
they cannot do, without informing and helping them to judge for themselves. So
that liberty of examining in order to private judgment, does by no means
exclude advising with and hearkening to men of greater skill and ability than
our selves, especially to the public Guides of Souls, but rather makes it
necessary so to do, this being one means of Gods appointment by which we are to
inform our selves. And I grant that without very good and clear reason, we are
not to depart from their Doctrine, but in all doubtful cases to presume in
favor of it.

But that it should be dangerous to private persons to weigh and consider, as
well as they can, what their Guides teach them to believe or to do, this is
that which I can by no means understand, unless it were a dangerous thing to
follow our Guides like men that have Reason, and not like beasts that have
none. It is at any time as safe to follow a Guide with our eyes open, as to
suffer our selves to be blindfolded, and then to follow him by a string. God
has referred us to Guides, Heb. 13. 17. but yet he has trusted us to our
selves too, and we are to try the spirits whether they be of God: otherwise we
may follow Guides that want Guides themselves. And if the blind lead the blind,
both fall into the ditch.

To say that inquiries after truth with the best endeavors and means that we
have in our power, is the way to be mistaken, is to reproach our own Reason,
and God the Author of it; since as it seems, the more we exercise and improve
our Reason, the more likely we are to be in the wrong, and to deceive and abuse
our selves.

At the great day of Accounts, Seducers shall answer for those whom they have
deceived. And therefore the Guides of the Church are strongly obliged that they
do not through wilfulness or negligence mislead us. But if they mislead us in
things that touch our eternal state, I do not sind that all the blame will lie
upon them, but rather that we also shall answer for it our selves: Otherwise
why should our Savior say, Why of your selves do ye not judge that which is
right? Luke 12. 57. and St. John, Believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits, etc. 1 John 4. 1. and St. Paul, Prove all things, hold fast that which
is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and, Let no man deceive you, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Again, if
it be dangerous to permit men to judge for themselves in that sense wherein I
contend for it, then these are not wholesome but very dangerous Exhortations.

And yet if a Church which pretends to be an Infallible Guide in Religion,
could make it out clearly and plainly that she is so, I should, without much
examination of her particular Doctrines, receive them as the Oracles of God.
But then I must have stronger Arguments to assure me that she is infallible,
than those which at present make me certain that she is actually deceived. For
to submit to a pretended infallible Authority, without knowing why I do so, is
to put it into the power of others, for ought I know, to lead me into the most
damnable errors, and to call Virtue Vice, and Vice Virtue. Therefore they must
be very convincing Reasons upon which I am to believe that of my Guide, which
being once admitted, I must take his bare word afterward for all things else. I
think none of the Roman Communion will deny this. And then it will follow, that
for my own safety I am to use my own Reason and Judgment as severely as I can,
before I admit this fundamental Article of their Faith. And this will amount to
what I say, that it is so far from being dangerous for men to use their own
Judgment in matters of Religion, that it is very dangerous for them not to do
so; since otherwise they are likely to follow men of the greatest confidence,
as they for the most part are who have the least reason for it.

Besides, if I am led into error by the Authority of a Church that does not
pretend to Infallibility, I may hope to recover the knowledge of the truth,
especially if it be a matter of great consequence, more than if she pretended
and I believed her infallible. For such a Church will not so readily deny me
the means of examining her Doctrine, and so I may be able to discover the
error my self: If not, I have this comfort at least, that my Guides being not
engaged to contend that they are infallible, are themselves in the way of
detecting their own mistake, and will more easily come off from it. But they
that pretend to Infallibility, are staked down to their Opinions; and though
their Cause be never so bad, they are engaged to serve it. And therefore this
Pretense is so far from discharging me of the pains of using my own Judgment
and Reason in matters of Religion, that I make the most foolish venture in the
world, if I do not use my Reason as strictly as I can in examining that very
Pretense before I admit it. And though a Churches claim to Infallibility were
in it self never so just and well-grounded, it is to me but a Pretense, till I
understand the grounds of it.

Nor can any man blame me, if before I am convinced of the Infallibility of
that Church, I take those particular Doctrines into consideration which are to
be believed upon this account, that I may this way also judge of the
reasonableness of that Pretense: for it is not for nothing that men would be
thought infallible. If I find the Doctrine they would put off with such
authority, to be indeed divine and heavenly, rational and scriptural, tending
to the reformation and salvation of Mankind, this will incline me to yield more
easily to the antecedent Arguments of the Infallibility of that Church. But if
the Doctrine for which she vouches this Authority does, upon the most impartial
trial that I can make, appear to be worldly, unscriptural, or contrary to
common sense; then I am bound to examine the grounds of her Pretense more
severely than in the former case. And there is no question but such Doctrines
may be taught by men pretending to Inspiration or Infallibility, which will
justify a man in rejecting that Pretense out of hand, and troubling himself no
more about it. If a Physician of never so great name should tell me that he
would infallibly cure my Disease, and then prescribe a dose of Arsenick, I
think Reason would advise rather to question his Infallibility, because he goes
thus madly to work, than to take his Poison because he promises an Infallible
Cure.

Now if I am not to do violence to my own understanding in things that concern
my bodily health, much less should I do the same in things that regard my
everlasting state. And they are a strange sort of men, who will allow people
the liberty of using their Reason as well as they can for the security of their
worldly interests, but will have them be led in the great affairs of Religion
and Eternity, as if they had no reason at all. For to judge aright, and to know
the truth in matters of Religion, which is our highest concernment, was the
principal end for which we have Reason, and are Creatures of judgment and
choice. And they may as well say that it is dangerous for a man to walk abroad
with his eyes open, as that it is dangerous for him to take upon himself to
judge as well as he can whether he be in the right way to Heaven or not.

2.
If we consider what has been already said, it will not be difficult to answer
the second Question.

2. Whether a liberty of examining and judging in matters of Religion, does
mischief in the Church, and be the cause of Heresies and Schisms? To which I
answer, that

To affirm this, is in effect to say, that it had been much better, in order to
the peace of the Church, and the prevailing of Truth, that men had been nearer
to stocks and stones, than endued with natural Abilities of judging, and
natural propensions to use those Abilities; which I think would be to reflect
upon the Wisdom of our Maker. For certainly it had been better for men to have
wanted the faculties of judging and proving, if it be so dangerous a thing to
the Church to make use of them. Nor is it much for the credit of the Church,
that it should be against her interest for men to examine her Doctrine, and use
their Reason about it as well as they can.

To speak to the thing: It is not the liberty of examination and judgment in
order to the knowledge of the Truth, that causes Heresies and Schisms, but the
not making a right use of this liberty, i. e. men's entering upon this work with
Pride, and the prevalency of Lust and Passion, and worldly interest, their want
of care and diligence, and of proving things sufficiently; their taking up
Opinions without reasonable examination, and then seeking for Pretenses to
color their obstinacy. The Lusts and Vices of men are against the peace of the
Church and the interest of Truth, but not the use of that Reason which is the
divine part of our Natures, and which God has given us to restrain and govern
our inferior Faculties.

It Is true indeed, that if few or none troubled themselves at all to judge in
matters of Religion, there would be no Heresies. But it is true too, that if
they had no reason to judge of these things at all, there would have been no
Heresies; and it is as true, that if there had been no Religion at all, it were
impossible that there should be Heresies in Religion. But will any men say,
that Reason or Religion is therefore the cause of Heresies? And yet there is as
much reason to say this, as to conclude that the use of our own understandings
in the things of God, is the cause of Heresies. These things are too gross to
need a Confutation.

And yet this Pretense against the liberty of proving what is propounded to us
in Religion, is intended chiefly against private and ordinary persons, but not
against the public Guides and Officers of the Church; whereas in truth, if
there be any thing in it, it holds more strongly against these than against the
other: And that because the most pernicious Heresies that ever came into the
Church, were brought in by men of Learning and Authority in the Church. And if
this Pretense be good, they of all men should be forbidden to inquire into
matters of Religion; because if they fall into any dangerous mistake, their
Authority is likely to give reputation to it, and to make it go down more
easily with the common People, than if it had been started by one of
themselves. So that we must not lay the Heresies that have been in the Church,
to the liberty we have been contending for, unless we will be content to
exclude all from the duty of proving what they have been taught to (...). And
no man can think this reasonable, unless he (...) all Religions to be equally
true, that is, every one to be alike false. And he that believes this, needs
not care what Heresy he is of.

3.
3. But if every man has a just liberty and right to examine for himself, is
not this a good reason for Toleration, or for the universal liberty of
practicing according to a man's Conscience or Persuasion? For to what purpose is
liberty of enquiry, if after all, I must be concluded by the Authority of my
Superiors, or else suffer under those Laws by which they provide for
Uniformity in Religion?

To this I answer, That every man's right and duty to judge for himself in
matters of Religion, is no good reason for Toleration, unless it were also
apparent that every man used that Right as he ought to do, i. e. with industry,
deliberation, and impartiality. If all men were sincere, and would examine
without prejudice, without that bias to one side which is made by lust and
passion, and worldly interest, if they all intended to know the truth, that
they might do their duty, then doubtless it were very fit that all should enjoy
an undisturbed liberty of practice according to their Judgment; for then no man
would err in things plain and necessary to his own salvation and the peace of
Church and State. For our Lord has assured us, that if any man will do the
will of God, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God. But so long as
there is that Hypocrisy in the World whereof men are conscious to themselves,
so long as all those Vices also reign, which insensibly corrupt the Judgment,
and make men disloyal to the Truth, while they perceive it not; it is by no
means reasonable that the State under which we live, should leave us lawless,
and free from all obligation of temporal Penalties what Religion we profess,
and what Communion we observe. For the most dangerous Pretense for the ^^^rying
on of seditious and rebellious designs against the Government, is that of
Religion: And a few men that mean nothing but their own greatness and power,
shall be able to manage the Zeal of a superstitious Multitude against the
Government for their own private ends, while they scorn the superstition of
their Followers, and perhaps all pretense to Religion in their own hearts. And
therefore it concerns the Government to take care that the true Religion be
protected by the Laws, and then to provide by the most prudent methods that no
other be professed in the Commonwealth.

If it be said, that the end of all liberty to inquire and judge for our selves
is destroyed, if at last we must conform to the Laws, or be punished for our
refusal: The contrary will be easily shown to any one who believes that we are
infinitely more concerned what will become of us in the life to come, than in
our present fortunes. For suppose that they are Errors which Authority
requires us to profess, and that they are unlawful things which it requires us
to do in Divine Service, and that by a due and diligent examination of things I
come to know this; do I get nothing by my enquiry, but the severity of those
humane Laws that are against me? Do not I obtain the comforts of a good
Conscience, in having honestly endeavored to know the truth, and in doing what
I thereupon knew to be my duty? If I do hereby obtain Gods Favor at present,
and shall obtain Gods Rewards in a better life, is not this worth all my care
and sincerity, though I should get nothing by it in this World but Trouble and
Persecution?

So that it is worth the while to examine the Doctrine imposed upon me by
Authority, though I know beforehand that be it right or wrong, I must be
punished by man if I receive it not.

True Religion, and our observation to profess Gods Truth, and to do his Will,
stands indeed upon the Authority of God, and the Evidence of divine Revelation;
but nevertheless, the profession thereof ought to be encouraged and protected
by the Powers of the World* and by consequence all false Religions should be
discountenanced, and the profession of them made uneasy by their Laws:
Scripture and Reason teach us, that they no less than Parents, should use that
Authority for God, which they have received from him. But if they, for want of
sincere trial and examination, do themselves establish Iniquity or Heresy by a
Law, and turn the edge of their Power against the true Religion, they must
answer it to God at the day of Judgment, who has showed them as well as
others, what is good and what he required of them.

In the mean while Persecution distinguishes between the Sincere and the
Hypocrite; and as the insincere study how to perplex the Truth, and to avoid
the convictions that are upon their minds, and to reconcile their Apostasy to
their Credit and Consciences; so the honest inquire into the grounds of their
Faith more diligently, and being desirous to strengthen themselves under
Sufferings by a full assurance that they suffer for Righteousness sake, they
search into all the grounds of their Persuasion more narrowly than if they had
never come under this temptation: and by this means the true Doctrine comes to
be propounded to the World, with the advantage of stronger Arguments, and those
better managed than if it had never met with opposition.

But if the true Faith and Worship be established by Law, and the Penalties of
Nonconformity be strictly required; this is so far from hindering men from
enquiring, that it lays an obligation upon a great many to consider things
impartially, who otherwise would never have looked but upon one side of the
Question; I mean all those whom either Wantonness and Self-conceit, or Faction
and Worldly Interest, or the undue admiration of men's persons, and the like,
would have held under a constant prejudice against Reason and Truth. A carnal
Argument for a good Cause, is very often a wholesome means to remove a carnal
prejudice against it: And the Authority of the Magistrate can hardly be better
used in matters of Religion, than to make such a difference between the
Observers of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Dissenters from them, that it
shall be very hard for any man to lie under a Worldly Temptation, to dissent
sufficient to recompense the damage he must undergo. This will make a great
many impartial in weighing the Objections against Conformity, with the
Arguments and Answers on the other side, and by degrees bring them to the
knowledge of the Truth, and at length to a sincere love of it. It is a false
Maxim, That Force in matters of Religion makes Hypocrites, but not true
Converts. For sometimes it cures Hypocrisy, very often Ignorance and
Partiality; and that is a good degree toward Conversion: And yet this will not
justify the putting of men to death for mere difference in Religion. The least
degree of severity which will do the business, is great enough. The Supreme
Powers should consider their Subjects in these cases, as a wise and good Father
would consider his own Children; who if he had power of life and death over
them, would not kill his misbelieving Son, and yet would try to reduce him by
Worldly Discipline, and drive him to consideration by the sensible effects of
his Displeasure. The moderation of the English Laws for Uniformity, is visible
to all disinteressed persons; and though the unevenness of their execution has
rendered them less effectual, yet there are several who have cause to bless God
for being compelled to come to our Churches, and to consider the Terms of our
Communion with some impartiality; whereas if there had been an absolute
Toleration, their Ignorance and Prejudices might have led them they know not
whither.

The Church of England causes the Scriptures to be publicly read, and puts
them into the Peoples hands, and desires nothing more than that every one would
diligently and impartially consider the cases between her and those that
separate from her. And it is no absurd thing to say, that this liberty of
Judgment which she allows, is consistent with the English Laws that require
conformity of all; since if it had not been for those Laws, some men had never
attained to liberty of Judgment but had still been held in bondage to their
Prejudices and Errors. (...), that they make the greatest noise for liberty of
practice, according to their Judgment, who have made little or no use of their
Judgment in distinguishing between good and bad, true and false. They demand
one liberty, while they make no use of another; the liberty of being
undisturbed and licentious in a wrong way, while they never use that liberty of
examining the grounds of their Persuasion, to which the Church so vehemently
persuades them by her Ministers.

If it be urged, that when a man sets himself with honesty and diligence to
examine the Case of Communion with the Chnrch, and does all that he can to
inform himself aright in this matter, but cannot be satisfied that he may
lawfully conform, and this through mere weakness of understanding; it is not
reasonable that he should suffer any thing for that.

It may be said on the other side, that there are many more who fail of
understanding their duty in this kind, for want of examination and inquiry, and
through the prevalency of Prejudice and passion, than there are of those who
continue erroneously persuaded through mere weakness of understanding. But as
for those who in perfect weakness remain unconvinced, if I may suppose any
such, I wish the Laws could distinguish them from the rest, and that they could
be known by some visible characters, that they might be exempted from
undergoing any penalties. But since this cannot be, it must be endured that a
few or none in comparison, come to have hard measure, by means of that which is
necessary for the common and public good.

4.
Having premised thus much concerning this subject, I shall proceed in this
method following.

I. To consider in what cases we are to enquire most of all into the Truth.

II. To show how or by what Rules or Tests we are to try and examine Opinions
in Religion.

III. How we ought to be disposed and qualified that our Inquiries may be
profitable and successful.

IV. To lay down some Motives whereby to persuade men to such Inquiry and
examination.

V. To consider what becomes us and is our duty, after the discovery and
knowledge of the Truth.

I. I shall consider in what cases we ought to be most careful in making
inquiries after the Truth, lest we be imposed upon* or mistaken.

All inquiries about Religion are either concerning the truth of Religion in
the general; or supposing the existence and providence of God, which is the
true Religion, whether the Pagan, or the Jewish, or the Mohammedan, or the
Christian; or the truth of the Christian Religion being granted, what Communion
of men professing Christianity, is to be chosen; for instance, whether the
Church of Rome, or the Church of England, or the Communion of the Dissenters
who separate from this Church.

But now all things are not alike needful to be proved, or are equally proper
matters of inqniry. For,

1. Every man is not bound to know all the false ways of Religion that are in
the World, and therefore not to try and examine every one of them. It is
sufficient for most men, that they well consider the Faith and Profession to
which they have been educated, that if it be the Truth, they may be
well-grounded in it; if it be false, that they may upon good reason depart from
it.

2. Things that are self-evident, need not to be examined: for no Argument can
make them plainer to us than they are already. We may without any hesitation
assent to such Principles as these: That God cannot lie; That men ought to
observe fidelity and justice to one another, and the like. If there were not
some Principles that needed no proving, it were impossible to prove any thing;
and the more plain any thing is in it self, the less need there is to examine
it. If I am told that white is black, I shall not go about to disprove it,
because the thing is evidently false of it self, and I can use no Argument that
can make the matter plainer than it was at first. In like manner, if any man
pretends that there is no difference between Vice and Virtue but in name, and
that all things are equally lawful; this shall not put me to the trouble of
examining the thing, because it is contrary to the common sense of mankind. And
for this reason any man is to be excused that dismisses the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, without taking much pains about it; because upon a very
little consideration, there appears so many gross contradictions and
inconsistencies in it, that I can have no greater reason to believe any thing
is true, than I have to believe that is false.

3. Some things are hardly worth the examining, and it signifies little or
nothing to understand the right side of the Question. If the Doctrine of the
immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary were true, yet it were not worth a
quarter of the pains they have taken about it in the Church of Rome. It is by
no means true, that an infallible living Judge is necessary upon Earth, and
that for the deciding of all Controversies in Religion; since all such
Controversies are not necessary to be decided, some of them being of so little
concern to us, that it is no great matter if they remain Controversies to the
Worlds end.

But we ought to use our Reason as well as we can to find out the truth in all
those cases wherein it will be dangerous to be deceived; and therefore in these
four:

First, When any man or company of men would gain us over to their way by lofty
and extraordinary Pretenses.

Secondly, When Doctrines are propounded to us with considerable Authority,
which seem to encourage licentiousness, and to render all care of living well
needless.

Thirdly, When we are tempted to separate from the Communion of the established
Church where we live, or if we are in a state of Separation from it.

Fourthly, When Opinions in Religion are propounded to us by those that would
get us to yield up our Judgments wholly unto them, and do what they can to keep
us from examining them.

A prudent man would examine in all these cases;

First, When men make extraordinary Pretenses. The reasonableness of which I
have already shown, with reference to that Pretense of the Church of Rome to
Infallibility. And the like is to be said of those that pretend to work
Miracles, or that talk of immediate Revelations, of knowing the Truth by
Inspiration, and of more than ordinary Illuminations. For it is not only a
childish thing to be frighted with big words from looking what is under them,
but a very dangerous sort of cowardice, to be afraid of calling those things
into question which are set off with such highflown Pretenses. For from hence
it has come to pass, that Superstition and Idolatry, Enthusiasms and
Impostures, have prevailed so much in the World. It is somewhat strange that we
should believe men the more, for that very reason upon which we should believe
them less, that is, for magnifying themselves. And yet if this had not been
common, Mahomet had not imposed upon so great a part of the World, nor the
Church of Rome upon so great a part of Christendom, nor our Enthusiasts upon so
many People in England as they have. I would not be backward to give that man a
hearing, that pretends to great things in teaching Religion; but then I should
be something forward to give him a trial too: for otherwise I might encourage a
very impudent Hypocrite to be more impudent still, and to play upon my easiness
till I had swallowed all the foolish and damnable Opinions which he would have
me believe for his own advantage.

Secondly, When we meet with Doctrines that seem to strike at the foundations
of Morality and good living, we are to examine them too, before we yield our
assent* though they be recommended by men of name and authority. For the end of
divine truth is a good and holy life; and therefore I should suspect that to be
false Doctrine, which in my judgment either takes away the necessity of Piety
and Virtue, or discourages men from endeavoring to attain them. For instance,
I find this Doctrine maintained by some men of great note, That God has from
all eternity absolutely chosen some men to salvation, and reprobated the rest,
without respect to any personal qualifications. Now if this be true, I cannot
see for my life how the obtaining of eternal happiness, and the avoiding of
damnation, depends upon any care of mine, or upon any thing that I can do,
since every man's state is absolutely overruled by predestination and an
irreversible decree; so that let me do what I please, all that I can do for
another world will be but lost labor, and might as well be spared. But if I am
sensible of this, it is but reasonable that I should not rely upon the credit
of the Author or of the Preacher for so perilous a Doctrine; but because it is
pretended to be grounded upon the ninth Chapter to the Romans, I should go to
the Apostle my self, and carefully inquire into his meaning in that place, by
the best Rules of interpretation that I can learn. And whoever goes thus
impartially to work, will find that the Apostle in that place was discoursing
of another Question, and indeed upon a subject that has nothing to do with this
Question of absolute Election or Reprobation of the persons of men; and that
though the words sound that way to a man that is already prepossessed, yet the
meaning of them is nothing to the purpose. Suspicion of Doctrines when it is
grounded upon so good a reason as we are now speaking of, should cause inquiry,
and then that inquiry will discover on which side the truth lies. He that would
be a Libertine, and live as he lists, may be pleased when he meets with any
pretended Doctrine of Religion that will excuse a wicked life, or discourage
Virtue and holiness; and therefore it is likely that he will rest satisfied,
and examine no farther. But an honest mind will not let a man deceive himself
in this manner; but if it does not cause him to reject such Opinions as soon as
ever he has well satisfied himself of their consequences, it will at least keep
him from admitting them, till he has tried them every way that he can.

Thirdly, We ought also to be very well satisfied, and that upon much
consideration of the matter, before we separate from the Communion of the
Church where we live. For whatever some men may think of it, this is a business
of so weighty a nature and consequence, that it is not to be resolved upon or
continued in, till we are sure we are in the right, and that upon most plain
and evident reasons. And if there be any case in which a Christian ought not to
go rashly to work, this is one. And therefore it is greatly to be lamented,
that so many amongst us pretending to the power of Godliness, should make so
light a matter as they plainly do of running into separate Congregations; it
being very notorious, when one discourses the point with them, that they never
enquired why the Church Assemblies were to be forsaken, and what it is in the
established Forms of Worship, or in the Terms of our Communion, that makes it
needful for an honest and wise Christian to depart from it. And this is an
Argument that they take it to be a matter of very little consequence; for
otherwise they would have applied themselves with more diligence to weigh it in
all the particulars that belong to it.

And therefore I shall offer some Reasons in behalf of such inconsiderate
People, to convince them how bold and dangerous a thing it is to separate from
this Church of England, unless they were fully satisfied upon mature
examination that there are just and necessary causes for separation, such
namely as will make them sinners against God, if they do not separate.

1. If without just cause I separate from this Church, I do wilfully reject the
great blessings and advantages of Communion with it, and must be answerable to
God for slighting that merciful providence of his through which I happened to
be born and bred in a place where I might enjoy the benefits of
Church Communion, without venturing at any disorderly and sinful practice for
them. Surely it is no small blessing, if my lot has been cast where so great a
blessing did, as it were, lie in wait for me, where the true Christian Doctrine
and way of Worship was recommended to me by public Authority, and established
by Law and Custom, and defended to my hand by clear and strong Arguments. If
this be our Case in the Church of England, then my separation from her (I say
it again) makes me guilty of a stupid and ungrateful contempt of Gods exceeding
mercies in disposing my condition in this World so to my advantage, that I was
born, baptized, and bred in a place where the Truth invited me, and was ready
to receive me, before I made one step toward a search after her. Indeed to be
baptized within the Communion of a particular Church, and to have been born and
to live under that Authority which requires me to keep close to it, is of it
self no sufficient reason why we should continue to be of it; but it is a
mighty reason why we should examine things carefully before we leave it, or
take up a resolution never to return to it, if we have left it already; because
if there be no just reason for separation, we shall have the more to answer to
God: For it is a great fault to neglect searching after the Truth in matters of
this concern, even when it lies a great way off from a man; but it is much more
inexcusable to reject it when it lies at our doors.

2. I had need be very careful and impartial in this case, since if the reasons
upon which I separate be not really weighty and substantial, I am at once
guilty of throwing off that subordination and subjection to the Pastors and
Guides of the Church, which the Christian Profession requires, and of
contemning the lawful commands of my Superiors in the State, contrary to the
Rule of the Gospel which obliges me to submit to their Ordinances. I should not
easily be led to a Practice where there is danger of such a complicated sin.

3. I am to consider, that differences in Religion and Worship, do dangerously
affect the Peace of Kingdoms and all other Societies, especially where the
interests of Church and State are so mixed and interwoven together as they are
in England. They that agree in Religion, are the most likely to be at peace,
and to agree together in other things. But it seldom happens that they maintain
hearty correspondence in any thing, who are of opposite Communions in the
service of God. When the Unity of the Church is broken, there is a foundation
laid of those uncharitable censures and animosities which for the most part end
in violence and bloodshed, very often to the dissolation of Kingdoms and
Nations. It were easy to put this out of question by several instances of the
sad experience which Christendom has had of it. But the late and sad Example
hereof at home, is enough to make all others needless for our conviction. The
Rebellion here was supported by nothing more than by difference about Religion.
This was the principal cause that brought together so many People against the
King, and that inslamed them with anger and resolution to venture all, till
they had secured the King and enslaved the Kingdom. I need not say (for sure
every body must be sensible of that) how diversity of Religions weaken the
Government, and render a People unable to do well for themselves, to oppose
foreign Enemies, and to use the most likely opportunities for the common safety
and prosperity. Therefore in love to our Country, and for the sake of Peace at
home, and of success in all just Enterprises abroad, we should be very backward
to violate the present Constitution of the Church, and to unsettle the state of
Religion, and never separate from the established Communion, till we find our
selves forced to it by Reasons so plain and weighty, that there is no avoiding
of it, if we would keep our selves honest men and good Christians.

4. The setting of a bad example to others should in this case be most
considered. For if where a necessary Reformation in things of Religion is made
by just Authority, or a lawful separation made by private persons from a
Communion polluted with unlawful conditions; it is yet very hard to keep the
Example from being abused by others in reforming or separating without any such
cause, and will still be of worse consequence to set an example of wanton and
unjustifiable separation: for this is so plain a contempt of Authority, Order,
and Unity, that others will be afraid to subdivide into more Parties, as
Self-conceit, Ambition, or Revenge, or the like evil dispositions shall prompt
them.

5. If separation should not be made but with very great caution, for fear of
incurring the guilt of Schism by a causeless and unlawful departure from the
Assemblies of the Church, and setting up other Assemblies in opposition to
them. This in the judgment of the ancient Christians was no less than for a man
to cut himself off from the Catholic Church of Christ; and if the body of
Christ be but one, as the Scripture plainly tells us, he that divides himself
from any particular Church that is a Member of this Body, divides himself from
the whole Body. And therefore Schismatics were not accounted by the Ancients
to be within the Church, although they retained the profession of the Common
Faith. And surely a man would well advise with himself about an action whereby
he may be in danger of putting himself into that condition. The Unity of
Christians in one Body and Communion, was instituted by our Lord for very great
and weighty reasons, and particularly for the securing of Brotherly kindness
amongst his Disciples, who being Members of the Body of Christ, should
therefore love and care for one another more than other men are wont to do; and
for the retaining of Professors within the Rules of a true Christian life, from
which if they should break away by any scandalous practice, they were to be
punished for it by the shame of being turned out of the Communion of the
Church, and by the loss of the great advantages thereof. But it is evident,
that they who are guilty of dividing the Communion of Christians, and setting
up one Communion in opposition to another, without necessary cause, do what in
them lies to render this provision for the maintenance of Charity and purity of
Manners amongst Believers, altogether ineffectual. And we see by experience
that hatred and ill will, and looseness of life, gains ground more by the
Schisms that are amongst Christians, than by any thing else; and no wonder,
since men that are of different and opposite Communions do not use to love one
another; and vicious persons do not value the Communion of a true Church, nor
care if for their ill manners they be turned out of it, when they can take
Sanctuary in a pretended Church of another Communion, that makes as loud a
claim to all the Privileges of a Chruch-Society as that Church can do from
which they have divided themselves. Which things being considered, we are not
to wonder that in St. Cyprian's time Schism was accounted no less, but rather a
greater fault than to sacrifice to Idols for the avoiding of persecution. For
though Idolatry simply considered be in it self worse, yet Schism in its
consequences is more pernicious. He that is the Head of a Schism, does more
mischief to the Church than if he turned a Pagan or a Mohammedan. The conclusion
from hence is this: That it concerns every man that separates himself from an
established Church, it concerns him, I say, as much as his Soul is worth, to
look to it that the cause of his separation be just and necessary, and such as
will throw the guilt of Schism upon that Church from which he separates.

But alas, how few are they that examine the reasons upon which they have
broken away from the Church of England? How many, that when they are pressed in
good earnest, can say no more for themselves than that they have better
preaching, and more spiritual praying elsewhere, than in our Parish-Churches?
How will they abuse our Prayers and call them Porridge, and such other vile
names, who never in all their lives so much as read them, and are not ashamed
to own that they have not? They call the Bishops Antichristian, and the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church Idolatrous or Superstitious, who yet never well
considered what Antichrist means, what is Idolatry or Superstition; who have
little or nothing to say, if they be asked what evil is in Bishops, in
Liturgies, and in the Rites of our Worship. How many others are there who read
the Books written to defend the separation, but will not vouchsafe so much as
to look upon any one that is published in behalf of the Communion of our
Church? God of his mercy give a better Spirit to such people, and Repentance to
those that have misled them.

Fourthly, We should not easily believe those men in matters of Religion, who
would keep us from examining their Doctrines by fair ways of trial, and would
affright us into an implicit Faith, by pronouncing damnation against all that
are not of their own way. If men use violence or subtlety to hinder us from
judging for ourselves, there is great reason to suspect that they are conscious
to themselves of a bad Cause which will not bear the trial. I need not say how
this reaches the Roman Church, which forbids the Laity to read the Scriptures,
unless some one Layman has that special favor granted him of leave so to do
from his Ordinary, who commonly is wise enough not to give this license, but
where he is sure the party is fast enough to the Cause of that Church.

Those of the separate Congregations best know what Arts are used to keep the
people that go that way, from informing themselves by reading our Books, or
discoursing with our Ministers about the matters in controversy between them
and us. But we are not ignorant of all of them, some of their Leaders teach
them to pity our ignorance, and want of illumination; Alas, poor wretches that
we are, we know not the things of the Spirit of God! we are strangers to the
life and power of Godliness!

Thus they use to represent us. They take all the good names and promises of
the Scripture to themselves, and leave the threatenings of God, and the
punishments inflicted upon his enemies, to us. Now this is but a cunning and
indirect way to keep the People from harkening to any thing we can say to 'em,
and to teach them how to conclude against us, without thinking it to any
purpose to examine what is offered on both sides. They that have a good Cause,
need not use those disingenuous Arts; they will not fright men from considering
what their adversaries say, by denouncing damnation against them, nor forbid
them to read their Books, but rather encourage them to do so, that they may see
the difference between Truth and Error, between Reason and Sophistry, with
their own eyes. This is the effect of a well-grounded confidence in the Truth;
and there is this sign of a good Cause apparently discernable in the
Application of the Clergy of this Church both to their friends and enemies.
They desire both the one and the other to consider impartially what is said for
us and against us. And whatever Guides of a Party do otherwise, they give just
cause to those that follow them, to examine their Doctrines so much the more,
by how much they are unwilling to have them examined. It is a bad sign when
men are loath to have their Opinions seen in the day, but love darkness rather
than light.

Thus I have shown in what cases we are most concerned to examine the Doctrines
of those that undertake to inftruct and guide us.

5.
II. Because the duty of proving all things supposes certain Rules and Tests,
by which Doctrines are to be examined and tried, I proceed to show what they
are. Now it is very certain that the Rules by which we are to try Doctrines for
our own satisfaction about them, are no other than those want of Argument by
which a wise man would prove the truth of his Persuasion to others for their
satisfaction. And therefore it is plain that those Rules must be common to me
and to other men whom I would also guide so into the knowledge of that Truth to
which I have attained. And they are these three.

1. Reason, which is a common Rule to all men. 2. Scripture, which is a common
Rule to all Christians. 3. Antiquity, or the uniform Judgment and Practice of
the Church in the first Ages of Christianity; which is a common Rule to those
who are verst in the Histories of the Primitive Church, and in the Writings of
the Fathers.

The two former Rules are the principal and most necessary, and we are safe if
our Persuasions in Religion will bear the Test of Reason and Scripture, and
withal those Rules are near at hand for every man's use amongst us. But the last
Rule is also of good use to those that can use it, for their own confirmation
in the truth, and stopping the mouths of gainsayers. But more particularly,

1. By Reason, I do not understand that Faculty by which we are men, and can
compare one thing with another, and argue and conclude, etc. for this is that
Natural Power by which we use any kind of Rule whereby to judge of the truth or
falsehood of Opinions in Religion; but I understand by it, those common Truths
which are natural to the minds of men, and to which we give a ready assent,
without any need of having them proved by any thing else. For by these
fundamental Truths we are to prove all things else; and if there were none
such, we could prove nothing. And they are such as these, That nothing can make
it self; That the same thing cannot be and not be at the same time; That common
sense is to be trusted; That God is a being absolutely perfect; That the Good
is to be chosen, and the Evil to be refused; and that Contradictions cannot be
true, and the like. Now whatever is by true consequence deduced from such
Principles, is thereby proved to be true; and whatsoever is repugnant to them,
or can be disproved by them, is false. They are the forementioned Propositions,
with others as self-evident as they; which make up that which we call the Light
of Nature or of Reason. And I mention this Rule in the first place, because it
must be presupposed to all other ways and means of enquiring after Truth, and
without which nothing could be done in it; insomuch that the belief of that
Truth which is not to be deduced from mere natural Reason, but depends upon a
divine Testimony, is at last resolved into a rational Act, and relies upon this
natural Principle, that God cannot lie.

Wherefore they that cry down Reason, as if it were at no hand to be trusted in
matters of Religion, and call it carnal, blind, and foolish Reason, and
suchlike vile names, if they are in good earnest, they are incapable of
searching after Truth themselves, and of receiving any satisfaction from
others. While they are in this humor, I may as well take a Beast to dispute
with, as go about to convince them. And if all men were thus senseless, it were
impossible that men should be serviceable to instruct one another in the things
of God. But to abandon the use of Reason in matters of Religion, and to scorn a
man when he speaks consistently, and argues clearly from common Principles of
Truth, is such a wretched sort of unmanliness, that I cannot but think it is
for the most part taken up in design, by those men that have brought Nonsense,
and Contradictions, and absurd Opinions into Religion; which no man can admit,
without doing violence to his own understanding. For when Hypocrites have for
their worldly interest debauched Religion in this manner, they know that the
meanest people will never swallow their gross absurdities, unless they can
first prevail with them to believe that it is a dangerous thing to trust their
own eyes, or to hearken to any discourse from Principles of Reason, though it
be never so clear and strong; and that it is a kind of merit to believe things
incredible, and to stick to a conclusion the faster, the more impossible it
seems to be true. But by the way, if Reason be one, and that the first means by
which we are to judge for our selves in matters of Religion, as I shall make
bold to say it is, I should vehemently suspect, without farther examination,
that they know their Opinions to be very foolish, who at first dash renounce
the most general and necessary Rule by which they are to be tried.

I shall only add, that because the fundamental Principles of Reason are the
same all the World over; Reason is therefore the most public Rule and Test,
whereby to judge between Truth and Error. And therefore if a Council defines
things in that manner, that I must forsake right Reason to follow its
Definitions; when I make this plain, this is not opposing a private Spirit to a
public Judgment, but appealing from a less public Judgment, to the most
public Sense and Judgment of mankind.

6.
2. As Reason is a Rule to all men, so is Scripture a Rule to all Christians,
at least it ought to be so; and all pretend to make it a Rule for their
Judgment, by appealing to it. The Church of Rome indeed allows it to be but
part of the Rule of Faith; we say it is an entire and perfect Rule thereof.
However, so long as she acknowledges the Scriptures to be a Rule, though she
pretends there is another Rule besides that, she is to be concluded by the
authority of the Scriptures; and so we are to be acquitted by her, in not
believing her against the Scriptures.

Now every body must grant that we do not judge rightly by the Scriptures,
where we mistake the meaning of the Text. And we ought to be sure that the
sense wherein we take any place, is the true sense, before we make our
interpretation of it a Rule whereby to examine other things.

Where the sense is very plain, it requires nothing more than common sense and
common honesty to understand it; and it is very reasonable to suppose that God
has revealed all points necessary to salvation so clearly and plainly, that it
is not difficult for an honest man to understand what they are.

But because there are many obscure places in the Scriptures, we must be very
careful not to ground any Doctrine upon them, till we have well weighed and
examined the meaning of those places; and the way to be secure from any
dangerous mistake in concluding from places of Scripture that are more or less
hard to be understood, is to observe such cautions as these are, which I think
all Christians must allow to be reasonable.

1. That we take no Text in a sense which is repugnant to common Sense and
natural Reason.

2. That we put no sense upon a place of Scripture that is repugnant to the
general scope and design of the whole Word of God.

3. That we understand no*difficult places in a sense that is contrary to to
those places whose meaning is plain and manifest to all men.

4. That we mistake not those places for plain, which are not so.

5. That we put no other sense upon a Text than what agrees with the scope and
design of that particular Discourse wherein we find it.

1. Before we conclude upon the sense of a Text, so as to prove any thing by
it, we must be sure that sense is not repugnant to natural Reason. For if it
be, it cannot be the true meaning of the Scripture. For God is the Original of
natural Truth, as well as of that which comes by particular Revelation; and, as
Hierocles says, to believe and obey right Reason, and to follow God, are the
same thing. And therefore no Proposition that is repugnant to the fundamental
Principles of Reason, can be the sense of any part of Gods Book; and that which
is false and contrary to Reason, can no more be true and agreeable to the
revelations of Scripture, than God, who is the Author of one as well as the
other, can contradict himself. From hence it is evident, that these words, This
is my body, are not to be understood in that sense which makes for the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, because it is impossible that contradictions should be
true; and we cannot be more certain that any thing is true, than we are that
that Doctrine is false. There are some other Doctrines maintained by men of
Name in the World, that they have no better grounds for, than obscure Texts
interpreted contrary to the Principles of natural Reason and Religion. This
caution therefore is to be minded in the first place.

2. We must put no sense upon a difficult place, which contradicts the great
end and drift of the whole Bible. Now that is, to work Faith in men, and
thereby to bring them to repentance, and to a holy life. And therefore
whatsoever Doctrine does naturally tend to take men off from the care of holy
living, by nourishing them in foolish presumption, or driving them to miserable
despair, cannot be the Doctrine of the Scriptures; and therefore such a
Doctrine cannot be proved from any obscure Text of the Bible, and by
consequence that sense of an obsure Text from which it may be proved, is not
the true sense, unless we can believe that some part of the holy Books teaches
something that undermines the great end of the whole. There are too many
Opinions amongst some Christians that have no other color for them, than
Scripture interpreted without this necessary caution, which must therefore be
added to the former.

3. We must not understand a difficult place in a sense that is contrary to
those places whose meaning is plain and manifest to all men. For the Scripture
cannot teach one thing plainly in one place, and the quite contrary obscurely
in another. It is but reasonable therefore in trying to understand a difficult
place, or in going about to prove any thing from it, that we should compare
Scripture with Scripture, and the obscure places with those that are plain; not
to interpret the plain by the obscure, which is contrary to all Rules of
Discourse, but the obscure by the plain; especially because the plain places
contain things that are most necessary to be understood and believed by us: and
therefore we cannot without great danger forsake the Doctrine which they teach;
as every man in effect does, who takes a difficult place in a sense contrary to
that Doctrine. In a word, the Scripture is our Rule principally where it is
easiest to be understood, and the meaning is most plain and evident. But this
caution will be of greater use, if we take the next along with us; and that is
this:

4. In trying Opinions by Scripture, we must be something careful lest we
mistake those places for plain, which indeed are not so, but more or less
obscure.

And here I think it needful to show what I mean by the plainness or by the
difficulty of a Text. A Text is then plain, when that is the true and intended
meaning of it which the first reading or hearing of the words does suggest to a
man's mind. And the Scripture is thus plain in necessary points, especially in
the Precepts and Exhortations thereof, which though in some places they are
couched under more obscure terms, yet in others they are delivered with this
plainness.

A Text may be said to be difficult, when we do not hit of the true and
intended sense upon the first reading, or gather it from the bare surface of
the words, but must search and enquire farther to know it.

And there are two sorts of difficult Texts in Scripture. Some places are so
hard to be understood, that upon the first reading of the words or phrases, no
tolerable or intelligible sense can be put on them at all, without a great deal
of farther study and enquiry; the difficult places of which sort are more
seldom perverted to maintain any ill Opinion: for no body goes about to make a
Text a Scriptural proof of any thing, without he first determines with himself
in what sense to take it; and as for the hard places of this kind, it being not
obvious at the first reading what sense they can bear, a man cannot well offer
to prove any thing by them. The other sort of difficult Texts are those which
being taken by themselves, do upon the first sight or sound of the words, seem
to have a plain sense and meaning, which yet are not to be understood in that
sense the words will be upon the first reading of them; and these are the hard
places in Gods Word which are most perverted, and taken in such sense as the
Holy Ghost never intended: for then is an hard place like to be wrested, when
it seems plain to him who does not understand it; and a difficult Text may seem
plain to him who for want of studying and considering, thinks he understands
it, but does not.

I shall instance in some difficult Texts of the latter sort, which have been
mistaken for plain (that is) erroneously taken to have such a meaning as they
appear to have upon the first reading.

In the ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans we have these words, That it
might not be of works, but of him that calls: some take this for a plain
place, and therefore think it a clear scriptural truth, that our salvation is
not at all of our works, but only proceeds from an absolute decree of Heaven.

So again we have it affirmed by the Apostle in the same Chapter, It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Hence
some think it is plain in Scripture, that what we do signifies little, all is
from an arbitrary favor of God.

Again, in the 1 Cor. 4. 7. we find these words, Who makes thee to differ from
another? From the sound of which words some gather that we are not free Agents
in our own conversion; but that if we be better than our Neighbors, it is an
Almighty Power has made us so, and not any free choice or care of our own.

Now certain it is, that we mistake the meaning of a Text of Scripture, if we
look upon it as plain when it is not so; and consequently, in this case we
cannot be able to judge what is orthodox or erroneous, by having recourse to
any Scriptures so misapprehended.

But how can I know when a place is but seemingly plain, and not really so, (i.
e.) when I am not to take that to be the meaning of the place, which I may
apprehend upon the first running of the words and sound of the phrases?

This is to be known by comparing places together, and going by this Rule. A
place seems only to be plain, but is not, when it is uppermost sense, and what
it offers to us, does not agree with the sense of a place undoubtedly plain.
For instance, the Texts now mentioned may seem plain to those who would prove
their erroneous Persuasions to be scriptural Truths by them; yet if we suppose
them plain, (i. e.) if we think they are to be taken in that sense which they
will bear at the first reading, then they are Texts undeniably repugnant to
such places of St. Paul, as all must believe and acknowledge to be plain.

For whereas he says -- That it might not be of works, etc. in another place he
gives us this plain Precept, Work out your salvation. Is not salvation of
works, and Phil. 2. 12.
yet must we work it out? Either therefore it is not true in the sense some
take the words, that salvation is not of works, or it is not proper to bid us
work it out; wherefore by this plain place [Work out your salvation] we must
conclude that the other place [That it might not be of works] whatsoever the
sense of it may be, it cannot have this meaning, that our salvation does not
depend upon our works or doings.

In like manner, whereas the Apostle says [It is not of him that wills, nor
of him that runs, etc.] does he not in a plain practical discourse, wherein
he compares the Christian life to a Race, exhort us so to run that we 1 Cor.
12. 24.
may obtain?

Now is it not of running that we obtain? and yet does he bid us so run that we
may obtain? Wherefore the plain Precept to run, etc. evidently shows that it
cannot be the meaning of the other place, that it is not by running or by
diligence in a Christian life* that we obtain salvation.

1 Cor 4. 7.
Again, whereas he asks in one place, Who makes thee to differ from another?
he also exhorts in another, Romans 12. 2.
Be not conformed to the world. And therefore the meaning of the former clause
cannot be, that the righteous man who is more excellent than his neighbor,
does nothing toward the making of that difference: for then it would be very
improper to exhort a man to make that difference, by not conforming to the
world.

Finally, it is evident that these places of St. Paul which I have now
compared, cannot be all of them plain, for then they are irreconcilably
repugnant to one another; and if they are not all plain, then some of them must
not be thought to have such a meaning, as the first reading of the words might
make us think they have. And therefore in judging things by Scripture, we must
be careful that we do not prove or disprove them by Scriptures mistaken for
plain when they are not so.

5. We must also see that the sense wherein we take a passage of Scripture that
belongs to a Discourse, be agreeable to the design and scope of that
Discourse to which it belongs. This Rule, as it is necessary for all to
observe, so it is especially to be urged upon men that are apt to interpret
places that are not of themselves plain, by those Opinions that they are
already possessed with a belief of, but for which they have little ground,
besides the mere sound of some Texts, which at first hearing seem to be of
their side, but which, if they were compared with the design of the holy
Writer in that Chapter or Book, would be found to mean quite another thing. All
that I shall say besides of this Rule is, that the difficulty of many places
that are not of themselves plain, will be removed by observing it. For
instance, by this way we shall easily be satisfied, that that forementioned
place of St. Paul, Who makes thee to differ from another? was chiefly meant of
those extraordinary gifts which were distributed amongst believers in the first
Ages of the Church; and therefore (though in a qualified sense this is true of
all saving Graces) it is very consistent with all those Scriptures that suppose
the difference between the righteous and the wicked, to depend upon something
which is in the power of the righteous. If we mangle coherent Discourses, and
take a shred or a phrase of Scripture by it self, without regard to the main
scope of the place, and this to prove what what we would have; we do not try
our Opinions by Scripture, but we interpret Scripture by our own Opinions.

Thus I have shown what Cautions are to be observed in judging by Scripture. I
doubt not but all will acknowledge them to be very reasonable and equal; and if
all men had observed them, who have a just veneration for the Scriptures, the
Word of God had been better understood and less wrested; unsound Divinity had
not easily passed for Scriptural Truth, and all occasion of those unjust
Reproaches had been taken away which the Church of Rome throws upon us for
allowing to all Christians the free use of Gods Holy Book.

And thus much for the Rules of Reason and Scripture.

3. The third I mentioned was Antiquity and Catholic Tradition. Now if this
Rule, as I said at first, be of excellent use, then they are in the best way to
find out what is the true Christian Religion by it, who stick to the Holy
Scriptures, though they are not capable of using it otherwise. For if that be
true which was most anciently taught and believed in the Church, and which was
received all along in the best Ages of the Church; then he that can prove his
Faith by Scripture, has the Argument of Antiquity and Catholic Tradition
unquestionably on his side, because the Scriptures are the most ancient Records
of our Religion, and they have been delivered down to us as such from the
beginning through all Ages to our present times. But we acknowledge also the
testimony of Antiquity of something of a later date, that is, of the ancient
Fathers of the Church, to be of very good use for the clearing of some places
in Scripture; for showing what Order and Discipline was left in the Church by
the Apostles; for confirming us in points of Faith grounded upon the
Scriptures, but which have been disputed and opposed by Heretics; and likewise
for confuting those gross errors in Belief or Practice, which of later days
have been brought in amongst Christians, especially those of the Church of
Rome. But how things are to be examined by this Rule, I shall not Discourse
about Tradition, showing, etc.
here direct, because this is the subject of an excellent Discourse already
published.

And thus much concerning Rules whereby to try Opinions in Religion.

7.
III. The Dispositions wherewith we are to search for the Truth by these means,
are also of necessary consideration: for whatever other advantages we have, if
we be greatly defective in these, we shall very often lose our labor, and fall
into mistakes of dangerous consequence.

To qualify a man for receiving Truth when propounded with sufficient
evidence, or to find it out by his own search, there must be these three things.

1. A prepared mind. 2. Competent Diligence. 3. Prayer to God for his blessing
upon that Diligence.

1. A prepared mind, which our Savior calls a good and honest heart. Now this
consists in Humility, Ingenuity, and Sincerity.

Humility is necessary, because overweening and self-concit makes a man apt to
despise what those of a different Persuasion can say for themselves, before
their Arguments are considered; and in general, to neglect that help which may
be had by the advice and reasoning of others. So likewise vainglory fixes a
man in an error he has once defended; and while he is unwilling to
acknowledge a mistake, he strains all his Wit to delude himself into a stronger
belief of it, and of his ability to defend it. In Controversies he is desirous
of victory, and would fain be thought somebody; and therefore he studies more
to expose an adversary, than to inform himself. And if he be yet to choose his
side of a Question, he takes the wrong one, if it be more fashionable than the
right. Therefore says our Savior, Whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little child, i. e. with a meek and pliable spirit, shall not enter
therein. Again, says he, My sheep hear my voice; intimating that they would be
easily convinced who were of tractable and humble minds. And therefore he adds
concerning the Pharisees, that they rejected him, because they were not of his
Sheep, i. e. because of their haughty and inflexible dispositions.

Prejudice is apt to bar the mind against conviction as well as Pride, and
therefore to Humility we must add Ingenuity and Sincerity, by which a man is
qualified to distinguish between the suggestions of Prejudice on the one side,
and the force of good Reasons on the other.

Ingenuity is opposed to those Prejudices that are either unavoidably
contracted, or taken up through weakness of understanding.

Of the former sort are the Prejudices of Education, or conversing altogether
with our own Party. Men are generally prepossessed with great favor to those
Opinions in which they have been all along trained up, and which have been
instilled into them by all that they have conversed with. And therefore we
cannot be meet Inquirers after Truth, if we want the ingenuity of suspecting
our selves on this side, and trying those Persuasions in which we have been
bred up, with the greater impartiality and severity.

Some men are prejudiced by an unaccountable inclination toward an Opinion, or
an antipathy against it; and these ought the more carefully to distinguish
between the warmth of their imaginations on the one side, and the force of
Arguments on the other; and not to take a passionate fondness for a conclusion,
or an aversion from it, to be a Reason one way or other. It is very incident to
weak minds, to prejudg in favor of their Opinions whose persons they admire,
and mostly to that degree, as not to hear with any patience an Argument against
them. Such a Precious man said this or that, and therefore no body must say
otherwise. But it is at once disingenuous and silly, to entertain such an
opinion of any man, as to take all that he says for Gospel; for the best men
are fallible, and it is easy for an Hypocrite to make himself pass for a Saint
in the opinion of ordinary people: and therefore men may be led into great
errors, whose judgments are captivated in this manner.

To this we may add that Prejudice which arises from conceiving hard things of
men's persons; which an ingenuous man will by no means yield to, but will
consider what another says, though he does not fancy the man. It is reason
enough with some people to reject all that their Minister says to convince them
of their mistakes, if he be called a High Churchman, or goes for an Arminian;
and all this while they stand in their own light, and will not suffer
themselves to be instructed in many profitable Truths which they might learn.
Thus the Jews, though they were astonished at our Savior's Doctrine and Works,
yet believed not; and this because they were offended at him for the meanness
of his Parentage.

Some are so weak as to be prejudiced against Opinions and Practices, merely
because they have heard them often abused, nicknamed, and inveighed against in
a rude and reproachful manner. And this goes a great way with some Dissenters
to make them deaf to all our Reasons, that when they are got together, they
hear the Rites and Prayers of our Church scoffed at and called by vile names.
But it stands not with the least ingenuity, to run away with prejudice against
things that are abused and laughed at, without examining whether there be
reason for it.

Sincerity is opposed to those Prejudices that arise from vicious affections
and worldly interests; and it consists in a firm resolution to do the Will of
God, and a vehement desire to know it for that end. And this is a most
necessary preparation to know the Truth, because nothing is more common than
the perverting of men's judgments by the inordinacy of their lusts, and the
serving of a corrupt interest.

The love of any Vice makes a man partial and insincere in examining the truth
of that Doctrine by which he stands condemned. The belief of it is uneasy to
him; it is not for his interest that it should be true* This is the reason why
the fool says in his heart, There is no God.

The worldly interests of men do strangely bias and fashion their Judgments.
It were a thing never enough to be admired, that so many men of Parts and
Learning should not be ashamed of those pitiful grounds upon which they
maintain the Supremacy of the Pope, the Doctrine of Purgatory, the Half
Communion, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Invocation of Saints, and the like;
but that those things do notoriously serve the Wealth and Grandeur of the Roman
Church. If it be needful to go to a Conventicle for the getting of a rich
Fortune, or the bettering of a man's Trade, a little enquiry will for the most
part serve his turn, and satisfy him that the Separation is lawful, and the
Causes of it are just. A man ought to set aside all consideration of his
worldly interest, and to propound eternal life to himself as the end of his
inquiry, when he labors to know the Truth.

The affectation of Popularity, and the love of Praise and Flattery, cannot
consist with a sincere love of the Truth, and does very often hinder the
attainment of it. It is hard to convince men of those things that check their
vainglorious ends and purposes. And therefore says our Savior, How can ye
believe in me, that receive honor one of another, and seek not that honor
which comes of God only?

The wise man exhorts us to buy the truth, intimating thereby that we must quit
all our sinful lusts and affections, and our carnal interests in prosecuting of
it. In a word, we must be in mind prepared to believe all truth, by being
resolved to do whatsoever appears to be the Will of God, let what will come of
it in this World, having our hearts evermore fixed upon the great concernment
of eternal life. And this is more necessary for the best knowledge, than
vastness of Parts and Learning.

Where the mind is thus prepared, there will be little need to press the two
remaining Dispositions; whereof the former is,

2. Competent diligence. Error is sometimes made to look so like the Truth,
that a superficial examination will not serve to distinguish one from the
other. Sometimes the Truth must be had by laying a great many things together,
and the proof does not lie in one, but in many Arguments pointing the same way.
Sometimes also a conclusion is offered with the show of many Motives of
credibility, which neither singly nor jointly prove what is intended. And here
patience and industry commonly helps more than quickness of judgment.

Our Savior bad the Jews search the Scriptures; those very men who in all
probability had read them, but as it seems, not with diligence enough. It
were very well, if those that begin to study Divinity would not presume upon
the diligence and honesty of others, whose Books they see full of Citations of
Scripture; but take some pains to judge whether that be the true sense in which
they are quoted. For want of this, several have miscarried in their first
entrance upon this work; and the errors of men of name and authority, have
been propagated. It would also be very happy for this Church, and for
themselves too, if the dissenting people would not presently conclude that what
they read in the Books of their own way is all agreeable to Gods Word, because
they see abundance of Scripture in them, but would use some diligence to judge
whether that be the true meaning in which the Scripture is there understood. It
was doubtless with design to catch such slothful people, that the Catechism of
H. T. was published in our Language, wherein Abridgment of Christian Doctrine
printed at Doway.
he pretends to prove all the lewd Doctrines of the Romish Religion, by Texts
of Scripture. But if any man will take the pains to examine his pr^oofs, he
shall find such miserable wresting and perverting of the Scripture, that he
will never trust a Book more merely for store of Scripture-Phrases and
Citations; but go to the Fountain of Truth it self, the pure Word of God, to
see whether the interpretations of men are indeed the unpolluted streams of
that Spring, from whence they are said to come.

We must be willing to sift things to the bottom, if we would not be imposed
upon. A very little pains will serve to make a man confident; but it is not a
little that will make him confident upon safe grounds.

3. To Diligence we must add Prayer for the divine Illumination. In searching
for Truth we must implore his help who is the God of Truth, whose Word is the
Word of Truth, and whose Spirit is the Guide into Truth, that he would free our
minds from all prejudices and corrupt affections, and from every thing which
obstructs a right understanding. If we lack wisdom, we must ask it of God, who
gives his holy Spirit to them that ask him.

And now I dare appeal to all that read these Papers, if it had not been to the
unspeakable advantage of Gods Church, and the Souls of men, if all that profess
Christianity had inquired into the Controversies of Religion (so far as they
are concerned in them) with these Dispositions that I have recommended. And
therefore I do the more earnestly desire them to lay their hands upon their
breasts, and in good earnest to ask themselves if they have in this manner
sought the knowledge of the Truth; with a mind thus prepared, with impartiality
and diligence, and constant Prayer for Gods blessing and direction.

8.
IV. My next business is to offer some Considerations to persuade our people to
an honest and impartial trial of Opinions in Religion.

This indeed cannot be done by all with equal advantage, because of the
difference of men's abilities; but something is to be done by all, and every one
is to do what he can, and God expects no more.

If we choose a way of Religion at random, or without honest care to know the
Truth, we are in great danger of falling into delusion, because there are false
Religions and damnable Errors in the World. Says St. John, Try the Spirits
whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the
world. There was danger of running into grievous error in the best and purest
Age of the Church, if Christians were not careful to examine things. And surely
the danger is greater in this corrupt Age, and this extremely-divided State of
Christendom.

It often happens also, I doubt for the most part, that Seducers are more
diligent and wise to propagate Error, than good men are to gain Proselytes to
the Truth. The former are evermore too hard for the latter in confidence,
peremptoriness, threatening of damnation, magnificent and lofty pretenses, and
where the case calls for it, in artificial addresses and insinuations. And this
makes our danger the greater, if we are not resolved to try before we trust.

Nay, if we were secure from Impostors, yet because no man is infallible, we
should not surrender up our Belief wholly to the Authority of any man, but
judge of his Doctrine as well as we can.

Because there cannot be a stronger ground for our assent to any thing, than
that God has said it, we are to be very careful how we receive an Opinion, for
which Texts of Scripture are multiplied one upon another, i. e. we must see
whether they do indeed prove the thing in question: for otherwise we may by the
pretense of so great Authority, be the more fastened in some dangerous error.
We are exposed to manifest hazard, if we are apt to admire a man for bringing
much Scripture to serve his purpose, but not to think it needful to see whether
those passages of Holy Writ be pertinently applied or not.

To this I must add, that the errors we may fall into for want of enquiry and
examination, may for ought we know, be of dangerous consequence to our own
Souls. Some there are that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; and
if we are in their way, they may wrest them to ours too. We may inconsiderately
take up Principles that will by degrees debauch our Consciences, and reconcile
us to wicked practices, and in many instances eat out the sense of good and
evil, sin and duty.

On the other hand, by considering things as impartially and judiciously as we
can, we shall not only be secure from running into great errors, but the
Doctrines of true Religion will become more plain to us, and we shall have a
more clear and distinct apprehension of them; which will reward our endeavors
with great pleasure and satisfaction. For next to the delight of a good
Conscience gained by doing what we know to be our duty, there is no pleasure
more pure and agreeable to the best part of our nature, than that which arises
from an improved knowledge in the things of God.

And having well weighed and considered the grounds of our Persuasion, we shall
adhere more steadfastly to that truth which we have learned, and not be easily
unsettled by the Sophistry or the Confidence of ill men, being prepared to show
that there is no sound Reason in the former, and no just Cause for the latter.
And when Seducers perceive that we have inquired too far into things, to be
born down with peremptoriness, or to be deluded with colors; they will be
discouraged from attempting to draw us into their Net.

Moreover, it will be no little satisfaction to us, when we are going out of
the world, that we have all along taken due pains to inform our selves in
things of the greatest concernment to us, viz. those which regard our
everlasting salvation; and that the errors into which we may have fallen, were
not to be imputed to want of honest diligence in inquiring after the Truth, but
only to humane infirmity.

In the mean time, we cannot have the conscience of sincerity upon good
grounds, if we do not with diligence apply our selves to know all our duty, and
consequently all that divine Truth which is the Rule of it, or which leads to
the performance of it. One character of that good and honest heart which our
Savior compares to the good Ground, is to understand the Word. And the reason
why the Pharisees did not understand, was because they were not of God, but of
their Father the Devil whose lusts they did. One reason why God in his wisdom
permits Impostures and Errors to go up and down in the World, is because this
serves to make a more evident difference between those that are sincere and
honest, and those that are not so. For in these circumstances good men will
take the more pains to distinguish between Truth and Error, while the
insincere either take up that Profession which serves best for their worldly
ends, or take occasion by the differences that are in the World about Religion,
to throw off all pretense to Religion it self. There must be herefies among
you, says St. Paul, that they which are approved may be made manifest.

To which we may add, that by honest endeavors to be rightly informed in
matters of Religion, we do in some measure qualify our selves for the
happiness of another life, and show that we are disposed heavenwards, and
desirous of that infinitely-better state of things, where Darkness and Error
shall be done away. For one great part of the Reward promised in a better life,
is that we shall know divine things more perfectly there, than we can do in
this World. But this can be no happiness to any but to those that are lovers of
Truth and Goodness here.

I shall conclude this point with one consideration more, That at this time we
have very confiderable advantages and opportunities toward the discovery of
Truth in the present Controversies among us. We of this Church are persuaded
that Papists and other Sectaries do causelessly divide from our Communion, and
grievously sin against God, and endanger their own Souls, as well as disturb
the quiet of the Church, by their separation from it, and their combinations
against it. And therefore some pains has been taken, more than ordinary, to
show them the error of their way, by going through the several points upon
which they pretend to justify their doings. And it is plain, as I have shown
already, that in things of this nature they are mightily concerned to know the
Truth. And therefore if they neglect so fair an opportunity of examining things
as is now offered them, they will have the more to answer for another day. The
several Controversies between this* Church on the one side, and the Dissenters
and the Recusants on the other, are stated and argued in a plain and familiar
way, and brought down for the most part to the capacity of ordinary Readers.
And therefore let both the one and the other look to it, that they do not
either in obstinacy or in laziness, or for worldly interest, put away the Truth
from themselves. We should be very sorry if our endeavors should have no other
effect than to make them more inexcusable at last. It will be our grief, but it
will be their condemnation.

9.
V. When after due examination, we have settled our selves upon true grounds,
whether in keeping our first Persuasions, or in changing them (if we found they
were wrong) for better: we must remember that there are duties incumbent upon
us growing from the knowledge we have gained.

1. We are to be thankful to God for the Truth we have learned. When we see how
miserably some men are mistaken and deluded in things that are both plain
enough, and of great moment, we should not insult over them and grow into
self-conceit, but into humility and gratitude to God, acknowledging it to be of
his grace and goodness, that we are not led away into the same delusions. We
are indeed to thank him for all things that contributed toward our escape or
recovery. If we have a better natural apprehension and judgment than some
others, who was it that made the difference? If we had a good Education, and
were put into a right way at first, it was God that chose those happy
circumstances for us. If we have recovered from any way of dangerous error in
which we were bred up, the conversation, the friends, the books, and all other
means by which we came to be better informed, were ministered unto us by the
good providence of God. And that degree of a good mind which either prompted us
to inquire, or prepared us to do it with success, was likewise from his Grace.
Finally, it was his Blessing that crowned all. For every good and perfect gift
comes from above, from the Father of lights. So that in effect God is to have
all the praise. And if we make it our business humbly and thankfully to
acknowledge all his goodness in that knowledge of the Truth to which we have
attained, we shall reap this great advantage and comfort thereby, that by his
grace and providence he will communicate to us more and more knowledge, if it
be needful for us; or at least that he will not suffer us to fall into any
dangerous error. For we are not safe from damnable errors merely because we
believe the Truth at present; our perseverance in it depends upon the Grace of
God, which is forfeited by nothing sooner than by Pride and Ingratitude. For
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. And if by the impiety
of neglecting to acknowledge God in those Blessings we have received from him,
we should provoke him to leave us to our selves; our Judgments though they be
set right at present, will easily be depraved and corrupted by vicious
affections, and by degrees we may fall from one delusion to another, till we
come to believe the same things with those men whom we were once apt to scorn
or to pity for their stupidity and blindness.

Now the ways are very plain by which we are to express our thankfulness to God
for the knowledge we have gained.

We must do this in our daily Prayers, if we would show our selves grateful in
any proportion to the greatness of the benefit we have received. We are to
thank God for the least of his mercies, because we are less than the least; and
therefore for all the Blessings of this life, and of the outward man; that we
are not blind or lame, that we have not distorted limbs, or a deformed shape.
But is it not a more valuable Blessing still to have a mind clear from all foul
and monstrous error, endued with soundness of Judgment, and replenisht with
the knowledge of Divine Truth? Does not this therefore call for particular
acknowledgments and thanks?

We must be sure to express our thankfulness by better obedience, and by
improving in all Virtue and Piety, as we have improved in Knowledge. Otherwise
we receive this Grace of God in vain. Knowledge conduces to a man's true
happiness by leading him to do well; but if he holds the Truth in
unrighteousness, by increasing knowledge he does but increase sorrow, and that
because he increases his guilt. But that which I chiefly intend here, is this:
That God by inlightning our minds with a more full discovery of the Truth, has
laid upon us a great obligation in general to love him more perfectly, and to
perform his Will in all things more readily and cheerfully than we have done.
And this is true thankfulness, if because God has led us to the understanding
of some things which we were ignorant of heretofore, we do more heartily
perform those plain Duties, and obey those divine Rules of which we were not
ignorant before.

Finally, it is a principal expression of our gratitude to God, for being
enlightened and undeceived our selves, to be charitably helpful for the
undeceiving of others, and leading them into the knowledge of that Truth into
which God by his providence and grace has led us. For God is never more
pleased with us than when we do good one unto another: And therefore our
charity to our mistaken Brethren, is the most acceptable Sacrifice of Praise
that we can offer to him. But this is so considerable a thing, that it ought to
go by it self for one remarkable use we are to make of having gained the
knowledge of the Truth. Wherefore,

2. Let us consider how we are after this to behave our selves to others. I
have already told you, that in gratitude to God we are to do what we can to
recover those to whom we have opportunities to do this good office; and that
because God would have all men to be*saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth. This was that which our Lord said to Peter, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren; and if those who are not thoroughly confirmed in the
Truth are to be farther instructed, there is the same reason for endeavoring
to recover those that are quite out of the way. Therefore if any of our Friends
and Acquaintance, or others, whom at any time we have a good opportunity of
instructing, remain under those errors that we have forsaken, and have
discerned good cause to forsake; we must remember that though it was chiefly by
the grace and disposal of God that we came to a right understanding, yet it was
also by humane means, by conversing with others, or by reading their Books. And
therefore we should take our selves to be fit Instruments under God for the
reducing of them, by desiring them earnestly either to hear what we have
learned from others, or to read those Books by which we have been convinced.
And we should be the more earnestly engaged in this charity, because those whom
we may prevail withal, will thereby be engaged to help others also; and by this
means our diligence and charity will be blessed with the good success of
propagating the knowledge of Truth so far, that we shall not be able to see to
the end of it. If therefore thou art convinced that thy former Persuasions were
erroneous, and thy Practices grounded upon them unjustifiable, be not ashamed
to confess thy mistake, but show thy self glad that thou art now better
informed; and go to thy Friend and tell him that thou art fully persuaded thy
was has been wrong all this while, and show him these Arguments that have set
thee right, that he, as well as thy self, may rejoice in the discovery of the
Truth, and have the same reason to bless God that thou have.

Now when we are thus resolved, let us by no means forget in what manner we are
to apply our selves to our mistaken Brother for his information, i. e. in
meekness of wisdom, in the spirit of meekness, without railing and bitterness,
though we should meet with unhandsome opposition, remembering that we our selves
not long since were under the same mistakes, and had the like fondness for
those erroneous Opinions which we would now rescue our Brother from. If he does
not take information and receive instruction as fast as we did, we must not
presently grow into passion; for some men's prejudices are greater and stronger
than others, and all men have not the same capacity of understanding, and
quickness of apprehension; and therefore more time is to be allowed, and more
patience is to be used for the recovery of one man, than may be needful in the
case of another. And because nothing puts a slow or a prejudiced man more
backward than rough and bitter discourse, therefore more meekness, and
gentleness, and patience is requisite in dealing with him, than if we had to do
with one of better wit or less prejudice. When we would bring a man to the
Truth, we must avoid all things that will be sure to drive him at a farther
distance from it, as clamor, fierceness, and railing will certainly do. For
this carriage does but harden the obstinate, and confound the simple.

3. When we are convinced of the Truth, as we must not be ashamed, so neither
must we be afraid to own it, but constantly adhere to it by professing it, and
practicing according to it, whatever we lose or suffer for so doing. For
otherwise we are convinced to no other purpose than the increasing of our
guilt, for he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes. If therefore thou have hitherto been a Papist, but art now
convinced of the impious Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome; or a
Dissenter, but art now satisfied that there is no just ground for separation
from the Church of England; be not afraid of the Reproaches and Accusations of
those whose errors thou have left, no, not though your dependence be in a
great measure upon them, or your expectations of worldly advantage from them be
never so great. Consider that thy salvation lies at stake, and that the
question is, whether Gods love is not to be preferred before their favor, and
that you are now to show that you do not love the praise of men more than the
praise of God. Tell them that you will be still glad of their friendship, but
that you cannot purchase it at so dear a rate, as to sin against God for it,
either by renouncing that which you are thoroughly convinced is Gods Truth, or
by going contrary to a Conscience well informed of your duty. Let them know
that you have been at a great deal of pains to discover the truth in these
matters, and more than they have been at; that you value that knowledge of your
duty to which the Grace and Providence of God has led you, at a more just rate
than to sacrifice it to every worldly interest; and that the industry you have
used to inform your self aright, would turn to a very evil account, if after
all, you should play the Hypocrite.

When we have the Truth, our loins must be girt about with it; we must love it
heartily, profess it sincerely, and contend for it earnestly, and practice it
honestly. When we have bought the Truth by diligent and impartial enquiry, we
we must not sell it for the gain of worldly Wealth or Honor, or any other
secular advantage, no not for the safety of our lives. The sum of all, is this:
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of several Tracts written by some Divines in and about the City of
London, for the satisfaction of the Protestant Dissenters.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. A Letter to
Anonymus, in answer to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion. 4. The Case of Lay-Communion. 5. The Case of mixed Communion:
Whether it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 6. The Case of Indifferent things used in
the Worship of God, proposed and Stated. 7. A Vindication of it. 8. A Discourse
of Conscience. 9. A Discourse about a Scrupulous Conscience. 10. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren.
11. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 12. An Answer to the
Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of
Divine Service prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 13. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 14. A Defense of it. 15. The Case of
Infant Baptism, in Five Questions. 16. The Case of the Cross in Baptism. 17. A
Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 18.
The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament stated and resolved, In two Parts.
29. A Discourse about Edification. 20. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 21. An Argument to
Union; taken from the true Interest of those Dissenters in England who profess
and call themselves Protestants. 22. A serious Exhortation, with some important
Advices, relating to the late Cases about Conformity, recommended to the
present Dissenters from the Church of England.
Against Popery, these:
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith. 5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of
Faith. 6. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints. 7. A Discourse
concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the Church of
England. 8. A Discourse of Auricular Confession. 9. A Discourse against
Transubstantiation.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for T. BASSET.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of foreign parts.
Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Guillim's Heraldry. Bishop Sanderson's
Sermons. Mezaray's History of France. Dr. Howell's History of the World. In 2
Vol. Dr. Littleton's Dictionary. Complete Clerk. Dr. Sherlock's Sermon on the
Discovery of the Plot. Medicina Curiosa. Miege's French Dictionary. Willis's
London Tract of Physic. Bishop Wilkin's Sermons. -- Principle and duty of
Natural Religion. Bishop Land's Devotions.
All the Works, newly printed, of Doctor JOHN LIGHTFOOT, in two Volumes in
folio. Illustrated with Maps and several Tables to the Whole, with some things
never before printed.


