AN HISTORICAL AND Geographical Account OF THE MOREA, NEGROPONT, AND THE
Maritime Places, AS FAR AS THESSALONICA.

Illustrated with 42 Maps of the Countries, Plains, and Draughts of the Cities,
Towns and Fortifications.

Written in Italian by P. M. Coronelli, Geographer to the Republic of Venice.

Englished by R. W. Gent.

London, Printed for Matthew. Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, and W. Canning at his Shop in Vine-Court in the Middle
Temple, 1687.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
THis Book having been Published in Italian in the Year 1685. by the Ingenious
Coronelli, and the last Year in French with Additions, 'twas thought a Present
not unacceptable to give our Nation the Translation of it in English, which how
performed here we leave to thy candid Judgment. The Draughts of the Cities,
Towns and Fortifications, having already received sufficient Approbation.

As to the Book it self, we dare promise the Reader Diversion and Pleasure mixed
with Profit, let his Genius be what it will. The Sons of Mars will with Warmth
and Action read of the glorious Victories, and even envy the glittering Fame of
those Noble Hero's that sleep in the Bed of Honor. The Poetic Fancy will be
diverted with the old Fictions, like sweet Flowers strewed over the whole, and
the grave Mythologist with their Morals. The Antiquary and Historian will find
Entertainment in the Melancholypleasing Remains of past State and Glory, that
were once the Scenes of the greatest Performances the Mind of man joined to
active Bodies is capable of, and reflect on the Fate of human Affairs subject
all to Time and Chance. The Naturalist will meet with the Descriptions of the
Labors and Sports of Nature, and find some Account of the hitherto puzling
Tides of the Euripus. Nor will the solid Mathematician lose his Time, but with
satisfaction behold the Views of Cities, Plains of Fortifications, and Charts
of Shores, Rocks and Seas: But we refer to the Book it self. Farewell.

An INDEX of the Draughts, Maps and Plains inserted in this Work, in the order
that they ought to be placed.
THE General Map of the Morea Page 1. Patras p. 47. Castle Tornese p. 52.
Navarin ibid. Modon p. 55. Plain of Coron p. 61. Plain of Coron, with the
Incampments p. 74. Two Prospects of Coron ibid. Standard taken before Coron
ibid. Horse-tails taken with the Standard ibid. Calamata, and the Battle before
it p. 84. Plain of Zarnata p. 87. Profil of Zarnata ibid. Height of Zarnata
ibid. Plain of Chielefa p. 88. Plain of Passara p. 92. Mysitra or Sparta p. 93.
Plain of the Ruins of Maina p. 102 Cape of Matapan ibid. View of Malvasia p.
111. Two Views of Napoli di Romania p. 117. Isle of Corfu p. 132. Plain of
Santa Maura p. 147. Santa Maura, with the little Isles round it p. 149. View of
Cephalonia and the Chart of the Isle p. 151. Fortress of Asso p. 157. Isle of
Zant, and Fortress of Zant p. 162. Port of Cerigo and Plain of Cerigo p. 179.
Megara p. 190. Port Lion p. 195. City of Athens p. 197. City of Negropont p.
204. The Ebb and Flow of the Euripus. p. 212. Plain of Volo p. 220. The
Dardanelles of Lepanto p. 225. Lepanto p. 228.
map of Morea

OF THE MOREA.
PART I. Wherein is shown, That the Morea is a Peninsula; the different Names
by which it has been called; its Extent and Figure; the Divisions that the
Ancients and Moderns have made of the Provinces contained in it: with a
Discourse of its Consines and Frontiers; and at the End, several Curious
Relations are added upon the same Subject.
IF a Land surrounded by the Sea, except a small Isthmus, that joins it to the
Continent, may be called a Chersonesus, or Peninsula, the Morea may justly be
so reckoned, since being on all sides environed by the Sea, it is at the North
only joined to Achaia, by the Isthmus of Corinth.

This pleasant part of Greece has not always had the Name of Morea, as it is now
commonly called; but formerly, Argos, Apia, and Peloponnesus. Its Figure well
enough resembling the Leaf of a Mulberry, or Plane-tree, gave sufficient ground
to the later Emperors of Constantinople to entitle it Morea; though some will not
assent to this, but pretend to derive the Name from Romea, which by a
transposition of the Letters was changed into Morea, grounding themselves upon
this, That the Greeks, while subject to the Empire of Constantinople, and that
City was styled New Rome Which Name it kept till Constantine the Great.
, were themselves also called Romei, as much as to say, Romans. Doglioni thinks
that it took this Name when invaded by the Moors. Strabo insinuates, that it
was anciently called Argo, or Argos, from a famous City of that Name within its
Confines; and Aegialea from Aegialus, a renowned King of the Sicyonians.
According to Compend. Hist. Vniv. di Nic. Vdogl. p. 11.
Apollodorus, and Pliny, it had the Name of Apia from Apis, the Third King of
the Argives, who reigned from about the year of the World's Creation, 2307. to
the year 2342. that is 1647. years before the Nativity of Christ. This Apis was
the Son of Egialus. Four hundred and twenty years after, it had the Name of
Peloponnesus, from Pelops, Son of Tantalus, King of Phrygia and Taygeta, a Man
sufficiently famous for his Ivory shoulder, and Incests with his own Daughters.
Its bounds (which, as we said, are of the shape of a Plane-tree Leaf), are sixth
between the end of the 35. degree, and beginning of the 38. degree of North
Latitude, and at the Extremities of the degrees 37, and 51. of Longitude,
taking the most West part of the Isle of Ferro for the first Meridian.

As to its Circumserence, Authors disagree, some making it bigger, others less.
Isidore allows its Circuit to be 363. Miles; Bourdon extends it to 563.
Porchacchi adds Ten more, assuring us, that it is 573. Miles round: Blean,
Sagredo, and Vianoli, assign it 600. Baudrand, a Geographer, of our time, makes
it but 550. Miles.

Strabo makes its length 1400. Stadia; and Sagredo agrees with him, making 170.
Miles from the Isthmus to Modon. Baudrand makes it five Miles longer from the
Cape of Schilli to the Castle Tornese, and takes its breadth, which, according
to him, exceeds not 150. Miles between Corinth and the Cape of Matapan.

The most skillful Geographers describing this delicious Peninsule, have
employed the greatest accuracy in distinguishing those parts from the rest,
whereon Nature has been at the greatest expense for Embellishments, that they
might the more advance its Glory and Reputation. As Pausanias reports, it was
once divided into five parts, the first containing Arcadia, the second Achaia,
the third Doria, etc. Ptolemy, and others, divided it into Eight Provinces;
viz. Achaia, properly so called, Arcadia, Argos, Corinthia, Elis, Laconia,
Messenia, and Sicyonia, or Sicyonis.

Achaia was bounded on the North with the Gulf of Lepanto, on the West with the
Ionian Sea, on the South with Elis and Arcadia, and on the East with Sicyonia.
Patras was then its capital City.

Arcadia being up in the Country, and by consequence distant from the Sea, had
for its Eastern boundaries Argos and Laconia, with the Mountain Oronio; Elis
and Mount Flora for the Western; on the North, Achaia proper, and Mount
Skinfali; and on the South, Messenia, and the Mountain Taygeta. Its principal
City was Megalopolis; that is, the great Arta situated at the foot of Mount
Coronio, called at this ^ime El Cesal Londari.

Argos he^ ^^ the East the Gulf of Napoli di ^^mania, and the Aegean ^ea; on
the West, Arcadia; on the ^outh, Laconia, and on the North, the Gulf of Engia,
or Sinus Sardonicus. Ar^os was its chief City.

Corinthia, which was the most Nor^hern part of Peloponnesus, was extended
^etween Sicyonia Westward, and Argos ^outh and Eastward; and was separa^ed from
Achaia by the Isthmus and Gulf of Lepanto. It took its Name ^om Corinthus, the
Son of Jupiter, or ^^ Ephipeus, who also gave a Name to ^e Capital City.

Elis bordered on the North upon Achaia, properly so called; on the East upon
Arcadia, on the South upon Messenia, and on the West upon the Ionian Sea.
Polybius and Strabo name this likewise Elea and Cauconia. Its principal City
was also called Elis.

Laconia had for its Southern Limits partly the Gulf of Colochina, and partly
that of Coron; for its Eastern, the Gulf of Napoli di Romania; for its
Northern, Arcadia; and for the Western, Messenia. Sparta was its chief City.

The South of Messenia was between Laconia toward the East* and Elis toward
the West: it had Arcadia on the North, and contained all that space between the
Gulfs of Coron and Zonchio. Messene was the principal City.

Sicyonia, or Sicyonis, which was the least of the Provinces, took the Name
from its capital City called likewise Sicyon. It bordered Eastwards on
Corinthia, Westward on Achaia; the Gulf o^ Corinth was on its North, and
Arcad^^ on the South.

Pomponius Mela divides the whol^ Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Morea into six Provinces; viz. Argo^ Laconia, Messenia, Achaia, Elis, and
Arcadia.

At this time Morri and Baudrand make but four Provinces of it: and this
Division is likewise approved of by the Learned Cautelli, in his Geography,
received with general Applause.

The first of th^se four Provinces Achaia proper Sicyonia, and Corinth, and is
called the Duche of Chiarenza. Its Northern bound is the Gulf of Lepanto; and
on the South the Province of Belvedere. This Province has several Cities and
Towns. Patras is its chief City, after which Chiarenza, Caminitza,
Castel-Torneso claim their places: but we shall reserve their description to
the Second Part, where we will give particular Informations of the whole
Country.

Its most noted Promontories are the Cape de Rio, of which we will speak when
we come to treat of the Gulf of Patras.

Another is the Cape by Bourdon, called the Cape de Chiarenza, and by Pto^emy
and Strabo, Araxis Promontorium, which extends it self into the Ionian Sea, not
far from the Mouth of the River Larissus, between the Gulfs of Patras and
Chiarenza.

The last, lying Southward, is Cape Torneso, which Strabo called Chelonates
Promontorium, Thevet Cape Thorice, and Sophianus Cape Chlumutzi. This likewise
stretches it self into the Ionian Sea, between the Gulf of Chiarenza and that
of Arcadia.

The second Province termed Belvedere, Elis and Messenia were formerly: It
confines Northward on the River Carbon, which also divides it from the Province
of Chiarenza; and on the South it is bounded by the Gulf of Coron; on the East
it has Braccio di Maina; and on the West the Gulf of Arcadia and Zonchio. It
contains several Countries and Cities, amongst which Modon is the principal,
then Coron, Calamata, and Navarin, follow in dignity.

The most celebrated Promontories are Cape Jardau, which is the Ichtus
Promontorium of Ptolemy, and is the most Northern of all.

Cap de Zonchio, which Pausanias calls Coryphasium Promontorium.

Cap de Sapienza, or Cap Gallo, by Ptolemy named Acritas Promontorium.

The third Province is called Saccania, Romania, and contains all the Ancient
Argos. It has its North Confines on the Gulf of Lepanto, the Gulf d' Engia, and
the Isthmus; its South on Braccio di Maina, and the Gulf of Napoli di Romania;
its West in part on the Duche of Chiarenza, and part on Traconia. Napoli di
Romania is the capital, the other chief Towns are Argos and Corinth.

The Palus, or Morass of Lerna, where Hercules killed the Seven-headed-Hydra,
is a place very remarkable in this Province.

Though this Monster was but a Fiction, yet it is true, that there were Seven
Brethren that lived in this place, and pillaged all Passengers, making the
Country desolate; against these Hercules undertook the Combat, and having
killed the first that encountered him, he dispatched the rest two by two, as
they came under his hands. Whence the Poets took occasion to feign an Hydra
with Seven Heads, and its Death from that of the Seven Brethren sacrificed by
Hercules his Rage to the just Revenge of the Country.

This Province has but one Promontory, but that very famous, and known by
several Names. It is called Cape Shilli, in Pliny Scylaeum, and in Pausanias
Plethon Promontorium, by Ptolomy Scillium, by Favolius Sigillo, by Sophianus
Scylli, by Villanova Damala. This Promontory with its opposite, called Colonne
in Attica, makes the entrance of the Gulf of Engia.

The fourth Province, which has Laconia for Zaconia, is the Braccio di Maina,
and is at this day indifferently called by those two Names. It much surpasses
the bigness of either of the three former, as it is also more extended on the
South along the Seaside. It was at first called Lelegia from Lelex, who first
ruled there as King. Virgil, and other Poets, call it Oebalia from Oebalus,
Lord thereof; and, according to Strabo, 'twas likewise termed Argos. It Is
washed on the South by the Gulf of Calamata, and in part by that of Colochina;
on the East by the Gulf of Napoli di Romania; its West bounds on the Province
of Belvedere, and some part of it on the Duche of Chiarenza.

This Province has many high and dreadful Rocks and Precipices, whence it is
subject to frequent Earthquakes. The most of its deep Caverns are found about
Mount Tageta, at this time called, on the side of Misitra, Voutri it is Misitras,
and on the side of the Main, Voutri it is Portais.

It breeds Dogs of good esteem: Zaiman Basha, or the Grand Signior's chief
Huntsman, chooses a great number of them yearly for the Sultan's use and
diversions: and there is scarce a Turk that lives at any Rate, but has one of
them.

The principal places of this Province are Malvasia, Misitra, Sarnata,
Chielefa, Vitulo, Paslava, and others; of which in their places.

Its Promontories are the Cape of Matapan, of which we will give a particular
description when we come to speak of that of Maina. The Cape Onugnato, or Asses
Jaw, distant from Cape Rampani about 200. Stadia; there stood once the Temple
of Minerva, built by Agamemnon. The Cape of Malea brusht by the South Wind from
the Sea of Candia: It is famous not only for its exquisite Wines, but also for
its Shelves and Shoaly ground, dreadful to the Mariners. Ptolomy calls it
Malea, Pliny Maleum, Hesychius Promaleum, Sophianus Capo Malio. The Seamen (as
Bredebachius says) name it Ale di San Michael, Saint Michael's Wings. Brichus
calls it Capo Malio di Sant Angelo: according to Baudrand it is Ten Miles
distant from Cerigo, 90 from Napoli, 70. from Sparta, and 60. from Candia.
Mention Aeneid. lib. 5. Amor. l. 2. Baudr. let. M. Laur. p. 164.
is made of this place by Virgil, Ovid, in the Universal Geography of Baudrand,
and in the Greek of Laurembergius.

Of the Mountains of the Morea.
AMongst the Mountains of this Peninsula is reckoned that of Foloe, near which
was once situated the City of Olympia, so much famed by the Poets for the
Country of the Centaurs. The rise of this name was thus, Hercules having slain
the Nemaean Lion, and being Victorious over the Lernaean Hydra, and the Boar of
Erymanthus, happened to go to this Mountain, where he retired into the Cave of
the Centaur Foloeus, who treated him with a great deal of Civility, and
entertained him with excellent Wine which he kept there hid from the rest of
the Centaurs; it chanced while they were thus Carousing, some other Centaurs
passing by, were drawn by the smell of the Wine, and running to the Den
endeavored to enter by Violence. Foloeus's chief endeavor was for an hiding
place, so that Hercules was left alone to engage with all the Centaurs; he then
played his best, and gave them such terrible Effects of his Rage, that having
killed some, the rest betook themselves to flight to carry away a wretched
Life. The Combat ended, Foloeus crept out of his hole, and sufficiently admired
the Valor of his Guest; but by misfortune handling the Arrow wherewith
Hercules killed the Hydra, he let one of them fall on his Foot, the wound was
so deep that he fell down and dyed on the spot; Hercules much grieved at this
accident, and in acknowledgement of his kind Entertainment buried him in his
own Cave, and named the Mountain from his name Foloeus.

The other most noted Mountains are Cyllene, Lyceus, Parthenius, Menalus, and
Sepia; of all these Cyllenius is the highest, it is near that of Calidoria, at
the Top whereof are yet to be seen the remains of the Temple of Mercury, from
thence called Cyllenius; yet some will have that name to be derived from
Cyllenus Son of Aleates. The Mountain Lyceus taking its beginning in Zaconia,
is memorable for the place where the Tyrant Aristarchus was made an offering to
the public Rage of the Lacedaemonians, who there stoned him. It joins to Mount
Menalus, which is covered with green and shady Groves and pleasant Pasturage
for Cattle; a place for the coolness of its Shades, and refreshing briezes of
serene Air dedicated to the God Pan, as Mount Cyllene, whose name signifies
Maiden, was Sacred to the same Deity. Mount Sepia is that where, as Pausanias
reports, Epites, the Son of Eleates was stung to death by a Serpent. The Duche
of Chiarenza has on the North the Mountain now called Poglizi from Diana's
Temple which once adorned it; it was at first named Geronte, then Skinfale from
the name of a Nymph, the Daughter of Arcas, or from certain large Birds of Prey
called Stymphalides, that live in these quarters in great flocks: These
devoured Men, wherefore they were either chased away, or the Species quite
destroyed by the slaughter Hercules made of them.

On the East side between Saccania and Tzaconia lies Mount Cronie commonly
called Grevenos, on whose farthest Northern part stood the Temple of Lucina and
Fesipoli, so named from the Idol to which the Eleans offered Sacrifices. Where
is found the Stone called a Cylinder which may be taken from the Rock, when the
thunder rumbling in the Clouds causes an agitation of the Air.

In the Province of Belvedere Mount Mintia or Mente now Olonos comes in view;
its South has a Prospect of the Gulf of Coron, on the North rises the River
Alpheus; it took its name from Pluto's Mistress, when Proserpina Jealous of her
Husband, sought after her and found her in this place, and changed her into the
Herb Mint, a great quantity of which grows wild on this Mountain; and in Memory
of this Act of the Infernal Goddess, the proud Fanes of Pluto and Proserpina
once stood there.

The little Mount Neris lifts it self up in Saccania and Nonacris in Tzaconia,
at the foot whereof roll the fatal Waves of Styx, fatal to those that taste the
otherwise clear and tempting Stream. The Poets make this one of the infernal
Rivers; Inachus also has its source in this Province. There is likewise Mount
Artemisius, thought to be Mount Parthenius; 'twas named Artemisius, from the
abundance of the Herb Artemis, wherewith it is covered.

The most considerable and famous of all the Grecian Mountains, and that which
Polybius compares with the Alps is Taygeta, bearing another name now of Orta,
it extends it self in the Province of Tzaconia not far from the River Taenarus,
very near the Eurotas that runs by Misitra; it is stockt with Deer, Bears, Boars
and other wild Beasts: It took its name from Taygeta, the Daughter of
Lacedaemon, who being ravished by Jupiter, out of shame and grief for her lost
Virginity, killed her self there. At different times this Mountain has been
Sacred to Bacebus, Ceres, Apolle, and Diana; and in its Entrails are found
excellent Whetstones.

Of the Streams and Rivers of the Morea.
HAving discoursed of the most remarkable Mountains of the Morea, it seems
natural to descend from them with the Streams and Rivers that water the lower
Grounds of this Kingdom. Amongst these is reckoned that in the Duche of
Chiarenza commonly called Carbon, and by Sophianus Orsea; Strabo names it
Alpheus, Ptolemy Alpehius, others Strimphalus and the River Nyctimus; into this
stream One hundred and forty Torrrents, whose Virtues are so extolled for
taking away Tetters or other deformities in the Skin. The Poets have sung a
thousand strange things of this River; they would persuade us that its Waves
have a peculiar subterraneous Chanel under the Sea, and that passing the
Arcadian Gulf without mixing with it; beyond the Strophades they haste to unite
with their beloved Fountain Arethusa, which is in the Territory of Syracuse a
City of Sicilia: This River receives several lesser into it, as Celadon,
Erimantus and Amarinthus: It Is name was derived from Alpheus. Tebba after the
Death of his Brother Cercafus, flying from the sury of the Arcadians and
despairing of escape, his Enemies being at his Heels, drownded himself in this
River. It formerly had the name of Strimphelus from one of the Sons of the God
Mars; one may well term it the Antaeus of Rivers, for after having several
times ingulfed it self in narrow Passages under the Rocks, it breaks out at
last and slides with a serene Majesty within its own Banks.

The River Eurotas is also in great Reputation, at this day called Vassali
Potamos: Niger names it Iris, Plutarch Hemerus and Martathon; it passes through
the middle of Misitra, and falls into the Gulf of Colchina; it has its source
from the same place as the River Carbon. The name of Eurotas, so celebrated by
the Ancients, was given to it from Eurotas the third King of the Lacedaemonians,
either, as, Pausanias reports, for that this Prince made a new Bank to this
River to keep in its Waters, that sometimes used to overflow the Country to
their great damage; or as Plutarch says, because that this King having lost a
Battle he had engaged in before the Full Moon, in scorn of the superstitious
Custom of the Lacedaemonians, carried on by the height of Despair, cast himself
into this River; which from so Tragical an Event changed the name Himerus to
Eurotas. As for the name Vassali Potamos, the Inhabitants say it signifies the
Imperial River, which name was imposed on it by the Despots of Morea, who
descended from the Imperial Blood, and for the most part resided at Misitra,
for the pleasant Diversions of Hunting, etc. on the Banks of Euretas, which the
Lacedaemonians called the Imperial River in flattery, and to enhanse the Glory
of these Despots and Despoenes, a name given to the Princesses the Despots
Wives. This Stream is still adorned with Silver Swans, which here come in great
flocks to sport themselves; these are the more admirable for their
extraordinary Beauty and Size, besides their extreme whiteness; possibly the
Poets on this account called this River Olorifer, upon which Statius sings,

Taygetique falx and oloriferi Euro^ae.
And since its Banks were clothed with Laurels, 'twas dedicated by the Poets
to Apollo; all the Summer it deserves not the name of a River, for it is so
shallow, that it may rather be taken for a pretty large clear purling Brook;
but in Winter increased by the Rains, it proudly lifts it self up, and
sometimes overflows its bounds. It once had on its left the Country of Ormoas,
which Strabo and Pliny call Acria.

There is also in Tzaconia the River Inachus, taking its source from the
Mountain Crovia; it is at this time called Planizza, once Cramavor, then
Haliacmon; in fine, Inachus, from the name of a Son of Occanus and Thetis. The
cause thus, Inachus not being able to take the Ravishing of his Daughter by
Jupiter, without repining and murmuring against the deflowring God, in
punishment for his Murmurs was so tormented by a wild Beast, that he became
besotted, and precipitated himself into this Stream, which took its name from
his death.

Between Inachus and Saccania are seen the Rivers Linceus, Asteria or Stella
and Erasinus, which rapidly* wash the Foot of Mount Strimphalus.

We must not forget the River Spirnazza, which is not the least considerable:
Styled by Niger, Stomius; by Strabo and Pliny, Pamylus; and by Ptolomey,
Panysus; it discharges it self into the Gulf of Coron near Calameta.

Of the Confines and Frontiers of the Morea.
THe Morea is bounded by the Ionian Sea, that of Sapienza and the Aegean; which
are known by several names, as we shall show in their order in the second Part
of this Treatise.

We may take as a part of the Mediterranean, Plin. l. 8. c. 11.
that Sea which Strabo and Pliny call the Ionian, and which was likewise named
the Grecian, bounding Northwards upon the Mouth of the Gulf of Venice, on the
West upon the Borders of Calabria and Sicilia, beginning from the point of
Santa Maria, and so on to the Cape of Passaro; its Eastern bounds are the
Shores of Epirus, and the Morea from Cape Lenguetta to Cape Matapan, and on the
South it has the African Sea.

This Sea on its Western extent, on which side it washes the Morea, comprehends
the following Gulfs:

The Ionian Sea comprehends The Gulf of Lepanto. The Gulf of Patras. The Gulf
of Chiarenza. The Gulf of Arcadia. The Gulf of Zonchio.

The Sea of Sapienza, which is also a part of the Mediterranean, takes its name
from the Isles near Modon, and has on the West the Ionian, and on the East the
Aegaean Seas: its South beating upon the Morea includes these Gulfs.

The Sea of Sapienza includes The Gulf of Coron. The Gulf of Colochina. The
Gulf of Beatico.

The Aegean Sea a part likewise of the Mediterranean, contains within its whole
extent a great many Gulfs, we will only mention those on the Morean Shore.

The Aegean Sea toward the Morea comprehends The Gulf of Napolidi Romania. The
Gulf of Engia.

All Europe affords not a place comparable to this pleasant Peninsula, enricht
by Nature with so many rare Qualities: Its fruitful Plains flourish with
plenty, adorned with the charms of Variety; and its high Hills, which might be
thought an unpleasing Object for their cragginess, are yet made agreeable by
the Verdant Crowns they wear of rare and excellent Plants and delicious Fruits.
Its Inhabitants have a Genius fit for great Undertakings, and are inspired with
a Martial Soul: Its Cities have all once had glorious Founders; and its Climate
is soft, serene and temperate.

This Place has still had the Prerogative, and been chief over all Greece, and
indeed its main Bulwark; a thousand Illustrious Monuments present our Eyes with
Objects of Beauty, Grandeur, Magnificence, Splendour, and Glory; on the one side
Sumptuous and Stately Buildings raise their once proud Heads; on the other side
we have the Melancholy pleasing view of the Imperial Seats of the My^enians,
Corinthians, Lacedaemonians, Si^yonians, Elians, Arcadians, Pyleans, and
Messenians. Arms and Learning have always been the two famous Pil^ars set up
here amongst this People, of ^ Ne plus ultra to others. The Athe^ian School had
here its Foundation, ^n whose Front were engraven these words Matter Sermonum,
the Mother ^f Eloquence: Here likewise, as in ^he true Field of Mars, the most
He^^ick Captains of Greece have poured ^ut their Blood, for never-dying ^ame.
War has here either been per^etual, or at least frequent.

Amongst all, the Athenians have ^^ew'd themselves the valiantest con^enders
for Liberty; for from the year ^23. in the LXXXVII. Olympiad, ^o the year 350.
they still defended themselves, tho they had then lost ^ome of their Power.
This little Re^ublique (its Government being only ^ltered) became after some
Ages a ^reat and powerful Kingdom; when ^aving passed through several hands, it
at last met the beginnings and causes of its future Ruin under Emanuel the
Grecian Emperor: For that Prince, ignorant of that Maxim, That the power of a
Monarch is maintained by the Union of the Princes, and that a failure in this
brings on the Ruin of Kings and Kingdoms, through a fatal Policy equally
divided his Realms amongst his seven Sons; and by that sowed the Seed of
discord and intestine Broyls, which in the end produced the entire destruction
of that Empire.

The Princes that had the Government of this Province were styled Despotes; and
though there happened a frequent alteration of Governors, and those of
different Extractions, yet the Despotate was still continued in its Prosperity;
for the Election depending on the Emperors pleasure, he seldom promoted any to
this Eminent Employment but his Brothers or his own Sons, or some other of his
Relations, or great Favorites, who by their good Services merited so high a
Recompense.

Constantine Surnamed Dragares, Brother to Theodore the Second, was Despot when
Amurath the First made an irruption into the Morea, and began to exercise Acts
of Hostility; a stop was for some time put to the proceedings of this terrible
Enemy, but 'twas upon this Condition, which the prudent Emperor proposed, of
paying an annual Tribute, and with that price bought his Peace; a while after
this having taken the Imperial Crown in the City of Constantinople, he divided
the Morea between his two Brothers Demetrius and Thomas; Thomas had for his
share the Despotate of Carinth, and Demetrius that of Sparta; there arose
between these two Brethren an irreconcilable Enmity and Division; possibly
being both equally swayed with a secret wicked design, that by embroiling the
Affairs of the Empire, they might lessen its Glory, and thereby increase their
own, and obtain by its Ruin the independence of their Government: Thomas had
gained to his Party the Albanians and Latins, who were equally at his devotion:
Demetrius was assisted by the Turks, and Turchan Beglerbey of Romania defired
nothing more than to procure and forward the Ruin of this Empire.

These unfortunate Princes went one after another to make their complaints to
Mahomet the Second; whose aid they implored, and did him Homage, never
considering that thereby they lost so much of their Power; and gave it up as a
Sacrifice to him who wished but to devour them both: At last they came to be
sensible of their Error, but too late; for Thomas perceiving that the Turks
made Inroads even to his Borders, and justly suspecting a design to surprise
him, was forced to provide for his safety by flight; and Demetrius was made an
example of the Turks cruel perfidiousness, and would have thought it a great
Felicity if he could have prevented a miserable Captivity by a glorious Death.
The first fled for refuge to Rome, where in consideration of his Royal
Extraction, and the Present which he brought of the Head of the famous Apostle
St. Andrew, he received an honorable and advantageous Entertainment. The other
transported to Adrianople, by a malicious surprise of the Ottomans, was forced
not to think it his greatest Misfortune to Espouse his own Daughter, so to free
her from the danger of losing her Honor with her Liberty.

The Virtues which have rendered Greece so famous, have indeed had their Birth
there, but they could never have grown to that height, if the Republic of
Venice had not assisted and sustained them; for she has al^ays been a good
Mother, and signa^z'd her tenderness, by that strict al^ance she has always had
with Greece. It Is an unquestionable Truth as apears by the Historys of Venice,
and which any one may be easily satisfied ^n, that there is no Empire, Realm or
^rovince in all Greece where the Vene^ans have not left some marks of their
Dominion. In the declining of ^he Greecian Empire, when it suffered ^everal
dismembrings, the greatest ^arcels thereof submitted to the Ve^etians; for
under their dependence ^ere Arcadiopolis, Rodesto, Adriano^e, Gallipoli in
Thrace, and therewith all the County about Prevesa and Arta part of Macedonia,
the Province of Lacedaemon, and a great deal of the Morea; besides, they were
acknowledged Sovereigns of most of the Isle^ of the Archipelago. In fine, these
were the Titles of the Venetian Empire born by the sole Person of the Doge Dux
Venetiarum, Dalmatiae, Croatiae, Dominus quartae partis and dimidiae toti^
Imperii Romaniae; and if these Testimonies were not sufficient to evinc^ the
vast extent of the Venetian Empire, in Greece we need only bring an Epitome of
what Historian^ have related in several great Volumes.

The designing Turks having go^ footing in the Possessions of the Provinces of
these two Princes, desire^ nothing more than to invade the rest of the Country,
so to become sol^ Masters of the Peninsula. The Venetians only could put a
check to the height of Ambition, which was altogether unjust, especially since
they went about to violate the Faith o^ Treaties, and break the Peace
concluded. But it is a Maxim of the Barbarous Nations, to count nothing
inviolable, but the advancement of their Interests by any means whatsoever, and
take occasion then to make War, when their Enemies think themselves most
secured by Peace. Thus the Turks never making themselves Slaves to the
Religious observance of the Peace, surprised Argos, and then behaved themselves
as declared Enemies. The Republic found by this first Attempt of the Enemy,
that it was full time to provide for their defense; and it being an Enterprise
of great Importance, and that from Heaven only we expect the most powerful Aids
and an happy Success, it was above all things resolved that the Standards
should bear the Ensigns of our Redemption. Then Troops were raised, and the
General Command given to Bertoldo d' Este: This great Captain armed with his
utmost Courage for so great an Attempt, set sail for the Morea, and landed with
his whole Army between the Gulfs of Engia and Lepanto. He at first applied
himself to get a perfect knowledge of the place, and to find means of putting a
stop to the frequent irruptions of the Enemy; to which end he began that
memorable Work, and in few days finished it, the famous Wall called Eximile;
after which he employed his whole Forces in the defense thereof, and in a
thousand glorious Actions, gave Proof of his great Courage, and perfect
Experience in the Art of War: Neither his Head nor his Hands were idle, he was
the first in all perilous Encounters, undervaluing his Life, so he might
Sacrifice it to the Service of his Country, and at the same time forward the
loss of his natural and sworn Enemy. He was arrived to the height of his hopes,
and his Troops animated by his Example, had already gained several advantages
promising a glorious Victory, and entire defeat of his Enemies; when God, whose
Thoughts are not as our Thoughts are, and who when he pleases can give the
greatest Conquerors their defeat, and Death in the Field where they expected to
be Crowned with Victory, and ride Triumphant; permitted by the secret orders of
his Providence, or Effects of his Justice upon us, that our General sunk and
dyed of several Glorious Wounds. The Head being thus cut off, the Members soon
languisht, and the Enemy becoming more sierce through the weak resistance they
found, renewed the Combat with greater Fury, and gained the Victory; after
which setting no Bounds to their unjust Ambition, they ravaged and became
Masters of all the Country, possessed for so many Years by our August
Republique.

After which they establish there a Governor of some Quality with the Title of
Sangiac, or Morabegi, as much as to say, Lord of the Morea, and allowed him an
Hundred thousand Aspers a year, obliging him to keep a thousand Horse with all
necessary Equipage, to be at the disposal of the Beglerbey of Greece.

For all the advantages which this Sangiac enjoys, yet he is not without his
Thorns in his side; for there happen frequent Disputes with the Dins, the
Beglerbey or Basha of the Sea, about certain rights he pretends to in all
Maritime places, upon all Merchandises imported or exported.

Modon is the usual place of the Sangiac's Residence: the Republic of Venice,
who only to maintain their Rights in this Kingdom, has ever Valorously been at
War with the Turk, has been the first that have attempted its Re-conquest: and
its Arms had so great Success in the Campaign in 1685. as to be Victorious over
almost all the Southern places, reckoning amongst these Conquests the City and
Fortress of Coron, the Towns of Calamata, Zarnata, Passava, and Chielefa:
besides the frequent in roads made by the Troops up in the Country, that were
sent to succor any Fortress that was vigorously attacked; the Venetian Army
will make this next Campaign a more advantageous Progress; which we are the
more assured of from this hopes, that its Arms are employed only for the great
Glory of the Catholic Religion, and to promote the Ruin of Infidels.

OF THE MOREA.
PART II. Wherein is given a particular Description of the Maritime Towns, the
Gulfs, Rocks under Water, and of the Isles, not only those on the Morea side,
and which are in this Sea, but likewise in the Ionian.
AFter having in the First Part of this Work treated of the Morea in general, I
design here to Discourse in particular, and with all the exactness agreeable
with my proposed Brevity, of all the Maritime Places, of the Gulfs, hidden
Rocks, and Isles, as well on this side, as in the Ionian Sea. My Readers may
take notice, that after having shown the different Divisions that have been
made of the Morea, I agree with the Sentiment of those who divide it into four
Provinces, and that I shall refer to one of these Provinces each of the places
whereof I shall have occasion to speak.

The Isthmus of Corinth.
THe Isthmus of Corinth, otherwise Geogr. Reform. Ricioli. l. 1. c. 16.
called the straight of the Morea, or the Argolique straight, is a tongue of
Land very rough and Stony; situated between the Gulf of Lepanto, and that of
Engia, uniting the Morea with Achaia.

This Isthmus is famous for the Isthmian Games, instituted by Theseus here, and
which were Celebrated every five years or Lustrum; as likewise for its Theater,
its furlong of white Marble, its Temple Dedicated to Neptune, and its Forest of
Pines whose Branches Crowned the Victorious Combatants.

It were a great advantage to Navigation, and which would make it easy and
safe, if a Chanel of communication were cut between the two Seas; and what
might promote this Design and encourage its Execution, is that it has been
thought practicable, and attempted by several Princes; as Alexander Pausanias,
Rannus. Nero would himself give the first stroke with a Mattock, to make this
famous Chanel. Zonora. p. 200.
the Great, Pitias, King Demetrius, Caesar, the Emperor Caligula, Nero, Herodes
the Athenian. It Is true indeed, these Princes, diverted from this Design by
more important Affairs, or disheartened by the tediousness of the Work, have
given it over, and desisted from bringing it to an End, that would much have
advanced their Glory.

To supply in some sort the want of Corinth was the first City which put great
Vessels to Sea. Sabel. Hist. di Venet. deca. 3. l. 8.
this Chanel, the Emperor Emanuel in the Year 1413. caused a Wall to be there
raised, by Volateran and Niger, called Hexameli, by Hermolaus Heromilion, and
by Nischius Dioclos, which beginning at Port 'Lechee 16. Stadia from Corinth,
50. from the Gulf of Saronica (which according to Baudrand, who differs from
Lauremburgh is that which we now call Lest Jocori) situated at the Western
edge of the Gulf of Corinth, was extended to Six miles length to the Port of
Cenchrea, on the East toward the Gulf of Engia; the Commodiousness of these
two Ports much advanced and facilitated the Eastern Trade.

Amurat the Second after the Siege of Constantinople in the Year 1424.
notwithstanding the Peace with the Greek Emperor, caused the Eximile to be
demolished. The Republique o^ Venice highly resented these Infringements of the
League, and the Violences of Amurat, perceiving that by this Action the Enemy
had an open Liberty of invading all the Neighboring Countries. Wherefore Luigi
L^redano General at Sea, had orders to land at this place with his whole Army,
who joining his Forces with Bertoldo d' Este, they employed 30000. There were
3600. according to Sagr. 69.
Men with so much heat, that in the Year 1463. they finished the Wall in fifteen
days, and added to what was before, several very broad double Ditches, and 136.
Towers, which made his Wall of much greater strength and more tenable than it
was before; ^o implore a particular Blessing, and ^s it were an Establishment
to this Edifice, and an happy success to the Arms of the Republique from
Heaven, Bertoldo in the middle of the Wall caused an Altar to be Erected, where
the whole Army assisted at Mass which was there solemnly sung. The General at
Sea and Bertoldo lea^ing a sufficient number for the defense of the Wall, went
to Encamp near Corinth, and there busied themselves in planting Artillery, and
fit^ing them for Service When the Spies brought word that Amarbei Flambular of
the Morea, had made an Inrode near them with a Party of 1200 Men: They
immediately upon this advice, made a detachment of a good part of the Army,
which was Encamped for the defense of the Eximile, and made so hot a fireing
with their great Artillery on the Turkish Forces, that their Commander was
obliged to Retreat farther out of Gunshot; though he again showed himself about
Noon to the Venetians, and took his Lodgments not far from thence. Bertoldo
observed all the motions of Armabei while the other Geral went to prosecute the
Siege: But perceiving that the Turk seemed to desist from his design, through
the difficulty there was of executing it without too great a hazard, Bertoldo
slighted him, and went to join himself with the other General to advance the
Siege; it happened by a Misfortune, the forerunner of many others, that as soon
as the General arrived at the Camp, he was struck dead upon the place with a
blow of a Stone, such was the end of this great Captain; and Bettino da
Calcinato who succeeded him in the Command of the Troops, found them so
discouraged by this fatal Accident, and was himself so frightened at the
approach of the Beglerbey with an Army of Fourscore thousand Men, that he not
only left the Camp before Corinth, but neglected also the defense of the
Eximile, after that Wall had been raised with so great a charge to the
Republique.

Corinth.
THe City of Corinth, which Strabo and Polybius call Corinthus, Laurembergh
Ephyro, the People Coranto, and the Turks Gerame, had its beginning and
foundation from Aletes, who lived in the time of Cecrops King of the Athenians
Anno 3066. It Is situated as it were in the midst of the Isthmus, in the place
where the Ionian and Aegean Seas commix their Waves: It is the Sea of an
Archbishop, distant from Patras 80 Miles, 50 from Athens, 85 from Mysitra, 25
from Argos. It is Commanded by the Fortress of Acrocorinthus, which is near to
it; it is so advantagiously seated, that some have thence taken occasion to
term it the Eye of Greece, others the Band thereof, and the Bulwark of
Peloponnesus: Plutarch judged it the most excellent, and Cicero the most
beautiful City, the splendour of all Greece; nay it arrived to that height of
Glory, that Syracusa and Corfu thought it an Honor to be its Colonies.

The Romans under a pretense of revenging themselves on this City, for some
violences committed upon some Roman Citizens sent the Consul L. Mamius Anno
Mundi 38 18. to abate, as they said, their Pride, with express Order to raze
the City to its Foundations, and that giving the Spoil and Pillage to his
Soldiers, the Women and Children should he made Slaves.

By the Bounty and Care of Augustus it was rebuilt and re-peopled, and again
flourisht in Riches and Beauty; but through the hard fate of the Times and
continual devouring Wars, it can now only show the miserable Remains of its
past Glories, whose Ruins are now the Asylum to a few poor Inhabitants, forced
by Necessity rather than Choice to live here. It has been twice the Theater
whereon the Barbarity of Amurat the Second and his Son Mahomet has been Acted;
where the Turkish fury has been so Merciless, that at this day not above a
score of Houses, or rather Huts, remain; the sad Image of its ancient Splendour:
we may add that we yet see entire with their former Beauty, 12 Columns of 5
Foot Diameter, with a simple Cordon, or List for its Capital about 15 Paces
from each other, standing on a little Hill in the Figure of an Amphitheater, at
about a Miles distance from the Sea; from this Hill there goes an easy descent
to Port Leche, where as yet stands a Tower, formerly a Lanthorn or Sea-mark.

The Corinthians embraced the Catholic Religion by the preaching of St. Peter
and Paul, and were therein confirmed in the year 169 by the careful diligence
of St. Denis the Second Bishop of this place, which they persevered in, till
the time that the Greek Emperors refused longer Obedience to the Sea of Rome.

Roger of Normandy King of Naples took Possession of this City, and might have
raised his Glory to a great height, if he could have added this Flower to his
Crown, and gained the Hearts of the Corinthians to a willing Obedience, and
have made them pay him the same Homages that they did the Emperor Emanuel; but
when he was in the greatest hopes of obtaining this desire, the Army of the
Venetians with the Troops of the vanquished Greeks, so opposed his Conquests,
that after a defeat of the greatest part of his Forces, he was constrained to
consult his own safety by a hasty flight. The Rout of this Princes Army, and
the Disadvantages he thereby received were of great consequence to his Enemies,
as the rich Spoil of his Camp was very considerable, which was divided amongst
the Auxiliary Troops, there being but little need to put them to more necessary
uses after the regaining of Corinth. Scarce two Ages were past before this City
submitted it self to the Despotes of Greece; they would willingly have yielded
it to the Venetians, in consideration that they could not otherwise possess it
than by usurpation, the just right thereof belonging only to the Venetian
Republique, who had employed its own Forces and the Blood of its Subjects to
deliver it from the hands of Strangers.

Mahomet the Second could not make so just Reflections, whose mind was
incapable of any thing but a boundless Ambition, he re-took Corinth; after
several great endeavors made by the Venetians to regain this Conquest, they
were not able to overcome the fury of the Barbarians, whose long resistance
made them at last sensible of the necessity of desisting from their Design.

A Table of the Kings of Corinth.
Year of the World. 2862. A Tletes the first King. Compend Universe. di Nic.
Dogl. p. ult.
2897. Trion. 2934. Agilas. 2971. Primina. 3006. Baci. 3041. Agelas. 3071.
Eudemus. 3096. Aristomedes. 3131. Egennomes. 3147. Alexander. 3172. Felesteus.
3184. Ansomenes was the last who ended his Reign in the Year of the World 3185.

Acrocorinthus.
THe famous Fortress of the Acrocorinthus must not be passed by with out a
particular remembrance, that i^ has remained a long time Victorious over the
Forces of the Enemy that attacqued it, though at the last it wa^ forced to
yield to its assailants, tire^ out with the length of the Wars; its Situation
was very advantageous for it overlookt and commanded the City, being built upon
the point of a high Rock, where it had a sufficien^ space of Ground
strengthened with a very stout Wall, having within it several Wells of
excellent clear Water, taking its fource from the Pyrene^^ Fountain, of which
the Greek Poet Homer in Odyss.
makes honorable mention. Nature and Art conspired to render this Castle
strong and impregnable; 'twas accessible only on the side of the Port of
Cenchrea, yet being but ill Garrisoned it has been several times taken, and in
particular by the Sicilians, under the command of Nicephorus Calufo, in PATRAS
view of Patras ^^e time of the Emperor Emanuel ^^mnenes.

Patras.
NEar the Cape of Rio appears an high Mountain, and on the ^op thereof a
Fortress, North of which is seated Patras, a very An^^ent City, and an
Archbishops See. ^he Turks call it Badra and B^labu^a; it has formerly had
other Names; ^^r in the first Age of its Foundation ^^ was termed Roas, and
afterward ^paired by Pater the Son of Preuge^s, it for a long time bore the
Name ^^ its Benefactor: Afterward about ^^e beginning of the Roman Empire, ^^s
Beauty increased with the number ^f its Inhabitants, besides it was bles^ed
with a most advantageous Situati^n, both for the goodness of its Ter^itories,
and its commodiousness for Traffic and Navigation. The Ro^ans knew it by the
name of Augusta Aroe Patrensis; at other times it was ^alled Neupatria. It lies
about 700 Paces from the Gulf of the same Name or from the Port Panorme. The
Emperor Augustus made choice of thi^ place, as most proper for the retreat o^
his Navy; and as a mark of his Lov^ to the People of Patras, he permitte^ them
to live as a free People, enjoying all the Privileges, and exempt^ons, as the
true Citizens of Rome.

The Goddess Diana was Adored i^ this City, under the Title of Dia^^ Latria,
and a Grove and Temple wa^ there dedicated to Diana Triclaria, ^^ whom every
year a young Man an^ Maid, the most beautiful that could be chosen out of all
the People, were Sacrificed in expiation of the Crim^ committed by Melampue and
Cimet^^ who also were first Sacrificed themselves, for being married to one
another, in the time of Diana, against the Will of their Parents. This cruel
Sacrifice had an end when Euripil^ came to Patras, and was there converted to
the Christian Religion by the preaching of St. Andre^ the Apostle. Patras at
that time was very well peopled, as at this day it is not thin; there are
especially a great number of Jews who much pro^ote its Trade; and it is almost
the ^nly Maritime Town on this side, ^here the Greeks of the neighboring
^slands, the English and the French ^ome to Traffic. The Air is not very
^holesome by reason of its nearness ^o Mountains that are covered with ^now,
and the great quantities of Wa^^r wherewith it is environed: The ^erritories
once comprehended under ^s Rule in the time of the Greek Em^erors bore the
Title of a Duche, which it kept till the Prince that en^yed it, in the year
1408. not having ^fficient Forces for its guard and de^^nce, delivered it for a
great Sum to ^e Venetian Republic, from whom ^e Turks took it.

In the Year 1533. the General Do^a attempted to make himself Ma^er thereof,
which he easily gained ^rough the bad Condition of its For^ications, with an
absolute Victory, ^hen at the same time the Castle sur^^ndered which Commanded
the ^ity, though it once for a whole year ^^sisted the Forces of Constantine
Pa^logus.

The Victor used great moderation toward the Garrison, convoyin^ them to
Lepanto, whither they desire^ to go with their Wives, not one o^ them recieving
the least ill Treatmen^ from the Victorious Troops, no^ without their repining
against the General, for taking out of their hands ^ Prey justly due to their
Valor and Fortune.

Chiarenza.
ON the right side of the River Inachus by Ptolomey called Penae^, and on an
Hill toward the Gulf o^ Patras is seen the City Chiarenza thought to be the
Ancient Cyllene the Country of Mercury, whom the Po^^ thence called Cyllenius
Heroes. Thi^ was the Capital City of the Duche o^ that name, and under the
Government of its Princes; it was as Illustrious as its name Chiarenza speaks
it* The Venetians justly possessed it, and although at that time it was in a
flourishing Estate, yet it has now undergon so great a change, that its Moats
and some slight Traces of it are all ^at is visible. The Port belonging to ^
called likewise Chiarenza, which ^as near to it, a very commodious ^aven,
capable of receiving many ^eat Vessels, is now quite choked up ^ith Sand.

Caminitza.
^N the middle of the way, between ^ the Cape of Chiarenza and Patras, ^^ the
right hand of the River, by ^e Ancients called Pirus; we see ^^minitza which
Strabo and Ptolomey ^me Olenus, and Pliny Olenum; it is ^ree Miles from the Gulf
of Patras. ^enus the Son of Vulcan founded it, ^t though 'twas once a great
City ^th a Bishop, who was Suffragan to ^e Archbishop of Patras, yet it is ^w
reduced to a little Borough.

Castle of Torneze.
Castle Torneze is a Fortress built ^ on the outmost Promontory ^ the Duche of
Chiarenza, on that side t^ looks toward the Province of Bel^^dere, between the
Gulfs of Chiare^^ and Arcadia, 'twas called as Baudr^^ says, Chelonates, the
same name whi^^ Strabo gives to the Promontory when on it stands. The Turks
call it O^mourzi; it is on a very high place about three miles from the Sea, as
^^ be plainly seen by the Draught ^ have here given of it, taken upon ^ place
by the Illustrious Neovin a Ge^tleman near the Person of his Hig^ness Prince
Maximilian William D^^ of Erunswick.

Zunchio or Navarin
ZUnchio, which Ptolomey calls Pyl^ Steven of Byzantium, Coryphas^^ and
Navarin, Ten miles distant from Coron is built upon a rising Groun^ NAVARIN
view of Navarin CASL. TORNESE.
view of Castle Tornese at the foot whereof is its The 21. of June 1245.
Selistar Bassa was taken the Port of Navarin, with a great number of Ships
which he commanded for the Siege of Candia.
Port, wherein two thousand Vessels may ride at Anchor; on the right hand of
the same stands the new Navarin: The Ancient is a Fortress, which lying so much
in the Eyes of the Enemies, has been no small Temptation to them, upon which
account it has more than once changed its Master.

In the Year 1498. while subject to Baudrand calls Navarin Albaxinus, Nelea,
Albarinos and Javarin; it is thought to have been the Country of Nestor.
the Venetians it underwe^^^ furious assault of the Turks, who sound there such
resistance, that far from triumphing as they had flattered themselves, they
were forced to put off their Enterprise to another Opportunity, when they might
succeed better by surprise, as indeed they did some time after; for being made
Masters of Modon, the Inhabitants of Zunchio rendered themselves as soon as
they had Encamped before it: But the Venetians soon regained it from the Turks,
by the means of one Demetrius of Modon, who with one of his Friends, an
Albanian, undertook to put the Garrison to the Sword, by opening the Gates of
the Fortress; yet the Turks stood obstinately to the defense of a place they
had so lately gained, came with a re-inforcement on the side toward the Land,
with a great Detachment of Cavalry, and with fourteen Galleys and five Fustes,
under the Command of a Turkish Officer called Gamali. The Republique had before
ordered three Galleys for the guard of the Port. But those who ought to have
been watchful, never thinking the Enemy would have taken the first opportunity
of repossessing the place, and being in a great uncertainty what to do, when
they saw themselves just ready to be attacqued, left the Entrance free to the
Turk, who with a great deal of frankness declared himself the Patron and
Defender of any that would submit themselves to his discretion. But those who
seemed to be of his Party, in great consternation at the change of their Fate,
exposed themselves to the hazard of their Lives, embarquing themselves in
little Boats, and they were happy that got aboard five great MODON
view of Modon Galleys that returned from Baruty, laden with Merchandises, and
had cast Anchor within sight of the Port. The news of so strange an Adventure,
gave them the alarm to provide for their safety by an hasty flight. The
Inhabitants of Zunchio were Spectators of all this Catastrophe, and finding
themselves attacked by Land, found no other expedient but to deliver themselves
up to the Enemy.

Modon.
IN the Frontiers of the Province of the so fertile and pleasant Belvedere,
lying in that part of the Peloponnesus which was the Ancient Messenia, amongst
the rest of the Cities in the Archbishopric of Patras the Episcopal and Staple
Town, which Sophianus calls Modon, is reckoned: The Turks name it Mutum, and
Pliny Methone, in Memory of Methena the Daughter of Honer: It is ten Miles off
of Coron, an hundred and twenty from Napoli di Romania, and seventy two from
the Cape of Matapan: Its Situation favored in several particulars by Nature
and Art, makes it very strong, and is upon a Promontory advanced into the Sea
of Sapienza, fronting the Coasts of Africa; at its Foot is a safe and
Commodious Haven, where usually resides the Sangiac of the Morea, much
respected at the Port for his good Government.

In several Ages this place has been exposed to the Assaults of those who,
intending to make themselves Masters of the Realm, have thought of gaining this
City and Province; from hence it has happened that the famous Wall built at its
entrance, and which for its breadth and solidity makes a considerable
Opposition, has been oftentimes attacked and gained, and by that means the
whole Province subdued, and forced to pay a Tribute to keep themselves in any
show of Command. The People of Naples by means of the Spartans, made themselves
Masters of Modon, and to subject it more easily to their Rule, they placed
there a Colony of their own People.

Some time after the Illyriaus entertaining an Ambitious design of enlarging
their Dominions by conquests, chose them a King, and having got together a very
numerous Army, made an irruption into the neighboring Countries. When they came
near to Modon, they gave its Inhabitants to understand with feigned shows of
Amity, that they desired but to buy the necessary Provisions which they wanted.
Those of Modon believing the matter to be so without any deceit or trick, took
care to provide for them accordingly, some bringing them Bread, others Wine,
and others Provisions. When the Illyrians saw a great number of them without
the Gates, they thought (as it really was) that they were so foolhardy as to
leave but a few to guard the Fortress, so they ran all at once to seize on all
the Posts and Avenues, and fell on with their whole Army with that fury, that
they put a great many to the Sword, and made the rest their Slaves, making the
City a sad Example of their Perfidie and Devastation. The Emperor Trajan
touched with the Misfortune of those poor People that, escaping from the fury
of their Traitorous Enemies, were returned thither, gave them Proofs of his
Generosity, granting them several Privileges and Freedoms. After this manner
they lived in a kind of Aristocracy till the time of the Emperor Constantine,
who left Rome for Constantinople; yet when subject to the Empire they kept so
much of their first immunities, that the same form of Government remained; and
as to the Homages paid the Emperor, they were rather protected by him, than
entirely subjected to him.

In the year 1124. this City was Attacked, and taken by the Doge Dominico
Michael, when he returned the third time Triumphant from the Holyland, over the
Conquests of Tire and Ascalon in Soria, and of Rhodes, Scio, Samos, Lesbos, and
Andros, in the Archipelago; and to these memorable Exploits may be added the
entire defeat of the Army of the Infidels, when he raised the Siege of Zaffo.
And though the next year this place returned under Dominion of the Emperor of
Greece, yet in the Division of the Empire, Anno 1204. it again came under the
Republique, out of whose hands it was forced by Leon Vetrane, a Genoese by
Nation, who was a famous Pirat; he kept it not long, for soon after being made
Prisoner on the Hellespont, he was transported to Corfu, and there received a
violent Death from the hands of the Hangman, as a just reward for all his
Rapines. This Death of their Head disheartened the whole Party, and by that
means the Captains Dandolo, and Promarino without much trouble became Masters
of this Town.

But Bajazet the Second burning with a desire to enlarge his Empire by the
Conquest of some new Country: In the Year 1498. putting himself at the head of
an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand Men, closely besieged Modon: His
Cannon made so great a breach in the Wall of the Suburbs, that the Captains of
the place were forced, after mature deliberation, to retire into the City, and
carry with them what ever they could. But the Enemy pressed them in the City
with more violence than ever; that they were ready to demand a Capitulation,
when at last the Venetian Army appeared in view, which came from Zante, to
their aid. As soon as the two Armies came within shot, there hapened a Cruel
and doubtful Combat, but in the end after various Fortunes, the Venetians had
so much advantage as to get in one of their Feluques, to animate the besieged,
to continue Courageously in the defense of the place, in the full assurance
that their Army would soon rid them out of their Danger; and it fell out at the
same time, that four Galleys with all sorts of Ammunition from the Venetian
Army, passed through the Turkish Squadrons, and in despite of the Infidels
gained the Port very happyly. This had been a matter of great Success, if the
End had been less deplorable; for the besieged overjoyed at the receiving the
so long expected Succors, abandoned the Posts they ought to have kept still
guarded. The Turks on their side watching for all Opportunities of gaining the
Victory, and finding no great difficulty of entering the Town, laid hold of the
Advantage CORON
plan of Coron ^antage and gained the place, giving ^^rrible Proofs of their
Cruelty. In ^^at furious slaughter, that was made, ^he Illustrious Prelate
Andrew Falconi ^eceived his Death; who, clothed in ^is Pontificalibus, had
animated the people to an obstinate resistance of ^he Infidels.

It happened, for the common good of This was in the French Translation.
Christendom, that whilst these Memoires ^ere printing in French, we received
the ^greeable news of the taking of Modon from the Turks by the Venetian Army,
under the wise Conduct of the Valiant General Morosini. This will much advance
the Conquest of the whole Morea, which justly belongs to that Triumphant
Republic.

Coron.
COron has a strong and advantageous Situation in the Province of Belvedere,
the most Fertile and Rich in the whole Kingdom, and which was part of the
Ancient Messenia, at about ten Miles distance by Land, and twenty by Sea from
Modon; on the right side of Cape Gallo, by Ptolomey called Acritas
Promontorium; Strabo and Pliny knew it by the same name, which was given it
upon the account of what happened when its Foundations were laid; for in
digging they found a Sea Swallow, by the Greek^ called Coronis, and as an happy
Presage of future Prosperity, they named this City from the Bird, Coron.

It was once a Bishops Seat, Suffragan Strabo l. 9. Plin. l. 4. c. 7. Giov.
Bemb. Giust in Ferrari sub L. C. Baudrand Moreri Hofm. Verdizz. Sagredo.
to the Bishop of Patras, and at another time 'twas reckoned a Colony of the
Thebans, which the Poets called Pedosus; Laurenberg, Nisi: and Pausanias, Epea,
and all the Ancient and Modern Historians make honorable mention thereof.

It makes the Figure of a Scalen^ Triangle, and in one of its Angles i^ a great
Tower, built by the Venetian^ Anno 1463. for a Magazin; the other two sides,
which are not was^^ by the Gulf of Coron, leave a sufficient space fit for the
Tower of the Fortress, which is encompassed with an old Wall of an unequal
thickness flanked with great Towers, and a^ some Paces from thence on the North
^de there is a Suburbs of 500 Houses.

Since it has been several times expo^ed to the Assaults of the Enemy, so it
^as been often forced in different Ages ^o pay Tribute to different Nations.
Baudrand has thought it was yielded up to the Venetian Republic by the
Despotes, Princes of the Morea; and Verdizotti says that at the time of the
Division of the Grecian Empire, and in the same year that this glorious
Republic, having made Alliances with several Princes, thought upon the gaining
of this Kingdom, Coron was assigned for its Portion.

It was surprised Anno 1204. by Leon Lexic. Geogr. Baudr. sub lit. C. Verdizz.
fatti Ven. l. 7. p. 152.
Veteran, a Genoese by Nation, and Pirate by Profession, who enjoyed not long
his unjust Triumph, for being taken on the Hellespont, as we said before, he
was put to Death by the common Hangman at Corfu; whose death being known to his
Companions, all in amazement and disorder, they sought safety by an hasty
flight; at whose dispersion the Inhabitants of Coron after some slight Attempts
submitted themselves to the Venetians.

Bajazet the Second Emperor of the East, all inflamed with the desire of
extending the Bounds of his Empire Anno 1498. marched with a powerful Army
strait to Modon, which having gained, he turned his Victorious Arms against
Coron, which he could no otherwise win but by force.

In the Year 1533. the General Doria, who had under his command a Spanish
Armado of 35 great Vessels, and 48 Galleys with a design of environing this
City, caused a great number of Troops as well Spaniards as Italians, the later
under two Captains, Girolamo Tuttavilla and the Count Sarno, and the Spaniards
Commanded by Girolamo Mendozza. These three Commanders following the order of
their General, began with fourteen Cannon to batter the City, and to gain
Entrance by a large breach; but this Enterprise had not the Success that was
hoped for: The Turkish defenders obstinately withstood the Attack, and killed
300 Christian Soldiers; nevertheless those Forces by Sea performed what the
Troops by Land failed in: for vigorously following the Attack they got the
Wall, and ob^iged the Defendants to hang out the white Flag; so the Turks were
permitted upon Capitulation to go out, Bag and Baggage, and the Troops of
Mendozza took Possession of the Place: some time after the Turks attempted to
form a Blocus, so to regain the Town: it then fell out that the Spanish
Garrison being unwilling to endure a Siege, showed a resolution of going out to
meet the Enemy, and what opposition soever Maccian Novarese, who Commanded in
Mendozza's place, made thereto, endeavoring to divert them there from, by
putting them to the greatest Labors, yet he found himself constrained at last
to yield to their Importunity; wherefore he marched out for that bold Attempt
to attack the Enemy, near Andrusa, where they lay encamped with an Army of 3000
Foot, amongst which were 500 Janisaries, Commanded by Casan Aga.

The Spaniards being come near the Enemies Camp, to give them the greater
amazement, thought best to set on fire the Stables of the Horses, who being
enraged to free themselves from the Flames, made a strange noise, which soon
gave the Turks the alarm; who putting themselves in a Posture of defense, and
finding the Christian Army weak and few in number, endeavored to encompass it;
then was began a very bloody Combat, and in the midst of the Press the Valiant
Captain Maccian fell down dead of several Wounds; after that blow the Spaniards
began to sink, and had been utterly routed if one of their Musketeers had not
returned to the Turkish Commander, the like Fate which their own had suffered;
by whose Death the Turkish Courage began to cool, and the Spaniards made an
Honorable retreat back to Coron, where they took a Resolution to embark and
abandon the Place; and so the Emperor was willing not to raise new difficulties
that might obstruct the making of the Peace in Hungary: After this manner that
unfortunate City returned under the Barbarian Yoke.

In the midst of this Calm, and whilst the Forces of the Republic were not
employed about any great Enterprises, the Procurator Francisco Morosini,
Captain General of the Republic, touched with the Sentiments of Honor and his
great Courage, conceived the design of making use of the present opportunity to
regain those places in the Morca, which the Ottomans had ravished from the
Venetians; for which purpose, considering that if once they were Masters of
Coron, which was no difficult matter, a means might be found of carrying on
their Conquests; he set sail for this City Anno 1685. and sat down before it,
but scarce had the Venetians approacht the Place, when a great Body of Turks
came down from the Country, and took up their Lodgments within Pistol-shot of
the Christians; by this bold Act the besieged were animated to a more Vigorous
resistance, and it proved a great hindrance to the Valor and Designs of the
besiegers, who nevertheless desisted not from doing what ever they thought
might advance the Siege and promote the taking of the Place. They gave Fire to
a Mine of 100 Barrels of Powder, and were prepared for the Assault, if any
Breach should be made, as they hoped there would; and notwithstanding the bad
Success of their Mine, they proceeded to advance their Lodgments, and repulse
the Turks with an extraordinary impetuosity. In this far advanced Post they
defended themselves by their Dragoons, and were reinforced with some Troops of
Malta; but in the end, after above three hours Combat, they were beat back and
routed, and must all there have perished, had they not found a means of escaping
the Pursuit and Sword of the Enemy; yet for all this they carried off from the
Turks Seventeen Colors, and a Trophy of other rich Spoils: Being returned into
their Retrenchments, to discourage the besieged, they set up at the end of
their Pikes 130 Turks Heads; yet this abated not the Ardour of the Turks, who,
although in continual Action, that they had scarce time to breath, yet would
entertain no thoughts of Rendition, nor so much as Capitulation, so much were
they encouraged by the hopes of receiving a speedy Succor; and indeed a great
number of dispersed Fugitives and others got together from several parts of the
Kingdom; or sent from the Turkish Army, came down, so that they were
considerably increased; and then they thought upon the readiest means to
procure a speedy deliverance of the place. But their Efforts turned against
them, for having attempted to force the Besiegers in their Retrenchments, they
were briskly repulsed by a terrible Volley of Musket Shot and Granado's; and
being then pursued by a Regiment, and 200 Dragoons, they left 400 of their Men
upon the place, and their Vizier Calil Bassa was found amongst the rest of the
Dead.

After this blow, which was not a little advantageous to us, our General making
Reflection, that the Enemies were often refresht with new Supplies, to the
great disadvantage of his own Men, whereof he had lost a great number, without
any hopes of recruiting them, he at last concluded that the whole Success
depended upon the Defeat of the Turkish Camp; wherefore he applied himself to
whatever might contribute to make this Attempt successful and advantageous, he
animated his Troops, took his Measures, gave Orders and saw them Executed so
well, that he not only forced the Ottomans from their Camp, but put them to so
great a rout, that flying with precipitation, there were a great number of them
cut in pieces by our Forces in the pursuit. They left the Christians a
considerable Booty, consisting of six Brass Guns and much other Arms, all sort
of Ammunition and Implements of War, 300 Horse, a great many Tents and Colors,
amongst which the General-Standard, showing, by the Horse Tails that adorned
it, the Quality of the Commander, who was Machumat Bassa, who had the entire
Conduct of the Army, and was killed, as we said before.

After so fortunate an Adventure, the Venetians found themselves freed from the
great Obstacles of the Turks that were encamped without the Place; and being
Masters of the Field, they had hopes of soon putting the Besieged out of all
thoughts of defense. They prepared for a general Assault, springing a Mine,
whose Effect ^rought them to an Attack for three Hours; the besieged withstood
them with an incredible Valor and Opposition, fatal to a great many Nobles and
Valiant Soldiers, who perished there. This considerable loss gave a few moments
breathing to the Attack, put the Courage wherewith they again fell on made the
besieged think it high time to come to a Capitulation, as they testified by
hanging out a white Standard on the Rampart: Arms then were laid down to
regulate the Articles of the Capitulation, but this was only a trick of Ottoman
Perfidiousness, who made a feigned show of Rendition, to procure a greater loss
to the Besiegers, by a brisk and unexpected Assault: The Venetians also took a
more firm Resolution than ever to put an end to the Siege, which had already
continued Nine and forty days, and having swept the Ramparts with their Shot,
mounted the Walls and entered the Town, where being heated as they were with
the Assault, they made a dreadful slaughter of all the Inhabitants, without
regard of Sex or Age. They found there 128 Pieces of Canon, of which 66 were
Brass, besides a great quantity o^ Ammunition and Victuals.

There happened during the space of so long a Siege several Remarkable matters
that would make a great Volum. I shall but touch at some of the most
Considerable, and for those, my design is rather to beget an admiration of the
extraordinary Valor there shown by its Assailants, who were distinguished
either by Birth or their great Employs, and fell there a Sacrifice for Glory;
than to open our Wounds and renew our Grief for their loss and our Misfortunes:
amongst others was the Death of la Tour, Commander General by Land, and Knight
of Malta; of the Prince of Brunswick, and of the Prince of Savoy: These
Illustrious Warriors gave in the face of the Enemy sufficient Proofs of the
greatness of their Courage, answerable to the deserved high Thoughts conceived
of their Merit.

To these great Persons we may add, as he justly deserves a more than ordinary
remembrance, that excellent ^aptain Francesco Ravagnini, but 34 ^ears old,
Brother to Girolamo; ^e have been informed of this parti^^lar Circumstance of
his Death, which alone merits an eternal remem^ance amongst Men. At the last
Pe^ods of his Life, after having made ^s Will for the distribution of his
^state, he earnestly desired, that after ^s death, his Body might be buried ^o
where but in Coron, testifying, by ^at, his assurance, that the place ^ould be
taken; and nothing can ^ore demonstrate with what ardor he ^ust necessarily go
to the Attack, ^an this firm persuasion of their be^g Crowned with an happy
success.

After being a little recovered of the ^reat fatigues of this Siege, the
Gene^al raised a Trophy of the great Stan^ard taken from the Enemies, and an
Explication was made of the words that were upon it; with a general Ap^lause
the Ornament of the Golden ^tar was conferred by the Republic on his Brother
Lorenzo, as a recompense for his great Services. The taking of Coron gave the
People a perfect joy and satisfaction, testified p^lickly by them, especially
in their ^ving Thanks to the God of Arm^ and Supreme Triumpher, who ^^ given
them so great a Victory o^ the Enemies of his Faith. The ^^ accompanied by the
whole Sen^^ with an Infinite Concourse of Peop^^ went to the Church of St.
Mark, a^ after a Solemn Mass, Te Deum was sun^ and the same was done in all ^^
Churches with all imaginable Po^^ and Ceremony.

The Relation of the Battle befo^ Coron, by the Venetian For^ against the
Ottomans, the 7th. Aug. 1685. With the Descript^on and Draught of the Standar^
and Horses Tails, taken from t^ Turks.
WHen the Venetian Army w^^ the Auxiliary Troops began to form the Siege of
Corn, there ca^^ down from that side toward t^^ PLAN DELA VILLE ET FORTERESSE
DE CORON
Avec les Campem^^s de (...)

plan of Coron VEUE DE CORON
view of Coron VEUE DE CORON DU COTE DU GOLFE
view of Coron DESSEIN DES QUEUES Prises avec L'ENTENDARD par les VENE TIENS
Sur les Tures a'la Bataille DEVANT CORON l'an. 1685.
depiction of horse tails E^endart pris Sur les Tures par l'arm o^ des
Venetiens a la Bataille donnee devant Coron. 1685.
depiction of standard Land a powerful Succor of Turks, who lodging themselves
within sight of ours, so much the more encouraged the Besieged, already
sufficiently animated to make an obstinate defense, by the advantages of the
steep and difficult Situation of the place, and the abundance of Provisions and
Ammunitions they were stored with, and maintained with a very strong and
numerous Garrison. They were in hopes with the aid of this new Army of
Ottomans, which now were advanced within Pistol-shot of our Trenches, they
might raise the Siege and spoil our design; and indeed the Turks that were
encamped without the place acted for its defense whatever might be expected
from desperate and bold Men. They attempted several times to become Masters of
a Bonnet which commanded their Camp, but were still repulsed. This retarded the
Besiegers, and was an hindrance to their Works and Endeavors to reduce the
place; but the General took a Resolution to play a Mine of an hundred Barrels
of Powder: this was performed the 24 of July, although with but little Effect,
contrary to the hopes of the Success o^ this Work; then the Turks broke into
the Venetians Lines to gain their de^^red Object, the aforesaid Bonnet, but
when they thought themselves sun^ of it, the General poured upon them a Body of
Foot and Dragoons, and reinforced by the Maltese Forces, wh^ Attacked them at
the very entrance o^ the Bonnet with so much Force and Valor for three hours,
for so long the Combat lasted, that in the end our Forces replanted there the
white Colors. The Turks that were driven from it endeavored to shelter
themselves from our Shot, under the Covert of some Trees, but they were forced
from thence also; there were left 400 of them dead upon the place, and as many
wounded: Ours got by this Action several worthy Spoils, amongst the rest
seventeen Standards; and at their return into their Trenches, they exposed to
the view of the Besieged 130 Turks Heads, as a frightful dismaying Spectacle.

There were not above an hundred and thirty Christians killed and wounded,
amongst which the Gene^l by Land ended his days; Com^ander la Tour, of the
Order of Mal^ a Captain, well meriting the Grief ^f the whole Army;
notwithstand^g the loss sustained by the Turks, ^ey were not less obstinate in
their ^efence: Ours on the other side to ^ve them more terrible Effects of ^eir
Power, made a furious discharge ^f their Cannon, Bombes, and ^ones; at the same
time the Turks July 30.
^llyed again after their slight, and ^creased by a great number of Soul^ers
got together from all Parts of the ^orea, and with the Forces of the ^aptain
Bassa, again attempted with ^eater impetuosity than before, to ^row themselves
into the Venetian ^renches; but so great a discharge of ^usket and Grenades
was made upon ^em, that they were obliged to re^eat, and were followed by the
Regi^ent of Colonel Bianchli with 200 Dra^ons up to their own Retrenchments: ^^
this Action 400 of them were left ^ead; but what most increased their ^ss was,
that a Cannon Shot took off ^alil Bassa Vizier Commander General of the Ottoman
Army, and we lost but forty of our Men, yet all these losses would not abate
the Turkish Pride, and bring them to yield; for they knew where to gather a
recruit of fresh Troops, and omitted not daily to disturb the Venetians in
their Trenches. These frequent Attacks had much lessened our Men, who were
besides much harrased with continual Action; so that doubtless 'twas very
needful for the General to encourage them, which he did, showing himself a
fearless Example of Valor, being the first in all Dangers and fatigues.

In the end this prudent Commander finding the only means to reduce the place,
was to force the Enemies Camp, proposed the Design to the Council of War, which
was approved of by them. He drew out of the Galleys 1500 Volunteers, who under
the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Magnani landed about Midnight, and next day
being the 7th. of August 1200 of them filed off to the left of the Enemies
Retrenchments by the Entrance of a Valley, and the rest of them went to the
right; at the same time the other Troops had order to follow their Motions, to
be ready to give them a speedy Succor at necessary places, so to favor and
promote the design.

Twilight of the next Morning being come, two Barrels of Powder were fired, as
a Signal, which was immediately followed with a discharge of all the Cannon,
and surious Salvo of all the Musketeers, with a continual siring on the Front
and Flank of the Enemies Camp. This brisk and unexpected Assault put the Turks
into an extreme disorder, and the forwardest of them began to give back and
sly, without being able to be retained by the Example of the most fearless, or
the Commands of their Officers; all yield, and the Venetians find no more
resistance, but make a continual Butchery of the Turks, scarce any escaping
their Swords. The Event was such, that the Victory which the Venetians gained
in a very short time, was accompanied with the entire Defeat of their Enemies,
and the Ground was all covered with dead and dying Men, and Streams of the
unbelieving Blood ran down; in this Action but few of the Christians were lost
or wounded.

A very rich Booty was found in the Turks Camp of Artillery, Arms, Ammunition
and Provision, with above 300 Horses, Tents, Standards, six Brass Guns, three
whereof were marked with St. Mark of Venice, besides these the Imperial
Standard adorned with Horse Tails, the mark of a general Command and a numerous
Army.

By the order of the Senate this Monument of their Victory was designed for the
Church of the Tolentins of Venice, to be there for ever exposed to the Eyes of
the People, over the Altar of St. Gaetan, as an Eternal Memorial that this
Saints Festival was the day whereon the Venetians had so Glorious a Success
against the Infidels; and at the same time it was Decreed that every year on
the same day, this Festival should be kept with all the Solemnity possible,
conformable to what was then done. The most Serene Doge, with the whole Senate
and a general Concourse of all the City, went on Wednesday the Twelfth of
September, carrying the Standard with the Tails to that Church, where they sung
a Te Deum, and a solemn Mass was Celebrated in Thanks to God, to the great
Comfort and Edification of the People.

The Figure which we have given represents the Magnificence of the Standard,
and form of the Batons and Tails; the whole was designed and graved with so
much care and exactness, that one who has the Skill of Blazonry, will easily
comprehend not only its Grandeur, but likewise the Colors of this Standard;
wherefore it is needless to particularise it here: It was thought best to oblige
the Curious with the interpretation of the Turkish Characters that make the
Moon, and the Faces of the Lance on the end of the Standard.

On the right side of the Standard are read these Words,

In the Name of the most High and Almighty God, God the Lord of all, and of the
holy Prophet above all other Saints, Mahomet Abubechir, Homer, Osman, Ali.

On the Reverse.

There is no other God but one only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet: Our God;
thou art the God of Nations; thou art the Sovereign Good and Dispencer of Good.
Kalil Bassa.

On the Face of the Standard are seen these Words repeated,

There is no other God but one only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.

The Turks show these Tails as a sign of their Resolution, to make new Levies,
and that a great Army will march; and afterward they give them to him that is
to be the Commander in chief, as a sign of good Augury. This Custom took its
rise amongst them, from an Adventure that happened to them, when they first
began to establish their Tyrannick Rule out of their own Country. In a Battle
their Enemy made 6000 of them Prisoners, who took occasion to throw off the
Victors Yoke, and set themselves at Liberty; and wanting Standards to range
themselves under, they thought upon, and made use of some Horses Tails for that
purpose, since which time they have still continued the Custom; calculating the
future by their first Success, and think themselves, under these Colors, able
to deal with the most Courageous of their Enemies, and resist their most
furious Onsets. But as once when the Sabins, a proud and fierce People, planted
their Standard in the Face of the Romans to affront them, with these words;
Sabinis Populis Quis Resistet; Who dares resist the Sabin People. The Romans
answered them with an equal fierceness, in words beginning with the same
Letters. Senatus Populus Que Romanus, The Senate and Roman People. So the
Perfidious Ottomans will find their vain and ridiculous Sign opposed by the
Sign that is revered in Paradise, which will one day procure their final Ruin,
when we shall have made our selves worthy of this Favor from Heaven by our
constant Prayers.

Calamata.
ON the left Bank of the River Spirnazza which Strabo calls Pamissus, Ptolomey
Pamissus, Niger Stronio, and Giovio Tifoo; on the hanging of a Hill lies the
Fortress of Calamata of a large extent, by Baudrand called Thelame, Theramme,
Thuria and Abia, from the Nurse of Helles one of Hercules's Sons: Its Situation
is in an open place in the Province of Belvedere, it is well Peopled, and
though the Town CALAMATA
view of Calamata BATAILLE DEVAN^ CALAMATA
depiction of battle at Calamata has no Walls to repulse the Attacks of the
Enemy, yet upon a mount near it stands a strong Castle, with regular
Fortifications, able to guard it from all dangerous Incursions. Though Calamata
be but a little way from Coron, yet it stands not on the Gulf, which is
indifferently called the Gulf of Coron, and Calamata.

In the Year 1659. there was a very strong and numerous Garrison, who hindered
Six thousand of the Magnotes who performed the Greek Rites, from shaking off
the Barbarian Yoke, as they designed; they offered themselves to General
Morosini, and testified their great Zeal that they always had toward the
Republic. The General respecting their Generous inclination, and to take away
all impediment of their deliverance, caused a sufficient number of Forces to
land, under the Command of Chevalier de Gremouille, who caused them to advance
to Attack the Castle; it happened at the time when our Troops drew near it,
that they were met by a great Body of Turks that hasted to its Succor. Captain
Georgio Cornaro had the Fortune to rout them, and that this Success might
procure another of more importance, he caused some Venetians to enter into the
Castle, together with the Turks, as if they had been all one; those of the
Garrison never perceiving the Stratagem till it was too late to hinder its sad
Effects, so that they thought only upon flight; and thus they became Masters of
the place without striking a blow. They found in the place a great Provision of
Victuals, and after they had taken as much as they could dispose of, and burnt
the rest, with a good part of the Country, they left the Castle and returned to
their Ships, leaving the place to be reinhabited by the Turks.

This place was again taken by the Venetians, on the day of the Exaltation of
the holy Cross, Anno 1685. under the command of the same General Morosini; he
made Governor there, Baron General Degenfeld, who ^fterwards had Orders to
raze it to the Ground. The Plan we give thereof represents it as it was when it
was taken.

ZARNATA
view of Zarnata VEUE DE ZARNATA.
view of Zarnata

Zarnata.
ZArnata is a Fortress much favored by Nature, but made much ^ore considerable
by Art; its Figure ^ almost round, and its Situation on ^ very pleasant Hill:
in the Year 1685. ^he Captain Passa encamped within ^ive Miles of this place,
and though he had a numerous and powerful Army, yet he contented himself in
being an admirer of the Valor and Forces of the Venetian Army, without daring
to attempt any Act of Hostility; willing rather to expose the place to the
Enemy without Succor, than himself by defending it to a Ruin, which he thought
inevitable: After this manner the Garrison delivered it self up to General
Morosini, upon Conditions that were upon that account exactly observed; that
they should carry off their Lives and Baggage untoucht; for 60 of them who went
out of the place the eleventh of September, were convoyed to a certain place
prefixed, without receiving the least violence or insulation from our Part. The
Aga that Commanded them had no mind to go with them, for fear of losing his
Head; but chose rather to submit himself to the Generosity of the Christians,
and being retired into their Camp, he obtained of Angelo Michieli Captain of
the Slaves to stay aboard his Galley.

The General gave the Government of this place to two remarkable Volunteers, in
Qality of Representants, named Bartolomeo Contarini, and Angelo Emo, leaving a
Garrison of One hundred and fifty Soldiers, under the direction of Lieutenant
Colonel Prastini.

Chielefa.
CHielefa is a Fortress of great importance, whether it be considered for its
advantages of Nature or Art; it has its Situation upon a steep Rock a Mile and
half from the Sea, it is a Mile in Circuit of a Quadrangular Figure, and
Flanked CHIELAFA
plan of Chielafa with five great Towers about its Walls.

It is not far from the place where once Vitulo stood, a famous Trading Town,
from whence the Port that is near it took and retains the name of Vitulo,
though it is now but little frequented, being neither commodious nor safe.

When General Morosini was upon his expedition by War, to increase the Venetian
Conquests, he presented himself with his Army before this Fortress, and began
to Attack it with great Vigor; but the Garrison thinking it self not in a
Condition to oppose so great a Captain, endeavored to procure a favorable
Capitulation.

The fearful Turks made humble request to the General to spare their Lives, and
permit them to go out without suffering any Violence from the Christians. Assar
Passa, who resided there in quality of Commander of the whole Province, went
first our, carrying the Keys of the Place to the Generals Galley, followed by a
thousand Persons, whereof Three hundred and fifty embarked themselves on the
Ships of Pisani, sometime director of this Fortress, who transported them, with
what Baggage they had saved, to the Isle of Staggs.

After they had returned Thanks to Heaven, and planted the Standard of the
Cross, and the glorious St. Mark, the General established for Proveditor
ordinary Bernardo Balbi, and Lorenzo Venier for extraordinary.

A Relation of the Victory obtained by the Venetians, over the Turks; Before
the Fortress of Chielefa, on the first of April 1686.
THe Ottomans have now made Proof of what often happens, when by endeavoring
to regain what we have lost, we draw upon us new and sometimes greater Losses.
They intended at the beginning of the Campagn, to retake the Fortress of
Chielefa, which the Venetians had justly taken from them the year before;
confiding in an Army which they had gotten together of Ten thousand Foot and
fifteen hundred Horse: with a great number of Pioniers, they began to Attack
the place, playing upon it with six great Pieces of Ordnance, fully persuaded
that they durst not, or at most could not maintain the place long; nevertheless
they were ten days without much advancing their Works, or finding the Besieged
any thing inclined to Rendition; it fell out that the Venetian Army hasting to
their aid Encountered the Turks, and the Attack was so brisk and furious, that
the Insidels betook themselves to their Heels as their only refuge. The Defeat
was so hasty, that they left a very Rich Booty to the Conquerors; and a great
many of their Men dead upon the place.

Passava.
PAssava is a Fortification seated in the Province of Maina, near the Shore of
the Gulf of Colochina, upon Cape Matapan, opposite to Chielefa and Port Vitulo;
its Figure is as we have represented it in our Draught thereof; it is built
upon an Eminence, but is altogether irregular, and not in a condition to hinder
the inroads of the Enemy into the Province.

Captain General Morosini caused a Twenty fourth of September 1685.
great Party of Magnotes to make an halt before this Fortress, at the same time
that the Turks went out of Chielefa, to set up the Standard of St. Mark, but
perceiving the Garrison ready to march out, and stayed but to transport the
great Guns of the place, he sent a Detachment of five hundred Foot, under the
Command of Sergeant Major Gregorevick a Forreigner, to reinforce the Magnotes,
and hinder their design. The Turks discovering at a distance the Venetian
Colors, in a great fright and disorder ran and left their Post. So we became
Masters of the place without a stroke: It was not judged worth the leaving a
Garrison to maintain it; but on the contrary it was resolved to raze it, which
was the more readily concluded on, in that it was an useless place, and that
there was very near to it a strait passage where a few Men might put a stop to,
and engage a very numerous Army.

Mysitra.
AS this place has had several appellations, so some have chose to call it
rather by one than another; it was at the first called Sparta, then Lacedaemon,
and at last Mysitra; it is one of the most famous of all the Grecian Cities,
and has been of so vast an extent, that in Forty eight Stadia make 5440
Geometrick
Polybius's time it contained a Circuit of Eight and forty Furlongs. Its Figure
was almost round, and its Situation was partly upon an Eminence, and partly
upon the declivity of the Hill. The Mountain Taygeta commands it on the West.

From that vastness it once had, it is now shrunk to a little Town, scarcely
showing any remains of its former Glory: Although it had no Walls for Eight
hundred Years, yet it maintained it self very well against its Enemies, and of
those that afterward encompassed it, though they have been often rebuilt;
there is now only the Castle and the Foundations, where they once stood, to be
seen. It has but two great Gates, one on the North side toward Napoli di
Romania, the other on the West toward Exokorion, to which answer two Highways
or great Roads, one called Aphetais or grand Bazar, the other Hellerion.

The Inhabitants are exposed to excessive heats during the Summer: for besides
that the City lies full South, being seated at the Foot of the Mountain, the
Suns Rays by this opposition are reflected and redouble the heat.

The Learned Monsieur La Guilletiere being some years ago upon the place, took
the height of the Pole three several days one after another, viz. the 19. 20,
and 21, of June, and regulating himself by the Meridian height of the Sun, by
the Shadow of a Cylindrical Body, divided into a thousand equal Parts, the
difference of the Shadows at these three Observations was unperceivable, and
the length of the Shadow was still found to be 211 Parts of the Cylinder;
whence he concluded the Sun was 12 degrees and 56 Minutes from the Zenith, and
the Latitude of Mysitra 35 degrees and 26 Minutes.

The City is divided into four Quarters, each of which being separated from the
rest, makes of it self a disunited Body. The Castle is one of them, the City
another, and two Suburbs the other; whereof the one is called Melokerion, that
is to say the middle Suburb, and the other is called Exokorion or the outward
Suburb, by the Turks named likewise Maratche.

The Exokorion is separated from the other three by the River Vas^li Potamos,
and has no Communication with them but by a Stone B^^^ge.

The Castle named to Castron is seated on an Eminence, is of a conical Figure,
and has good Walls; it had some years since Ten Pieces of Artillery, and a
Garrison of Eighteen or Twenty Janisaries Commanded by a Disdar that seldom
resides there.

There are always Magazines well stored with Corn for the Armies use, for each
Turkish Family is obliged to bring his Corn in to renew the Store every year.
There are also some Cisterns, and in the midst of the Castle a Mosque, once a
Christian Church.

This Citadel is so advantagiously situated, that Histories assure us it was
never taken, though Mahomet the Second and the Venetians have Attacked it with
great Vigor.

It was a work of the Despotes in the declining of the Greek Empire, and that
because the old Castle seated on the opposite Hill, whereof now the Ruins are
only to be seen, did not sufficiently Command the Town.

It is not certain who was the first Founder of Sparta, Historians not yet
agreeing thereon: Some say 'twas Spartus the Son of King Amiclas; others, the
Princess, King Lacedaemon's Wife, who was called Sparta; many affirm 'twas
Cecrops, who likewise founded Athens; and again others attribute its Foundation
to Spartus the Son of Phoroneus, King of Argos, Contemporary with Jacob the
Patriarch, 1763 Years before the Birth of Christ, since according to the
Calculation of Father Petau, the Patriarch Jacob was born 1876 Years before the
Year of our Redemption, so that to this present Year 1687, there are 3422 Years
since the building of this City; therefore it is older than Rome 983 Years,
than Carthage 867, than Syracusa 995, than Alexandria 1405, than Lions 1639,
and than Marseilles 1136.

There never was any Nation in the whole World that may be compared to the
Lacedaemonians for Polity, and they never had a King but one of their own
People; and these People only have seen upon their Royal Throne two Virtuous
and deserving Heads circled with the same Diadem; and often amongst them have
been sound Prodigies for Wisdom and the Art of Governing, that they have been
thought the only Politicians; and upon these Foundations it is that it could
endure and flourish 800 years; it declined in its Prosperity and Glory, when it
lost Colemanes the third King of that name.

Finally, the Eastern Empire having been divided into Temata or general
Governments, Lacedaemon was made an Appendant to the Emperors eldest Son; since
when it lost its name of Lacedaemon, and was only called Sparta; and its
Princes who had under their Dominion the whole Morea were called Despotes.

The Despote Theodorus, who Espoused the Daughter of Renier Prince of Athens,
and was Brother to Andronicus and Emanuel, who succeeded each other in the
Empire; finding himself unable to attempt to resist Bajazet, treated with
Philibert de Naillac Prior of Aquitain, and great Master of Rhodes, about the
Sale of Sparta and Corinth; which Treaty was almost concluded, when Tamerlain
Triumphing over Bajazet, the Spartans were so encouraged thereat, that they
absolutely refused to consent to Theodore's Alienation of Tzaconia, and the
People being in a Tumult, the two Deputies for the great Master, that were to
take possession of the Government had notice that it was their best way to
retire, or otherwise they should be treated as Enemies; and so they lost
Corinth again, when they were already in possession thereof, and Theodore was
not well pleased to refund the Money he had so lately singered.

At last he dying, left the Despotate to one of his Nephews of his own name,
Son to the Emperor Emanuel: this new Despote married an Italian Lady of the
House of Malatesta, upon which that Family grounds a right to the Duche of
Sparta. Theodore the Second took a Resolution to go to Constantinople, to
succeed his Brother John in the Empire, leaving his Despotate to his Brother
Constantine; it was at this time that Amurath the First made an irruption into
Tzaconia. Constantine being raised to the Imperial Throne, Sparta fell to
Demetrius, out of whose hands 'twas ravished by Mahomet the Second, who
barbarously sawed the Governor of the Castle in two.

In the Year 1473 Benedetto Colleone, who had the command of the Venetian Army
conquered Sparta, and had well nigh reduced the Citadel. Sansovino shows us in
his History, that this City together with the whole Province was under the
Republic, at the time that Henry Dandolo was Prince of the Senate.

A List of the Kings of Lacedaemon, in their Order, with the Years of their
Reigns.
Anno Mundi.
2862. EUristes the first King. Compend Hist. Universe. de Nic. Doglioni Part.
ult.
2904. Agides. 2905. Achestrates. 2940. Labotes. 2977. Dosistes. 3006.
Agesilaus. 3050. Archelaus. 3110. Telecus. 3150. Alcanenes, whose Reign ended
in the Year 3187.

Maina at Cape Matapan.
OF all the Promontories of Peloponnesus, that which shoots it self farthest
into the Sea is the Cape of Matapan, which was once called Pliny, Senec. Ptolom.
Promontorium Taenarium, in the Bowels whereof is the Cave Taenarus, whose
dreadful Mouth gave the Poets occasion to call it the entrance of Hell; and
they added that the invincible Hercules came forth at this passage, Triumphant
over Cerberus; from whence they say amongst other Titles it had that of
Taenarus, though others again will have its name from Taenarus, who sprung from
Elaphus the Son of Ieanus, who married Elemanda the Daughter of Damasicles.

The Sea is very deep round about Zonaro. Giovio.
this Promontory, and there are two very Commodious Ports, as is well known to
those who sail that way; the one is called the Port of Quails, from the
prodigious number of PLAN DE MAINA
plan of Maina CAP DE MATAPAN.
view of Cape of Matapan those fowl there found; the other the Port of Maina.
Between these two Ports, and in the place of the Ruins where the Ancient
C^^sare Campana Vol. 1. l. 1.
Cersapolis once stood; the Ottomans built a Fortress which they named As is
seen in the Cart of the Plan of this Fortress.
Turco^ogli Olimionas, which the Greeks interpret Castro di Maini, and the
Turks Monige. Their design in this was thereby to bridle the Inhabitants of
Tzaconia; at this time this Province takes up an Baudrand Lex. Geog.
Arm of the Maina, and extends it self a great way along the more Southern part
of the Morea: The Men thereof are very Valiant, but some brisk Attempt of the
Christians they would forward with their utmost power and good will; for at
this time out of hatred to the Turks, and their Barbarous Government, as often as
they can they make their retreat into the dreadful holes of the Rocks, and hide
themselves in the thick Forests, to avoid paying Tribute and to breath a little
Liberty.

In the Year 1570. The Captain of the Gulf, Quirini, setting sail from Candia
with twenty four Galleys, came to Anchor at Corfu, where being informed that
this Fort was built upon that motive we have declared, immediately designed to
Attack it; but before he attempted it he went into these two Ports, giving the
Magnotes advice of his Magnati Campana.
Design; who indeed on this occasion gave good Proofs of their good Will and
Courage. After a very sharp and brisk Combat, wherein the Turks had the worse,
the Captain became Master of the Fort, and would not stir out of the Gulf, till
he had taken away this Eyesore from a People so well inclined to the Republic:
so having taken out whatever might be serviceable, he caused it to be demolisht.

Malvasia or Malvoisie
THe City commonly called Malvasia, which Ptolomy named Epidaurus Limera, and
Baudrand after Thucydides.
others Monembasia, is situated on a Rock, from whence is a pleasant Prospect
Eastwards over the Ancient Laconia, a Region rude and uneven, yet as Fertile as
any part of Peloponnesus, this Province is at this day known by the name of
Braccio di Maina, because it extends it self on the left side of that Arm where
begins the Gulf, by Ptolomy called Argolicus Sinus, now the Gulf of Napoli di
Romania.

It has the Title of an Archbishopric; being blessed with a very advantageous
situation, for it is built on the Top of a Rock whose Bottom is washed by the
Waves of Archipelagus; yet it enjoys this benefit of Nature, that it has
several sources of sweet clear Springs, which by watering the little Ground
that is about it, makes it so Fertile as to maintain the Garrison of the place,
consisting of 50 or 60 Men, it is inaccessible on all sides, but one place
where it is defended with a very thick triple Wall, at which place is joined to
it a Suburb or Lower Town, of a considerable number of Houses, strengthened
with a strong Rampart at that place, where the Inhabitants issue forth to go to
the main Land, which is separated from the ground whereon this Town stands, and
is united thereto by a Wooden Bridge of a good length; it has likewise a very
spacious Port which is better defended than the Fortress.

Its Territory bears a great quantity of Raisins, and incomparable Wines are
there made, not a whit yielding to any of the Wines of Candie.

In times past the Graecians came from all Parts to this little Isle, to adore
the God Aeculapius, whose Worship made the place famous through the World.

The People of Epidaurus when they were once deputed by their Commonalty to
this place, as they sailed from Argos, which was their Country then, had
several Dreams which made them hope for an happy and prosperous Success in
their Enterprise; and so being arrived at the Port, they determined there to
settle a Colony and build a City, which they called Epidaurus; the Buildings
are now wholly ruined by tim, that has been no more kind to that place than
others, and the name is all that now remains.

It is true that time and chance rules all things, an example whereof is seen
in the Fate of Malvasia or Epidaurus; for though its situation ought to render
it invincible, yet it has for all that often by ill Fortune undergon several
changes of Government.

In the time when it was subject to the Emperors of Constantinople it was taken
from them; when the French and Venetians having made themselves Masters of that
Empire, and Baldwin Count of Flanders was Emperor, this place was given in Ann.
1204.
Fee to a French Baron, called Guillaume, as a recompense for his great
Services performed in that War; but at last Michael Paleologus having
dispossessed the French, and being reinstalled in the Empire, he made the said
Guillaume Prisoner, who at that time made a renunciation of all Right and Title
to Epidaurus; the Baron being so escaped out of the Emperors hands came to
Venice, and there made a donation of the same Rights and Pretensions to the
Republic, affirming what he had done to Paleologus was extorted from him, and
upon that account invalid, that Act being not voluntary, but forced. So the
Venetians relying on this donation, set a great Army to Sea, and made
themselves Masters of Malvasia, which they kept till the year 1537. when
Solomon began to pass the bounds of Thrace, to invade the Grecian Empire, and
endeavor the ruin of Christendom.

The Venetians most resented these Usurpations, and the Barbarous Conqueror not
contented to have put several parts of their Dominions Ann. 1536. Paruta, p. 2.
l. 9.
to pay him Tribute, gave order to Cassin, Sangiac of the Morea, to lay Siege
to and to reduce this People; who getting together a numerous Army began to
execute his Orders. When Solomon reflecting upon the design, that to Attempt
this place were to hazard the Reputation of his Forces and lose time, changed
his mind and turned his Arms another way; yet sometime after he Ann. 1537.
returned thither, and reduced the place not by pure force but by assurances of
Peace.

During the Wars of Candia and Dalmatia, when the Venetians, as much as in them
lay, opposed the irruptions and violent inundations of the Enemy; General
Foscolo being near Epidaurus with a Squadron of Twenty two Galleys, Eight tall
Ships, and six Galeasses, went to Attack the Fort which the Ottomans had built
without the Suburbs. This Attack was very brisk, and the Venetians became
Masters of the Fort in one day: but it happened as they put the Enemy to flight
with loud shouts and cries, that a Mine took Fire under the Victorious, and left
an Hundred and fifty of them dead, with as many hurt and wounded. The Venetians
revenged the Death of their Companions, entering the place with their Swords in
their hands, and having demolisht the Fort, they left it, taking away with them
Twenty two Cannons, wherewith the Enemies covered and defended the Saicks that
came there to Anchorage in the Port, waiting till a fit time to set sail for
Candia offered.

MALUASIA
view of Maluasia

The Explication of the Letters in the Draught of Malvasia.
A. THe old Tower. B. The Castle. C. The Gate of the Fortress. D. The steep
Rocks invironing the place. E. The Suburb or lower Town. F. The Gate of the
Suburb. G. The Wooden Bridge which was broken by the Venetians. H. The Fort
built by the Venetians to hinder all Succors.
Napoli di Romania.
AMongst the celebrated Cities, once the glory of Argia, at this day called
Saccania or Romania Minor, a very rich Part of the Morea, Napoli preserves to
this time the remains of its former Beauty; it is named by Sophianus, Napli, by
the Greeks M. Spon. Voyage de Grace, l. 2.
Anaplia, and by Ptolomey, Herod. Xenoph. Strab.
Nauplia; this strong and trading Town was built by Nauplius the Son of
Neptune, and Amimone in the innermost part of the Gulf, commonly called di
Napoli, and by Ptolomey Argolicus Sinus, on the point of a little Promontory
which extends it self on two sides; that which is toward the Sea makes a large
Port and very safe, and the other is a great hindrance to the Commerce of those
that pass that way, because they cannot climb up it but by one very steep
narrow Path, which lies between mount Palamedes and the Sea.

The City is situated near to this place, and with very considerable advantages
which it has on three sides, puts as it were a Bridle on the Waves of the Sea;
whose Shores are so high and steep, that in all hazardous Attempts they
absolutely hinder the Enemy not only from landing, but likewise from battering
the Walls of the City from their Galleys; the Bay is very spacious within, but
it is stopped up at its entrance, and no Galleys can get in till they have passed
through a Chanel, where they are exposed to the great Artillery. The City is
defended by a Citadel well provided, and which being built upon a Shelf or
Rock, about 300 Foot out in the Sea, cannot be Attacked on that side toward the
Land, and the Rocks that surround it prevent all surprise: In fine, on which
side soever one looks upon the Town, one shall find that Nature and Art have
conspired as much as possible to render it strong: Nor Baudrand. Hofman.
Lauremberg.
has it wanted its honorable Titles, for it was once a Bishops Seat, whose
Metropolis was Corinth; and at this day it is an Archbishops it self, and one
of the Chief. It is distant Fifty five Miles from Athens; sixty from Mysitra;
Thirty six from Corinth: It is the Residence of the Governor of the Province,
in which are reckoned to be Sixty thousand Greeks, besides a great number of
other Inhabitants, which according to Pausanias were anciently Egyptians, who
inhabited there with Danaus, as in a Colony of their own. Napoli has tasted of
the same Fate with other places, to pass under the Rule of several Princes and
forms of Government.

As Paulus Ranusius reports, it was Paulo Ranusio querra di Constable. 1. 5. p. 160.
taken Anno 1205. by the Venetians joined with the French; but some time after
King Giovanissa turning his Arms against this City, though he found it well
furnished with Ammunition and Men, yet he gave so Vigorous an Assault to it,
that he carried it; where at his entrance he gave terrible Marks of his Rage,
for he put the Commander and the whole Garrison to the Sword, and Sacked the
Town, which was at that time rich, powerful, and seated in the best part of the
whole Romania.

Verdizzoti is of Opinion, that in the 13. Century this City being in the
Possession of Marie of Erigane, the Widow of Peter, the Son of Frederic
Cornarus Piscopia, this Lady not finding her self able to oppose so many
powerful Enemies, that had a mind to the place, especially Bajazet above the
rest, made a grant of it to the Republic; under this new Rule Napoli quietly
let some Ages pass over, yet not without often tasting those Misfortunes,
whereto all places are subject, that are the aim of the Ottoman desire; for
being several times Attacked by those Barbarians, it often proved the Misery of
want and Famine, together with the eating and tearing Misfortune of seditious
Persons, caused by these frequent allarms.

Mahomet the Second greatly thirsted to ravish it out of the Arms of its lawful
Prince; and thinking there was no other way to obtain his end, but by Arms, he
gave Orders to Macmut Bassa, to go and Besiege it with a powerful Army; but
this Siege was not Successful; for having found the Defendants very Valiant and
able to resist him, armed with a constant resolution to withstand all his
violences, he was obliged after several Attempts and great Losses sustained to
quit his Enterprise.

Solomon the most Ambitious of all the Turkish Emperors, commanded Cassin,
Sangiac of the Morea, to go and form a Siege before this place, with
proportionable Forces to the strength thereof; but Cassin had not herein a more
fortunate Success than Macmut; for after having obstinately endeavored a long
time to take the place, and sustained great loss from the Valor of the
Inhabitants, he was forced to retire; yet scarce two years past ere he returned
to the Attack, and won the place, though in reality it was not by force VEUE DE
NAPOLI D^ Roman^e du cot^ du Port
view of Napoli di Romania NAPOLI DE ROMANIE
view of Napoli di Romania ^^ Arms, for it still approved it ^lf invincible,
but by an agreement ^ade by the Republic, which much ^ressed and tired out
with continual ^ars and want, sought after some ^efreshments of Peace and
Re^ose.

The Explication of the Letters in the Draught of Napoli di Romania.
A. THe Fortress on that side toward the Sea. B. The Chain which shuts up the
Port. C. A Cavalier raised upon the Fortress of the Sea. D. The Port capable of
a Great Fleet. E. Another Chain to hinder the Entrance into the Port. F. A
Battery of great Artillery. G. The Mosques. H. The City. I. Another Battery of
great ^^tillery. K. The Chanel three (...) broad. L. Part of the Gulf of
Roman^. M. Mount Palamedes. N. The Fort upon the main Land, to which the Chain
that shuts up the Port is fastened.
Argos.
AS Baudrand the famous Geographer of our times reports, there have been three
Cities called by the same name of Argos; one which Pliny calls Argos
Amphilochium which is in Epirus. The Strabo.
Second Argos Pelasgicum in Macedonia, and the Third Argos Peloponnesiacum. Of
the two first we will make mention each in their place; at present we will
speak of the third, which was once called Phoronia of Phoroneus; Hippobote from
the great numbers of Horses bred ^^ere; Jasia from the name of a Va^nt Captain;
besides these it was ^lled Diposia and Jappia; it is the ^apital City of the
famous Argia, and ^ckoned amongst the noblest Cities ^ Peloponnesus. It is
seated on the ^iver Planissa which the Latins name ^achus, at Thirty six miles
distance ^om Corinth, Sixty from Sparta, and ^ive from Napoli di Romania, it is
the ^at of a Bishop, Suffragan to the ^rchbishop of Corinth; it has on the West
the Mountain Cronia, on the North Cleone, and on the South the Ruins of the
Ancient Mycenia, raised ^n the Ruins of some other Neighboring Cities, it
vaunted that the World could not show its like for Magnificence; and there is a
Tradition that from her all the Greeks took the name of Argives, as if to
testify that she alone was enough to maintain the Glory and honor of the
whole Nation at the greatest height desirable.

Its Rule began with Inachus its first Founder, in the year of the World 2197.
and continued for 546. years till Acrisius who was slain by his Nephew Perseus
An. 2742. several Authors, a Patena, Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. ^^firm that
this Inachus was contemporary with Moses; but Eusebius sh^^ the contrary, and
proves that he li^e 346 years before the Children of Isra^^ went out of Egypt.

A Chronological Table of the King^ of Argos.
Anno Mundi.
2197. I Nachus Reigned 50. 2247. Phoroneus Reign. 60. 2307. Apis Reigned 35.
2342. Argos Reigned 70. 2412. Ciraso Reigned 54. 2466. Phorbas Reigned 35.
2501. Triopas Reigned 46. Years. 2547. Crotopas Reigned 21. 2568. Sthenelas
Reigned 11. 2579. Danaa Reigned 50. 2629. Linceus Reigned 41. 2670. Abbas
Reigned 23. 2693. Proeto Reigned 17. 2710. Acrisius Reigned 31. 2741. Perseus
was the last King.

There are Authors who besides these, ^ake mention of Megaphentas, Anax^goras,
Melampus and Bias, which they ^dd to the Kings of Argos.

After having been for a long time ^he principal City of the Morea, it be^ame a
Commonwealth, and in that quality had a part in all the Grecian Wars, as is
seen in Pausanias, Moreri and Lauremberg: At this day it is but a miserable hole
giving shelter to a very few Inhabitants, and retains only the name of its past
Glory. Now that this City belongs to the Venetians several Historians affirm,
and the Decrees ratify; and if they agree not as to the manner, yet they all
unanimously conclude it has been justly enjoyed by them. Baudrand pretends that
the Duke of Sparta offering it to sale to them that would give most for it,
'twas purchased by the Republic for a great Sum of Money.

It appears by a Decretal of the Senate in the sixteenth of March, Anno 1383.
which we have here rehearsed, That Peter, the Son of Frederick Cornaro, at the
same time possessed Argos and Napoli di Romania. Verdizzoti assures the same,
adding that Marie d' Anguien, ^^ Enguien, by corruption called d' Erig^no,
being left without Children, t^^ Widow of Peter became Governess of Argos, as
pretending a right to it; but not being in a condition to defend it against so
many powerful Enemies, especially the ambitious Bajazet, who was the most to be
feared, she offered to deliver it to the Senate: and this Act of Marie d'
Erigano happened in the Month of December, Anno 1388. as we shall prove by a
Copy of the Original that is in the Library of that Noble and Honorable
Seigneur Giov. Baptista Cornaro Piscopia, Proveditor of St. Mark, the worthy
Descendent of Peter, and the Father of that Illustrious Helena, the Beauties of
whose Mind were much more surprising and admirable, than those of the Body of
the fair Grecian Helen: who though cut off in the She died in the 31. year of
her age, on the 26. of July, 1684. at Badova and is there buried in the Church
of St. Justin.
Flower of her Age, yet showed the World prodigious Effects of her Knowledge
and Parts.

In the Year, 1463. the Republic sent to make its Complaints against Mahomet
the Second then reigning, for that, contrary to the Faith of their Treaties, he
showed himself as an Enemy, by putting Argos under the Government of the
Flambular or Sanza^hei of Corinth. These Complaints produced no good effect
with that barbarous Prince; wherefore deliberating on the Means to obtain
Justice upon this his infringement of the Peace, War was concluded upon; and
Bertoldo d' Estee, who commanded the Army of the Republic, was sent before the
Place with fifteen thousand men, who soon won the Fort: The Citadel made some
resistance, but that likewise in a short time delivered up it self. It happened
afterward that this General dying, Dauch Passa soon put to rout the Venetian
Army, his own consisting of twenty four thousand men. Thus Argos was presently
retaken again by him, and threescore Cross-bow-men of Candia made Prisoners and
cruelly put to death.

The Copy of the Writing before mentioned taken from the Original of the Act,
contained in the Manuscript History of Raphael Caresini Great Chancellor of
Venice, added as a Continuation of the Chronicle of the Doge Andreas Dandola.
NObilis vir Petrus Cornario quondam domini Federici, dominabatur Terris,
Castris, and Fortiliciis, Argos, and Neapolis, vigore dotis uxoris suae
egregiae dominae Mariae, siliae quondam egregii viri domini Guidonis de Engino,
quo quidem Petro Cornario florida aetate, absque liberis defuncto, ipsa loca
manifesto discrimini subjacebant, ne ad manus Turcarum, seu Graecorum
pervenirent, in evidens damnum praefactae dominae Mariae, ad quam de jure
spectabunt. Quare Ducalis excellentia, 1388. indictione XII. die Sabbathi 12.
Decembris, ad instantem supplicationem ejusdem dominae, ipsa loca, and terras
emit ab ea jure proprio, ducatorum boni auri, and justi ponderis quingentorum
solvendorum omni anno in perpetu^m ipsi dominae Mariae de Engino, and suis
^aeredibus descendentibus. Ipsa potest te^tari, and per testes dimittere
singulis, and ^uibus sibi placuerit de pecunia Commu^is Venetiarum ducatorum
200. auri: and in ipso casu illustrissimus dominus Dux, and Commune Venetiarum
sint abso^uti ab omni debito, and prestatione alicui ^acienda de pecunia, vel
alia re pro dictis, ^uae remaneant, and sint, perpetuo, and libere, and
absolute praefacti domini Ducis, and Communis Venetiarum. Insuper praeliba^us
dominus Dux and Commune Venetia^um promisit ipsi dominae Mariae dare, and
solvere omni anno, in vita sua tantum du^atos 200 auri de provisione, ultra
suprascript. duc. 500 auri. Si vero ipsa loca ^erderentur, illustrissimus
dominus Dux, and Commune Venetiarum non teneatur in ^liquo haeredibus ipsius
dominae Mariae, do^ec ipse dominus Dux, and Commune Ve^etiarum reacquisiverint,
and iterum possederint ipsa loca, and utrumque eorum. Insuper ipsi dominae
Mariae non potest impo^i per excellentissimum dominum Ducem, and dominum
Venetiarum aliquod gravamen, sive onus faciendi imprestita, aut alias
impositiones, occasion istarum pecuniarum quantitatum: Veruntamen remane^ in
liberate Ducalis dominii providendi disponendo tantam pecuniam Commu^^
Venetiarum ad officium Imprestitorum, a^alibi, ex qua habeatur de proprio suo
redi^^ annuatim summa septingentorum ducat^rum auri, scribendo ipsum capitale
cum ge^tibus suprascriptis.

Caeterum praefata domina Maria de Engino motu proprio, sponte, and certa ani^i
scientia, considerans salutem, and conservationem personae, and status sui post
dictum consistere in benignitate illustrissimi Dutalis dominii Venetiarum, a
quo velut Fili^ benignissime tractata est, and tractari dignoscitur, promisit,
and juravit absque requisitione alicujus, provido viro Marco de Raphaelis
Notario, velut publicae Personae, and per eorumdem fieri fecit publicum
instrumentum 1388, die 17. Decembris, se toto tempore vitae suae non accipere
maritum, sive conjugem, nisi nobilem civem originarium Venetiarum, sub poena
perdendi statim ipso facto totaliter praetium, and provisionem praedictam
ducatorum 500 annumeratim pro praetio dictorum locorum; and supra scriptos
ducatorum 200 auri de provisione, and suprascripta 200 ducatos, quos per
testamentum legare potest in casu, quo ipsa moreretur absque haeredibus ab ea
descendentibus.

Exemplum.

Mixtorum number 38. ad Cartas 14.

1383 Die 16. Martii in Rogatis, CAPTA.
Cum loca nobilis viri Ser. Petri Cornario quondam Ser. Phaederici, scilicet
Argos, and Neapolis fuerint, and sint ad honorem nostri dominii, and pro omni
bono respectu, pro statu nostro faciat, quod dicta loc^ conserventur in manibus
dicti Ser. Petri ad honorem nostri dominii, and sicut sentitur, ad conservandum
dicta loca expedit, ut Persona dicti Ser. Petri vadat ad dicta loca propter
pericula, quae possent occurrere.

Vadit pars, quod concedatur dicto Ser. Petro Cornario, quod ipse cum illo
numero Personarum, and familiae, quae videbuntur Dominis Consiliaris Capitibus,
Sapientibus Ordimon, vel majori parti dicti Collegii possit ire, and conduci
super Galeis Culphi in proximo exituris ad loca sua praedicta. Etiam quia in
numero istarum Galearu^ Culphi, quae armantur, erit una Gal^ grossa, potest ei
optime, and de nostra grati^ complaceri.

Of the Confines of the MOREA.
The Confines of this Peninsula are (as we have said) the Ionian Sea, that of
Sapienza and the Aegean: To this we will add the Descriptions of the Gulfs of
these Seas.

The Gulfs of the Ionian Sea.
AMongst the Gulfs of the Ionian Sea, that of Lepanto shall have the first
place, which the Ancients called Crisaeus; Strabo, Halcyonius; others
Corinthiacus Sinus; and Sophianus the Gulf of Pedras. It is an hundred miles
long, and reaches on the North ^o the very Borders of Achaia, and on the South
to those of the Morea.

The Gulf, called that of Patras, from the name of a Maritime Town of the
Morea, situated within the Duchy of Chiarenza, being in part environed by the
firm Land, and in part by the Isles that are opposite thereto, resembles a
great Lake. Taking its length Northwards, it is 24 miles long, from the Isle of
Santa Maura, to the mouth of the Gulf of Corinth. On the East it extends it
self almost as much from one side of the Morea, beginning at the mouth of the
said Gulf quite on to the Promontory of Castle Tornese. On the West, over
against it at a distance from each other, with a Strait of seven miles Sea
between them, are seen the Isles of Cephalonia and Santa Maura; this of
fifteen, the other of forty miles length: The end of the Isle of Cephalonia
comes within twelve miles by Sea of the Isle of Zant; and this is separated
from the utmost Cape of the Morea by a space of twenty five miles.

The Gulf called that of Chiarenza, from the name of an Ancient Maritime Town,
has its length from the Cape of Chiarenza to Castle Tornese.

The Gulf of Arcadia which Ptolemy calls Chelonates or Chelonites Sinus, and
others Locardian, reaches from the Cape of Tornese to Cape Jardan.

The Gulf of Zonchio, otherwise Cyparisius Sinus, extends it self from Cape
Jardan to the Cape of Sapienza.

The Gulfs of the Sea of Sapienza.
THe Gulf of Coron which washes the City of that name, is likewise named that
of Calamata, from a place not far distant from its Shores. Ptolemy and Pliny
call it Meseniacus Sinus, because it was contiguous to the Ancient Province of
Messenia; Strabo, Messenius, and others Coroneus and Asineus Sinus: It is
between Cape Gallo and Cape Matapan.

The Gulf of Colochine, or of Castle Rampani, or of Fleos, which Strabo and
Ptolemy entitle Laconicus Sinus, beats upon Luconia with its Waves, and reaches
from Cape Matapan to Cape Malio. Though this Gulf be usually compre^ended in
the Sea of Sapienza; yet ^audrand places it to the Sea of Can^ia.

The Gulfs of the Aegean Sea on the side of the Morea.
THe Gulf of Napoli di Romania named from the Town so called, extends it self a
great way along the Morea, between the Capes of St. Angelo and Schilli. It once
bore the name of Argolicus Sinus, washing the Ancient Argia.

The Gulf of Engia is divided from that of Lepanto, by the Isthmus. It
comprehends a great number of Isles and Rocks: It Is named Saronicus Sinus, from
the River Saron that discharges it self into it. Ptolemy and Pliny call it
Salaminiacus, from the Isle of Salamis: By Strabo it is named Eleusinus; and if
we credit Pintianus, 'twas also called Hermonicus Sinus, at last 'twas named
Egena, from an Isle of that name, that lies about the midst of the Gulf, and is
extended North and South between Attica and Saccania, of twenty four miles
circumference, according to M. Spon. This is bounded by the Capes of Colonne
and Schilli.

Of the Isles and Rocks that are round the Morea, and in the Ionian Sea.
The Isle of Corfu.
AMongst the Isles of the Ionian Sea that are under the Venetians, the Island
of Corfu is not the least considerable. It lies at the extremity of the Gulf
of Venice in the Ionian Sea.

This Isle has Anciently had diverse names; Homer calls it Scheria, Calimacus
Drepanon, which in Greek signifies a Sickle: others have named it Efisa,
Corintoa, and the Poets Phaeacia, and Macria from Macride the Nurse of
Dionysius; Porcacchi, Effiso; others Cassiopea, Argos, Ceraunea; and Denis in
his Commentaries, Corcyra; others Cercira, ISLE DE CORFV
map of Isle of Corfu which name was at last changed into Corfu, as at this
time it is called. If it cannot be reckoned the greatest Isle of the
Mediterranean, yet it may of the Adriatic Sea: it was inhabited by Giants. Its
length, according to Pliny, is ninety four miles; and as Volteran will have it,
ninety seven Italian miles: but this measure does not at all agree with what it
is at this day, it being found much less: Possibly they measured with it the
Isle of Paxo; which as Paruta says, was joined to Corfu, and was separated
therefrom by an Earthquake for ten miles together; the like to which happened
to the Isles of St. Maura, Cyprus and Sicily: At present, from West to East,
Corfu is but seventy miles, and from the one side to the other, at the West
end, twenty miles, and but twelve at the other; in all other places more or
less: so that its whole circumference is a hundred and twenty miles; it is
distant on the East from the Cape of Otranto about sixty miles, and from Venice
700. On the North, where is the Rock of the Serpent, it abutts upon Epire at
about a mile's distance; and at the other end toward the East, at about twenty
miles distance. These two Promontories make a Sinus or Bay commonly called the
Channel of Corfu. The Isle is situated in the thirty first Degree of North
Latitude, and in the forty fourth and forty fifth Degrees of Longitude, placing
the first in the West part of the Isle of Ferro. Its shape, as we said,
resembles a Sickle. Its City is seated in the midst of it upon an advanced
Promontory. Its Figure gave occasion to the Poets to feign that the Goddess
Ceres begged a Sickle of Vulcan to give to Titan, which having obtained, she
hid it in the most inward part of this Isle; but after some time this Sickle
being rusted and consumed by the Waves of the Sea, it left its Figure imprinted
upon the Land. That which the Interpreter of the Tienian History reports is yet
more fabulous, which is, that Saturn, having cut off the genital Parts of
Coelum, or rather Jupiter having so served Saturn with a Sickle, cast them
immediately into the Sea, upon which grew those two Mountains whereon were in
time founded the two invincible Fortresses of Corfu; and that the Action might
be eternallized in the memory of men. The Isle it self had the Form of a Sickle.

This Isle is divided into four Parts, which those of the Place call Balie. The
first toward the East is named Lefchimo by Marmora, Leuchino by Porcacchi, and
Leucimne by Thucidides. The second toward the West is named Laghiro or Agiru.
The third Mezzo. The fourth Loros or Oros: Each of these Parts has its
Territories. There is spread over all a very pure clear Air, and exceeding
wholesome, as may be gathered from the Forests of Oranges and Cedars that there
flourish: And with some reason the Poets sung so much of the Gardens of
Alcinous, who dwelt in this Isle. The Country is also very fruitful in all
kinds of Grain, and Honey, and Wax, with Wine and Oil of an extraordinary
goodness; nor does it want pleasant Flats in its Northern Parts.

In the first Territory of Lefchimo, where yet remains some Tracts of the
Ancient and Episcopal City of Gardichi; at two miles distance from the Sea of
Garbino there is a Fountain which made it famous, which after making a small
River, runs down to the Sea; on which Stream are several Mills. This Territory
contains about ten thousand Inhabitants in twenty five Buroughs, the biggest
whereof is named Potamos from a Canal that divides it in two. It is inhabited
by very civil and gentile People. From thence is a Canal for Vessels down to
the Sea.

The Territory of Laghiro or Agiru on the East of the Isle abounds in all sorts
of necessaries. It has eight thousand Inhabitants in twenty Villages. It had
had more if the Africans had not come and demolished a City built in a
Peninsule, where at present stands a Monastery with a good number of Religious,
whose Church is dedicated to the Holy Virgin, and is called Palio Castriza. The
Castle called Angelo Castron, built by the Emperor Michael Comnenes upon the
Promontory Palachrum, is at this time named St. Angelo.

The third Territory called Mezzo, in which stands the City of Corfu, had once
a larger City. In an extent of sixty miles Possession there are thirty Castles
or Lordships and Villages, which together with the Capital contain twen^y five
thousand Persons.

The fourth Territory called Loros ^r Oros in forty five miles Country, and
^wenty five Towns, has about eight ^housand Inhabitants. Cassiopa now ^assiopo,
a very famous City was ancient^y its Capital. The whole Isle has properly no
Rivers; for though on the ^ide of Garbinio there seems to be one which they
name Mesongi, that takes ^ts source near the Fortress Cardicchi, yet it ought
rather, as well as all the rest, to be reckoned a Brook than a River.

Historians agree not as to the Original of the Inhabitants of this Isle, as
may be seen in the History of Corfu, writ by Marmora: yet all or most of the
People at this day are Greeks, and observe the Rites of the Greek Church.

One Historian observes, that this Isle was once of a considerable force
Eustachio Sopra Dionigi.
by Sea, and that, in the time of the War between the Greeks and Persians, it
put thirty armed Galleys to Sea. The Greek are not the only Historians that
make honorable mention of this Isle; for besides what Thucidides say^ of it,
speaking of the Wars of the Moreae, in which the Corcyreans had often their
part, we find that Titus Livius makes them to receive Orders in the Army of Q.
Fulvius Flavus, to guard the Coast of Calabria, and that they went in pursuit
of the Ambassadors of Carthage, who at the solicitation of Hannibal were sent
to make a League with Philip King of Macedon; and that these Ambassadors having
been brought before the Captain General, he se^^ them to Rome.

The People of this Isle after having been long subject to the Kings of Naples,
weary at last of being still subject to the frequent Commotions of that
Kingdom, offered to put themselves under the Obedience of the Venetian
Republic. This their Design they communicated to Giov. Penelasco, then
residing at Corfu in quality of Consul for the Venetians, who gave advice
thereof to the Senate: and because the Prince of Tarentum made some pretenses,
they sent to him the Secretary Pietro Compitelli or Campitelli, to show him the
danger that would ensue, if the Isle should fall into the Enemies hands, and so
with a good sum of money they found means to satisfy that Prince.

As Porcacchi reports, the Isle became subject to the Republic in the Year
1322. though Giov. Miani, Captain of the Gulf, did not take the Possession
thereof from the hands of Riccardo Altavilla and Giov. Alessio Cavalila, till
the ninth of June, 1327. yet Marmora assures that Possession was taken on the
twentieth of May, 1386. which last Author pretends he had it from the
authentic Archives. This whole Affair was managed and transacted by a
Religious of the Order of St. Francis, called Padre Maestro Giulio Vanello, a
man of good parts and much esteemed. He so brought the business about, that he
assembled the chief men of the place in the Church of the Convent, then called
St. Angelo, and there caused the Keys of the Gates to be delivered into the
hands of Captain Miani, with a grant of the Authority over the City. The
Representants of the Republic come every Year on the same day into this
Church, accompanied with the Body of the Officers, before whom the Protopapa
renews the memory of this Action. I might add that the Prince has assigned to
this Church, as a Mark of his acknowledgment to the Order, two Ducats, yearly
to be taken out of the Fiscale Chamber of Corfu.

The Venetians were after this manner possessed of it, till the Year 1401. when
Ladislaus King of Naples, the Son of Charles, for thirty thousand Ducats left
it quite free to the Republic.

It has been still maintained under the Venetian Government, who have guarded
and defended it, as a place very necessary for the conservation of their Empire
by Sea; for it has several very good Ports where the Navy may refresh it self
commodiously; besides it has a convenient Situation for the Defense of the
other Isles and States of the Levant, and can hinder a great Army from entering
the Gulf, who will hardly venture to pass by and leave so powerful an Enemy
behind in so advantageous a Post. Wherefore it is well named the Gate of the
Gulf and the Rampart of Italy against the barbarous.

In these last Ages that the Ottoman Forces are much increased, the Repub^ick
has, for the common benefit of Christendom, been at great expenses in Works and
Fortifications in this Isle, to make the Fortress impregnable: Wherein they
have hitherto succeeded. On the middle of the Circle of the Isle, there raises
it self up a solid Rock, on which is built the old Fortress, encompassed on all
sides with the Sea, except on that part which faces the Land, where it is
Flanked with two Bulwarks, with their Curtain, and a good Ditch cut from one
side of the Sea to the other. Under this Fortress is situated the City, joining
to which stands the new Fortress raised on the Mount of St. Mark, with infinite
charge to front Mount Abram, that lies over against it, and which for some time
has been much levelled.

The City glories in the birth of Aeneas, and has now the Title of an
Archbishopric. The Republic sends thither six Nobles, who remain in their
Government two years. The first has the Title of a Bail; the second of a
Proveditor; the third of a Captain, who with the fourth are the Councillor^ One
dwells in the Citadel of the ol^ Fortress, the other in the City; the fifth is
the Grand Captain, and has the new Fortress for his Lodgement, and the sixth is
Lord Castellain of the Cast called Della Campana, in the old Tow^.

In the year 1537. Barbarossa showed himself before Della Campana, with an Army
of five and twenty thousand Turks, which he commanded by the order of Solomon.
They had thirty great Guns, with which they planted a Battery against the
place, but by reason of the great distance they were at, their Bullets were not
able to make a breach in the Walls. But the Artillery of the great Fortress
made terrible Destruction in the Army and Fleet of the Turks; five of their
Galleys went to the bottom, and even that of Barbarossa was not out of the
Cannons reach. During thi^ Siege, the Republic sent an extraordinary
Ambassador to Rome, to represent to the Pope, and by him to the Emperor, of
what consequence the loss of Corfu would be to the Kingdom of Naples, to
Sicilia and all Italy. He endeavored all he could in this Embassage, that the
Emperor would send Fifty Galleys with Fifty other Ships as he had done once
before against the Turks, to join with 100 Galleys and the Galleasses, and
three Gallions and a good number of other Vessels that the Republic had then
in the Sea.

At first the Pope applied himself to this affair, to procure so great a
benefit to Christendom; but his endeavors were unsuccessful; so that the
Republic were left alone to withstand the Ottomans, and they obliged them
shamefully to raise the Siege: And thus that important place, Corfu, was
delivered.

The little Isles or Rocks that lie round about Corfu.
FAnari, or Ottonus, is a little Isle on the West of Corfu, to which it is
subject; it lies at 15. Miles distant from Cape Agiru of that Isle, and from
that of Santa Maria or Otranto 50. It Is 8. Miles in Circuit, and contains 200.
Inhabitants, in a Fertile Land.

La Serra is a Rock in a strait toward Cassiopo, between Corfu and Epi^^ It
raises it self up above the Wav^ and at its Foot lie several other cr^^gy
hidden Rocks, very dangerous ^ those that Sail by them.

Sant Vido, or according to the Anc^ents, the little Isle Pitia is a Rock
fa^^ing the City of Corfu, from whence ^t is but a Mile and half: it is covered
^ll over with Olive Trees.

Condilonisi, is a Rock on the West Or West-North-West.
of Corfu, of solid Stone, whereon formerly grew Canes, which they used to
write withal. There is a Church on it dedicated to the Holy Virgin.

Sant Demetrio, is a small Island, in which is a Lazar-house, with all
conveniences for those of Corfu, in case of necessity. Near this Isle is seen a
white Rock above the Water, which at a distance shows like a Ship under Sail:
which figure gave ground to the Fable, that this Rock was formed of Vlysses's
Ship, which being sunk in this place, was by the Gods turned into a Rock.

Paxo, is a little Isle not inferior to the rest that encompass Corfu, either
as to Fruitfulness of any necessary for life, or as to the number of its
Inhabitants. Bourdon calls it Pacsu, Porcacchi ^achiso, Pliny Ericusa, and
others ^axu Major, it is seated on the South ^f Corfu, at 100. Miles distance
from Cape St. Isidore in Cephalonia, and 12. from Epire. Porcacchi takes it to
be ^en Miles about, others make it five and twenty. On the West-North-West ^de
of it, is Port St. Nicolas, whereinto ^ Ship of any burden may enter; at its
^ntrance lies a Rock. On the West at Garbin is the Valley of St. Andrew, a
commodious Haven for Galleys. The other Valley at Siroc, is called Vromo
Lincione: On the side of Siroc, is the ^sle called Antipaxu, a Fertile but
un^nhabited place: between these two ^ittle Isles is a very deep Sea. In the
Channel between these Isles and the firm Land lies a dreadful Rock almost even
with the Waves, two Miles from Paxo. It has been thought by some, that Paxo was
once joined to Corfu, and was thence separated by the beating of the Waves.

The Isles called Curzolares.
THE Curzolares, which Strabo and Pliny name Echinades, and S^^phanus Echinoe,
are five Isles of the Ionian Sea, in the Gulf of Patras, the largest of which
are Samos and Dulichium. These being not above a Mile from the Continent, look
toward Lepanto on the East at 35. Miles distance: on the West 45. Miles off,
is seen the Isle of Santa Maura, and in a strait Line the Canal Guiscardo, 60.
Miles from it. On the North they respect the firm Land, and on the South they
lie just over against the Channel of Zant, at a space of twenty four Miles. The
smallness of them would doubtless have let them remain unregard^^, if the
glorious Expedition of the Army, in the year 1571. had not made them famous.

The Ancients thought these Isles had their beginning from the Sand and Mud
that stuck, and was heaped up in this place, brought thither by the impetuous
Stream of the River Achelous. Mythologists S. MAURA
plan of Santa Maura say, that these were three beautiful Nymphs, who
sacrificed to all the Gods, except the God Achelous, whom they refused to own,
and ridiculed his Deity, scorning and disdaining him. Wherefore as a revenge
proportionate to his Resentments, he threw them headlong into the Sea, where in
fine they were transformed into these Isles.

In the time of the Trojan Empire, as we find in Homer, these Isles were
possessed by Megetes with the rest of the Isles thereabouts.

The Isle of Lefcade, or Santa Maura.
THE Isle which we at this day call Lefcade, or Santa Maura, Ptolemey named
Leucus, Strabo, Pliny, and Mela Leucadia. It lies in the Ionian Sea, nine Miles
distant from Cephalonia, and twenty five from the Curzolares. It was once
United to Achaia, but was divided thence by the People that inhabited it, tho
it remained not long so separated; for the Impetuosity of the Winds filled up
the space between with Sand, which made a kind of Isthmus by which it was
reunited, so it became a Peninsula. This Isthmus having bee^ worn away, 'twas
supplied by a wooden Bridge over several little Islets, that are separated from
each other by little Channels. This Isle is 70. Miles round; it brings forth
abundance of Grain, Wine, Oil, Tabaco, and all kinds of Fruits. Besides Santa
Maura, to which it is joined, it contains 30. Villages, the Principal of which
are, Trini, Apolpena, Sfarchiotes, Caria, Azzani, Vurnica, Scuiro, San Pietro,
Englovi, Dragano, Englimento; and still as they have been left by the Fugitive
Turks, they have been and daily are re-peopled by Greeks from the main Land. It
has many Ports, which are, Demata, Santa Maura, Scivoto, Englimento, Vallone of
Vasilichi; the two first of these are the most considerable. Beside these, this
Isle has a Haven which serves for a Retreat to the Galleys and Galeasses of the
Venetians in their present Wars with the Turks. There shoots forth likewise
from its Continent three Promontories, FORTERESSE DE S. MAURA
map of Santa Maura one called Angusci, the two others, Cape Englimento, and
Cape Du^ato. Round about it are the Rocks ^f St. Nicolas of Sparta, of the
Scorpion, of Figlia, of Magnisci, and of Sessola, whereon is found great
numbers of Rats; wherefore it is also called Scoglio de Sorci, or the Rock of
Rats.

The City and Fortress of Santa Maura.
THe City and Fortress of Santa Maura is encompassed with the Waves of the Sea,
and is seated between the Isle Lefcade, and the main Land, to which it is
joined by several little Islands, by Bridges from one to another, and by its
own Bridge, and a sumptuous Aqueduct of Stone about a mile long, sustained by
three hundred and sixty Arches. On the East there is a little Tongue of Land,
which extending it self along makes the Port of Damata; its Walls make an
irregular Heptagon flanked with five great Towers. Sancta Maura's distant from
Provisa, 19. mil from Po^t Damata, 6.


It has endured diverse Sieges in its own Defense, and although it has
vigorously withstood its Enemies, yet has it often been forced to endure the
Turkish Tyranny, and been as often subject to the Venetians. Anno 1479. it was
attacked by the Turkish Forces, and then taken from certain Greek Princes that
possessed it.

Anno, 1502. The Venetian Army commanded by General Pesa^o (who in no
Expedition came off without Glory) resolving upon the Conquest of Santa Maura,
so hotly pursued this Design, that they forced the Turks from it, and set up
there the Lion of St. Mark in place of the Turkish Crescent. The taking of this
place ended the War, and all Acts of Hostility ceased, when by Articles of
Peace concluded on with Bajazet, the Place was again left in his Possession.
After that it was inhabited by so cruel and base a The Pirates of Santa Maura
first put to Sea in Galleys and became very famous for their Piracies.
People, that they were hated by all Christendom, which generally wished for
their utter destruction. This universal desire was answered by General July 23.
Anno, 1684.
Morosini very happily, for he brought the Defendants to a Capitulation, and
CEFALONIA
view of Cephalonia map of Cephalonia so they delivered up the Place, carrying
out only what they could upon their own backs. Since the Venetians have been
Masters of it, they have made it of much more importance than it was before;
for besides the great repairs, they have very much increased the Fortifications.

The Isle of Cephalonia.
THat Isle in the Ionian Sea, called Cephalonia, was not long since by the
Greeks named Cassa or Chieffali, to show that it was the head of the Isles in
that Sea: and because it once had four Cities, 'twas called likewise Tetrapolis.

Besides these different names, Authors have given it several others; as Pliny
calls it Melena, Porcacchi and others Samo; some again Dulichium and Tilebi.
It Is seated between the thirty seventh and thirty eight Degrees of North
Latitude, and the forty sixth of Longitude, the West part of Ferro being the
first. According to Porcacchi it is a hundred and sixty miles round: but it is
indeed 170. It is of a triangular Figure, its most advanced Angle being
Northwards at Cape Guiscardo, otherwise called Capo Capra: On the East it
regards Chiarenza in the Morea, and on the North Corfu, on one side with the
Point Schinori of the Isle of Zant; being at 18 miles distance, it forms the
Channel of Zant, subject to frequent and dangerous Tempests; and on the other
from Cape Viscardo to Samo it makes with the Isle of Teacchi the Channel called
that of Viscardo, which is three miles broad in the narrowest place, and very
deep. There are several Creeks where Galleys may safely ride, though there be a
good number of them manned with a great Army; for the Bay of Alessandria, Port
Argostoli (which is very considerable, and whereof we will treat apart) the
Port of Viscardo and that of Asso will each receive two or three; and have, as
likewise the whole Channel, a sound Bottom.

The whole Isle is divided into seven principal parts, which are Argostoli,
Liscuri, Finea, Erisso, Pillaro, Samo, Luceto. In these are several large
Buroughs which take their Names from the chief Families that dwell in them.
The least of these contains about 50 Houses: They are a very valiant and
ingenious People.

Under the Isle of Cephalonia lies that of Teacchi, it affords great Quantities
of Raisins, whereof the English yearly take their Cargo, yielding a
considerable Revenue to the Republic; and from thence come extraordinary large
Citrons. The Corn that they sow in the Spring is reaped again in June; the
Vines grow very low, near the Ground, they gather their Fruits in April and in
November, but the latter are smaller than those of April: It produces also
beautiful Narcissus's and Hyacinths, and it is common there to see Roses and
Pinks all the Winter.

When the South Wind blows there in the Summer it causes excessive Heat, which
is tempered by the North.

The Republic keeps a Noble Venetian there as Governor, with the Title of
Proveditor; and two other Noble Men as Counselors, who keep the public
Assizes alternately each their Month under the Proveditor; their Office lasts
for two years. The City is a Bishops Seat, and the Church belongs to Zant; in
the twelfth Age it was raised to a Bishopric by Marquis Rizzardo de Tochis
Prince of Achaia, and of these Isles, who gave the Bishop the Tithes of several
Possessions, as well of Cephalonia as of Zant, and to the Canons he gave the
Tithes of several Lands in Cephalonia.

Strabo says that in his time Caius Antonius the Uncle of Mark Antony being
banished from Rome (after his Consulship, which he officiated together with his
Colleague Cicero) went to Cephalonia, and being there as Sovereign, he laid the
Foundations of a City, where he made his Residence, but he had not time to
bring these Designs to Perfection, for he was recalled from his Exile and
employed in more important matters.

Titus Livius reports, that the Consul Marcus Fulvius having overcome the
Etolians, turned his victorious Arms against the Isle of Cephalonia, and being
arrived near to it, he sent to the Islanders to know if they would deliver it
up freely into his Hands or try the chance of War in its Defense; they were all
presently for delivering, except the People of Samo, who valiantly sustained
four months Siege, at the End of which the Romans became Victorious and left
dreadful Marks of their Rage against the Samians; for having pillaged the City,
they sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves.

In the Year 1224, the Isle was given to the Verdizzotti fatti Ven. l. 8. p.
163. And Morosini in a little Treatise of Cephal says it was given 1214.
Republic of Venice by a generous and free Act of Gaius who was Lord and
Governor thereof.

Anno 1479, there came from Gallipoli into the Ionian Sea, a great Ottoman Army
which invaded Cephalonia, then in the Possession of a pety Toccho Napo.
Prince, and took it out of his hands.

An. 1499, the Spanish Fleet being joined, by the order of King Ferdinand, with
the Venetian Forces, the Spaniards commanded by Consalvo, a valiant Commander,
the other by General Pisaro, they came both to anchor before Cephalonia, with
an Intention to reduce the City which was then maintained by a Turkish
Garrison: At first they began to raise a very high Work against the Place, to
which the besieged raised another of a like height within; but the Christians
kept themselves upon theirs with so much Disadvantage to the Besieged, that
they were obliged to retreat, and at the same time ours advanced to make
themselves Masters of their Post, which they had abandoned; and the two
Generals sent what help they could; mean while the Cannon played continually
upon the Walls, but with little Effect, which was an Obstacle to the Siege. But
then the Captain of the Venetian Vessels, and a Spaniard of equal boldness,
followed by a good number of Soldiers, ran on the first to plant the Scaling
Ladders and mounted the Walls with so much Courage and Nimbleness, that they
set up there the Standard of the Republic; at the same time they were followed
by a great Number of Soldiers that got up after them; and the Turks not
thinking themselves in a fit Posture to resist so great a Multitude of Men,
betook themselves to their Heels; and being hotly pursued were all put to the
Sword: Thus the whole Isle was won, and the Fort Della Rocca stayed but till
the next Morning, and then delivered up it self. Immediately after this Victory
the General Pisaro without losing time put a FORTERESSE D'ASSO.
plan of Fortress of Asso good Garrison in the Town and For^ress, nominating
for Governor of the Town, Luigi Solomon, Giovanni Veniero for the Fortress,
and Francesco Leone to command the whole Island.

He also sent a great Vessel to Junoo to transport some of those People that in
great numbers were retired thither, to re people and cultivate this Isle. There
came besides several other People voluntarily to dwell there; and so the hard
and tyrannick Government of the Island was changed into a more mild and just;
whence ensued a meliorating of the Place and manuring of the Grounds.

The Fortress of Asso.
THE important Fortress of Asso or Nasso in the Isle of Cephalonia, was built
by the Venetians an. 1595 for the Defense of the Inhabitants, who in time of
War could not all secure themselves in the City of Cephalonia: It is seated
upon a Rock whose Point is very high and steep, environed with the Sea; so that
it is hardly accessable by some narrow Paths; its Fortifications were made to
answer the Situation of the Place, which is altogether uneven, so that it is
very irregularly built. There is a Tongue of Land about 20 Paces long, whereby
it is joined to the Isle, and which makes the way to the Fortress: It was once
proposed to cut through it in the narrowest place and so to make a good Ditch
there.

It is composed of 60 public Houses and 200 particular Habitations.

At the Foot of it is a little Port which may shelter three Galleys, but it
grows daily worse and worse, by reason that when ever any tempestuous and great
Rains happen, the violent Torrents bring down with them from the Mountain a
great deal of Sand and Stones which choke it up, for which there is no Remedy.

The Republic sends thither a Patrician for Governor, with the Title of
Proveditor, whose Office lasts thirty two Months; the first of them was sent
thither on the 23 d. of June, an. 1596.

Argostoli.
WE must not pass by the Port of Argostoli in Silence, since it is of some
Importance to the Republic; it took its name from the Ship Argo and the
Argonauts, who came to land there. It has a Circuit of thirty Miles, and may
contain the most numerous Army. The Venetian Galleys and the Proveditor
Generals usually make a Descent there when they are upon any Expedition in
these Quarters. There is no Fortress upon it, so that it is free for all
Vessels to Land there: It has been proposed to build a Fort there which may
command the Port and the Entrance into the Isle, and if ever the Design be put
in Execution there is a very advantageous Situation for it upon a steep Rock.
There is yet to be seen in the farthest part, the Remains of the ancient City
built by the Corinthians, once called Cranea: Near to it toward the Sea is the
Place now called il Cutego, where are to be seen the Foundations of great
Caverns in the Earth, thought to have been once the Arsenal for the Port of
Argostoli.

The Isle of Teacchi.
THIS Isle has almost as many Names as it has had Authors who have described
it. Strabo and Pliny call it Itaca, Porcacchi and Denis the African Nerieia;
Niger, Val di compagno; and Sophianus, Val di compare; the Greeks at present
name it Thiachi; the Turks, Phiachi; and usually we call it Cefalonia Picciola,
the Little Cephalonia.

It looks toward Cephalonia, from which it is separated by the Arm of Viscardo,
which is a very deep Channel, 20 Miles long and five broad, and in the
narrowest place, three. The Shape of this Isle is irregular and longer than
broad; it is 40 miles round with several Gaps and Creeks; it has several little
Ports very necessary for taking in Firewood: But of all the rest that of Vathi
has the best Anchorage, the firmest Bottom, and very deep, which will receive a
great number of Vessels. There are two others little inferior to this, called
Gidachi and Sarachinicco. I will not stay to give the Particulars of the
others, being they are of so little Use and so bad Anchorage that it is not
worth the while to treat of them.

This Isle is thought to have been the Dwelling place of the chaste Penelope and
the Country of Ulysses; upon this Tradition the Cephalonians have a Veneration
for certain Remains that are thought to be in the place where that illustrious
Couple dwelt. It had once a City called by Plutarch Alalcomene, but there are
now but some Villages, the chief of which are Vathi, Annoi, Oxoi. The
Inhabitants are about 15000, a good part whereof are banished People from the
Isles of Zant, Corfu, and Cephalonia.

The Citizens of Cephalonia elect every year one whom they call the Captain of
Teacchi; but he cannot enter upon his Charge without the consent of the
Rectors, who are obliged once in the Year to go to that Island, which they do
in the month of March, to which time they remain in Office: the Authority of
this Officer extends but to hear and decide Causes.

Andrew Morosini the Son of Peter, who was Proveditor of Cephalonia, anno 1622,
tells us, that this Isle was taken by the Confederates of Michael, the Son of
the Emperor Paleologus, out of the Hands of that Emperor, after he had taken it
himself from Charles Tocco a Neapolitan; this Person had so great a kindness
for the Republic, that he remitted to them as to the supreme Judges the
Hearing of all Causes as well criminal as civil.

The Isle of Zant.
THE Isle of Zant has been always famous even from the first: It is but of a
small Extent in the Ionian Sea; it was called Zacynthus from the Name of a Son
of Dardanus; but as all things change in time, so that Name has been corrupted
and changed into Zante. Yet there are some Authors who think it was called
Zacynthus from the Flower almost of that Name, which flourishes extremely in
that Isle; others say that it was called Jerusalem upon a Story of Robert ISLE
DE ZANTE
map of Isle of Zant FORTERESSE DE ZANTE
plan of Fortress of Zant Guiscardo Duke de la Pouille, who ha^ing taken a
resolution of going to visit ^he Holy Sepulcher, had a revelation that he
should die in Jerusalem, and being arrived at this Isle he fell dangerously
sick, wherefore he demanded the Name of the Place, and 'twas told him
Jerusalem; whence he concluded he must end his Days there, as indeed it fell
out presently after.

This Isle has the Morea on the East at 80 miles Distance, on the West it
borders on the Isle of Cephalonia, from whence it is 12 miles, on the South is
the Coast of Barbary 150 miles off, and on the North it has another Part of the
Morea about Castle Tornese at 16 miles Distance, and a little lower it looks
toward the Country del Dichiamo, where are Natolico, the Curzolares, and Drago
Mestre, Places at above 50 miles distance.

The whole Isle is divided into three Parts, called Montagna, Pedimonte, and
Pianura. Montagna begins on the East side, where lies Port Chieri, and makes
the Circuit of the whole South and West side of the Isle even quite to the
North, having in its middle a very beautiful plain called Neruli, in the mid^
whereof was a great Lake of water^ from the Hills, till the Noble Angelo
Barbarigo took the pains and care to drei^ it. At this time it is a fair and
fruitful plain 10 miles long and five broad, and borders on two sides upon the
Sea shore. Here stands the City Chieri giving name to the Port: from the waters
of which comes the black Pitch, and there is an opinion among the Inhabitants
that the Lake was anciently all of this Pitch. There are besides seen here the
Towns called Littachio, Pigadachita, Sculicado with fourteen more, whose names
for brevity I omit. On that part called Montagna are Ambelo, Chilomeno, Agelo,
San Leo, Santa Maria, and other Towns to the number of nine. The farthest of
them is called Volimes, lying toward the West. It contains above one thousand
houses.

There are besides in this part three Monasteries of Greek Caloieros called San
Giovanni in Lancada, La Madonna Spiliotissa or Anafontria, and San Georgio di
Grebani, which is the most considerable and commodious for situation.

In that Part called Pianura, which is on the North of the Isle, are the Towns
^f Gaetani, Curculidi, San Quirico, Farao and San Dimetrio. Besides the great
^oted Mountain making a principal ^art of the Isle, there are two others which
encompass the Isle, one on the East, the other on the North: On the first stand
two Towns called Xerocastello, and Lambetti; on the other are four, Geracario,
Bellusi, Calenzi, and Tragacchi. In the whole Isle there is but one River named
the Camura, whose waters are brackish, being mixed with the waters of the Sea;
but there is below the Castle, not far from the Sea, a source of fresh water,
with all the qualifications of an excellent spring: It is at all times so
plentiful, that all the Ships that pass for Constantinople and Alexandria, as
well going as coming, take fresh water there.

On the North, the Isle is all precepitious and steep, and on the South covered
with all sorts of fruit trees. On the Greek shore is built a Castle on an
Eminence which commands the whole Isle; where reside the Rector and the
Governor. At the foot whereof lies the Town which stretches it self for two
miles along the shore, and one mile in breadth toward the Mountain. The^ are
in this Town a great many houses which belong to the Citizens, Merchants,
Artizans, or Mariners. They cure great Quantities of Raisins there and make
very strong wines, and excellent oil, which one year with another yields them
the sum of fifty thousand Ducats. There is also abundance of as delicious
fruits and rare Plants, as in any other place. Its Port is likewise called
Chieri, of good anchorage for all sorts of Vessels, Ships or Galleys.

On the North side is Cape Schinan and the Rock called San Nicolo, where
neither great nor small Vessel can enter, except on the East side; the
shallowness of the water and the want of a good bottom hindering that on the
West. On the East is the Valley of the Salt Pits where Ships come to take in
their Lading of Salt. A little nearer to the City is the Rock called fra
Filippo, at present Trenta Nova; and a little farther is the point Laugun very
near to the Town.

It is believed that Saint Veronica came to plant the Christian Faith in this
Isle, and that she converted the Inhabitants by showing them the Holy
Handkerchief, and thence preaching to them the Death and Passion of our Savior.

The Republic sends thither a Noble Man with the Quality of Proveditor, and
two others for his Counselors, who all keep their charge two years. But the
Inhabitants hold their Councils apart where they regulate Provisions, health,
and other matters that concern the Policy of the City. They have power also in
civil causes to give Judgment under a certain Sum, and there lies an appeal
from them to the Proveditor.

The most part of the Inhabitants are Greeks and live according to their rites;
and there are but few Latins, comprehending amongst them even the Soldiery.
There are about a thousand Jews who have three Synagogues. Their business is
trade, and they grow very rich all of them.

The People of this place are more inclined to Arms than Learning but of the
few that apply themselves to the Sciences, the brightness of that Eloquence
shines forth, which is so natural to the Greeks; and by a little study ^^ the
Laws and Rights, they soon becom^ great Orators and skilful Lawyer^ The People
are in continual broils an^ Suits with one another; those of the Country hate
the Citizens, the most o^ which live upon Traffic; the meane^ of the people
are Seafaring men an^ are always in their frigates going to the Morea, and
other places that depen^ on the Turk, to get their living.

The Isle is subject to Earthquak^^ which destroies what ever is good and
beautiful. Some years since they felt in one night sixty shakes, which were
preceeded by a terrible noise: This noise usually lasts half a quarter of an
hour, and is communicated to the Rocks, that are standing out of the Earth: and
sometimes there happens an infectious stink. When the Earthquake is very great
it raises an exceeding boisterous wind, upon which score their buildings are
but low and of few Stories.

There is a Bishop that makes his Residence in the Isle with the Title of
Bishop of Zant, conferred on him by the Holy See: yet by the patents from the
Senate of Venice, he is entitled the Bishop of Cephalonia. At first this Church
^cknowledged the Pope of Rome, till ^uch time as the Church of Constantino^le
had a Patriarch of her own; and ^hen the Patriarch, strengthened by the favor
of the Emperor, caused several of the Greek Churches, and some of the ^talian
to submit to his See.

At the time, when several of the Western Princes associated themselves to war
upon those that possessed the Holy Land, the Church of Zant returned to the
obedience of the Sea of Rome. Several very noted persons have flourisht there,
by reason of the great Revenues of the Bishopric, which has amounted, as is
seen in the Archives, to more than six thousand Crowns. Possibly the Bishops
had then the force of the Laws and secular Arm, more than the Authority of
their See and zeal of their preaching, to assist them. Two Bishops of this
Church successively went to the Council of Trent, where they were much
distinguished by their merit.

The first was John Francis Comendon, who died during the time of the Council,
who was succeeded by Petro Delfino, a Noble Venetian. The Parish Churches of
the Greeks comprehending those of the City, the Citadel, and others that have
been founded out of devotion are about forty four. There are likewise a great
number in Cephalonia that place being well Peopled. There are fifteen in the
City, in each of which is a plain Altar, with the Altarpiece toward the East,
adorned with paintings after the Greek fashion, who permit no Images in
Relievo, in their Temples. The Altar is of stone enclosed with a Rail, whose
entrance is forbidden to Laics and Women. Nay the Women presently after
Childbed, and the Men that are found in any ill action, are forbid the
Churches; but this custom is now neglected.

When the Archbishop happens to die all the Greek Curates, of which there is a
good number, assemble themselves; and according to a very ancient custom,
authorized by the Holy See, they give their suffrages in secret, to proceed to
the election of another. The Bishop has no fixed Revenue and maintains himself
upon Casualties, which the Greeks yearly present to him as in a Quantity of
Wheat and other Grain: He likewise has a considerable gain by Ordinations; and
by one way or other his Revenue is very large.

As a Qualification of a Bishop of this City, a man must have been a Monk of
the Order of St. Basil, upon which account there are so many Monasteries of
that Saint's in these Isles. The most considerable of which is built on the
Rocks commonly called the Strophades; of which in their place. This Monastery
has several Revenues in Zant and Cephalonia; and the Greeks have these Monks in
Great Veneration, because they live very retired from secular affairs.

These Monks of St. Basil fast the whole year, except in case of infirmity or
sickness, when they may have a dispensation for three days in the week, Monday,
Wednesday and Friday they eat nothing but milk, fish and oil. They keep four
Lents in the year; the first is that of Easter called, i Megali Tessara-costi;
which lasts seven weeks; for which time they are not permitted to eat either
fish or oil, except two days in the week, viz. Saturday and Sunday, nor that,
on Holy Saturday. Their nourishment then is only fish that have no blood, as
oysters, dried fish, Caveer, which is the Rows of fish salted; Botargo, which
is made of the Row of a Sturgeon dried and salted, etc. There are two other
days on which they may eat, that is the 25 of March, being Annunciation-day,
which they call Euangelismos, provided it happen before the Holy week; the
other is Palm Sunday, which they name Tou Vaghiou.

The Second Lent, is of the Agioi Apostoloi, in honor of the Holy Apostles,
which lasts from the Monday sevennight after Whitsuntide, till the Vigil of St.
Peter and Paul; so that some years it lasts three weeks, others more.

The Third is called It Is agias Parthenou, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which
lasts from the first to the fifteenth of August, in which time they eat no fish
except on the sixth, being the feast of the Transfiguration of Christ, which
they observe with Solemnity, and call it Metamorphosis tou Sotiros.

The Fourth is called ton Christogenon, which begins forty days before
Christmas, to wit on the fifteenth of November and continues till the twenty
fifth of December, for which time they may eat fish except on Wednesdays and
Fridays.

The Caloieros, besides these four, observe three other Fasts; the first before
St. Demetrius, which lasts twenty days; the second begins on the first of
September, fourteen days before the Exaltation of the Holy Cross; the third
eight days before the feast of St. Michael, Beside these all the Greeks in
general fast on Wednesdays and Fridays, and several of the most zealous on
Mondays also. Moreover on the day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and the
Decollation of St. John the Baptist, they keep a more severe Fast. Except these
times they eat flesh all the week after Easter-Sunday, and that whole week
after Whit-sunday, and for twelve days together after Christmas, and a week
before the great Lent. They keep likewise three other Vigils in the year, That
of the Epiphany, which they name Paramoni, on which day the Greeks baptize the
Sea with a great Ceremony; the second is the Vigil of St. John the Baptist, and
the third that of the Cross whereon they are forbid to eat fish. Thus those
Greeks, that are not Monks, fast about a hundred and thirty days in the year.

All the Monasteries of the Religious, observe the Rites of the Greek Church,
and if there should be one amongst them of the Latin Church; yet they must
observe the Greek Rites. It is permitted to these Religious, on diverse
occasions, to visit their sick Relations; and to go about the Cities, living
without any Cloister; which doubtless is contrary to the Institution of a
Monastic Life.

There is not in these Isles any kind of Hospital for the Poor. Except only in
Zant there are two little poor Almshouses, one for the Men and another for the
Women, under the direction of the Citizens of the Place: They used to receive
into these houses Foundlings and Bastards; but that custom is now left off.
There are also, in these Isles, many Protestants, most of them English. There
are four Convents, one of Preaching Friars, two of Friars Minors Conventuals,
one in Zant, the other in Cephalonia; and one of Minors Observants in Zant,
without reckoning the Parish Church of Argostoli, which is a jus patronale of
the most Serene Republic; which it has bestowed on the Minor Observants.

These People live willingly under the obedience of the Republic, which
watches continually for their defense against the powerful irruptions of the
Turks: And besides for that they permit them to live conformable to their own
Rites, of which they are so zealous, being persuaded of their ancient and pure
Institution.

There grows in this Isle very extraordinary Fruit; and that in as great
abundance as any Isle thereabouts.

Caroldi reports, that the Isle of Zant was sold with the other Isles by Robert
Prince of Tarentum, Anno 1350. Tarante.


In the Year 1571. Vluzzali Passa sacked the City, wasted the Country, and laid
the whole Isle extreme desolate.

The Isles Strivales.
THe Strivales are two Isles, by the Mariners called Stamfane, and which
Authors have known by several names, for Strabo, Pliny, and Apollonius name
them Strophades, Pausanias Strivali, Suidas Stromphides, and Camerarius
Calydnes. They are low, almost level with the water; their Port is distant from
Zant above fifty miles; they are but of small extent, the bigest not above
three or four miles in circuit. And tho they are so small, they produce a
Prodigious quantity of Grapes; and the wine of them is extraordinary good.
There are also many fresh Springs, all along which are found a great deal of
Planc-Tree leaves; tho the nearest place, where any of those Trees grow, is in
the Morea, at thirty miles distance; wherefore doubtless they must be brought
thither by subterranean passages.

The Inhabitants are all Greek Caloieros, who for their defense against the
Turk, have built their Convent in form of a Fortress, well provided with
Cannon, with a Port-cullis at the Gate.

The Poets feigned that Aello, Ocypite, and Celaeno, born of Thaumas and
Teletra, inhabited the infernal Pit in the shape of Harpies, whence they went
to torment wicked men at the command of the Gods: And they paint us these
Harpies with lean, tho beautiful faces like Women; the rest of their bodies
being like horrible Vultures, with large wings and pointed talons. The Fable
adds, that Phineus King of Arcadia, like an inhumane Father, having plucked out
his own Childrens Eyes, the Gods returned the same punishment upon him, by
tearing out his, and leaving him to the terrible pursuit of the Harpies, which
defiled his food with their ordure and stink. Jason touched with compassion for
the miserable King, and willing to relieve him, caused Zetes and Calais to
drive these Monsters from tormenting him and force them to retire into the
Strophades.

The Isle of Prodano.
PRodano is a little Isle or Rock, which Pliny and Ptolemy call Prote, and
other Proud, near the Morea, with which it makes a Channel of seventeen or
eighteen foot water, where Vessels may, commodiously ride safely under the Wind.

The Isles in the Sea of Sapienza.
THere are three Isles in the Sea of Sapienza, the first which Bordon calls
Sphagia or Sphateria, and Porcacchi Sfragia, and which is commonly named that
of Sapienza. This gives name to the Sea which flows by its side, and washes the
South part of the Morea. It lies directly over against Medon, and exceeds the
two others in extent.

The Second named Cabrera or Fuschella, or Teganusa and Cauriera, is but at a
small distance from the First, and is much less than it.

The Third called Venetico fronts Cape Gallo. It is so enclosed on all sides,
that it may rather be accounted a Rock than an Isle. There lie about it several
other Rocks, where the Pirates of Barbary lie in wait for the Ships that come
from the Gulf of Venice and Sicily.

PORT DE CERIGO
view of Port of Cerigo FORTERESSE DE CERIGO
plan of Fortress of Cerigo

The Isle of Cerigo.
ON the West of the Archipelago lies the Isle at this day commonly called
Cerigo. Ptolemy named it Cythera from Cytheron, the Son of Phenicus; Aristotle
calls it Porphyrusa, from the great store of Porphyry dug out of its Mountains;
and others again Scothera. It Is just against the Laconian Gulf, but five miles
off the Morea, forty from Candia, and has sixty in circumference. It has
several Rocks roundabout it, and good Ports on its sides. On the South is the
Port of the Fortress, which is but little frequented, because it is but a narrow
Bay, and lies much exposed to the winds: The other, which is on the other side
the Dragoniers, twelve miles from the Fortress, has a good bottom, is deep, and
will contain a great Fleet: Above all things the natural shape of the Bay is
wonderful, which may be shut up, and where forty Galleys may lie in safety.
There is a Church dedicated to St. Nicholas, though no body dwells there. On
the West at 25 miles distance from this Port, there is another little one
called San Nicolo de modari, proper for Galliots and small Barks, where is also
a Church dedicated to St. Nicholas.

There is in this Isle great quantities of wild fowl, but little corn, wine or
oil; and food is there very dear. There are several Villages, but of small or
no account: And some Monasteries of Hieromonachi and Caloierros, of which one
stands upon a Rock on the right side near to the Fortress, which they call San
Giovanni della Grotta. It has been hewn out of the Rock by pure labor with the
mattock. Tho it is very difficult to get up to it; yet the Greeks refuse not
that pains, whenever the Religious are to perform their Vows, which they have
made to God. The steep points of the Rock, affright all that look on them, for
they hang over so, that they threaten to fall and overwhelm those that approach
them. But for all this the Inhabitants have a great Veneration for the place,
upon a belief, that St. John began his Apocalypse there.

The City of the same name with the Isle has the Title of a Bishopric: It
stands upon a steep Rock in a very advantageous situation, having toward the
Sea an Esplanade well mounted with Canon, where they keep Guard.

The Republic of Venice has had the Some say ever since the Despots of Greece.
Command of it ever since the division of the Empire of Constantinople, and
sends thither, every two years, one of her Noble Men, in Quality of Chastelain,
and Proveditor. Selim attempted with a powerful Army, commanded by Hali and
Portau to conquer it, but he soon gave it over, finding his endeavors but vain.

Some fabulous Writers say, that the Goddess Venus had her Birth in this place,
others that she passed her first days there. And was there acknowledged for a
Goddess, and there was a beautiful Temple dedicated to her; under the name of
Cytherea in the most Eastern part thereof: In which Temple was her Statue like
a beautiful Woman holding in her right hand a Sea shell, and as if ready to
leap into the Sea. She was all dressed with blushing Roses and snowy Pigeons
flying around her, which seemed to follow and attend her motion. Three young
Virgins, representing the three Graces, hand in hand, went round her to serve
her; two whereof were in action, as if they were adorning her head, the third
waited on her behind. Her Son Cupid was before her, armed with his bow, who,
tho blind, yet wounded the God of Light, Apollo, with an Arrow from his bow.

'Twas in this Temple, that Paris, the amourous Son of Priam, met the fair
Grecian Helen; and here they tempted each other to the fatal Rape, which armed
the jealous Menelaus, and revenging Greece for the utter destruction of Troy.

The Isle is of no great extent, being not above sixty miles; yet 'twas of
great consequence to the Spartans, when they were Masters of it; for it was to
them as it were a Rampart and a shelter to their ships, which they sent to
Egypt. They sent thither every year a President to regulate civil and military
affairs; and the keeping of this Isle was then so necessary, that in the eighth
year of the Peleponnesian War, the Athenians having won it, Sparta was without
defense, and its Country lay open to the Enemy, till they hasted to fortify
and put Garrisons in the neighboring places.

The little Isle, or rather Rock, called de Cervi, lies between Port Rapini and
Cape St. Angelo, where with the firm Land it makes a Channel, unnavigable by
Reason of the Banks of Sand that are in it.

The nearest Rocks to Cerigo are the Dragonier, which have a good Anchorage,
and may be sailed from with any Wind, the others that are seen between this
Isle and Candia, are Ovo, otherwise called Eple, Oso, Doi, Poro, Poressa,
Cicerigo, or Cerigotto, which the Ancients called Egila, or Egiale; it is the
nearest to Cape Spada, and the largest of all. But there is none of all these
that deserves a particular Description, and serve only as Marks to the Sailer,
being of no other use.

The Isles of the Gulf of Engia.
THE Isles in the Gulf of Engia, and which are a great Ornament to it, are
first (beginning at Cape Colonne) Patrocleia, which the People call Gaidronisi,
and Macronisi: It has likewise the Name Ebanonisi, from the Ebany that grows
there in great Plenty.

On a high Place there is a Marble Stone set up, which may be seen a great way,
and serves for a Signal to the Mariner. On the side blowed on by the Greek
Wind, near to the Isle lie several dangerous Shelves of Sand.

Sailing toward the Attick Shore we find the Isle of Elisso, thought to be the
Eloussa of Strabo.

Then is the Rock of Phlega, with five others contiguous to it, called
Cumbonisa.

Between the Isle Culuri and Attica is the Isle Lipso Coutalia, or Psyttalce
near to Port Lion, where there is a prodigious Number of Hares and Foxes.

Between Culuri and Egena is seen the Isle called Laufa, near to which are
three little Rocks.

Between the Isle of Egena and the City of Corinth, are these Isles, Argios,
Thomas, Diaporia, Ebroeo, Agiolani, Platonisi, and another little Rock that has
no Name.

Between Egena and the Continent of Saccania, lie Angistri; Metopi, Dorousi and
Moni.

Between Cape Colonne and Cape Skilli, are seen the two Isles called
Kelevinais; but of all these Isles we have named, Egena, Culuri, and Poros, are
only inhabited. ^ Culuri, so called by Sophianus, is by the Seamen named Santa
Bursia, and is the same which was once called del Dragone, from a Dragon in
this place that was killed by Ceroneus, the Son of Neptune and Salamona, the
Daughter of Asopus, who gave to the Isle the Name of Salamis, by which Pliny
and Strabo knew it: There is in it a Village of its own Name, Culuri, of 200
Houses, situated on its South side, at its Port; which, as Monsieur Spon says,
is one of the bigest in the World, being two miles broad, and seven long; at
its Entrance lie two Rocks, called Canuli, and Prasuli. Baudrand, who gives the
Isle three. Names, Cychria, Scinar, Pityussar, says it is 10 miles off from
Egena, and two from Attica: It produces abundance of Wheat, Pitch, Rosin,
Coals, Sponges and Ashes, all which they carry to Athens to sell.

The Islanders are much inclined to Fishing, and the rather for that their
Shores are usually full of Fish.

The old City of Salamene, once a Bishops Seat, Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Athens, is situated four or five Miles off, a little Village of about 20
Houses, called Ambellachi, which has a small Port over against Athens, near
which is seen a Building like a Monastery, which has the Title of a Metropolis,
joined to another House.

The Circuit of the Isle is 35 miles, containing about a thousand Inhabitants.

Megalo-kira, and Micro-kira, that is, the great and little Kira, are two Rocks
between Culuri and the Terra firma of Attica. Over against Cape S^^nio,
otherwise Cape Colonne, is the Rock called Macronisi, which Homer mentions in
his Iliads under the Name of Cranae. Its first Name was Helene, being the place
where that Beauty of Greece was embraced by her enamored Ravisher, Paris.

The Isle of Egena.
EGena is an Isle distant from the Attick Coast 18 miles, 25 from Port Lion, 12
from the Morea, and 21 from Culuri. Strabo calls it Egina from Egine, the
Mother of Eacus, the Daughter of Asopus: Baudrand, Ae^o^e; Brietius,
Myrmidonia; and the Mariners, Engi; though this Isle has 36 miles Circuit, yet
has it never a Port to receive any Vessels, and they are obliged to cast Anchor
between Augistri and Dorusa, or between it and Moni; as the Venetian Navy did
during the Wars with Candia. Partridges there increase so, that the Islanders
are forced to search over the Island in the Spring to destroy their Eggs, lest
so great a Production of this Game devour up their Corn.

There are yet to be seen two fair Monuments of Antiquity, which are two
Temples, the one situated in the North Part of the Isle, by Pausanias thought
to be that, once dedicated to the goddess Venus; the other slands in a grove
upon a little Hill of an admirable Aspect; 'twas built in the Honor of
Jupiter, by Eacus, the first King of this Isle; there is still to be seen 20
Columns of the Dorique Order, canellated or fluted with their Architraves,
placed in a good Proportion.

The City of the same Name with the Isle, Egena, was once honored with a
Bishops Seat suffragan to the Archbishop of Athens, and famous by the Birth of
Paul de Medicis, but is now reduced to a small Borough joined to the Fontress,
considerable only for its situation upon a very high steep Rock, whence are
discovered many of the Isles of the Archipelago, even to Amimilo.

This Isle was once subject to Duke Galeotto Malatesta, by his Marriage with
the Daughter of Anthony, King of Boeotia; whence it came afterward to be under
the Venetians. But Frederic Barbarossa, having entered the Isles of the
Archipeldgo, advanced as far as Egena, intending its Conquest, thinking
doubtless, that all the rest would bring but little glory in Comparison of
this, which was then full of People and well. desended under the Government of
Francesco Sorian, who there ruled for the Republic.

Anno 1674, Franoesco Morosini, Captain General of the Army of the Republic,
setting Sail in the Archipeldgo, for the Exaction of the Contributions, being
to refresh the Slaves of his Galley, ^as informed that Egena was full of a ^ort
of barbarous People who waited ^ut for an opportune Season to trans^ort
themselves in small Barks to Ca^^a: This, backed with the refusal they ^ade of
paying the Imposition, made ^im take up a Resolution to reduce them by Force;
wherefore having landed his Forces, and begun the Attack, ^e soon repressed the
boldness of the Defenders; and having brought them to yield at Discretion, he
pillaged the Place, and then demolished it, condemning 300 of the Greeks, and
40 Turks to the Galleys.

Of the maritime Places between the Morea and the Negropont.
Megara.
MEgara is seated on a Mountain in Achaia, at an equal Distance of 26 miles
between Athens and Corinth: It Is at present a Town, inhabited proportionably to
the Houses, which are about 400, very low and meanly built, for the most Part
of Turves dried in the Sun, and covered with Boughs, and Earth upon them; all
the Inhabitants are Greeks, zealous Observers of their Ceremonies. The Turks
dare not dwell there since one of their Vayvodes was taken away by the
Corsairs. It was once the Capital City of the Territory of Megara, confining on
Eleusina, of old belonging to Athens, being the richest Part of their
Dominions; Pandion, dying, left it to King Pila, whereof these two Remains are
the witnesses, MEGARE
view of Megare viz. the Tomb of Pandion yet be seen in this Territory, and
that Nisus, who gave the Seigniory of ^^hens to Egeus, as being the oldest of
^at Race; he had under his Command ^egara with all the Country as far as
^rinth; whence it comes that at this ^y a little Port is called Nisaea, which
is two miles from the Town on ^e Edge of the Gulf of Engia, once an ^arbour for
the Ships of Megara.

During the Reign of Codrus, those ^f Peloponnesus, having declared War against
the Athenians, without gaining any Fruit of their Attempts, in their Return
surprised Megara; and so it ^ecame subject to the Corinthians, for those that
took it gave it to the Corin^hians and others of their Confederates that would
go to dwell there; from which time the Megareans changed their Customs and
Dialect into the Dorique.

Authors speak diversely of the Original of the Name; and there is an Opinion,
that it was called Megara in the Reign of Carus the Son of Phoroneus, who were
the two first that consecrated Temples to the Honor of the Goddess Ceres. The
Boeotians repo^ that Megarus the Son of Neptune, wh^ dwelt in Onchesto, hasting
with an A^my to the Succor of Nisus, beat ^^ Minos, was killed in the Combat,
an^ being buried in this place, gave the nam^ of Megara to the City before
calle^ Nisa. The Chronicles of the Meg^rians otherwise relate the Story o^
Megarus; for they affirm that he succeeded Nisus in the Government, having
espoused his Daughter called Finoes: So that it is not strange the^ should be
named Megarians from their King, they being once called Lelegian^ from Lelegus,
another of their Kings who coming from Egoto, was crowned King of this Place.

On the North of the Town in the Plain, stand nine or ten Churches, about which
stood once a Village called Paloeochorio, the old Village which is now forsaken
and suffered to fall to ruin. If time had not worn away all that anciently was
great and beautiful, we should yet see standing a great number of stately
Edifices, once the Glory and Ornament of Megara, and whose broken Remains now
surprise those that look on them. Amongst others there was a Fountain, where
the Workman had bestowed all the Delicacies and Beauties of Art. Not far from
this Fountain was a Temple, in which stood the Images of the twelve Gods, the
Work of Praxiteles, together with the Effigies of the Emperors, the stateliest
Show in the World. Megara also boasted in the brass Statue of Diana, by the
name of Salvatrix, by them erected to her, in acknowledgment of the aid they
believed they had from her, when their City was dangerously attacked by the
Army of Mardonius. For it fell out, that this General marching in the Night
lost his way, and in his error taking a Mountain for his Enemies, which he
sought after, he sent all his Arms and Warlike Machins that way: So the
Megareans falling upon him without Arms, had the advantage that might be
expected from such a mischance. Near this was also the Magnificent Temple of
Olympic Jupiter, in which was the admirable Figure of that false God made of
Gold, Ivory, and Clay; though that Statue was not brought to its perfection,
the Megar^ans so unwillingly bearing the Athen^an Yoke, that they could not
thin^ upon any Work of Glory; and indee^ they were unable, being so charged
wit^ Subsidies and Impositions, which the Athenians laid on them, to provide a^
new for the Peloponnesian War. The rich Works that were to be the Ornaments of
this Statue remained imperfect, and were laid in the back part o^ the Temple,
where hung as a Troph^ the Rostrum of a Galley, which thos^ of Megara had won
from the Athenians, when they retook the Isle of Salamina, which had been
forced from them.

At Megara also one might have the Curiosity to go into the Rock called Caria,
of Carus the Son of Phoroneus* where one might discover the Temple of Bacchus
Nitelius, and at the same time that of Venus Epistrophia, called the Oracle of
the Night.

map

Port Lion.
POrt-Lion or Porto-Lione, is so named from a marble Lion, ten foot high, that
stands on the Shore of the Port. The Modern Greeks call it Porto Draco, and
Cicero and Strabo Piraeus Portus. It has likewise had the name of Athenarus
Portus, and is the Northern Part of the Gulf of Engia.

The entrance into this Port is narrow, so that scarce two Galleys can get in
at a time; but when one is in there is every where a good bottom, except in one
of its Creeks, which is almost filled up. It Is capable of a great Pl. l. 7. c.
37. Portolane is a Book in Folio of the description of the Ports.
number of Vessels, Pliny says a thousand, and Sirabo four hundred, and the
Portalane of the Mediterranean five hundred, allowing it ten braces depth, but
Monsieur Spon, an exact Author, and of good reputation, has remarked, that as
our Vessels are much larger than those of the Ancients, so now scarce above
forty or fifty can be ranged there.

The greatest Trade of this Port is of the Velanede, that is gathered from the
green Oaks of Eleusis, and of Goat^ hair.

Before Themistocles was Prince of the Athenians, they kept not their Vessels
in this Port, but in that of Phalerus, because it was not far from their City*
And from this Port they say Menesteus set sail with a Fleet for Troy: and
before him Theseus when he went to revenge himself on Minos for the death of
Androgeus. But Themistocles being chosen Prince, and judging that the Pireus
was the most commodious, for that it had three distinct Ports for Vessels, he
fell to work to make it teneble, and made a wall three miles long, which
reached quite to the City: these walls were called Macra Teichi, which were
thrown down by Sylla, and of which yet the Foundations are to be seen. On the
great Port of Pireus once stood the Tomb of Themistocles; the Place dedicated
to Pallas and Jupiter, being a very long Lodgment for those that dwelt along
the Sea side, and several other Antiquities, as may be seen in Pausanias.

VILLE D'ATHENE
view of Athens

ATEHNS.
AThens is one of the most Ancient Cities of Greece, the Seat of an Archbishop,
and the Capital of Attica. Its Situation is not far from the Gulf of Engia,
which makes part of the Ionian Sea. King Cecrops first laid the Foundations,
and called it from his own name Cecropia; but its perfection was owing to
Theseus, who enlarged it, obliging those in the Country to come and dwell
there. The Citadel still kept the name of Cecropia, till at last 'twas named
Acropolis. It Is built upon a living Rock precipitious on all sides, except on
the West where the entrance is. The East and South walls make two sides of a
Square, the rest is not so regular, but answers to the Points and Windings of
the Rock. It Is a thousand two hundred ordinary paces round; but at the bottom
of the Hill plainly appear the Foundations of another wall, which encompassed
it almost round, and rendered it the more difficult to scale. The Soldiers of
the Garrison are in pay during their whole Lives, and dwell there with their
Families. They still are upon the watch against all surprise, by reason of the
frequent inroads of the Pirates. The Citadel is almost at an equal distance,
between two high Hills; one of an equal height with it on the South-West, about
a Falconet shot off, is called Museum; the other is Mount Anchesmus, which is
so rugged, that 'twere hard to plant a Battery of great Guns thereon against
the City and Citadel; besides there is no Plain upon it, only sharp Points of
the Rock; upon one of which is the Chapel of Agis Georgios, where once stood
the Statue of Anchesmian Jupiter. The lower part of the Town is on the North of
the Citadel, and when one comes from the Seawards it is so covered by it that
the Houses of the Citadel only can be seen, whence several, not having the
curiosity to land, have thought, that of all the Grandeur of Athens the Castle
only now remained. This Situation is very advantageons for it, as to the health
of its Inhabitants; for the Climate being hot, it is much better to lie open to
the refreshing North Winds, than to the Southern Burnings.

After all its Revolutions there is yet to be seen very fine Antiquities, the
chief whereof are, the Temple of Victory of the Ionick Order; which the Turks
make now their Magazin of Powder.

The Arsenal of Licurgus of the Dorick Order, in which they lay up their Arms
and Artillery.

The Temple of Minerva of the Dorick Order changed now into a Mohammedan Mosque.

The Lantern of Demosthenes, now serving as a Receptacle to the P. P. Capuchins.

The Tower of the Winds of an Octogonal Figure, whereof Andronicus Cyrrhestes
gave the Model, and Vitruvius has described.

The Temple of Theseus.

The Foundations of Areopagus, etc.

There is in Athens eight or nine thousand Inhabitants, three quarters whereof
are Greeks, and the rest Turks, who have four Mosques in the City, and a fifth
in the Castle. No Jews are permitted there, for the Athenians are as cunning as
they, whence the Proverb, God defend us from the Jews of Salonica, the Greeks
of Athens, and the Turks of Negropont.

The Habit of the Greeks of Athens is very different from that of the Turks,
for they wear only strait Garments of black, or some dark Colors.

The City at present is divided into eight Parts, called Platomata, which are

Placa Sotiras tu Cotaki Mono Calusi Roumbi Boreas Platoma Psiri Platoma
Gerlada Agioi Colymboi, or Olympoi.
As to its Terretory, it once contained an hundred seventy four Buroughs or
Villages, whereof some were as big as Cities; at this time the most of them are
in the Plain of Mesoia or Mesogia, wherein are the following Villages;

Metropis Keratia Misochori near to Rafti Chovarades near to Rafti Elada
Marco-Poulo, there is another Marco-Poulo Coursala Phyglia Carela Alopeki Cocla
Balambafi Boura Arvato Agoupi.
And these that are almost ruined, and are now called only Zeugalatia or Farms;

Pikerni Bafi Lecambafi Lambriano Lambrica in the way to Athens, at Cape
Colonne Palaeo Lambrica, the Ruins of the Ancient Lampra Elimbo Egnapyrghi
Spitia Vraona
In the other Territories of Athens, are,

Caramamet, at the foot of Mount Thymettus Marousi, near Penteli deserted
Calandri, in the way to Penteli Gifissia, in the way to Marathon, formerly
Cephyssia Basi Coumaria, behind Penteli Stamati, in the way to Marathon, now
ruined Belousa, deserted Chiourka Grammatico Calingi, as you go from Marathon
to Negropont Varnada on the Euripus. Limico on the Euripus. Calamo on the
Euripus. Marcopoulo on the Euripus.
Near to Athens amongst the Olive Grounds.

Sepollia or Sopollia Mainidi Cacovaones Patischa Ambelokipous, in the way to
Penteli Callirhoe, a few Houses near the Fountain.
This City was once an Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a School of Virtue;
and all the Princes that have possessed it, have been ambitious to leave their
Names upon some Monuments, thereby to gain an immortality in the Memory of man.
Thus we find out upon a Portal, a Greek Verse, signifying, that this is the
City of Adrian, and not of Theseus.

In the course of Time it has been subject to several Princes by diverse
Misfortunes, to which it has yielded. Sylla after a long Siege took it, and
Anno 687. from the Foundation of Rome.
made it subject to the Commonwealth of Rome. Bajazet triumphed over it when
it was under the command of Aristonicus the Epicurean Philosopher. After that
Renier Acciaioli having the Dominion of it, yielded it to the Venetian
Republic; but it returned again under the Government of the same Acciaioli,
who at once possessed Attica and Boeotia.

In the Year 1455. it was besieged by Mahomet the Second, and reduced for want
of Succors; since which it has still remained under the Ottomam Empire.

The Isle and Kingdom of Negropont.
THE Isle of Negropont is the most considerable of all the Isles in the
Archipelago. It has had diverse Names, and that of Negropont has by corruption
been changed into Egripont; the Turks call it Egribos, the Latins Euboea,
either from the Retreat of the Daughter of Asopus, or of Inachus thither, whom
the Poets feign to be turned into a Cow; which from its lowing is named Euboea.

It has also been called Macris from the Channel called so in Greek, Abantias
from the People Abantides, Calcis and Chalcondantis: Pliny likewise gives it
the name of Asopis, and Strabo says 'twas called Oche, and that once 'twas
called Ellopia from Ellopus the Son of Jupiter.

NEGROPONT.
view of Negropont

Some have thought that this Isle was once joined to Boeotia, and thence
separated by Earthquakes; or as others say, by the swift and impetuous course
of the waves, which make the Canal called Euripus. The Isle is three hundred
sixty five miles round, in length, from South to North ninety miles, and forty
broad, and twenty in the narrowest part. At which place it is joined by a
Bridge to the main Land.

It is, as it were, encompassed with two Promontories, Cape Lithar, and Cape
dell' Oro. The first facing the Gulf of Volo is by Ptolemy and Strabo, called
Cenaeum Promontorium, by Pliny Caeneum, and by Niger Canaia. Near this
Promontory was the coast of Artemisia, so called from a Temple of that name
there erected: At which place the Greeks sheltered their naval forces, during
their wars with the King of Persia. The second looking toward the East part of
the Archipelago, Ptolemy calls Caphareum Promontorium, Sophianus Chymium, Niger
Capo figera, Stephanus Cathereus, Lycophron Zarax, Isacius Xylophagos. Upon the
Top of this Promontory, Nauplius King of Negropont made fires, that the Grecian
Army returning from Troy, might by the light thereof arrive safely at the
Haven. There was formerly three cities in the Isle, which made it famous,
Ellopia, Histiaea and Oraeus Cities, that were joined together by reason of
their vicinity.

The Capital City of the Kingdom of Negropont was at first called in the
Athenian Tongue Calcis; and then it took the name of the Kingdom it self. It
was once the seat of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Athens;
afterward 'twas raised to an Archbishopric.

It Is situated on the banks of the Euripus: The compass of its walls is about
two miles, but there are more houses and people in the Suburbs, where the
Christians dwell, than in the City, inhabited by Turks and Jews. The Turks have
there two Mosques, and two others without, where the Christians also have their
Churches. The Jews have an house, where they instruct the Youth. All the
Inhabitants make about 15000. The City is divided from the Suburbs by a great
Ditch with a flat bottom, in a smooth and even ground.

There is a Captain Basha that commands the whole Isle, and part of Boeotia,
who has in his absence his Kiaja or Lieutenant, and his Subkiaja. There is also
a Bey or Lord, who has some Revenues, and is obliged to maintain a Galley. At
the place where the strait of the Euripus is narrowest to pass over into the
Isle, they go over a stone bridge of five little Arches not above thirty paces
long, and so under a Tower in the middle of the Channel, built by the
Venetians, where St. Mark is yet seen over the Gate. From the Tower to the City
is but one Drawbridge about twenty paces long, built on sharp bottomed boats,
which is raised half to the Tower, and the other half to the City, to give
passage to the Galleys and other Vessels, which cannot easily be done without
taking in their Oars.

There is also to be seen the Episcopal City, at present called Carisso, once
Chironia, which Strabo names Caristus and Caristos, Sophianus Castle Rosso, and
the French Chateauroux, it acknowledges Calcis for its Metropolis, being sixty
miles distant. It stands near Cape Caefareo. There was besides another
Episcopal City Eretria, which Moletius calls Rocho, which in his time was not
less famous than Calcis, which once was an Athenian Colony built on the banks
of the Euripus before the first destruction of Troy: both these Cities have
perished by the falsness of their own Inhabitants; So that now their names only
remain: They were once pillaged and burnt by Darius.

The soil of the Isle is stony and sandy, but this is only upon the top, for
digging deeper they find it very good. There are several Forests, where good
ship timber may be cut. Near Caristus is a Mountain of the same name of very
beautiful marble: And near to it is found the Asbestos stone, which may be spun
and made into cloth, which by putting in the fire grows white. There were
formerly in the Territory of Calcis Iron and copper Mines, which are now lost.
The Isle produces cotton enough to make Sails for a great Navy. There are
several hot baths. It is watered with two Rivers, Fimileus and Cereus, of which
the Poets said, that one made the Sheep have black wool, the other white. In
sine the Isle abounds in all things; and Pope Pius the fifth advised several
great Captains to go and begin the War with the Turk in this Kingdom; because
it is capable of maintaining a whole Army, besides it has good Ports on the
side of the Continent. It is true indeed, that when one is once there, he can
by no means get out to save himself. There are several places on the South
part, the most considerable whereof is called Spiritus.

When Pietro Zani was Doge, the Republic enlarged their Dominions by this
beautiful Kingdom, which was yielded to them by the Emperor of Constantinople,
as a reward for the good services they had done him. The first Governor that
was sent was Pictro Barbo, named il Zanco.

Anno 1469. the Turks attempting the Conquest of it, came with three hundred
Sail. At first they made a Bridge upon the Euripus, that so they might land
their Troops upon the Campaign of the Isle; but those of the Country so
vigorously opposed them, that they were forced to return to their Galleys.
Within a a Month Mahomet came himself with an Army of twelve thousand Men: He
made a new Bridge over the Channel, from the Church of St. Mark, a mile off of
the City, and by this means made himself a way to attach Negropent. This City
was in some sort fortified at that time, and had in it in Garrison twenty four
thousand Men under Ludovico Calbo and Paolo Erizzo Commanders. The last had
been Governor of the City, and tho his time was expired, yet he would not
leave the place, when he might contribute by his Arms and Counsel, to its
defense, and signalize his zeal for the Service of his Country. The Turks
raised several Batteries in diverse places, and continually played upon the
Walls. And four times marched to the assault, where four thousand Turks were
killed. The Place was besieged by Sea and Land, and extremely pressed on all
hands; yet the besieged still defended themselves with advantage, and had
already sustained a months Siege, when a treasonable practice was discovered.
For a little Girl found a letter, wherein was mentioned the means and way of
delivering up the place to the Ottomans. This letter was directed to Thomaso
Schiava. Luigi Delfino transported with indignation against the Traitor,
attacked him openly, and by mere force made him discover all the base Intrigues
he had with the Turks.

The besieged still animated more and more in their defense, gave daily notable
proofs of their courage and constancy; but at last they were almost wearied out
with continual labor and fatigue. In these extremeties, they, who had the
Guard of Port Bureliana, ran away from their Post, and left the place the
twelfth of July, 1649.

The Enemy soon perceiving the place deserted, and the entrance of the Gate
free for them, entered the Town, and gave in all places dreadful marks of their
Barbarity. Calbo was killed in the Place, and Bondulmiero in his house. Paolo
Erizzo being retrenched in an advantageous Post valiantly defended himself,
and the Sultan promised him life if he would deliver himself up, which having
done the cruel Turk broke his word, and caused him to be sawed in two. One of
his Daughters a very beautiful Virgin chose rather to be stabbed than receive
the Sultans caresses. All were murdered above twenty years old. This done
Mahomet left the City with a Garrison for the Guard of the whole Isle and
Kingdom.

Of the Ebb and Flow of the Euripus.
THe Euripus is a strait of the Egaean Sea, so narrow, that scarce one Galley
can pass it (under a Bridge that is made over it) between the Citadel and the
Tower or Dungeon of Negropont. It has been called Euripus Eubolcus, from the
old name of the Isle, or Ghalcidicus from the ancient City Chalcis; the Latins
named it Euripus, those of the place Egripos, the Italians Stretto di
Negreponte, and the French l' Euripe de Chalcidoine, or le detroit de l'
Euripe. It is about sixty miles long with little Gulfs in diverse places.

Its Ebb and Flow is doubtless one of the greatest wonders in the World, and it
is fabled, that Aristotle drowned himself in it out of grief that he could not
find out the cause thereof.

Antiphilus, a Native of Bizantium, says in a Greek Epigram, that the Euripus
rises and falls six times; Strabo, Pliny and Suidas, with several others, hold,
that it flows and ebbs seven times a day.

Pomponius Mela assures us, that this is done fourteen times a day, tho it
seems by his words, that he means, that the Euripus continually ebbs and flows
fourteen times in 24 hours. These are his words, lib. 2. cap. 7. Mare rapidum
et alterno cursu septies nocte fluctibus invicem versis, adeo immodice fluens,
ut ventos etiam ac plenis velis navigia frustretur. That is, the Sea is there
very rapid, running sometimes one way, sometimes the other seven times in a
night, and as often in the day with returning waves, with that violence that they
prevail against the winds, and put a stop to ships under Sail.

Seneca seems to be of the same Opinion in one of his Tragedies, where he thus
speaks:

Euripus undas flectit instabilis vagas, Septemque cursus flectit, and totidem
refert Dum lassa Titan mergat Oceano Juga. Swift Euripus receives within his
breast
Seven times the stoods, as often are outward pressed,
While Titan drives his weary Steeds to rest.
It seems also that Pliny would express the same, that it flows and ebbs seven
times a day, and as often at night, though his words are not very clear.
Quorumdam Aestuariorum privata natura est, velut Taurominitani saepius et in
Euboea septies die ac nocte reciprocantis: That is, there are Currents of a
very peculiar Nature, as that of the Taurominians, which often goes, and
returns, and that of the Euripus, which does so seven times in a day and night.

Titus Livius thinks he has hit the truth better, than the rest. The Euripus,
says he, has not seven regular ebbs and flows in a day, as the common report
is, but it runs sometimes one way, sometimes another, like the wind, as a
Torrent, falling with precipitation from a mountain. This agrees very well with
the irregular days, but he is mistaken when he adds, that there is no Port
worse, than that of Calcis, by reason of the Current; for this ebbing and
flowing, does not at all disorder the Vessels, which have room enough to keep
themselves from the Current, either in the great Port, which is covered with
the walls of the Citadel, or in that on the other side of the Bridge, as
Father Babin the Jesuit observed, Anno 1669. when the Turkish Navy wintered at
Negropont.

The same Father, considered the course of the Euripus, at several times. There
are eighteen or nineteen days each month, or to say better each Moon, whereon
it is regular; and eleven others, wherein it is irregular, and broken. Such are
the Terms, they use at Negropont, to describe this wonder of Nature.

It is in its force and vigor, or to speak plainer, it is regular from the
three lasts days of the old Moon, till the eighth of the new, and on the ninth
it is irregular and broken, and remains so troubled, till the thirteenth
inclusively. On the fourteenth it comes to it self again, and resumes its
Forces; but grows disorderly again, from the twenty first to the 27, as will be
better understood by the following Table.

A Table of the Regular, and Irregular flowing and ebbing of the Euripus,
according to the Age of the Moon.
New Moon. 1. Regular, as the Ocean. 2. Regular. 3. Regular. 4. Regular. 5.
Regular. 6. Regular. 7. Regular. First Quarter. 8. Regular. 9. Irregular. of
12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows. 10. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows.
11. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows. 12. Irregular. of 12. 13. or
14. Ebbs and Flows. 13. Irregular. of 12. 13. or 14. Ebbs and Flows. 14.
Regular. Full Moon. 15. Regular. 16. Regular. 17. Regular. 18. Regular. 19.
Regular. 20. Regular. 21. Irregular. Last Quarter. 22. Irregular. 23.
Irregular. 24. Irregular. 25. Irregular. 26. Irregular. 27. Regular. 28.
Regular. 29. Regular.

So each Moon there is eleven days of irregularity, and 18 or 19 others, that
are regular. It is then irregular from the first Quarter, to about the full
Moon, and after the last Quarter it begins again to be irregular.

During the time of its Irregularity in one natural day, that is, in twenty
four or twenty five hours, there is eleven, twelve, thirteen, and sometimes
fourteen Floods and Ebbs, according to the observations of the same Father; and
as those assure us, that are daily at the Mills, and find the wheels alter
often in a day, as the Stream turns. So that the Flood does not come only seven
times in a day, as the Ancients wrote, but much frequenter.

When the Course of the Euripus is regular for the other eighteen or nineteen
days; it is like the Ocean, and Gulf of Venice, that is in twenty four, or
twenty five hours, it has but two Floods and Ebbs, and every day retards it one
hour; as in the Ocean, it is six hours coming in, and as long going out,
whether in Summer, or whether the wind be violent or calm. On the irregular
days, it flows about half an hour, and ebbs three quarters of an hour.

All the Tides of the Euripus, whether regular, or irregular, differ in two
particulars, from those of the Ocean; first, that in high water, it rises not
above one Foot, and very rarely two, whereas the Ocean rises sometimes eighty
cubits, as in the Ports of Britain, though in the Isles of America, it mounts
not higher, than in the Euripus.

The other difference, is that in the Ocean, when the water sinks and abates,
it retires into the deep Sea, as on the contrary, it raises it self, and covers
more ground, when it approaches the sides. The Euripus is quite after another
manner, for its Flood happens, when its waters run toward the Isles of the
Archipelago, where is a much greater Sea; and its Ebb is when it runs toward
Thessaly, and through the Channel, by which the Galleys pass to go toward
Thessalonica, as a shorter and safer way to Constantinople.

Between high and low water, there is a short interval, when the water seems
quiet and still, and like standing water so that straws and feathers lie upon
the water without motion, provided there be no wind.

Caesar d' Arcons, who printed in French a Book in Quarto, concerning the Ebb
and Flow of the Sea, has a particular Paragraph of the Tides of the Euripus.

The Explication of the Draught of Volo.
A. The Mole. B. The Magazines. C. The Gate on the Sea side. D. The Towers
flanking the Fortress. E. The Mosque. F. The sides of the Gulf of Volo.
The Fortress of Volo.
THE Fortress of Volo, known to the Latins by the name of Pagasa, is situated
in that Part of Thessaly, which is most joined to Magnesia, a small Country of
Maoedonia, nine miles from Dimetrias; or as Livy and Pliny Demetrias and at the
edge of the Gulf commonly called del Volo. Pliny names it Pagasi^cus sinus,
Pelasgicus sinus, Ptolemy Pagasi^licus, Strabo Pagasaeus, Mela Jolciacus, O^vid
Demetriacus, Lucio Macedonicus, Oro^sius Golfe d' Armiro.

The Fortress is built after the old fashion, and takes up a great space, a few
paces from the Sea, where it has a larg^ Port, and of good Anchorage. I^ is
according to Bleau. vol. 2. l. 7. page 9.
Bleau at 31 degrees. 31 min Lat. and according to Cast aldo^ at forty degrees. fifty
min. lat. and forty eight degrees. forty min. Longitude.

In this place, the Turks, lay up great military Ammunitions, and provision^ of
Corn and Biscuit, brought them thi^ there from all the Provinces round about that
abound in them. Captain Morosini, VEUE DE VOLO.
view of Volo FORTERESSE DE VOLO
plan of Fortress of Volo who was Proveditor of the Army, Anno 1655. being
informed of the matter, resolved to turn his Arms against this Fortress,
designing to raze it as soon as he had it, concluding by that means, he should
deprive the Enemy of a great advantage, and at the same time furnish his Army
with Provision for a long time. He neglected nothing, that might gain a good
Success to his Enterprise. He lay with his whole Army before the Fortress, and
began to attack it very briskly with great shot. These beginnings were of the
greater advantage to the Besiegers, in that the Turks never expected so hot an
onset. The danger increased every moment, and the loss grew more certain; but
they could not as yet be brought to think upon a Capitulation, nor of rendering
the place. But when they saw the Petard fastened to the Gate, and the Ladders
at the walls, they had no more Courage to defend it. They, that were at the
Gates, left them, and they upon the walls deserted them, all seeking safety in
their heels. The Bassa that commanded it, and an Aga, at first thought to save
themselves in a place built in the form of a little Castle in the Fortress; but
perceiving the Necssity of miserably Perishing there, lest they should be shut
in, immediately went out of it. Thus General Morosini succeeded gloriously in
this Expedition; he presently ordered all the Biscuit found in the Place, and
which amounted to above four Millions of Livres, to be transported; they also
found there other Ammunition, and 27 great Guns: Then he set on fire the
Magazines, Houses, and Mosques; and wholly to raze it, before he left the
Place, he levelled the Walls to the ground with his Cannon.

The Gulf and City of Salonichi or Thessalonica.
THE Gulf of Salonichi has an Extent of 140 Miles length; it is bounded by a
very beautiful Plain, whence it is necessarily exposed to the Winds, and
therefore very dangerous to the Seaman: In that Place where it most wears away
the Land, is a very advantageous and spacious Port. There is situated, partly
on an Hill, and partly on a Declivity, as the Ground goes, the famous City of
Macedonia, called usually Salonichi, or otherwise Thessalonique; near it, on
the West side, glides down the River Vardar, which Ptolemy and Strabo call
Axius Fluvius, others Bardarus and Bardarius Fluvius, very full of Fish, and
its Banks covered and adorned with goodly Trees. The Walls of the City are
flanked with several Towers, and as to its circuit some make it ten, others
twelve miles. It has three Forts to defend it; the first, being the least,
comes first in view at the Entrance or Landing-Place at some distance from the
old City; it is Mouted with 20 great Guns. The two others are situated within
View of the Sea, at the highest Part of the Wall, furnished with 30 or 40
Cannon; on the Land side is a Fortress like that of the seven Towers at
Constantinople; this commands the whole Town, being built on a little Hill, at
the Foot whereof is a very great Number of Houses making a Suburbs, encompassed
with a Wall apart, but which joins to the City.

There are in this place a numerous People, and the great Number of Habitations
that are built in the Plain are but low and base, and not sufficient to contain
the great Numbers of Jews that dwell in them: Besides they are not a little
incommoded by the horrid stink that is in the Streets, they are so narrow.

There is a considerable Trade, as well from the commodiousness of its
Situation, as for the great Quantity of Silk, Wool, Skins of all sorts, Wax,
Gunpowder, Corn, Cotton, and Iron. The Jews most busy themselves in Traffic,
and have to themselves the Manufacture of Stuffs to cloth the Janissaries; and
by this means they find a Way to employ the Tribute they are obliged to pay the
Grand Seignior. There are in it 48 Mosques, in which is comprehended the Church
of St. Demetrius, of three Isles, born up with very fair Pillars, where St. Paul
Preached once; and that of St. Sophia, built by the Emperor, Justinian, thirty
Greek Churches, thirty six great Synagogues, and many other small ones. The
Governor has the Title of Mula, and his Place makes him very considerable at
the Port.

LES DARDANELLES DE LEPANTHE
map of Dardanelles of Lepanto

In the Year 118, when Andronicus would have got the Empire, Thessalonica was
taken by William, King of Sicily; but at the end, being returned under the
Dominion of its lawful Sovereign, the Emperor of Constantinople, Andronicus
Paleologus; he, to unite himself the more nearly to the Venetian Republic,
gave them all the Right he had to this City: But scarce two years past e're the
Turk seized on it without much Difficulty, by reason of its Distance, and the
ill State of Affairs in Italy, and the small Defense the Inhabitants were able
to make.

The Gulf, and the Dardanelles of LEPANTO.
THIS Gulf reaching on the North to the Shores of Achaia, and on the South to
those of the Morea, divides from each other these two great Parts of Greece. It
has had several Names which Authors have given it according to the different
Times and particular Occasions they had to speak of it. The Ancients called it
Cri^sus; Strabo, the Sea of Alcion; Sophianus, Golfe de Pedras; some,
Corintiacus Sinus, from the City Corinth; the Mariners, (as Niger reports) the
Shores of the Bostria, and now commonly Lepanto: It contains four Rocks in it,
and receives its Water from the Ionian Sea by an Entrance between two
Promontories, standing far out from the Continent, whereof one joining to the
Morea, is by Strabo called Anthirium Promontorium, and usually Cape Antirio,
upon the top of which is a Fortress called of Morea, or of Patras; the other
joining to Achaia, which Strabo calls Rhium Promontorium; and the Vulgar, Cap
de Rhio, or Rio; this also is provided with a Fort called Romelie.

These two Castles are otherwise called the Dardanelles of Lepanto: They are
both built of a square Figure, encompassed with good Walls, and a strong
Battery, level with the Water; there is no Fault to be found with them, but
that the Ground being Sandy, they admit of an easy Approach from the Enemy.
There is no landing any Forces on the side of Romelie, within two Italian Miles
of the Fortress, but it may be approached in small Barks within 100 Paces. The
Plain to the little Hill is very large, but it grows less and less as you come
nearer to the Castle. At the Foot of the Mountain is a great Valley, where
those that design to attack the Fort may march forward undiscovered.

All Merchandises brought out of the Gulf, as Skins, Oils, Tabaco, Rice, and
Barley, pay three per cent. to the Emin, who is likewise obliged to disburse six
thousand Crowns a year, into the Coffers of the Grand Seignior.

Once all Merchandises that came from the West, as likewise those from the
East, after having passed the Gulf of Engia, were brought into this Port; but
at this time the Entrance is forbid to all stranger Ships, which upon that
Account are obliged to stay at Patras; and the most of those that put in here
are Corsairs, and indeed one calls Lepanto the little Algiers. The greatest
part of the Inhabitants of this Place are Moors that have black Children like
those of Barbary.

The City of Lepanto.
THE City of Lepanto is by the Latins called Naupactus; by the Vulgar, Epactos;
and by the Turks, Einebachti; it is situated in the Country of Livadia, on the
Edge, not far from the Mouth of the Gulf of the same Name, environed with an
high conical Mountain, on the Top of which is built a Fortress with four strong
thick Walls round it, separated from each other by little Distances, where the
Inhabitants have their Dwellings; the Port is not above 60 Foot big, and which
may be shut up with a Chain being but narrow at its Entrance, upon which
Account, but a few Vessels can lie there; and at sometimes also they cannot get
out of it for want of Water: And if the famous Pirate, Durach Bey, used to
shelter himself there with his Galleys, he must have taken a special Care to
keep it clear.

In the times of Idolatrous Worship, there were four Temples in Lepanto,
dedicated, one to Neptune, another to LEPANTHE
view of Lepanto Venus, a third to Aesculapius, and a fourth to Diana. Falisius
built that of Aesculapius, to acquit himself of a Vow he had made when he was
troubled with sore Eyes.

Under the Empire of the Turks it is governed by a Vaivode. There are seven
Mosques, two Greek Churches which are held in great Disdain by the Turks, and
three Jewish Synagogues.

If the Inhabitants want pleasant Places within the Town, they have, without,
on the East side near the Sea, a plentiful Stream of Water, which after having
served the Powder-Mills and the Tanners of Leather, in which consists the
Riches of the Place, waters about a dozen very great Plains, and makes the
Place very delightful. There is likewise round about very pleasant Gardens and
Fields covered with Limons and Orange Trees: The Soil produces a Wine that
surpasses all the Greek Wines in Goodness.

The taking of this Place was very Difficult, before the Use of great Guns. In
the Year 1408, it was subject to the Emperor of Constantinople, but the
Emperor, Emanuel, finding it too hard a Task for him to keep it, delivered it
into the Hands of the Republic of Venice. Under this new Dominion, it received
a new Form, and was fortified so as to be able to resist a powerful Army; and
indeed, being besieged anno 1475, it destroyed thirty thousand Turks, and their
Army was forced shamefully to raise the Siege, after having sat down before it
above four Months. The Inhabitants could not be better pleased with their
Rulers, nor ever made more ardent Vows to be kept there and preserved from the
barbarous Tyranny of the Turks, when Bajazet, 2. came to attack them by Sea and
Land, with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, and brought them to
the most deplorable State that can be imagined. There is yet to be seen St.
Mark of Venice, to show us, that the Rights of the Republic are as well
founded there as its Arms ineffaceable; and to give us Hopes, that triumphant
Republic will add to the Conquests it has made these last Years, that of this
Place; which will be crowned with Glory and immortal Fame.

FINIS*
ADVERTISEMENT.
ANgliae Notitia; or the present State of England complete, with Reflections on
the ancient State thereof, by Edward Chamberlain, Doctor of Laws; the sixteenth
Edition, with Additions and Alterations, down to this time. Printed for Matt.
Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall; and James Partridge at
the Post House between Charing Cross and White Hall.


